 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council Special Meeting 15.09.2025        Page 1 of 3 
 
 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Full Council held at 3:30 p.m. 
Monday 15 September 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
 
                     
Members Present: Councillors C. Kelly (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, A. Breen, 
A. Breslin, F. Brett, B. Caldwell, B. Clear, N. Connolly, S. Doyle, 
G. Dunne, T. Durkan, W. Durkan, A. Feeney, D. Fitzpatrick,  
R. Heather, N. Killeen, M. Leigh, P. McEvoy, P. Melrose,  
S. Moore, P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer, B. O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, 
C. Pender, D. Trost and P. Ward. 
 
Online: 
Councillors V. Behan, P. Brooks, B. Dooley, K. Duffy, I. Keatley, 
P. Mulroe, L. Panaite Fahey, D. Phelan, R. Power and B. Wyse. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillors N. Heavey, T. McDonnell and E. Sammon. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Mr. J. Boland,  
Mr. D. Creighton, Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator),  
Mr. B. O’Gorman (Meetings Secretary) and other officials.  
 
 
01/0925SM 
Declarations of Interest 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0925SM 
Welcome by Cathaoirleach 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the Special Meeting of the Council to 
receive presentations from individuals seeking a presidential nomination from Kildare 
County Council. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council Special Meeting 15.09.2025        Page 2 of 3 
 
 
03/0925SM 
Presentations from individuals seeking nomination 
The members received presentations from the following individuals seeking 
nomination as a candidate for the forthcoming Presidential Election: 
 
1. Catherine Morrissey 
2. Charlotte Keenan 
3. Séana Kerr 
4. Lorna McCormack 
5. Lucy Ann O’Leary 
6. Dominic Plant, and  
7. Dr. Cora Stack. 
Following the presentations, the Cathaoirleach referred to the running order list which 
included the contact details for each individual that presented, noting that members 
may follow up with an individual using the contact details provided or by referring to 
their presentations previously circulated.  
 
04/0925SM 
Individuals seeking nomination, not presenting 
The Cathaoirleach referred to list of nine (9) individuals including contact information, 
seeking the Council’s nomination, noting that members may follow up with an 
individual using the contact details provided or by referring to their presentations 
previously circulated. 
 
The Cathaoirleach also noted, up to an additional 11 individuals sought a presidential 
nomination from Kildare County Council but had not provided the necessary 
documentation to confirm their eligibility to run as a presidential candidate, noting 
that Members Services would advise the members if the circumstances changed for 
an individual.   

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council Special Meeting 15.09.2025        Page 3 of 3 
 
 
05/0925SM 
Nomination Procedure for the Special Meeting on 22 September 2025 
The Cathaoirleach advised members that the recommendations of the Protocol and 
Procedures Committee (08 September) regarding the procedure for members to 
make a nomination was previously circulated.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor McEvoy, seconded by Councillor Pender, 
and agreed by all members present that the recommendations of the Protocol and 
Procedures Committee on the procedure to make a nomination for the Special 
Meeting on 22 September 2025 be approved.  
 
06/0925SM 
Voting Procedure for the Special Meeting on 22 September 2025 
The Cathaoirleach advised members that the recommendations of the Protocol and 
Procedures Committee (08 September) regarding the voting procedure was 
previously circulated. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Breslin and 
agreed by all members present that the recommendations of the Protocol and 
Procedures Committee on 08 September 2025 on the voting procedure for the 
Special Meeting on 22 September 2025 be approved. 
 
 
There being no further matters the meeting ended. 
 
 
