 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         15.12.2025                   Page 1 of 5 
Áras Chill Dara 
Páirc Devoy 
An Nás 
Co. Chill Dara 
  
05 Nollaig 2025 
   05 December 2025 
  
  
Don Chathaoirleach agus do gach ball tofa de Chomhairle Contae Chill Dara 
  
A Bhaill Uile, 
  
Tionólfar cruinniú míosúil na Comhairle ar 3:00 i.n. ar an Luan, 15 Nollaig 2025 i Seomra 
na Comhairle, Áras Chill Dara, Páirc Devoy, An Nás, agus iarrtar ort a bheith i láthair. 
  
The monthly meeting of the council will be held at 3:00 p.m. on Monday, 15 December 
2025 in the Council Chamber, Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, and you are invited to 
attend.  
  
  
Le gach dea-ghuí, 
  
 
 
_____________________________________ 
Letitia Hanratty 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe  
Meetings Administrator 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         15.12.2025                   Page 2 of 5 
Clár 
Agenda 
 
1. 
Dearbhuithe um (a) coinbhleachtaí leasa nó (b) leasanna airgid nó leasanna 
tairbhiúla faoi Alt 177 den Acht Rialtais Áitiúil 2001, arna leasú.        
Declarations of (a) conflicts of interest or (b) pecuniary or beneficial interests under 
Section 177 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended. 
 
2. 
Glacadh le miontuairiscí an chruinnithe buiséid a reáchtáladh ar an 17 Samhain 
2025 (ceangailte) agus an chruinnithe mhíosúil a reáchtáladh ar an 24 Samhain 
2025 (ceangailte) agus an tuarascáil ar dhul chun cinn a thabhairt faoi deara 
(leanfar leis seo).   
To adopt the minutes of the budget meeting held on 17 November 2025 (attached), 
monthly meeting held on 24 November 2025 (attached) and to note progress report 
(to follow).   
 
Gnó Reachtúil 
Statutory Business 
 
3. 
To note the Chief Executive’s monthly management report (copy attached). 
 
4. 
To consider the Chief Executive’s Report and adoption of the proposed 30 kph speed 
limit in residential housing estates taken in charge (Jake’s Law) in accordance with 
Section 9, Road Traffic Act 2004 (as amended). (report to follow). 
 
5. 
To consider nomination to the Housing and Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee 
(Social Inclusion) (report to follow). 
 
6. 
To receive bi-annual update on Climate Action (report to follow). 
 
7. 
To receive reports from members appointed to Other Bodies, pursuant to Section 141 
of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended (reports to follow). 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         15.12.2025                   Page 3 of 5 
8. 
Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
9. 
Correspondence (to follow). 
 
10. 
Conferences and Training (report to follow). 
 
 
Rúin Chomhairle Contae Chill Dara 
Motions Kildare County Council 
 
11. 
Na Comhairleoirí - Councillors Aoife Breslin, Mark Leigh, Rupert Heather, 
Angela Feeney and Ann Breen  
That the council supports the introduction of a national "No Wait Card" scheme for 
individuals with medical conditions requiring urgent access to toilet facilities, 
• Develops a voluntary "Urgent Access" initiative within County Kildare, inviting local 
businesses to participate by allowing urgent toilet access to cardholders, 
• Provides recognition or incentives for participating businesses such as window 
stickers, or promotion through local business networks, and  
• Works with relevant health organisations and disability groups to publicise the 
scheme and raise awareness among residents and businesses.  
 
12. 
Na Comhairleoirí - Councillors Chris Pender and Pat Balfe 
That the council outlines, in advance of the Christmas period, the supports that will be 
made available to families and individuals in emergency accommodation across the 
county, with specific detail on a) arrangements for food provision, meals, vouchers 
and access to cooking and kitchen facilities over the Christmas and New Year period, 
b) child focused supports, including access to play spaces, activities and any 
additional measures in place to support children during the school holidays, and c) 
coordination with charities, community groups and voluntary organisations that 
traditionally provide additional seasonal supports over the Christmas period. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         15.12.2025                   Page 4 of 5 
13. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Claire O’Rourke 
That Kildare County Council insofar as is practicable supports the international  
 
Boycott, Divest and Sanction movement and, refrains from purchasing goods and 
 
services originating from Israeli occupied territories in Palestine, in a spirit of solidarity 
 
with all who oppose genocide, until Israel complies with international law and  
 
universally recognised human rights standards.  
 
14. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Suzanne Doyle 
That the council receives a presentation from Kildare Land Activation Office (KLAO),
 
outlining locations of land that they are working with, the costs and timelines in  
 
activating this land, what the housing yield estimate is and breakdown of numbers in 
 
social, affordable and private units.  
 
15. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Ger Dunne 
That the council agrees to introduce technology that would convert spoken language 
 
into written text during the screening of council meetings.  
 
16. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Tom McDonnell 
That the council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to 
approve an exemption for families to build detached residential dwellings (45 square 
metres) in their gardens without planning permission, to assist in the housing crisis. 
 
17. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Seamie Moore 
That the council identifies what streams of government grant funding are available for 
towns in excess of 20,000, which are experiencing significant population growth and 
have shortfalls in their social, amenity, community and sport infrastructure, to support 
the development and provision of these essential facilities to address the shortfall, 
enhance community well-being and help mitigate anti-social behaviour.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         15.12.2025                   Page 5 of 5 
18. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Bill Clear 
That this council write to all Irish Members of the European Parliament requesting that 
they oppose the Mercosur Trade Deal and vote against the proposal, which poses a 
serious threat to Ireland’s native beef sector by allowing large volumes of cheaper, 
lower-standard imports into the EU market.  
 
19. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Pádraig McEvoy 
That Kildare County Council write to the Minister for Transport, the Minister for the 
Environment, Climate and Communications, the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, the Minister for Public Expenditure, National Development 
Plan Delivery and Reform, and the Oireachtas Members for County Kildare to express 
this Council’s concern regarding the National Development Plan Review 2025 
Sectoral Investment Plan for Transport, in particular: 
• 
the impact that delays to regionally significant light and heavy rail projects will have 
on achieving both housing-delivery and emissions-reduction targets in County 
Kildare; and 
• 
the impact that insufficient funding for walking and cycling infrastructure will have 
on public safety, public health, and traffic congestion in County Kildare. 
and to request that the relevant decisions within the Sectoral Investment Plan be 
reviewed and amended to address these concerns.  
 
20. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Nuala Killeen 
That this council agrees to write to the Minister of Transport seeking the urgent  
reinstatement of the plan to progress the Dart + South West within the next four years 
 
and to not delay commencement to 2030. 
  
 
