 
 
 
Annual Full Council Meeting 20 June 2025                                                                   Page 1 of 5 
 
 
Minutes of the Annual Meeting of Full Council  
held at 3.00 p.m. on Friday 20 June 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare. 
 
Members Present: Councillor K. Duffy (Cathaoirleach), Councillors V. Behan, A. 
Breen, A. Breslin, B. Caldwell, B. Dooley, S. Doyle, G. Dunne, 
W. Durkan, A. Feeney, D. Fitzpatrick, R. Heather, N. Heavey, C. 
Kelly, N. Killeen, P. McEvoy, S. Moore, P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer, 
B. O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, D. Phelan, R. Power,  D.Trost,  P. 
Ward, and B. Wyse. 
 
Online: 
Councillors P. Balfe, F. Brett, P. Brooks, B. Clear, N. Connolly, 
T. Durkan, P. Mulroe, C. Pender, and E. Sammon.  
 
Apologies: 
Councillors I. Keatley, M. Leigh, T. Mc Donnell, P. Melrose, and 
L. Panaite Fahy. 
 
 
Also Present: 
Ms. S. Kavanagh Chief Executive, Ms. A. Aspell, Mr. J. Boland, 
Mr. A. Dunney, Mr. E. Ryan, (Directors of Services) Ms. L. 
Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Ms. L. Morgan (Meetings 
Secretary) and other officials. 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the Annual Meeting of Kildare County 
Council. 
 
Councillor Duffy reflected on his year as Cathaoirleach and thanked the 
management, staff and fellow councillors for their help and support during his year in 
office. He thanked Leas-Chathaoirleach Councillor Brett for his work and the Fine 
Gael party for his nomination. 
 
He informed the meeting that during his term of office, he had the opportunity to 
attend many wonderful events, projects, and initiatives across the county, each one  
 
giving him a deeper insight into the heart of the community, its people, the volunteers 
as well as the spirit that makes Kildare such a special place to live and work.  

 
 
 
Annual Full Council Meeting 20 June 2025                                                                   Page 2 of 5 
 
He referred to community centres, local festivals, environmental initiatives and youth 
programmes which there were too many to name, with each having left a lasting 
impression on him, being a testament to the dedication and creativity of our citizens. 
He was so proud to have witnessed such at first hand. 
 
He thanked the Chief Executive, Ms. Sonia Kavanagh, for her guidance, support and 
leadership throughout the term, the Executive Management Team for their invaluable 
assistance and professionalism, as well as his fellow council members for their 
patience, engagement and support. He also thanked the press and media for their 
work during the year and gave special thanks to his wife and family for their 
continued support.   
 
The group leaders on behalf of their parties and individual councillors thanked 
Councillor Duffy for his hard work and fairness during the year. 
 
Councillor Doyle, on behalf of Fianna Fáil, thanked him for his professionalism and 
also commended the previous Cathaoirleach, Joe Neville for his work during the 
previous year. 
 
Councillor Aoife Breslin, on behalf of the Labour Group, also thanked the 
Cathaoirleach for all the work he did during the year. 
 
Councillor Nuala Killeen, on behalf of Social Democrats also commended the 
Cathaoirleach for his work. 
 
 
The Chief Executive thanked Councillor Duffy for his work and dedication, his family 
for their continued support and spoke of his visit to New York highlighting its 
importance to the Kildare Community living in that city. She acknowledged the very 
significant commitment which the work of an elected member entails, that it is a 24/7 
role, and that the addition of the Cathaoirleach role was immense.   
 
The Chief Executive made a presentation to the outgoing Cathaoirleach. 
 
 

 
 
 
Annual Full Council Meeting 20 June 2025                                                                   Page 3 of 5 
 
01/0625 
Election of Cathaoirleach 
Councillor Duffy sought nominations for the position of Cathaoirleach for the coming 
year.   
Councillor Fitzpatrick proposed Councillor Kelly, citing her excellent work as a 
councillor, how she had performed this role with the Naas Municipal District and had 
served as a member of Naas Municipal District, AILG, Finance Committee, 
Environmental Services and Water SPC, County Kildare Twinning Committee, 
Twinning Liaison Committee and Local Community Development Committee. He 
advised the members and all present that he believed she was an excellent 
candidate for the position. 
 
Councillor Peggy O’Dwyer seconded Councillor Fitzpatrick’s nomination. 
 
Councillor Duffy asked if there were any other nominations. As there were no other 
nominations, Councillor Duffy asked Councillor Kelly if she accepted the nomination.  
 
Councillor Kelly informed the meeting that she was proud to accept the nomination 
and was duly elected as Cathaoirleach of the County of Kildare. Councillor Kelly was 
presented with the Chain of Office by the outgoing Cathaoirleach and took the Chair.  
 
She thanked the Fianna Fail group for nominating her, welcomed and thanked her 
family and supporters attending the meeting noting that she looked forward to their 
continued support during the year.  
  
She noted her commitment to do her utmost to represent all the people of Kildare, 
that it was a proud day for the Parish of Naas, and she was humbled and honoured 
to be elected. She acknowledged the busy year ahead, highlighting the Variation of 
the Development Plan, Newbridge Local Area Plan, Settlement Plans in Sallins and 
the Heritage Plan. She emphasised that there is no strength without unity, and that 
true strength lies in the ability to work together to ensure that County Kildare 
maximises its potential.  

 
 
 
Annual Full Council Meeting 20 June 2025                                                                   Page 4 of 5 
 
She thanked the outgoing Cathaoirleach for his contribution and his professionalism 
as well as the Leas-Chathaoirleach for his work throughout the year. She also 
thanked her husband and son for all their love, encouragement and sacrifices which 
enabled her to dedicate herself to her duties as a councillor and gave a special 
thanks to her late parents for encouraging her to ‘aim for the stars’. 
 
She thanked her Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael colleagues, the members, and advised 
she would now wear the Kildare jersey with pride. 
 
The Group leaders and individual councillors congratulated Councillor Kelly and 
wished her well for the coming year. 
 
The Chief Executive also congratulated Councillor Kelly, stating that she and her 
team looked forward to working with her. 
 
Resolved in accordance with section 37 (a) and (b) of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended that Councillor Carmel Kelly be elected as Cathaoirleach of the 
County of Kildare.  
 
02/0625 
Election of Leas-Chathaoirleach 
Councillor Ward proposed Councillor Veralouise Behan as Leas-Chathaoirleach for 
the coming year.  He informed the meeting that she was an excellent and hard-
working politician who had served as Cathaoirleach of the Athy Municipal District 
Committee previously. 
 
Councillor Dooley seconded the nomination informing the meeting that Councillor 
Behan was an excellent candidate and had worked very hard as a councillor for the 
people of Athy. He said Councillor Behan was dedicated and passionate in her work 
in the community. 
 
As there were no other nominations, the new Cathlaoireach asked Councillor Behan 
if she accepted the nomination. Councillor Behan confirmed her acceptance and was 
duly elected as Leas-Chathaoirleach of the County of Kildare. 

 
 
 
Annual Full Council Meeting 20 June 2025                                                                   Page 5 of 5 
 
Councillor Behan was presented with the Chain of Office of the Leas-Chathaoirleach 
by the newly elected Cathaoirleach.  
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked all the members and welcomed Councillor Behan as 
Leas-Chathaoirleach. The Chief Executive also congratulated Councillor Behan. 
 
The newly elected Leas-Chathaoirleach thanked all the members for their support, 
the outgoing Cathaoirleach Kevin Duffy and previous Cathaoirleach Joe Neville for 
the wonderful work they had done throughout their terms. She looked forward to 
working with the members over the coming year. She would be proud to work with 
the newly appointed Cathaoirleach Carmel Kelly and would be humbled to perform 
the duties of the Leas-Chathaoirleach.  
 
The group leaders and individual councillors congratulated Councillor Behan and 
wished her well for the coming year. 
The Chief Executive joined with the members to wish both the Cathaoirleach and 
Leas-Chathaoirleach all the best in the coming year and that she was looking forward 
to working with them both. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Ward, seconded by Councillor Dooley that 
Councillor Veralouise Behan be elected Leas-Chathaoirleach of the County of 
Kildare. 
 
The meeting concluded. 
 
 
