 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         20.10.2025                               Page 1 of 5 
Áras Chill Dara 
Páirc Devoy 
An Nás 
Co. Chill Dara 
 
10 Deireadh Fómhair 2025 
   10 October 2025 
 
 
Don Chathaoirleach agus do gach ball tofa de Chomhairle Contae Chill Dara 
  
A Bhaill Uile, 
 
Tionólfar cruinniú míosúil na Comhairle ar 3:00 i.n. ar an Luan, 20 Deireadh Fómhair 2025 
i Seomra na Comhairle, Áras Chill Dara, Páirc Devoy, An Nás, agus iarrtar ort a bheith i 
láthair. 
 
The monthly meeting of the council will be held at 3:00 p.m. on Monday, 20 October 2025 
in the Council Chamber, Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, and you are invited to 
attend.  
 
 
Le gach dea-ghuí, 
 
 
__________________________ 
Letitia Hanratty 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe  
Meetings Administrator 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         20.10.2025                               Page 2 of 5 
Clár 
Agenda 
 
1. 
Dearbhuithe um (a) coinbhleachtaí leasa nó (b) leasanna airgid nó leasanna 
tairbhiúla faoi Alt 177 den Acht Rialtais Áitiúil 2001, arna leasú.        
Declarations of (a) conflicts of interest or (b) pecuniary or beneficial interests under 
Section 177 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended. 
 
2. 
Glacadh le miontuairiscí an chruinnithe speisialta agus an chruinnithe mhíosúil 
a reáchtáladh ar an 22 Meán Fómhair 2025 (leanfar leis seo), agus an tuarascáil 
ar dhul chun cinn a thabhairt faoi deara (leanfar leis seo). 
To adopt the minutes of the special meeting and the monthly meeting held on 22 
September 2025 (attached) and to note progress report (to follow).   
 
Gnó Reachtúil 
Statutory Business 
 
3. 
To note the Chief Executive’s monthly management report (copy attached). 
 
4. 
To consider the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government 
Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 01 October 2025, circulated previously and 
attached).  
i. 
Disposal by way of lease of 1.664 acres (0.6735 hectares) of land at 
Newbridge Family Resource Centre, Dara Park, Newbridge, Co. Kildare. 
 
5. 
To receive reports from members appointed to Other Bodies, pursuant to Section 141 
of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended (reports to follow). 
 
6. 
To consider SURF membership nomination of the Chief Executive. 
 
7. 
Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
8. 
Correspondence (to follow). 
 
9. 
Conferences and Training (report to follow). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         20.10.2025                               Page 3 of 5 
Rúin Chomhairle Contae Chill Dara 
Motions Kildare County Council 
 
10. 
Na Comhairleoirí - Councillors Pat Balfe and Chris Pender 
That Kildare County Council, recognising the long and distinguished association 
between County Kildare and the Defence Forces of Ireland, resolves to commemorate 
this relationship through the erection of a permanent memorial on the grounds of Áras 
Chill Dara, to: 
(a) honour all Members of the Defence Forces, particularly those personnel who have 
made the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace, and acknowledge the sacrifice of 
their families,  
(b) mark the historic connection between County Kildare and the Defence Forces, 
including the Defence Forces Training Centre at the Curragh, the long history of 
barracks in Newbridge and Kildare Town, and the former Army Apprentice School 
once located on the site of Áras Chill Dara, and  
(c) engage with the Defence Forces, their Veterans’ organisations, and other 
stakeholders to design and locate a fitting memorial within the Council grounds, with 
proposals to be brought back to Members for approval. 
 
11. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Evie Sammon 
That Kildare County Council explores the possibility of appointing an EU Funding 
Officer. The role of this officer would be to analyse the Council’s strategic plan and 
identify where EU funding could be used to progress elements of that plan and to 
assist community and voluntary organisations in identifying possible funding sources. 
 
12. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Tracey O’Dwyer  
 
That the council invites Uisce Éireann Legacy Team to the November Full Council 
meeting to brief Members on how Uisce Eireann plan to progress legacy estates in 
particular DPI”s in County Kildare.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         20.10.2025                               Page 4 of 5 
13. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Brian O’Loughlin 
That the council commits to supplying more salt bins throughout the county following 
the freezing spells last winter and confirms the number and locations of proposed salt 
bins.  
 
14. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Bill Clear 
That the council outlines how it is monitoring changes in cycling levels throughout the 
county, and what progress has been made toward its County Development Plan 
targets of a 20% increase in cycling to work and a 15% increase in cycling to school 
by 2029, with just five to six years remaining for Ireland to meet its legally binding 
target of a 51% reduction in carbon emissions and given the Advisory Climate 
Council's warning that the transport sector is increasingly unlikely to meet its targets.  
 
15. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Donna Phelan 
That Kildare County Council, through the Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services SPC and in partnership with Kildare Library 
Service, the Local Enterprise Office (LEO), EmployAbility Service, Intreo, Kildare and 
Wicklow ETB, and the LCDC/SICAP programme, develop and pilot a ‘Workforce 
Inclusion Roadshow’ for each Municipal District. 
 
The purpose is to provide free, accessible, drop-in advice to: 
(i) jobseekers, including people returning to work after illness, injury or disability 
(ii) employers seeking support to recruit inclusively. 
 
The aim of this pilot will mirror the successful ‘roadshow’ model used for 
homelessness awareness bringing services to communities rather than expecting 
people to navigate multiple offices while specifically targeting workforce participation 
and inclusive recruitment.  
 
16. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Claire O’Rourke 
That Kildare County Council insofar as is practicable supports the Boycott, Divestment 
and Sanctions (BDS) campaign in relation to goods and services originating from 
Israeli occupied territories in Palestine, and, refrain from purchasing goods or services 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         20.10.2025                               Page 5 of 5 
produced, provided or facilitated by Israeli state-owned enterprises or companies that 
materially support the policies of the Israeli state, until Israel complies with 
international law and universally recognised human rights standards. 
 
17. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Nuala Killeen 
That the council details if any specific strategies might be in place for the creation of a 
Breastfeeding Friendly Kildare Strategy to promote breastfeeding-friendly spaces, 
businesses and designing public environments to promote breastfeeding.   
 
18. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Peggy O’Dwyer 
That the council clarifies the planning position on the applicaiton of external insulation 
to homes with existing cladding when applying for the SEAI Grant Scheme.   
 
19. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Noel Connolly 
Go n-oibreoidh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara le Cill Dara le Gaeilge agus le páirtithe 
leasmhara ábhartha eile chun Cultúrlann a chur ar fáil don Chontae 
That Kildare County Council works with Cill Dara le Gaeilge and other relevant 
stakeholders to provide a Cultural Centre for the County.  
 
 
