 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 1 of 18 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 20 October 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
 
                     
Members Present: Councillors S. Doyle (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, A. Breen,  
A. Breslin, B. Caldwell, B. Clear, N. Connolly, B. Dooley,  
G. Dunne, D. Fitzpatrick, N. Heavey, I. Keatley, N. Killeen,  
M. Leigh, T. McDonnell, P. McEvoy, S. Moore, P. O’Dwyer,  
T. O’Dwyer, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, D. Phelan, E. Sammon,  
D. Trost and P. Ward. 
 
Online: 
Councillors F. Brett, P. Brooks, B. Dooley, T. Durkan, W. Durkan  
P. Melrose, P. Mulroe, L. Panaite Fahey, R. Power and B. Wyse. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillors C. Kelly, V. Behan, K. Duffy, R. Heather and  
B. O’Loughlin. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. A. Aspell (Deputy Chief Executive), Mr. J. Boland,  
Mr. A. Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, M. Higgins, E. Ryan (Directors of 
Services), Ms. C. Barrett, (A/Director of Services), Mr. B. 
Leonard and Mr. G. Maher (Senior Executive Officers). 
 
Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Mr. B. O’Gorman 
(Meetings Secretary) and other officials.  
 
 
Councillor S. Doyle chaired the meeting on the request of Cathaoirleach C. Kelly who 
was unavailable due to an official engagement abroad.  
 
Councillor S. Doyle (Cathaoirleach) welcomed everyone to the October monthly 
meeting of the Council. The Meeting Administrator read out a notice regarding the 
live streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 2 of 18 
 
00/1025 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised the meeting that she had been informed of the following 
bereavements:  
 
• John (Gerry) O’Brien, Father of Aisling O’Brien, Finance 
• Christina Deegan, Mother of Mona Deegan, Facilities 
• Lena McNeela, Mother of Liam McNeela, Building and Development Control 
• Orla Wilson, Corporate Services and recently moved to Planning. 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/1025 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. 
 
Councillors P. O’Dwyer and C. Pender advised that they are former Board Members 
of the Newbridge Family Resource Centre (Item 4). This was noted.  
 
There were no other declarations.  
 
 
02/1025 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the special meeting and monthly meeting 
held on 22 September 2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. McEvoy, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the special 
meeting held on 22 September 2025 be adopted. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor A. Breen, seconded by Councillor C. Pender 
and agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the monthly meeting 
held on 22 September 2025 be adopted. 
 
The progress report was noted.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 3 of 18 
 
     03/1025 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 
 
04/1025 
Section 183 Disposal – Lands at Dara Park, Newbridge 
The Members considered the report on the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 01 October 
2025, circulated previously and attached). The disposal is by way of lease of 1.664 
acres (0.6735 hectares) of land at Newbridge Family Resource Centre, Dara Park, 
Newbridge, Co. Kildare.  
 
Councillors C. Pender and T. McDonnell queried the extent of lands and whether the 
Section 183 would impact proposed plans for a sports area. Mr B. Leonard advised 
that the disposal relates to extending an existing lease, which commenced in 2018, 
from 25 to 30 years. This extension of the lease, enables the Family Resource 
Centre to apply for capital funding to expand the building.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor P. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by the members present that the disposal be approved.  
 
05/1025 
Report from Members appointed to Other Bodies 
The members considered report from member appointed to Other Bodies, pursuant 
to Section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended). 
 
The following report was received at the October meeting: 
• Athy Heritage Company CLG. 
 
The report was noted. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 4 of 18 
 
06/1025 
Nominees to the South Western Substance Use Regional Forum (SURF) 
The Meetings Administrator briefed the Members on the terms of reference and 
membership of the SURF Forum, based on recent correspondence received. The 
membership requires a representative from Kildare PPN, Kildare County Council, 
and an elected representative. Currently, Councillor Panaite Fahey along with a 
Housing Department representative are members. Ms. L Hanratty advised that 
Member Services has written to Kildare Public Participation Network (PPN) inviting a 
nominee and is awaiting their response.  
 
The briefing was noted. 
 
07/1025 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
No report considered in the Cathaoirleach’s absence.  
 
08/1025 
Correspondence 
The Meetings Administrator confirmed that 10 items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included: 
• Eight resolutions from other local authorities,  
• Letter from National Oversight & Audit Commission (NOAC) regarding the 11th 
annual Performance Indicator Report for 2024, and  
• Letter from Uisce Éireann regarding the notice of motion process for MD and 
Full Council meetings. 
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 
09/1025 
Conferences and Training 
The Meeting Administrator referred to the Conference and Training report which was 
circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
Additional request received not included in the training report: 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 5 of 18 
 
Retrospective approval was sought for Councillor Brett who attended the AILG 
Autumn Training Seminar last month (Westport) at a cost of €175 plus travel and 
subsistence. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor Keatley and 
agreed by the members present that the Conference and Training report and the 
additional request from Councillor Brett be approved. 
 
10/1025 
Defence Forces Memorial at Aras Chill Dara 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Pat Balfe and Chris Pender was 
considered by the members: 
 
That Kildare County Council, recognising the long and distinguished association 
between County Kildare and the Defence Forces of Ireland, resolves to 
commemorate this relationship through the erection of a permanent memorial on the 
grounds of Áras Chill Dara, to: 
(a) honour all Members of the Defence Forces, particularly those personnel who 
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace, and acknowledge the 
sacrifice of their families,  
(b) mark the historic connection between County Kildare and the Defence Forces, 
including the Defence Forces Training Centre at the Curragh, the long history of 
barracks in Newbridge and Kildare Town, and the former Army Apprentice School 
once located on the site of Áras Chill Dara, and  
(c) engage with the Defence Forces, their Veterans’ organisations, and other 
stakeholders to design and locate a fitting memorial within the Council grounds, with 
proposals to be brought back to Members for approval. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Balfe and seconded by Councillor Pender.  
A report from Mr J Boland, Director of Services, Corporate and Cultural Services 
stated that the council fully recognises the long and distinguished association with 
the Defence Forces and is generally supportive of this motion. The Director, referred 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 6 of 18 
 
to the 6ft memorial erected in 2018 outside the Clock Arch, which houses the 25-
pounder gun and noted that a related motion was recently discussed and adopted at 
a recent meeting of Naas Municipal District. There was also discussion on a proposal 
for a similar initiative on the part of Kildare Newbridge Municipal District some years 
ago, culminating in the unveiling of a plaque on the external wall of the Town Hall. 
Following on from the Naas Municipal District motion, the council are preparing a 
tender document to engage a Conservation Architect to examine the feasibility of 
restoring the Clock Arch/Lantern Building. This could, in turn, further animate its 
existing military theme and could also include an appropriate memorial, as suggested 
in the current motion. The cost of any memorial feature and the funding of any 
significant memorial work outside of the normal capital expenditure on refurbishing 
the Clock Tower will also have to be considered. It was also noted that consultation 
with the Defence Forces veteran organisations should be arranged.  
Councillor Balfe highlighted the tradition and heritage of service by the Defence 
Forces from bases in the county and the distinguished service of personnel at home 
and abroad. He noted that 24 out of 88 members of the Defence Forces who lost 
their lives in the Service of Peace served in Units that were based in this county and 
sought this permanent memorial to remember these.  
Mr J. Boland confirmed the executive’s support for the proposal and indicated that he 
was of the view that the request could be incorporated as part of the council’s current 
plans. 
Councillor Pender supported the motion and welcomed the positive report stating 
that looked forward to progressing the feasibility study and design proposals. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Balfe, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted.  
 
11/1025 
 
 
  
 
Appointing an EU Funding Officer  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Evie Sammon was considered by the 
members: 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 7 of 18 
 
That Kildare County Council explores the possibility of appointing an EU Funding 
Officer. The role of this officer would be to analyse the Council’s strategic plan and 
identify where EU funding could be used to progress elements of that plan and to 
assist community and voluntary organisations in identifying possible funding sources. 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Sammon and seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer.  
A report from Ms M Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water and Mr E Ryan, Director of Services, People and Property Management 
stated that securing additional funding for strategic projects and work programmes is 
a priority of Council.  Kildare County Council actively applies for EU funding 
opportunities as appropriate.  There is already considerable awareness within the 
local authority regarding relevant EU Funding streams that can be, and are pursued, 
where feasible. 
  
Eastern Midlands Regional Authority (EMRA) has a prominent role in the delivery of 
some EU funding programmes, including managing the EU Just Transition Fund, 
overseeing the implementation of the European Regional Development Fund 
(Southern, Eastern and Midland programme), being the contact point for URBACT 
and European University Institute, and partnering in some European projects.  This 
key agency supports Local Authorities knowledge base in the field. For more 
information see: EU Affairs - Eastern & Midland Regional Assembly.  
  
Furthermore, both Leader and SICAP funding are administered via the Local 
Community Development Committee, with their origin from EU 
programmes.  Projects in the Climate arena have also secured EU funding the most 
recent being the ‘Repower the Regions Project’.  Further information on this project is 
available at the following link Repower Regions: Posts | LinkedIn.  
  
In addition, within Kildare County Council, all staff have been issued with the Funding 
Point Digest from Kildare LCDC and The Wheel which contains details of funding 
opportunities for community and voluntary groups – not just from EU sources but 
ranging from local, national, and government funding schemes to corporate and 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 8 of 18 
 
philanthropic alternatives. Every scheme features an introduction, application 
details/links, plus the specific deadline for applying, meaning this is very accessible 
information for staff and community groups.  The digest for August-September 2025 
is available online. Funding Point is also published on the Public Participation 
Network (PPN) website as part of its fortnightly e-Bulletin to all member groups. 
 
In terms of organisational structures, as the members will be aware the appointment 
and assignment of staff is an executive function.   
 
Councillor Sammon noted that other countries and counties were benefiting from 
significant EU funding opportunities by having a dedicated staff resource to pursue 
EU funding opportunities that would provide long term economic and community 
benefits. 
 
M. Higgins explained how the council was already in receipt of EU funding 
referencing examples under the climate action and LEADER/ SICAP programmes. 
She noted that existing structures and networks allow for information sharing on all 
funding opportunities. A formal business case would be required to consider the 
proposal.  
 
Councillor Sammon agreed to discuss the matter offline with the Director.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Sammon, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by members present that the report be noted.  
 
12/1025 
 
 
  
Invitation to Uisce Éireann Legacy Team 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Tracey O’Dwyer was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the council invites Uisce Éireann Legacy Team to the November Full Council 
meeting to brief Members on how Uisce Éireann plan to progress legacy estates in 
particular DPIs in County Kildare.  
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 9 of 18 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor T O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor P 
O’Dwyer.  
A report from Ms L Hanratty, Meetings Administrator stated that the motion had been 
referred to Uisce Éireann for consideration in advance of the workshop that took 
place in advance of this meeting on 20 October at 11.30a.m. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor P 
O’Dwyer and agreed by members present that a request issue to Uisce Éireann to 
attend the November meeting of the Council. 
 
13/1025 
 
 
  
 
 
Supply of Salt Bins 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Brian O’Loughlin was listed on the 
agenda: 
 
That the council commits to supplying more salt bins throughout the county following 
the freezing spells last winter and confirms the number and locations of proposed 
salt bins.  
Councillor O’Loughlin was not in attendance and motion fell in line with Standing 
Orders. 
14/1025 
 
 
  
 
Cycling Levels in the County 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Bill Clear was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council outlines how it is monitoring changes in cycling levels throughout the 
county, and what progress has been made toward its County Development Plan 
targets of a 20% increase in cycling to work and a 15% increase in cycling to school 
by 2029, with just five to six years remaining for Ireland to meet its legally binding 
target of a 51% reduction in carbon emissions and given the Advisory Climate 
Council's warning that the transport sector is increasingly unlikely to meet its targets.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 10 of 18 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Clear and seconded by Councillor Pender.  
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that Kildare County Council aims to prioritise and promote the 
development of high-quality, suitable, safe and sustainable walking and cycling 
pathways and facilities, both inter-county, intra county and within the towns and 
settlements of County Kildare that will encourage the shift to active travel that is 
accessible for all. Recent projects delivered include the Kilcullen Road Active Travel 
Scheme, Naas; Craddockstown Road Active Travel Scheme, Naas; Royal Canal 
Greenway; Grand Canal Greenway; Millstreet Active Travel Scheme (currently under 
construction) and Moone-Timolin National Cycling Network Pilot. Future projects 
include the Celbridge Road Active Travel Scheme, Maynooth; Dublin Road, Naas 
and a scheme in Sallins Village. 
In addition, there is an extensive programme of Safe Routes to School projects 
developed in conjunction with the National Transport Authority (NTA) and An Taisce 
Green Schools. Current projects include Scoil an Linbh Íosa, Prosperous and Kilkea 
National School, Athy.  
Kildare County Council recently appointed a Road Safety and Sustainable Transport 
Officer whose remit includes the promotion of cycling and working with schools to 
develop behavioural change amongst students and guardians. 
The priority for this Local Authority is to develop a connected active travel network 
within the county in order to assist in achieving the targets set out in the County 
Development Plan. Following the substantial completion of the network, a monitoring 
system will be developed that is consistent with adjoining local authorities and the 
requirements of Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII), National Transport Authority 
(NTA) and the Department of Transport. 
Kildare County Council currently participates in the Smarter Travel Programme to 
encourage staff to use more sustainable means of commuting to work and the 
Council is currently participating in a pilot with Transport for Ireland to encourage the 
use of public transport in commuting to work. 
The following targets are included in the County Development Plan 2023-2029: 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 11 of 18 
 
• TM T2:  As a minimum, increase the current modal shares of trips to work by 
walking to 20% and cycling to 10% during the lifetime of this Plan, and, 
• TM T3:  As a minimum, increase the current modal shares of trips to 
education by walking to 50% and cycling to 15% during the lifetime of this 
Plan. 
 
Achieving a significant reduction in car dependency as proposed in this Target is 
beyond the scope of a Local Authority alone and requires an all-Government 
approach to monitor progress. Accurate national data in this regard will not be 
available until Census 2027 is completed, which will be used to inform the 
preparation of the next County Development Plan 2029-2039. 
Councillor Clear welcomed the report and acknowledged the delivery of the multiple 
projects by the council. He asked that monitoring and data collection commence to 
determine the success of the various projects completed. Ms. C. Barrett cautioned 
against the merit of such data collection in the absence of infrastructure and a 
connected network, where projects were not completed.   
Councillor Clear requested that the matter be referred to the Transportation, Mobility 
and Open Spaces Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) for further consideration.   
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Clear, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and referred to the 
Transportation, Mobility and Open Spaces SPC. 
 
15/1025 
Pilot Workforce Inclusion Roadshow 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Donna Phelan was considered by the 
members: 
 
That Kildare County Council, through the Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services SPC and in partnership with Kildare Library 
Service, the Local Enterprise Office (LEO), EmployAbility Service, Intreo, Kildare and 
Wicklow ETB, and the LCDC/SICAP programme, develop and pilot a ‘Workforce 
Inclusion Roadshow’ for each Municipal District. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 12 of 18 
 
The purpose is to provide free, accessible, drop-in advice to: 
(i) jobseekers, including people returning to work after illness, injury or disability 
(ii) employers seeking support to recruit inclusively. 
The aim of this pilot will mirror the successful ‘roadshow’ model used for 
homelessness awareness bringing services to communities rather than expecting 
people to navigate multiple offices while specifically targeting workforce participation 
and inclusive recruitment.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Phelan and seconded by Councillor Killeen.  
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that the Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Tourism Team supports the development of a Workforce Inclusion 
Roadshow across each Municipal District in County Kildare. 
This initiative aligns strongly with our ongoing commitment to inclusive economic 
development and community engagement, as outlined in the Kildare LECP 
Implementation Plan 2024–2026.  
We are proud to collaborate with our partners in Kildare County Council’s Planning, 
Enterprise, Economic Development and Emergency Services SPC, Kildare Library 
Service, Employability Service, Intreo, KWETB, and the LCDC/SICAP programme to 
deliver this pilot. 
Importantly, Enterprise, Economic Development and Tourism Team in Kildare 
County Council already hosts annual/bi-annual Municipal District Roadshows to 
engage directly with businesses, aspiring entrepreneurs, start-ups and communities 
across the county. These roadshows provide a valuable platform for outreach, 
support, and collaboration, and the proposed Workforce Inclusion Roadshow would 
build on this established model with a targeted focus on workforce participation and 
inclusive recruitment. 
To date, these Municipal District Roadshows have aimed to: 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 13 of 18 
 
• Engage local entrepreneurs, start-ups, and small businesses 
• Showcase and increase access to Local Enterprise Office (LEO) supports, 
including grants, mentoring, training, and networking 
• Promote sector-specific initiatives, such as food, craft, retail, childcare, equine, 
and tourism, and 
• Facilitate direct access to LEO staff and business advisors in an informal, 
drop-in setting. 
 
LEO Kildare will work with our partners with a view to building on existing practices, 
including our annual/ bi-annual roadshows, to support workforce activation and 
inclusive recruitment as key pillars of our economic strategy. 
Councillor Phelan noted the report and highlighted the need for a specific measure to 
support workforce inclusion.  
Mr. G. Maher confirmed support for the proposal and agreed that this will be 
considered as a feature of existing roadshows in operation.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Phelan, seconded by Councillor Killeen and 
agreed by members present that the proposal be incorporated as a feature into 
existing countywide roadshows.  
 
16/1025 
 
 
 Boycott of Goods from Israeli Occupied Territories in Palestine 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Claire O’Rourke was considered by 
the members: 
 
That Kildare County Council insofar as is practicable supports the Boycott, 
Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) campaign in relation to goods and services 
originating from Israeli occupied territories in Palestine, and, refrain from purchasing 
goods or services produced, provided or facilitated by Israeli state-owned enterprises 
or companies that materially support the policies of the Israeli state, until Israel 
complies with international law and universally recognised human rights standards. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 14 of 18 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor 
Salmon.  
A report from Mr E Ryan, Director of Services, People and Property Management 
stated that Kildare County Council follows all EU Procurement Directives and 
national procurement advice (from the Office of Government Procurement, the Local 
Government Management Agency, etc.).  Therefore, the adoption of this motion 
would be very challenging and potentially non-enforceable in the absence of an 
overall national approach. 
Councillor O’Rourke noted the context of her motion and highlighted the importance 
of adopting the proposal. She advised that several other local authorities (north and 
south) have already passed similar motions. A number of other members spoke in 
support of the motion, acknowledging practical issues that might arise in 
implementing such action.  
Mr. Ryan explained that there would be practical difficulties in implementing the 
motion as presented, if passed. He noted that guidance and advice on such 
procurement matters is provided centrally (OGP) and undertook to further consult on 
the request with the OGP.  
It was noted that, in a situation where no resolution was passed at the meeting, 
Councillor O’Rourke would have the option to resubmit the motion at a future 
meeting. 
This motion was not resolved.  
17/1025 
 
 
  
Breastfeeding Friendly Kildare Strategy 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Nuala Killeen was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council details if any specific strategies might be in place for the creation of 
a Breastfeeding Friendly Kildare Strategy to promote breastfeeding-friendly spaces, 
businesses and designing public environments to promote breastfeeding.   
The motion was proposed by Councillor Killeen and seconded by Councillor Pender. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 15 of 18 
 
A report from Ms M Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water stated that it is noted that where this initiative has been progressed in 
other counties, it has been under the Healthy Ireland Programme.  
In Kildare, the Healthy Ireland Programme currently works through Kildare Local 
Community Development Committee (LCDC) and Kildare Children and Young 
People’s Services Committee (CYPSC). 
Kildare County Council, on behalf of Kildare LCDC has been approved for Healthy 
Ireland Round 4 funding for the period 2023-2025. This funding was provided based 
upon the Healthy Kildare Plan 2022 - 2026, and the themes and related actions that 
form priorities for this funding to the end of 2025, are Mental Health and Healthy 
Lifestyles, and do not include a Breastfeeding Strategy.   
The initiative referenced in the motion is noted, for the purposes of the next round of 
Healthy Ireland funding. 
However, it should, as set out, be noted that the priorities in the programme are 
agreed through engagement with a range of relevant partner agencies through the 
LCDC.  
M. Higgins advised that the proposal could be considered as part of the engagement 
for the next programme. Councillor Killeen agreed and asked that the motion be 
referred to the LCDC for consideration.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by members present that the request be referred to LCDC for consideration 
as part of their public consultation for the future programme.  
 
18/1025 
External Cladding to Homes and Energy Retrofit 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Peggy O’Dwyer was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the council clarifies the planning position on the application of external 
insulation to homes with existing cladding when applying for the SEAI Grant Scheme.   

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 16 of 18 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor P O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor T 
O’Dwyer.  
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that Section 4(1)(h) of the Planning 
and Development Act 2000 (as amended) states that the following shall be exempted 
development for the purposes of the Act: ‘development consisting of the carrying out 
of works for the maintenance,   improvement or other alteration of any structure, 
being works which affect only the interior of the structure or which do not materially 
affect the external appearance of the structure so as to render the appearance 
inconsistent with the character of the structure or of neighbouring structures’. 
The provision of external insulation to existing detached, semi-detached and terraced 
houses is considered on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the above 
provisions. 
The Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage is currently reviewing 
potential changes to existing classes of exempted development and the possible 
introduction of new classes of exempt development is currently ongoing as part of 
the regulations that will support the new Planning & Development Act, 2024.  
Under the heading Residential - domestic extensions/ minor works - Areas identified 
as requiring further consideration include ‘the wrapping of dwellings for insulation 
purposes, subject to limitations in respect of protected structures and ACA areas. 
No updated legislation in this regard has been enacted to date. 
Councillor P. O’Dwyer noted the report and referenced a local case where 
householders applying for an energy retrofit grant had been affected. She asked that 
the council seek clarification from the Minister of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage on the matter.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by members present that the Council writes to the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage to provide clarity and guidance on the 
matter.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 17 of 18 
 
19/1025 
Cultúrlann Chill Dara 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Noel Connolly was considered by the 
members: 
 
Go n-oibreoidh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara le Cill Dara le Gaeilge agus le páirtithe 
leasmhara ábhartha eile chun Cultúrlann a chur ar fáil don Chontae. 
That Kildare County Council works with Cill Dara le Gaeilge and other relevant 
stakeholders to provide a Cultural Centre for the County.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Connolly and seconded by Councillor 
Pender.  
Arna eisiúint ag: S. Ó Beoláin, Stiúrthóir Seirbhísí, Seirbhísí Corporáideacha agus 
Cultúir. Tá forbairt Cultúrlainne ar cheann de phríomhchuspóirí Chill Dara le Gaeilge 
agus tá an cuspóir seo leagtha amach ina bPlean Gaeilge 2024 go 2030; is é sin 
Cultúrlann a fhorbairt a bheadh ina lárionad cultúrtha ionchuimsitheach, chun ár 
dteanga dhúchais agus ár gcultúr traidisiúnta a cheiliúradh.  
Tacaíonn Comhairle Contae Chill Dara leis an gcuspóir seo agus tá sí sásta dul i 
mbun plé le Cill Dara le Gaeilge. Sa chomhthéacs seo, tá cruinniú leis an ngrúpa an 
mhí seo chugainn beartaithe agus, go deimhin, tá ábhar an rúin 'Cultúrlann Chill 
Dara' ar chlár an chruinnithe.  Bheifí ag súil leis, le himeacht ama, go mbeifí ábalta 
bogadh ar aghaidh ón gcéim choincheapúil agus dul chun cinn a dhéanamh maidir 
leis an gcuspóir seo a bhaint amach.  Mar sin féin, beidh dúshláin i gceist, maidir le 
suíomh a aithint, maoiniú is araile (srl).  Coimeádfar na baill ar an eolas.  
A report from Mr J Boland, Director of Services, Corporate and Cultural Services 
stated that a key objective on the part of Cill Dara le Gaeilge and included in their 
ambitious Irish Language Plan 2024 to 2030 is the development of a Cultúrlann as 
an inclusive cultural centre, to celebrate our native language and traditional culture.  
Kildare County Council supports this objective and is happy to engage with Cill Dara 
le Gaeilge. In this context, a meeting with the group is scheduled for the coming 
month and, indeed, the proposed ' Cultúrlann Chill Dara' does feature on the agenda. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 20.10.2025                 Page 18 of 18 
 
Hopefully, as time progresses, it will be possible to move beyond the conceptual 
stage and to make progress in realising this objective. There will, however, be 
challenges ahead in terms of site identification, funding, etc. The members will be 
kept informed. 
Councillor Connolly noted that he previously advocated for such a facility and 
expressed frustration at the apparent delay in progress. However, he thanked the 
Director for the report and highlighted that significant funding may be available to the 
council to progress such an initiative.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Connolly, seconded by Councillor Pender 
and agreed by members present that the report was noted.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
