 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council Special Meeting 22.09.2025        Page 1 of 2 
 
 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Full Council held at 2:00 p.m. 
Monday 22 September 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
 
                     
Members Present: Councillors C. Kelly (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V. Behan,  
A. Breen, A. Breslin, F. Brett, S. Doyle, K. Duffy,  
T. Durkan, W. Durkan, D. Fitzpatrick, R. Heather, N. Heavey,  
I. Keatley, N. Killeen, S. Moore, P. O’Dwyer,  
T. O’Dwyer, C. O’Rourke, D. Phelan, E. Sammon,  
D. Trost, P. Ward and B. Wyse.  
 
Online: 
Councillors P. Brooks, B. Clear, N. Connolly, B. Dooley, A. 
Feeney, M. Leigh, P. Melrose, P. Mulroe, L. Panaite Fahey and 
R. Power. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillors B. Caldwell, G. Dunne, T. McDonnell, P. McEvoy,  
B. O’Loughlin and C. Pender.  
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Mr. J. Boland,  
Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator),  
Mr. B. O’Gorman (Meetings Secretary) and other officials.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the Special Meeting of the council to 
consider motion for a presidential nomination. 
 
 
01/0925SM2 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council Special Meeting 22.09.2025        Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
02/0925SM2 
Minutes of Special Meeting 
The council considered the draft minutes of the Special Meeting held on 15 
September 2025 to afford potential candidates for presidential nomination, the 
opportunity to present to the members.   
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Peggy O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor 
Seamie Moore and agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of Special 
Meeting held on 15 September 2025 be adopted. 
 
     03/0925SM2 
Nomination of Maria Steen 
Councillor McDonnell (Proposer) was not in attendance. Consequently, the 
Cathaoirleach removed agenda item 3 from the agenda in line with ‘Kildare County 
Council Standing Orders for the Regulation of Business and Proceedings at Meeting 
of the Council’.  
 
There being no further matters the meeting ended. 
 
 
