 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         22.09.2025                               Page 1 of 6 
Áras Chill Dara 
Páirc Devoy 
An Nás 
Co. Chill Dara 
 
12 Meán Fómhair 2025 
   12 September 2025 
 
 
Don Chathaoirleach agus do gach ball tofa de Chomhairle Contae Chill Dara 
  
A Bhaill Uile, 
 
Tionólfar cruinniú míosúil na Comhairle ar 3:00 i.n. ar an Luan, 22 Meán Fómhair 2025 i 
Seomra na Comhairle, Áras Chill Dara, Páirc Devoy, An Nás, agus iarrtar ort a bheith i 
láthair. 
 
The monthly meeting of the council will be held at 3:00 p.m. on Monday, 22 September 
2025 in the Council Chamber, Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, and you are invited to 
attend.  
 
Le gach dea-ghuí, 
 
 
__________________________ 
Letitia Hanratty 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe  
Meetings Administrator 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         22.09.2025                               Page 2 of 6 
Clár 
Agenda 
 
1. 
Dearbhuithe um (a) coinbhleachtaí leasa nó (b) leasanna airgid nó leasanna 
tairbhiúla faoi Alt 177 den Acht Rialtais Áitiúil 2001, arna leasú.        
Declarations of (a) conflicts of interest or (b) pecuniary or beneficial interests under 
Section 177 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended. 
 
2. 
Glacadh le miontuairiscí an chruinnithe mhíosúil a reáchtáladh ar an 28 Iúil 2025 
(leanfar leis seo), agus an tuarascáil ar dhul chun cinn a thabhairt faoi deara 
(leanfar leis seo). 
To adopt the minutes of the monthly meeting held on 28 July 2025 (to follow) and to 
note progress report (to follow).   
 
Gnó Reachtúil 
Statutory Business 
 
3. 
To note the Chief Executive’s monthly management report (copy attached). 
 
4. 
To fix the date of the statutory 2026 Annual Budget Meeting. 
 
5. 
To consider Commercial Rates Incentive (Waiver) Scheme (CRIS), in accordance 
with Section 15 of the Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as 
amended (report to follow). 
 
 
6. 
To approve the seeking of sanction for continued Bank Overdraft facilities of €4.5m for 
the year ending 31st December 2026 (report to follow).  
 
7. 
To receive reports from members appointed to Other Bodies, pursuant to Section 141 
of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended (reports to follow). 
 
8. 
To consider request from Councillor Feeney regarding membership of the ‘EU Local 
Councillors Network’. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         22.09.2025                               Page 3 of 6 
9. 
To nominate a member to the HSE Dublin and Midlands Regional Health Forum.  
 
10. 
To seek nomination for two elected members to participate in the new Kildare Road 
Safety Working Together Group (report to follow).  
 
11. 
To consider nomination to the Environmental and Water Services Strategic Policy 
Committee (report to follow). 
 
12. 
To consider nomination to the Housing and Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee 
(report to follow). 
 
13. 
To receive an update/report on Public Sector Duty Framework (report to follow).  
 
14. 
Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
15. 
Correspondence (to follow). 
 
16. 
Conferences and Training (report to follow). 
 
 
Rúin Chomhairle Contae Chill Dara 
Motions Kildare County Council 
 
17. 
Na Comhairleoirí - Councillors Brendan Wyse, Daragh Fitzpatrick, William 
Durkan, Evie Sammon, Ivan Keatley, Fintan Brett, Donna Phelan, Carmel Kelly, 
Paul Ward, Angela Feeney, Paula Mulroe, Pádraig McEvoy, Mark Leigh, Aoife 
Breslin, Bill Clear and Ger Dunne 
That the council update the elected members with reports, draft designs, works 
completed and required resources to improve safety on the 10 junctions identified in 
Phase 1 of the Junction Improvement Programme, which commenced in April 2022. 
These junctions being Dag Weld's Cross, Prosperous Village, Allenwood Cross, 
Firmount Cross, Cloncurry Cross, Bert's Cross, Perry Street Cross, Watchhouse 
Cross, Thompson's Cross and Allen Cross.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         22.09.2025                               Page 4 of 6 
18. 
Na Comhairleoirí - Councillors Chris Pender and Claire O’Rourke 
That Kildare County Council provides members with clear information on the process 
for allocation of emergency accommodation, to include: 
a)  The procedure followed when a request is made through the emergency line, 
b)  The legal requirements and criteria applied in determining eligibility and 
placement, and 
c)  Details on the current availability and capacity of emergency accommodation 
within the county.  
 
19. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Peggy O’Dwyer 
That Kildare County Council, in conjunction with Kildare Sports Partnership, explores 
the installation of sunscreen dispensers at various sporting facilities.  
 
20. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Kevin Duffy  
That the council provides a breakdown of the refusal rate of first-time grant 
applications submitted to Kildare County Council for private homes grants (mobility, 
disability and older persons grants) with refusal being for reasons such as incorrect 
documentation, missing information rather than for applicants not qualifying.  
 
21. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Rupert Heather 
That the council acts to protect centuries old hedgerows bordering new developments 
across County Kildare to help conserve our natural environment.  
 
22. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Tracey O’Dwyer 
That the council clarifies their position regarding renewing the service level agreement 
with the Cairde App.  
 
23. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Peter Melrose 
That this council affirms its commitment to protecting Kildare’s natural heritage by 
prioritising enforcement proceedings, allocating additional resources, if necessary, 
against illegal peat extractions in this county.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         22.09.2025                               Page 5 of 6 
24. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Nuala Killeen 
That the future Mid East Region Homelessness Action Plan (to be adopted in 2026), 
delivers meaningful action on youth homelessness and includes an action plan, 
timeframe and be developed following meaningful consultation with young people.  
That as part of the plan, the council collects data and provides quarterly reports on 
presentation numbers including:  
- the number that are subsequently assessed for social housing, 
- the number that are regarded as experiencing homelessness under s. 2 of the 
Housing Act 1988,  
- the number that are regarded as experiencing homelessness that are 
subsequently allocated emergency accommodation, 
- the number that are regarded as experiencing homelessness but are not 
allocated emergency accommodation, and the reasons given, 
- the number that are not regarded as experiencing homelessness under s. 2 of 
the Housing Act 1988, and the reasons for this determination, and 
- the number of those that are not regarded as experiencing homelessness that 
are signposted to appropriate support or prevention services. 
 
25. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Noel Connolly 
Go mbreithneodh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara an fhéidearthacht go mbeadh 
Oifigeach Idirchaidrimh tiomnaithe maidir le Foréigean Teaghlaigh, Gnéasach agus 
Inscnebhunaithe agus Mí-Úsáid ag an gComhairle Contae chun comhairle a chur ar 
fáil dóibh siúd atá ag iarraidh rochtain a fháil ar sheirbhísí na Comhairle agus atá ag 
fulaingt ón bhforéigean agus/nó ón mí-úsáid sin, agus chun abhcóideacht a 
dhéanamh ar a son. 
That Kildare County Council explores the possibility of having a dedicated Domestic, 
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and Abuse Liaison Officer to advise, and 
advocate for, those who are seeking to access Council services and are experiencing 
such violence and/or abuse.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cruinniú na Comhairle    Council Meeting         22.09.2025                               Page 6 of 6 
26. 
An Comhairleoir - Councillor Seamie Moore 
That this Council agrees to support a petition letter to the Minister for Finance in 
advance of his Budget preparation, to request him to introduce a Government Savings 
Investment Scheme for ordinary savings investors, for the singular purpose of the 
creation of a Government Fund to finance Local Authorities in the acquisition of 
Community Sports and Recreational Lands and the provision of Community 
Infrastructure, to overcome the inadequacy of the present funding systems to assist 
the growth counties like Kildare, where the adjusted National Planning Framework will 
expect the population to increase from 250,000 at present to 350,000 by 2034 and to 
400,000 by 2040.  
 
