 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 1 of 28 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 22 September 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
 
                     
Members Present: Councillors C. Kelly (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V. Behan,  
A. Breen, A. Breslin, F. Brett, B. Caldwell, S. Doyle, K. Duffy 
T. Durkan, W. Durkan, D. Fitzpatrick, R. Heather, N. Heavey,  
I. Keatley, N. Killeen, T. McDonnell, P. McEvoy, S. Moore, 
P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer, B. O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, 
D. Phelan, E. Sammon, D. Trost., P. Ward and B. Wyse. 
 
Online: 
Councillors P. Brooks, B. Clear, N. Connolly, B. Dooley,  
A. Feeney, M. Leigh, P. Melrose, P. Mulroe, L. Panaite Fahey 
and R. Power.  
 
Apologies: 
Councillor G. Dunne. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms. A. Aspell, Mr. J. Boland, 
Mr. A. Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, (Directors of Services), Ms. C. 
Barrett, Ms. B. Maher (A/Directors of Services), Ms. L. Hanratty 
(Meetings Administrator), Mr. B. O’Gorman (Meetings Secretary) 
and other officials.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach proposed to suspend standing orders to facilitate the conclusion 
of the ‘Into Kildare’ presentation ahead of the monthly meeting. 
 
This was seconded by Councillor W. Durkan and agreed by the members present. 
 
The meeting commenced at 3:05 p.m. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the September monthly meeting of the 
Council. The Meeting Administrator read out a notice regarding the live streaming of 
the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 2 of 28 
 
00/0925 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised the meeting that she had been informed of the following 
bereavements:  
 
• Victoria (Tori) Rowan, Sister of Brian Rowan, Planning Department and 
Daughter of our former colleague Ann Rowan. 
• Ann Mahon, Mother of Ann Quinn, Local Enterprise Office.  
• David Kelly, former colleague National Roads Design Office (NRDO). 
• Gerry Halton, former colleague. 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/0925 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0925 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 28 July 
2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Moore, seconded by Councillor P. O’Dwyer 
and agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the monthly meeting 
held on 28 July 2025 be adopted. 
 
The progress report was noted.  
 
     03/0925 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 3 of 28 
 
04/0925 
 
 
 
 
Annual Budget Meeting 2026 
The members considered a date for the statutory annual budget meeting. Ms. E. 
Hanlon, Director of Service, Finance, Digital Services, Innovation and Governance, 
advised members regarding Circular Fin 10/2025 and the prescribed periods for local 
authorities budget meetings between 03 November and 28 November 2025.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Duffy, seconded by Councillor Keatley, with 
the agreement of all members present it was agreed that the statutory annual budget 
meeting be held on Monday, 17 November 2025 at 3.00pm and a briefing on the 
draft budget be held on Monday, 10 November 2026 at 3.00pm. 
 
05/0925 
Commercial Rates Incentive (Waiver) Scheme 
The members considered the report circulated on the Commercial Rates Incentive 
(Waiver) Scheme (CRIS), in accordance with Section 15 of the Local Government 
Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended. 
 
The scheme aims to encourage reoccupation of vacant commercial premises in town 
and village centres across County Kildare. The scheme provides for a three-year 
waiver of a percentage of commercial rates to eligible entrepreneurs/ businesses 
who occupy a property that has been vacant for a period of at least two years. 
 
Councillor Keatley, Chairperson of the Planning, Enterprise and Economic 
Development SPC acknowledged the work of staff and the committee in progressing 
the draft scheme.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Keatley and 
agreed by the members, that the council approves the adoption of a Scheme for the 
waiver of Rates (as circulated) pursuant to Section 15 of the Local Government 
Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended and in accordance with S.I. No. 349 
of the Local Government Waiver of Rates Regulations 2024. The scheme shall apply 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 4 of 28 
 
for the financial year ending 31 December, 2026 and is intended to support the 
implementation of the Kildare County Development Plan 2023 – 2029 (as reviewed).  
 
06/0925 
Bank Overdraft Facility 2026 
A report was circulated by Ms. Hanlon informing the members that as in previous 
years, Kildare County Council’s Finance Department was seeking the council’s 
approval to seek sanction from the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage to continue to maintain an overdraft facility of €4,500,000 (€4.5million) for 
the year 2026 to assist in funding the working capital requirements of the council 
should it be needed. As shown in the Chief Executive’s monthly report, there has 
been minimal requirement to use this facility in 2025, however it was strongly 
recommended that it be maintained for cash flow purposes. 
 
Councillor T. O’Dwyer asked that where the facility was accessed, details to be 
updated in the CE Report. This was agreed.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor Doyle 
and agreed by the members, that the seeking of sanction for Bank Overdraft facilities 
of €4.5m for the year ending 31st December 2026 be approved. 
 
07/0925 
Reports from Members appointed to Other Bodies 
The members considered reports from members appointed to Other Bodies, 
pursuant to Section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended. 
 
The following reports were received at the September meeting: 
• Association of Irish Local Government - AILG 
• Eastern and Midlands Regional Assembly 
• Kildare Town Heritage Company CLG 
• Kildare-Meath Upgrade Community Forum 
 
The reports were noted. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 5 of 28 
 
 
 
08/0925 
 
EU Local Councillors Network 
The members considered the request from Councillor Feeney regarding her request 
to become a member of the ‘EU Local Councillors Network’. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Breslin, seconded by Councillor Melrose and 
agreed by the members present that Councillor Feeney’s membership of the ‘EU 
Local Councillors Network’ be approved.  
 
09/0925 
HSE Dublin and Midlands Regional Health Forum 
The members considered the nomination of one additional elected member to the 
HSE Dublin and Midlands Regional Health Forum.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Trost, seconded by Councillor Ward and 
agreed by the members present that Councillor Phelan be appointed to the HSE 
Dublin and Midlands Regional Health Forum. 
 
10/0925 
Kildare Road Safety Working Together Group 
The members considered the nomination of two elected members to participate in 
the new Kildare Road Safety Working Together Group – One to represent North 
Kildare and other for South Kildare. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Caldwell and 
agreed by the members present that Councillor Ward (North); and on proposal of 
Councillor Duffy, seconded by Councillor Salmon and agreed by the members 
present that Councillor T. O’Dwyer (South) be appointed to the Kildare Road Safety 
Working Together Group. 
                                                                                                                                                  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 6 of 28 
 
11/0925 
Nomination to the Environmental Services and Water Services SPC 
The Cathaoirleach advised the members that Kildare Public Participation Network 
(PPN), following an election process, proposed a sectoral interest candidate 
representing community and voluntary for the Environmental Services and Water 
Service SPC. She noted that a biography of the nominated candidate had been 
circulated prior to the meeting and that CPG had recommended the nomination for 
consideration at Full Council. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Doyle, and 
agreed by the members present that the nomination from the PPN be accepted and 
that Ms. Patricia Foley be appointed to the Environmental Services and Water 
Strategic Policy Committee. 
12/0925 
Nomination to the Housing and Regeneration SPC 
Matter deferred as CPG was awaiting more information from PPN regarding 
nominee.  
 
13/0925 
Public Sector Duty – Implementation Framework 
Kildare County Council’s Implementation Framework for the Public Sector Human 
Rights and Equality Duty was circulated to members previously. 
Mr. J. Boland, Director of Services outlined that the Public Sector Duty is a statutory 
obligation for public bodies under Section 42(1) of the Irish Human Rights and 
Equality Commission Act 2014. The council, in the performance of its functions is 
required to have regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, promote equality and 
protect the human rights of staff and persons to whom it provides services.  
Under the Implementation Framework, the key actions are:  
• Assess - In preparing strategic plans, the council will assess and identify the 
human rights and equality issues that are relevant to its functions as policy 
maker, employer and service provider.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 7 of 28 
 
• Address - Identify the policies and practices that are in place, or that are 
planned to be put in place, to address these issues.  
• Report - The council’s annual report will outline the developments and 
achievements because of the plans, policies and actions put in place to 
address equality and human rights issues. 
The Council is committed to progressively realising the human rights and equality of 
specific groups, whether staff or those to whom it provides services, listed as a 
priority. 
The Director acknowledged the positive engagement and collaboration of staff and 
members in drafting the implementation report. He highlighted next steps – 
awareness raising, staff training, oversight by the council’s management and 
mainstreaming the duty to all the council’s work. 
The report was noted. 
14/0925 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach advised members on the following: 
 
• Certificate of Recognition – County Kildare Senior Football Team (GAA): 
The Cathaoirleach congratulated the County Kildare Senior Football Team on 
winning the Tailteann Cup in July. She proposed that a Certificate of 
Recognition be presented to the team.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Duffy, seconded by Councillor 
Pender, and agreed by the members present that the award be presented to 
the County Kildare Senior Football Team (GAA) in advance of the November 
monthly meeting of the council. 
 
• Emily Square Athy – Official Opening: 
The Cathaoirleach advised that she was honoured to have attended the 
official opening of Emily Square in Athy. The project was progressed by the 
Council’s Public Realm Team.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 8 of 28 
 
• National Pride of Place – Kildare Adjudication: 
The Cathaoirleach attended the recent adjudication for two County Kildare 
applicants in Athy. She wished both the Athy Sign and Sing Group and 
Loughnamona Youth Hub /Leixlip Youth Project INSYNC every success in the 
final (taking place in Limerick on 7 November next).  
 
• E Government Award Finalist - Grass to Gas: 
The Cathaoirleach congratulated the Parks Department on being shortlisted 
for the recent E Government Awards. The Grass to Gas Project seeks to 
realise the energy potential for managed green spaces to contribute to climate 
action and climate mitigation opportunities. 
 
15/0925 
Correspondence 
The Meeting Administrator confirmed that 38 items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included: 
• Seven resolutions from other local authorities,  
• Circular LG 11-2025 - Increase to Annual Remuneration of Elected Member 
(1 August 2025) 
• Circular F.08-25 - Presidential Election Order and Nomination Paper to Local 
Authorities (03 September 2025) 
• Reply from the Office of Minister Alan Dillon TD regarding policy on the 
disposal of large nitrous oxide canisters (Councillors Peggy O’Dwyer, William 
Durkan and Brendan Wyse 110725) 
• Reply from National Transport Authority regarding review of bus services in 
the county (Councillors Pender and Balfe 140525),  
• Acknowledgement from the Office of Minister James Browne regarding 
changes to apartment standards (Multiple Councillors 100725). 
• Twenty-five items of correspondence seeking consideration as a nominee for 
the Presidential Election. 
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 9 of 28 
 
16/0925 
Conferences and Training 
The Meeting Administrator referred to the Conference and Training report which was 
circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
Additional requests received as below:  
• LAMA Conference: 
Approval for Councillors Heavey and Caldwell to also attend. 
 
• Planning Course (Microcredential) - Maynooth University: 
Approval for Councillor Moore to attend. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Behan, seconded by Councillor McEvoy and 
agreed by the members present that the Conference and Training report and 
additional requests be approved. 
 
17/0925 
Junction Improvement Programme – Phase 1 – Ten Junctions 
The following motion in the name of Councillors Brendan Wyse, Daragh Fitzpatrick, 
William Durkan, Evie Sammon, Ivan Keatley, Fintan Brett, Donna Phelan, Carmel 
Kelly, Paul Ward, Angela Feeney, Paula Mulroe, Pádraig McEvoy, Mark Leigh, Aoife 
Breslin, Bill Clear and Ger Dunne was considered by the members: 
 
That the council update the elected members with reports, draft designs, works 
completed and required resources to improve safety on the 10 junctions identified in 
Phase 1 of the Junction Improvement Programme, which commenced in April 2022. 
These junctions being Dag Weld's Cross, Prosperous Village, Allenwood Cross, 
Firmount Cross, Cloncurry Cross, Bert's Cross, Perry Street Cross, Watchhouse 
Cross, Thompson's Cross and Allen Cross.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Wyse and seconded by Councillor Salmon.   

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 10 of 28 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the following table outlines the current position in respect of the 
Junction Improvement Programme. 
Junction 
Location of 
Interest 
(LOI) 
Status 
Next Steps 
Allenwood 
Yes  
Round 3a 
Design of signals complete, 
finalising tender and 
drawings for consenting 
phase. 
Complete consenting 
phase and move to 
construction. 
Dag Welds 
Yes  
Round 3a 
Phase 1 complete, finalising 
tender and drawings for 
consenting phase. 
Phase 2 which entails the 
introduction of a stagger will 
require land acquisition and 
a Part 8 process due to the 
extent of the scheme.  
Complete consenting 
phase and move to 
construction for Phase 1. 
Begin engagement with 
the relevant landowners to 
discuss land acquisition to 
allow Phase 2 to 
progress. 
Prosperous 
Yes  
Round 3a 
New school development 
conditioned to upgrade 
junction crossing. 
 
Bert Cross 
No 
No funding for substantial 
works at this location as it is 
not an LOI. 
Junction to be tightened 
up as part of HGV 
restriction in Athy. 
Additional signage to be 
erected each side of 
junction. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 11 of 28 
 
Watchhouse 
Cross 
Yes 
Round 3a 
Project to be progressed 
now that location is 
classified as an LOI. Option 
report received and the 
delivery of the preferred 
option will require land 
acquisition and a Part 8 
process due to the extent of 
the scheme.  
Begin engagement with 
the relevant landowner to 
discuss land acquisition to 
allow scheme to progress. 
Cloncurry 
Yes  
Round 3a 
Project Team to review 
options report received. 
Scheme to be developed 
thereafter however the other 
junctions (Allenwood, Dag 
Welds and Watchhouse) will 
be prioritised. 
To be progressed once 
Allenwood, Dag Welds 
and Watchhouse have 
been consented and 
moved into the delivery 
phase. 
Firmount 
Yes  
Round 2 
Project Team to review 
options report received. 
Scheme to be developed 
thereafter however the other 
junctions (Allenwood, Dag 
Welds and Watchhouse) will 
be prioritised. 
To be progressed once 
Allenwood, Dag Welds 
and Watchhouse have 
been consented and 
moved into the delivery 
phase. 
Perry Street 
Cross 
Yes  
Round 2 
Project Team to review 
options report received. 
Scheme to be developed 
thereafter however the other 
junctions (Allenwood, Dag 
Welds and Watchhouse) will 
be prioritised. 
To be progressed once 
Allenwood, Dag Welds 
and Watchhouse have 
been consented and 
moved into the delivery 
phase. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 12 of 28 
 
Thompsons 
Cross 
No 
Project team to review 
options report received in 
conjunction with the MD 
office who have done some 
work on a scheme at this 
location.  
To be progressed once 
Allenwood, Dag Welds 
and Watchhouse have 
been consented and 
moved into the delivery 
phase. 
Allen Cross 
Yes  
Round 2 
Project Team to review 
options report received. 
Scheme to be developed 
thereafter however the other 
junctions (Allenwood, Dag 
Welds and Watchhouse) will 
be prioritised. 
To be progressed once 
Allenwood, Dag Welds 
and Watchhouse have 
been consented and 
moved into the delivery 
phase. 
  
The identification, prioritisation, and delivery of road safety improvement projects is 
determined by road safety analysis carried out by the Department of Transport 
Support Office. A presentation or further information in this regard can be provided to 
the members if required. 
Several members highlighted the apparent delay in progressing works at the various 
locations. They queried the funding process and asked that the required works at the 
identified junctions would be prioritised. They also noted the ongoing concerns of the 
local communities in the various areas.  
The Director advised members regarding the design process for works and 
application for funding based on the Location of Interest (LOI) categorisation. 
Temporary interim works cannot be realistically recommended. She agreed to 
facilitate a briefing for members.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Wyse, seconded by Councillor Salmon, and 
agreed by the members present that a briefing be facilitated for members to consider 
progress of the various projects.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 13 of 28 
 
18/0925 
 
  
 
Allocation of Emergency Accommodation 
The following motion in the name of Councillors Chris Pender and Claire O’Rourke 
was considered by the members: 
 
That Kildare County Council provides members with clear information on the process 
for allocation of emergency accommodation, to include: 
a) The procedure followed when a request is made through the emergency line, 
b) The legal requirements and criteria applied in determining eligibility and 
placement, and 
c) Details on the current availability and capacity of emergency accommodation 
within the county.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Pender and seconded by Councillor 
O’Rourke.  
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the process for allocation of emergency accommodation for individuals/families 
experiencing homelessness is detailed hereunder:  
a) The procedure followed when a request is made through the emergency line: 
Between Monday and Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., the Homeless Team at 
Kildare County Council conducts homeless assessments. Where an individual or 
household is deemed to be homeless following assessment, temporary 
accommodation will be arranged accordingly. 
Kildare County Council operates an Out of Hours Freephone service with the 
support and assistance of The Peter McVerry Trust. The Freephone service is 
available from 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday to Friday and 12:00 p.m. to 5:00 
p.m. Saturday and Sunday.  
On contacting this service where it is determined that a household has no place 
to stay, efforts to secure emergency accommodation will be made for that night. 
The household will be required to present to Kildare County Council on the next 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 14 of 28 
 
working day, where a formal homeless assessment will be conducted to 
determine their eligibility for further support. 
b) The legal requirements and criteria applied in determining eligibility and 
placement, 
When a person presents as homeless, Kildare County Council will conduct an 
assessment to determine if they are eligible for homeless service provision under 
Section 2 of the Housing Act 1988.  
Section 2 of the Housing Act 1988 states: 
A person shall be regarded by a housing authority as being homeless for the 
purposes of this Act if—  
(a) there is no accommodation available which, in the opinion of the authority, 
he, together with any other person who normally resides with him or who 
might reasonably be expected to reside with him, can reasonably occupy 
or remain in occupation of,   
or 
(b) he is living in a hospital, county home, night shelter or other such 
institution, and is so living because he has no accommodation of the kind 
referred to in paragraph (a),  
and 
he is, in the opinion of the authority, unable to provide accommodation from his 
own resources. 
c) Details on the current availability and capacity of emergency accommodation 
within the county. 
  
Kildare County Council provides Supported Emergency Accommodation across 
several locations to assist individuals experiencing homelessness. These facilities 
offer on-site supports and are managed in partnership with service providers to 
ensure residents receive appropriate assistance. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 15 of 28 
 
The current bed capacity across supported emergency accommodation sites is as 
follows: 
• Kerdiffstown, Naas: 50 beds 
• Newbridge: 20 beds 
• Athy: 11 beds 
 
These facilities play a vital role in providing emergency accommodation while 
longer-term housing solutions are explored. 
Kildare County Council, in partnership with the Peter McVerry Trust, operates 
a Cold Weather Initiative to provide additional emergency accommodation during 
the winter period. An additional 20-25 beds are made available throughout this 
time under this initiative. These beds are temporary and designed to respond 
quickly to urgent needs. 
Jigginstown Manor in Naas, operated by Tiglin in partnership with Homeless Care 
CLG, is a purpose-built transitional housing facility for young adults (aged 18–30) 
experiencing or at risk of homelessness. It comprises 12 studio apartments and a 
central main house that fosters community and on-site support. 
The service provides tailored key working support focused on personal 
development, including pathways to education, employment, and wellbeing. The 
aim is to help residents progress toward long term, sustainable accommodation. 
Osberstown Cottage in Sallins, operated by Dublin Simon Community, is a five-
bed (no. 5) shared transitional housing facility specifically designated for female 
residents experiencing or at risk of homelessness. The service provides a 
supportive environment aimed at promoting independence and progression 
toward secure and long-term housing. 
There are currently two (no. 2) Family Hubs in operation within County Kildare, 
located in Athy and Prosperous with a combined capacity for eleven (no.11) 
families. These facilities are specifically designed to support families with children 
who are experiencing homelessness. Family Hubs are generally operating at full 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 16 of 28 
 
capacity; however, new placements arise on a regular basis as families transition 
to longer-term housing solutions. While residing in a Family Hub, families 
receive ongoing support, including assistance with housing applications, welfare 
entitlements, and access to relevant services, with the aim of securing 
sustainable accommodation. 
Kildare County Council currently operates twenty-four (no. 24) Transitional Units 
in its five (no. 5) Municipal District areas to support individuals and families in 
advance of progression to more long-term accommodation. 
Where alternative accommodation options are either unavailable or deemed 
unsuitable, emergency accommodation is arranged through a number of hotels 
and bed and breakfast (B&B) establishments with whom Kildare County Council 
engage regularly for accommodation provision. The availability of these 
accommodations is subject to daily fluctuations and is managed accordingly to 
meet immediate needs. 
In instances where access to hotel or B&B accommodation is limited, 
the Freephone Service assists with securing bookings to ensure that emergency 
accommodation. 
Both Councillors Pender and O' Rourke accepted the report and acknowledged the 
work of the Housing Department and particularly the Homeless Team. They noted 
that it is important that both elected representatives and the public understand how 
the system operates. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor O’Rourke 
and agreed by the members present, that the report and update be accepted.  
 
19/0925 
Installation of Sunscreen Dispensers at Sporting Facilities 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Peggy O'Dwyer was considered by 
the members: 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 17 of 28 
 
That Kildare County Council, in conjunction with Kildare Sports Partnership, explores 
the installation of sunscreen dispensers at various sporting facilities. 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor P. O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer.   
A report from Ms C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the Parks Department has no plans to install sunscreen 
dispensers. There are no resources to put them in place or maintain them. The 
general public have to take individual responsibility for sun protection. 
Councillor P. O’Dwyer highlighted the increasing incidence of skin cancer diagnoses 
and noted that pilot projects were being undertaken in other counties. The Director 
noted that feedback from other councils was awaited. Councillor O’Dwyer advised 
that she was disappointed with the report and will consider referring the matter to the 
Regional Health Forum.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by the members present that the report be noted.  
 
20/0925 
 
 
Refusal Rate of First-time Private Home Grant Applications 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Kevin Duffy was considered by the 
members: 
That the council provides a breakdown of the refusal rate of first-time grant 
applications submitted to Kildare County Council for private homes grants (mobility, 
disability and older persons grants) with refusal being for reasons such as incorrect 
documentation, missing information rather than for applicants not qualifying.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Duffy and seconded by Councillor T. 
Durkan.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 18 of 28 
 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that Kildare County Council administers three types of private grants on behalf of the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH): 
• 
Housing Adaptation Grants for Disabled People (HAGs) 
• 
Mobility Aids Grants (MAGs) 
• 
Housing Aid for Older People Grants (HOPs) 
 
Applications are prioritised based on medical need and the urgency of the proposed 
works, in line with departmental guidelines. 
To be considered valid, applications must include all required documentation, as 
outlined in the application form available on the Council website.  
In general, the Housing Grants Team do not return incomplete applications to 
applicants as they will work with those applicants to help complete valid applications.  
The Grants Team do not maintain a record of the number of applications returned to 
applicants where the application has not been completed in full.   
The information below sets out the instances where applications have been returned 
to applicants.   
On 1 December 2024, following a review of the Housing Adaptation Grant schemes, 
the DHLGH introduced a revised scheme. Key changes included: 
• 
Increased household income thresholds. 
• 
Grant limits under means testing raised to 100%. 
 
At the time of this change, approximately 350 applications had been submitted under 
the old scheme. These applicants would have been disadvantaged under the 
previous criteria. We contacted each applicant, returned their original applications 
with an explanatory letter, and included the updated application forms for completion 
under the new scheme. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 19 of 28 
 
At the December 2023 Housing Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) meeting, it was 
agreed that: 
• 
60% of private grant funding would be ringfenced for Housing Adaptation Grants, 
supporting people with disabilities to live independently, and  
• 
40% would be allocated to Housing Aid for Older People (e.g. windows and 
doors). 
 
In April 2025, members were informed that the 40% threshold had been reached. As 
a result, no further applications for Housing Aid (windows and doors) could be 
approved, except for emergency repairs assessed on a case-by-case basis. A total 
of 111 applications were returned with an explanatory letter. 
By the end of August 2025, the Housing Grants Team had received approximately 
1,000 applications—already exceeding the total of 800 applications received in all of 
2024.  
The initial grant allocation for 2025 was €4,907,428, including €736,114 in matched 
funding from Kildare County Council. 
As communicated to members at the start of September 2025, the acceptance of 
new private grant applications has temporarily been paused. However, we will 
continue to process validated Priority 1 and emergency applications throughout 
2025, using the remaining balance of €525,500. This approach ensures that the most 
critical needs are addressed while maintaining fiscal responsibility amid high 
demand. The Housing Grants Team continues to liaise with applicants daily via 
phone and email. 
The Council will seek additional funding from the DHLGH, if available, and will keep 
members informed of any updates. 
Councillor Duffy thanked the Director for the report and acknowledged the work of 
the Grants Team in assisting applicants.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Duffy, seconded by Councillor T. Durkan and 
agreed by the members present that the report be accepted.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 20 of 28 
 
21/0925 
 
 
Protection of Hedgerows Bordering New Developments 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Rupert Heather was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the council acts to protect centuries old hedgerows bordering new 
developments across County Kildare to help conserve our natural environment.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Heather and seconded by Councillor Breen.  
A report from Mr A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that all Local Area Plans and 
Settlement Plans are informed by Green Infrastructure and Habitat Mapping which 
assess and identify hedgerow values etc with details reflected on maps published 
with the respective plans. Objectives BI O26, BI O27 and BI O28 of the Kildare 
County Development Plan 2023-2029 (as varied) also refer. 
Councillor Heather accepted the response and acknowledged the continuing work to 
protect hedgerows.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Heather, seconded by Councillor Breen, and 
agreed by the members present that the report be accepted.  
 
22/0925 
 
 
 Renewing Service Level Agreement with the Cairde App 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Tracey O’Dwyer was considered by 
the members: 
That the council clarifies their position regarding renewing the service level 
agreement with the Cairde App.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor T. O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor 
Sammon.  
A report from Ms. B. Maher, A/Director of Services, Climate, Community, 
Environment and Water stated that the Cairde application facilitates the 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 21 of 28 
 
dissemination of Community Text Alerts, issued by An Garda Síochána and other 
authorised users.  
The service was procured on an initial three-year pilot basis, with the option of a two-
year extension, and was funded through the Local Property Tax (LPT), and the 
members support in this regard is recognised.  
This initial funding arrangement is scheduled to conclude in September 2025, and 
the Community Department only has capacity to fund the operational costs for the 
remainder of 2025. To ensure the continuation of the service beyond this period, a 
formal funding request will be submitted to all Municipal Districts seeking LPT 
allocations for 2026 and beyond. The Community Department does not have 
sufficient budgetary provision to support the service beyond 2025, accordingly the 
continuation of the Cairde application is contingent upon the success of this funding 
request.  
The application has been welcomed by An Garda Siochána who have played a key 
role in promoting take-up and engagement with the service.  
Councillor T. O’Dwyer highlighted the importance of the app to support local 
community groups, particularly for rural and elderly people.  
The Director distinguished between the council’s Map Alerter system and the Cairde 
app. The Map Alerter system provides local updates from the council particularly 
during weather events and these are shared with registered users on a geographic 
basis.  
Councillor O’Dwyer asked that the council consider the cost to support the continued 
operation of the Cairde app, noting the difference in both systems.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor Salmon, 
and agreed by the members present that the cost of the ongoing licence be 
determined and a funding source considered.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 22 of 28 
 
23/0925 
Illegal Peat Extractions 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Peter Melrose was considered by the 
members: 
That this council affirms its commitment to protecting Kildare’s natural heritage by 
prioritising enforcement proceedings, allocating additional resources, if necessary, 
against illegal peat extractions in this county.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Melrose and seconded by Councillor Killeen.  
A report from Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that Kildare County Council is fully 
committed to safeguarding the county’s natural heritage and enforcing full 
compliance with all applicable legislation within its remit. 
With respect to peatlands specifically, discussions are ongoing between the City and 
County Managers Association and the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage with respect to resourcing this issue with the required specialist legal, 
planning and environmental expertise so that enforcement plans can be implemented 
consistently and vigorously across the peatland’s region. Furthermore, the 
establishment of a regional enforcement authority, is provided for under Section 356 
of the Planning and Development Act 2024 (as amended) and this resource, if 
established, will prove of significant benefit to Local Authorities in the robust and 
coordinated enforcement of planning law across extensive and complicated land 
uses at a local level. 
Councillor Melrose highlighted the findings of the Environmental Protection Agency 
and welcomed the council’s commitment to enforcement and looked forward to 
additional resources through the development of the regional enforcement authority.  
He asked that the motion be referred to the six (6) adjoining local authorities for their 
consideration.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Melrose, seconded by Councillor Killeen and 
agreed by members present that report be accepted and circulated to the 6 adjoining 
local authorities for their consideration. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 23 of 28 
 
24/0925 
 
 
  
Mid East Region Homelessness Action Plan 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Nuala Killeen was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the future Mid East Region Homelessness Action Plan (to be adopted in 2026), 
delivers meaningful action on youth homelessness and includes an action plan, 
timeframe and be developed following meaningful consultation with young people.  
That as part of the plan, the council collects data and provides quarterly reports on 
presentation numbers including:  
• the number that are subsequently assessed for social housing, 
• the number that are regarded as experiencing homelessness under s. 2 of the 
Housing Act 1988,  
• the number that are regarded as experiencing homelessness that are 
subsequently allocated emergency accommodation, 
• the number that are regarded as experiencing homelessness but are not 
allocated emergency accommodation, and the reasons given, 
• the number that are not regarded as experiencing homelessness under s. 2 of 
the Housing Act 1988, and the reasons for this determination, and 
• the number of those that are not regarded as experiencing homelessness that 
are signposted to appropriate support or prevention services. 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Killeen and seconded by Councillor 
O’Rourke. 
 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the 2027-2029 Mid East Region Homelessness Action Plan will be due for 
review in 2026 in consultation with the Homelessness SMG and Homlessness Forum 
and for adoption by the members in Q1 2027, in accordance with the Guidance on 
the Preparation of Homelessness Action Plans Circular 44/2021. The items 
referenced in this motion will be taken into consideration during the preparation of the 
plan having regard to data available from existing IT systems, iHouse and PASS. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 24 of 28 
 
Kildare County Council, as the Mid-East Regional lead authority for homelessness, 
provide monthly reports on homelessness from the National PASS system to the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage which identify the number 
of people utilising emergency accommodation on a regional and county basis.  
These reports can be viewed at https://www.gov.ie/en/department-of-housing-local-
government-and-heritage/collections/homelessness-data/ . In addition to this, 
monthly and quarterly Chief Executive management reports are presented to the 
elected members and include details of homelessness figures in Kildare. 
 
The 2027-2029 Plan will contain clear targets and timelines for achievement, while 
integrating the measures to ensure that the actions set out in the Government’s 
Housing Action Plan are addressed and incorporated in the targets. The Plan will 
continue to align with the aims of the Youth Homelessness Strategy and will be 
informed by statistical data and collaboration between Kildare County Council, Tusla, 
Health Service Executive and youth-focused organisations who are actively involved 
in delivering services to young people experiencing homelessness, including care 
leavers and those aged 18-24. 
 
Tusla leads the coordination of Aftercare Steering Committees, which meet bi-
monthly, with active participation from Kildare County Council to anticipate and plan 
for the housing and support needs of young adults leaving care. The Council also 
leads the Homeless Action Team (HAT), which meets monthly and facilitates 
proactive interagency case management for homeless clients, including those aged 
18–24. Tusla and the HSE are core members, contributing to early identification of 
support needs such as mental health, addiction, and aftercare. Youth organisations, 
such as Tiglin, also participate in HAT, offering transitional housing and tailored 
supports for young adults. 
 
The development of the Plan will be shaped through ongoing dialogue and 
partnership with these stakeholders via the Mid-East Regional Homelessness Forum, 
where their specialised expertise and proven experience in delivering targeted 
services to young people will be instrumental in the formation of the Plan. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 25 of 28 
 
Councillor Killeen highlighted the importance of relevant data to support the 
development of the future Homelessness Action Plan. She acknowledged the work of 
the Housing Department and accepted that the request will be considered as part of 
the preparatory work for the draft plan.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor O’Rourke 
and agreed by members present that the report be accepted.  
 
25/0925 
Domestic, Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and Abuse Liaison Officer 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Noel Connolly was considered by the 
members: 
Go mbreithneodh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara an fhéidearthacht go mbeadh 
Oifigeach Idirchaidrimh tiomnaithe maidir le Foréigean Teaghlaigh, Gnéasach agus 
Inscnebhunaithe agus Mí-Úsáid ag an gComhairle Contae chun comhairle a chur ar 
fáil dóibh siúd atá ag iarraidh rochtain a fháil ar sheirbhísí na Comhairle agus atá ag 
fulaingt ón bhforéigean agus/nó ón mí-úsáid sin, agus chun abhcóideacht a 
dhéanamh ar a son. 
 
That Kildare County Council explores the possibility of having a dedicated Domestic, 
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and Abuse Liaison Officer to advise, and 
advocate for, those who are seeking to access Council services and are 
experiencing such violence and/or abuse. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Connolly and seconded by Councillor 
Pender. 
 
 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that Cuan (established in 2024 under the remit of the Department of Justice, Home 
Affairs and Migration) is the statutory agency dedicated to tackling and reducing 
domestic, sexual and gender-based violence (DSGBV). 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 26 of 28 
 
Cuan coordinates and drives the implementation of the Zero Tolerance strategy, 
through: 
• 
delivering services to victims of DSGBV, including delivering on the number of 
safe and accessible accommodation spaces available, as well as ensuring that 
helpline and other supports are available to anyone requiring them 
• 
putting in place a robust set of national service standards and governance 
arrangements to ensure adherence to the appropriate standards for such 
supports 
• 
leading on consistent and ongoing research to inform DSGBV policy 
development, working with others such as the CSO who have data projects 
underway 
• 
leading on awareness-raising campaigns designed to reduce the incidence of 
DSGBV in Irish society as well as ensuring that all victims know how to access 
the supports they require 
• 
coordinating all government actions set out in the Third National Strategy and 
reporting on their delivery to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration. 
Political oversight of the strategy will be provided by the Cabinet Committee on 
Social Affairs and Equality 
• 
Coordinating, overseeing and providing advice and support, as appropriate, in 
relation to the implementation by public service bodies of the strategies and plans 
in relation to domestic, sexual or gender-based violence 
 
Housing Circular 2/2017 provides guidance for Housing Authorities to ensure 
effectiveness and consistency in responses to assist victims of Domestic Violence. 
Kildare County Council Housing Department staff, including Social Workers, 
Homeless Support Workers, Homeless Outreach Workers, Tenancy Sustainment 
Workers and Tenant Liaison Officers also provide advice and advocacy for 
vulnerable people experiencing DSGCV. These teams regularly provide support to 
people seeking services of the council who are experiencing DSGBV.  There are 
strong links with local DV service providers within Kildare and nationally with 
Women's Aid, with regular contact with refuges for placements, supporting move-on's 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 27 of 28 
 
and support with housing applications and allocations, and ongoing support and sign-
posting post allocation.     
 
Councillor Connolly highlighted a national report regarding increasing incidents and 
acknowledged the work of Cuan and council’s staff in signposting individuals and 
families affected in the county.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Connolly, seconded by Councillor Pender 
and agreed by members present that the report is accepted.  
 
26/0925 
Government Savings Investment Scheme for Ordinary Savings Investors 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Seamie Moore was considered by the 
members: 
 
That this Council agrees to support a petition letter to the Minister for Finance in 
advance of his Budget preparation, to request him to introduce a Government 
Savings Investment Scheme for ordinary savings investors, for the singular purpose 
of the creation of a Government Fund to finance Local Authorities in the acquisition 
of Community Sports and Recreational Lands and the provision of Community 
Infrastructure, to overcome the inadequacy of the present funding systems to assist 
the growth counties like Kildare, where the adjusted National Planning Framework 
will expect the population to increase from 250,000 at present to 350,000 by 2034 
and to 400,000 by 2040.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Moore and seconded by Councillor Doyle.  
 
A report from Ms. L. Hanratty, Meetings Administrator stated that this is a matter for 
the members to agree. 
 
Councillor Moore highlighted the continued growth in population within the county 
and associated demand for community and sporting facilities. He noted that major 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 22.09.2025                 Page 28 of 28 
 
investment is required, which is beyond the level of funding available locally. He 
asked the members to support his proposal.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Moore, seconded by Councillor Doyle and 
agreed by members present that Councillor Moore write to the Minister for Finance 
on behalf of the Members regarding this motion.  
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
