Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 1 of 22 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 24 February 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
________________________________________________ 
                     
Members Present: Councillors K. Duffy (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V L Behan, A. 
Breen, A. Breslin, F. Brett, P. Brooks, B. Caldwell, B. Clear, S. 
Doyle, G. Dunne,  T. Durkan, W. Durkan, A. Feeney, D. 
Fitzpatrick, R. Heather, N. Heavey, C. Kelly, N. Killeen, M. Leigh, 
T. McDonnell, P. McEvoy, S. Moore, P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer, B. 
O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, E. Sammon, D. Trost and P. 
Ward. 
 
Online: 
Councillors N. Connolly, B. Dooley, I Keatley, P. Melrose, P. 
Mulroe, L. Panaite Fahey, D. Phelan and R. Power.  
 
Apologies: 
Ms. S. Kavanagh, (Chief Executive), Councillor B. Wyse. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. A. Aspell (Deputy Chief Executive), Mr. A. Dunney, Ms. E. 
Hanlon, Ms. M. Higgins, Mr. E. Ryan, (Directors of Service), Ms. 
C. Barrett, Mr. D. Creighton (A/Directors of Service), Ms. G. Allen, 
(County Librarian), Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Ms. 
L. Morgan (Meetings Secretary), and other officials.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the February monthly meeting of the 
Council and asked the Meeting Administrator to read out a notice regarding the live 
streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 2 of 22 
 
00/0225 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised he had been informed of the following bereavements.  
 
• Ronan O’Dwyer, in-service staff member, mobile library driver, Library 
Services. 
• Mary Moore, mother of Martina Gorey, school warden, Ardclough. 
• Stephen Kelly, son of Pauline Kelly, school warden, Leixlip.  
• Enda Linnane, mother of Ronan Linnane, Area Engineer, Celbridge, Leixlip.  
• Annie Dunne, mother of Joe and Roy Dunne, Caretakers. 
• Martin Cummins, father of Stephen Cummins, NRO. 
• Martin O’ Brien, brother of Margaret O’ Brien – Building & Development Control. 
• Professor Nick Heather, father of Councillor Rupert Heather. 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/0225 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0225 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 27 January 
2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor Moore and 
agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 
27 January 2025 be adopted.  
 
The progress report was noted.  

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 3 of 22 
 
03/0225 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executives monthly management report. 
 
04/0225 
 
 
 
Filling of Audit Committee Vacancy  
The members considered nominees to fill the vacancy in the Audit Committee 
following elections to Dáil Éireann. 
 
Councillor Killeen proposed Councillor Pender. This was seconded by Councillor 
Balfe.  
 
As there were no further nominations Councillor Pender fill the vacancy in the Audit 
Committee. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Balfe and 
agreed by the members present that Councillor Pender was duly elected to fill the 
vacancy in the Audit Committee. 
 
05/0225 
 
 
Kildare Library Service Development Plan 2025-2029 
The members considered the Kildare Library Service Development Plan 2025-2029. 
Ms. G. Allen, County Librarian, gave a detailed presentation of the five-year plan. She 
advised that the next step, following the members approval of the Plan is to have the 
Plan translated into Irish. 
 
The members complimented Ms. Allen on the plan noting that they welcomed the 
inclusion of the youth panel, the provision of Celbridge community hub, and services 
in Athy for Ukrainian events. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
 
• Could the exact routes of mobile library units be confirmed? 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 4 of 22 
 
• Could books in other languages be available in libraries? 
• Could items with images and tables be fully accessible, with alternative text 
(ALT) on them? 
 
Ms. Allen responded to the issues raised stating that the mobile library unit attends 
rural primary schools around the county and provides an outreach service to Naas 
Hospital. There will be a second mobile library vehicle in the future. Books in other 
languages are available, but that the requirement of many non-nationals is for English 
language books to learn English.  
 
Deputy Chief Executive Annette Aspell acknowledged the work of the Library Service 
in preparing the Plan. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor Killeen 
and agreed by the members present that the Kildare Library Service Development 
Plan 2025-2029 be approved. 
 
06/0225 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach advised members that he attended a number of local events 
recently: 
 
• St. Brigid’s Day Festival Events  
• The opening of Kerdiffstown Park.  
 
He stated that Kerdiffstown Park is a wonderful facility for all the county and a great 
example of what can be achieved. 
 
07/0225 
Correspondence 
The Meetings Administrator confirmed fourteen items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included two circulars 
from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, LG 02/2025 – 
Domestic Subsistence Rates for Elected Members of Local Authorities and LG 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 5 of 22 
 
03/2025 – Allowances and Expenses of Elected Members, ten resolutions from other 
County Councils, one acknowledgment from ‘As I Am’ and one reply from Iarnród 
Éireann re invitation to present to full council.  
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 
08/0225 
Conferences and Training 
The Meetings Administrator referred to the conference and training report which had 
been circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
Retrospective approval was sought for Councillors O’Rourke and Clear’s attendance 
at Module 1 - An overview of Wind Energy: Contribution to Economy, Climate Action 
and Future Potential, provided by AILG at a cost of €90 per person, held in Fairways 
Hotel, Dundalk on 20 February 2025. 
 
Retrospective approval was sought Cllr O’Loughlin’s attendance at Module 1 - An 
overview of Wind Energy: Contribution to Economy, Climate Action and Future 
Potential, provided by AILG at a cost of €90 per person, held in Newpark Hotel, 
Kilkenny on 22 February 2025. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor McEvoy, seconded by Councillor Doyle and 
agreed by the members present that the above requests as set out in the training and 
conference report be approved. 
 
Approval sought for Councillors Caldwell, Brett, Kelly, Clear, Mc Donnell, P. O’Dwyer 
and Councillor Heavy to attend the AILG Annual Training Conference 2025 in Limerick 
Strand Hotel, Limerick on 2-3 April 2025 at a cost of €175 per person. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Mc Evoy, seconded by Councillor Brooks and 
agreed by members present that Councillors Caldwell, Brett, Kelly, Clear, Mc Donnell, 
P. O’Dwyer and Councillor Heavey be approved to attend the AILG Annual Training 
Conference 2025 in Limerick Strand Hotel on 2-3 April 2025. 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 6 of 22 
 
                    09/0225 
Bus Stops with Timetables 
The following motion in the names of Councillors Wyse, Fahey, W. Durkan, P. 
O'Dwyer, T. O'Dwyer and Keatley was considered by the members: 
 
That the council prepares a plan of action, with target timelines for completion, to work 
in conjunction with the NTA and Local Link to install bus stops with timetables at all 
bus stop locations for all daily Local Link routes in the county.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor W. Durkan, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the Council has received notification of funding of €500,000 for 
2025 from the National Transport Authority for a bus stop enhancement programme.  
The council has held an initial meeting with the NTA and are awaiting details of the 
programme, and particularly the recoupment process for claims, including expenditure 
from previous bus stop/shelter programmes.  The council welcomes the streamlining 
of interaction and the clear line of communication with a nominated member of staff 
from the NTA.  Regular progress meetings are scheduled with council staff so that 
agreement can be reached on a programme of works for 2025 and future years. 
 
In parallel, the council currently holds regular update meetings with the TFI Local Link 
Kildare South Dublin Manager.  Staff are working closely with this Transport 
Coordination Unit to develop a framework within which the provision of bus stop 
infrastructure can be most effectively delivered across the county. To that end, the 
proposed Route 888 is being used to test a new process and consultation which has 
improved the levels of coordination and cooperation between TFI Local Link and the 
Council.   
Once work has been completed on this working procedure and clarity received from 
the NTA on procurement processes, then an update and timescale for a rolling 
programme of implementation can be developed and shared with members.    

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 7 of 22 
 
Councillor W. Durkan thanked the Director for the report noting that Local Link Stops 
needed to be accessible and reliable.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
 
• That updated timetables (including local link service) is required at all bus stops. 
• That a change in policy and procedures on unofficial bus stops/drop-off points 
is required to provide more flexibility for passengers. 
• More supporting infrastructure required at bus stops, i.e., footpaths and 
shelters. 
Ms. Barrett advised the members that an executive engineer is now in place to 
progress the programme further. Bus timetables for both TFI and local links services 
will be included at each bus stop. Members will be notified when the programme is 
available.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor W. Durkan, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by members present that that the report be noted and that a bus 
timetable for both TFI and local links services will be included at each bus stop. 
 
10/0225 
 
 
Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission Act 
The following motion in the names of Councillors Melrose and Pender was considered 
by the members: 
 
That the council affirms its commitment to, and provides training for staff and elected 
members on, Section 42 of the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission Act 2014, 
which seeks to eliminate discrimination, promote equality of opportunity, and protect 
the human rights of its members, staff, and the persons to whom it provides services.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Melrose and seconded by Councillor Pender. 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services stated Kildare County Council are committed to promoting equality of 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 8 of 22 
 
opportunity, eliminating discrimination, and protecting the dignity and human rights of 
our staff, elected members, and everyone in Kildare, across all functions.  Our Public 
Sector Duty Implementation Framework supports this objective, through a cross-
departmental committee to oversee development and implementation of a Public 
Sector Duty Action Plan. This will support a workplace where everyone feels welcome, 
connected to their colleagues, and contributes their perspectives and talents. Through 
our Implementation Framework, Kildare County Council commits to strive for best 
practice across our range of services to meet the needs of an increasingly diverse 
population. Already this Council contributes to the Public Sector Duty through a range 
of programmes and activities, which are reflected in our Corporate Plan. Our 
implementation strategy commits us to forming a PSD Steering Committee within the 
Council, to: 
• 
Assess human rights and equality issues to ensure that the policies and plans 
of the Council are responsive to the needs of service users and staff. 
 
• 
Implement an Action Plan covering Awareness, Employment/Recruitment, 
Service Delivery, Policy Making, Implementation.  
 
• 
Act as champions for the duty across the organisation, bringing it back into 
different sections, explaining the requirements and potential of the duty, and 
addressing concerns about the duty. 
 
• 
Identify appropriate timelines across the organisation for implementing the 
duty in terms of the development or review of plans, programmes, or policies.  
 
• 
Support an effective communication strategy in accessible language. 
 
• 
Ensure actions are led within sections and incorporated in the Annual Service 
Delivery Plan. 
 
• 
Endeavour to work on an evidence-basis and to engage with key stakeholders 
where necessary and/or appropriate. 
 
Training and awareness is an important aspect of our implementation strategy and 
action 
plan 
and 
there 
is 
an 
online 
eLearning 
module 
available 
at 
www.ihrec.ie/elearning for staff and elected members.  As part of the roll-out of the 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 9 of 22 
 
Strategy, we will consider whether a mandatory Meta Compliance training module 
should be developed. 
Councillor Melrose thanked the Director for the report and requested that the ‘IHREC’ 
Public Sector Duty eLearning link be circulated to members and included in the starter 
pack for new councillors. 
Mr Ryan agreed to circulate the eLearning link.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Melrose, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and that the ‘IHREC’ eLearning 
link be circulated to members and included in the starter pack for new councillors. 
 
Public Sector Duty eLearning - IHREC - Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission 
 
11/0225 
 
  
 
 
3D Construction Printing Technology  
The following motion in the names of Councillor Feeney and Councillor Heather was 
considered by the members: 
 
That the council explores using 3D construction printing technology to automate the 
concrete laying process for its residential housing developments.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Feeney and seconded by Councillor Heather. 
 
A report from Ms. Annette Aspell Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration 
stated that Louth County Council has recently completed a pilot scheme of 3 houses 
using this construction method, and the sector is awaiting learnings from this project. 
When tendering for projects we are always open to suggestions from contractors to 
use alternative methods of construction provided there is no cost increase or time 
delay, and that this method aligns with our quality specification, the building 
regulations, etc. Similarly, when tendering to design and build contractors, where the 
contractor completes the detailed design, there is an opportunity for the contractor to 
use various means of construction, including a 3D printed structure, provided it meets 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 10 of 22 
 
our performance specification etc., and subject to approval of the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
 
• 3D construction could bring huge savings and speed when delivering housing.  
• Could a pilot scheme be explored to replicate Louth? 
• Innovation was needed for quicker housing delivery. 
• The introduction of 3D printed structures will reduce the requirement for 
manpower, skilled tradesmen, and labourers on sites leading to trades and 
crafts dying out. 
 
• Large companies can afford this technology, but smaller companies could not, 
leading to the smaller companies being squeezed out of the market. 
 
• Scalability of projects required to make it cost-effective. 
 
• That apprenticeship programmes in relation to this technology in conjunction 
with ETB are required. 
  
• Evidence of efficiency and resilience to frost and very wet weather should be 
provided. 
 
Ms Aspell advised that all contracts to construct houses must go through the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage approval process, noting that 
some projects are considered for delivery through innovation.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Feeney, seconded by Councillor Heather 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
 
12/0225 
 
 
Storm-related Tree Damage to Electricity Infrastructure 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Phelan was considered by the 
members: 
 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 11 of 22 
 
That the council outlines what actions it will take to mitigate the risk of future storm-
related tree damage to electricity infrastructure and ensure a proactive approach to 
preventing further disruptions following the severe damage caused to the electricity 
supply by fallen trees during Storm Eowyn.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Phelan and seconded by Councillor Doyle. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the electricity grid is not within the remit of local authority functions 
and is the responsibility of ESB Networks and the Commission for Regulation of 
Utilities.  
 
The Minister for Transport and Minister for Environment, Climate and Communications 
Darragh O’Brien has requested a number of actions be taken by the ESB once the 
initial storm response has been completed which includes an enhanced Winter Grid 
2025 Resilience Plan; increased stock of spare parts for the electricity network; the 
creation of forestry corridors to protect overhead line corridors; and the enhancement 
of partnerships across Europe. 
 
Kildare County Council will continue to manage trees on its own land and remind other 
landowners of their responsibilities in accordance with Section 70 of the Roads Act, 
1993 to ensure that trees, shrubs, hedges and any other vegetation on their land are 
not a danger to people using or working on a public road. Restrictions on the cutting 
back of trees and hedgerows are in place from 1 March to 31 August annually in 
accordance with Section 40 of the Wildlife Act, 1976 (as amended). 
 
Councillor Phelan thanked the Director for the report and sought clarification on the 
tree maintenance programme. 
 
Ms Barrett stated that Kildare County Council maintain the trees on its land through 
the tree maintenance programme. She said the Transportation Safety and Emergency 
Services SPC are looking at developing a Tree Policy to address the life cycle of trees. 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 12 of 22 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Phelan, seconded by Councillor Doyle and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and that the Transportation 
Safety and Emergency Services SPC review Kildare County Council’s Tree Policy to 
address the life cycle of trees.   
 
13/0225 
 
 
 
 
Response to Emergencies in Kildare 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Moore was considered by the 
members: 
 
Notwithstanding the very helpful discussions and considerations at the January 2025 
meeting following Storm Eowyn, that the Chief Executive on behalf of Kildare County 
Council, the leading Public Authority, present an outline of what proposals are in train, 
to bring other Kildare-based formal groupings, other authorities, service providers, 
emergency responders, key community leaderships and a non-energy-dependent 
communications system, into a pre-organised framework with leadership and timed 
responses to emergencies in Kildare, be they advanced Red Warning Weather 
Reports or unannounced life-threatening disasters and also how it is planned to 
interact with similar Central State or Regional Emergency Response Groups.    
The motion was proposed by Councillor Moore and seconded by Councillor Balfe. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces and Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that the document “A Framework for 
Major Emergency Management”, as adopted by Government, provides national 
guidance on the structures that should be in place at local and regional level to respond 
to emergencies including severe weather events such as the red level warning recently 
experiences for Storm Eowyn.  
The key principle of this document is inter-agency coordination and there are defined 
structures, at On-Site, Local and Regional Level, to deliver this coordination. 
Kildare County Council has adopted and implemented this guidance, and it is detailed 
in our Major Emergency Plan  Major Emergency Management - Kildare County 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 13 of 22 
 
Council. The plan can be used whether a major emergency is declared or not. The 
structures of the plan have been used by Kildare County Council to coordinate a range 
of issues from the fire in Kerdiffstown to the recent severe weather events. 
The document defines three key agencies, An Garda Síochána, the HSE and the local 
authority and refers to these agencies as Principal Response Agencies (PRAs). The 
PRAs can engage with any agency or group that they see as relevant as part of the 
planning or response phases to deal with any emergency as it arises.  
The planning for emergencies is an iterative process and the lessons learned from the 
recent storms will be considered in future revisions of our Major Emergency Plan and 
this learning process is ongoing following Storm Eowyn with a particular focus on 
communication including use of Kildare County Council’s Out of Hours service and 
other tools such as press releases, in person briefings at Municipal District level and 
https://scanner.topsec.com/?d=1340&r=show&u=www.mapalerter.ie&t=45a8dd8dbd
00da3cc50e7c1a8a8a319300fe0f0d.    
Councillor Moore thanked both Directors for their reports.  
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
 
• The Major Emergency Plan was too long, and could a user-friendly short 
document be provided? 
• Are staff prepared and trained for emergency events? 
• The assistance of the Defence Forces was acknowledged. 
• Community hubs for recovery and service be identified throughout the County. 
• Can we learn from other Local Authorities? 
 
Mr. Dunney responded to the queries raised confirming that they will consider all the 
points raised in reviewing Kildare Major Emergency Plan. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Moore, seconded by Councillor Balfe and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 14 of 22 
 
14/0225 
 
 
 
Communication System with Public Representatives 
The following motion in the name of Councillor O’Loughlin was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council endeavours to put in place a better communication system with their 
public representatives in emergencies/severe weather events.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Loughlin and seconded by Councillor 
Caldwell. 
 
A report from Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that following the recent severe weather 
events, and immediately following the clean-up phase, the Council’s SWAT (Severe 
Weather Alert Team) initiated a debrief process around all operational matters related 
to severe weather responses, including communications. 
In addition, the January Council meeting presentation on the weather event also 
provided an opportunity for feedback from all elected members.  
As members may be aware a significant range of communication tools are available 
and used, highlighted below are some features and information to assist members: 
• All Councillors can register themselves for the MapAlerter system which generates 
weather alerts, planning weekly lists, and will soon be used also by Transport/MD 
Offices to communicate planned road closures/disruptions and hazards on roads 
during weather events. We are also exploring the potential for dynamic 
communications (using MapAlerter) in the aftermath of Storm related events, 
during the clear up phase – i.e., closure and opening of roads for removal of trees 
etc.  
Members can register here: https://www.mapalerter.ie/kildare and are advised to 
download the MapAlerter App following registration.  

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 15 of 22 
 
However, during the recent event, information was published on the Council’s existing 
Alerts feed on its website. This was referenced in the press release (see below) and 
shared by Gardai, local media. Link here: https://kildarecoco.ie/EmergencyNews/wp/  
• Councillors can and do use the Council’s Out of Hours phone number which is for 
reporting emergency related issues outside the normal working hours of the 
Council. This information along with a lot of other information about other key 
phone numbers and service information was provided in press releases emailed 
to 
all 
elected 
representatives 
prior 
to 
the 
recent 
Storm: 
https://kildarecoco.ie/News/KildareCountyCouncilIssuesKeyPublicSafetyMessage
safterStormEowyn.html 
It is standard procedure that such press releases be sent to Councillors, Elected 
Representatives and then the press, before wider publication online etc.  
• In terms of any information that is of interest related to Winter Maintenance Salting 
Routes, 
these 
are 
published 
on 
our 
website: 
https://kildarecoco.ie/AllServices/Transport/WinterMaintenancePlan/  
 
Transport Operations are happy to give a briefing on the delivery of Winter 
Maintenance services and the operational response to emergency/severe weather 
events, if requested. 
Debrief meetings following the Storm have taken place internally with the SWAT team 
and a number of specific enhancements to processes and communications are being 
explored, and to that end meetings with relevant vendors are ongoing.  
The Council are committed to continuous review and improvement around all aspects 
of our Emergency Planning and Response, especially in the context of likely future 
Red Weather Warning events, given climate change. 
Councillor O’Loughlin thanked the Director for his report. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points:  
• Long delays in power returning to some areas. 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 16 of 22 
 
• Difficulties in having no water for long periods. 
• Can Kildare County Council assist private homeowners with pumps? 
• Difficulties in accessing information from Uisce Éireann and Electricity Supply 
Board. 
 
Mr Dunney responded to the queries raised stating that Uisce Éireann are looking into 
battery power back-up options; that ESB worked systematically through repairs and in 
relation to private pumps, he advised that this was not a matter for Kildare County 
Council. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor O’Loughlin, seconded by Councillor Caldwell 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
15/0225 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Information Screens 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Doyle was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council delivers a digital information screen in appropriate locations in towns 
throughout the County with the purpose of providing a comprehensive 
communication hub for communities.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Doyle and seconded by Councillor Kelly. 
A report from Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Service, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water stated that Kildare Community Stories social media platforms provide a 
communication hub for communities around the county. This is an invaluable resource 
for sharing community news and events. In addition, the library service has digital 
displays in their buildings with various programme information. 
The provision and maintenance of a digital information screen in towns throughout the 
county will require significant investigation including sourcing site location, planning, 
procurement, identification of funding, ongoing resource for management of a digital 
system, and criteria on the type of information to be displayed. Given the considerable 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 17 of 22 
 
logistics required to advance this project and because it is not included in the workplan 
for 2025, this matter may be referred to the Local Community, Cultural and Integration 
SPC for further consideration.  
Councillor Doyle welcomed the report and asked the members if they agreed for the 
motion to be referred to the Local Community, Cultural and Integration SPC for further 
consideration. The members confirmed their support. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Kelly and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and that the motion be referred 
to the Local Community, Cultural and Integration SPC for further consideration. 
 
16/0225 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tenant In-Situ scheme 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Duffy was considered by the members. 
 
That the council provides an update on the purchases of houses under the Tenant In-
Situ scheme and if still paused, that the council writes to the Minister to seek 
confirmation that Kildare can recommence purchases.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Duffy and seconded by Councillor T. O’Dwyer. 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the Programme for Government 2025 Securing Ireland’s Future contains a 
commitment to the continuation of the Tenant in Situ Scheme and the assignment of 
targets and budgets to local authorities.  In response to a Parliamentary Question 
relating to the continued operation of the scheme in Kildare, Minister Brown advised 
that a decision on a Tenant in Situ Programme for 2025 is expected to be made by 
Government shortly and will be notified to local authorities thereafter.  We await further 
direction from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage on this 
scheme and, until then, the council cannot purchase any tenant in situ properties.  Last 
year the council purchased 55 properties under this scheme and view it as an essential 
homeless prevention measure.  Currently 66 HAP households have a Notice to Quit, 
53 of which are due to sale by the landlord.  It is a matter for the Members if they wish 
to write to the Minister. We await further direction from the Department of Housing, 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 18 of 22 
 
Local Government and Heritage on this scheme and, until then, the council cannot 
purchase any tenant in situ properties.   
Councillor Duffy welcomed the report and asked the members if they agreed for a 
letter to be issued to the Minster.  The members confirmed their support.  
During discussion the following points were raised by the members:  
• That we should not be penalised in our allocation from last year. 
• That cost-based rentals should be pursued also. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Duffy, seconded by Councillor T. O’Dwyer and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and a letter be issued to the 
Minister to seek confirmation that Kildare can recommence the Tenant in Situ Scheme.  
 
17/0225 
 
 
  
 
Funding for Small Community Groups 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Killeen was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council seeks community or other funding resolution to assist with the issue 
of small community groups that provide essential services to cover basic statutory 
running costs where no funding stream permits the cover of essential running costs 
e.g. insurance.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Killeen and seconded by Councillor Balfe. 
 
A report from Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Service, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water stated that running costs are not currently permitted as an eligible expense 
under the current Kildare County Council Community Grant Scheme. The inclusion of 
funding to support running costs of community groups is not included in the current 
revenue budget of Kildare County Council.  The focus of funding arising from Kildare 
County Council grant schemes is targeted towards programmes, community 
development and small capital works. Each year all community grant schemes are 
oversubscribed and require extensive evaluation.   

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 19 of 22 
 
To further support community groups, Kildare LCDC has contracted ‘The Wheel’ to 
issue a publication for Kildare which includes all EU, national, philanthropic and local 
funding information for community and voluntary groups in the county.  This is 
circulated via the PPN, LCDC, KCC and other social media platforms. This provides 
other potential funding sources which may benefit community organisations.   
Councillor Killeen welcomed the report but acknowledged that it did not address the 
financial support for small community groups. 
During discussion the following points were raised by the members: 
• Local groups have installed defibrillators around the county, but HSE did not 
provide support for them. 
• Can a link to ‘The Wheel’ be issued to members? 
• Through LCDC the Local Enhancement Programme provided two separate 
application processes for funding. 
• Libraries provide meeting space for small community groups free of charge. 
 
Director of Service, Ms. Higgins, advised members of funding opportunities under the 
Local Enhancement Programme. The closing date for LEP funding applications is 28 
February 2025. Information about these funding opportunities had been circulated on 
social media platforms and sent to registered charity groups. She also stated that a 
link to ‘The Wheel’ would be circulated to the members. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Balfe and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and that the link to ‘The Wheel’ 
be circulated to all the members. 
Supporting & Representing Charities | The Wheel 
 
18/0225 
 
 
Introduction of 30km Speed Limit in Housing Estates 
The following motion in the name of Councillor O’Rourke was considered by the 
members. 
 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 20 of 22 
 
That, following the implementation of the revised national default 60 km/h rural road 
speed limit on 7th February last,  the Executive outline its proposals to introduce a 30 
km speed limit in all residential housing estates in County Kildare that are taken in 
charge and when it is proposed to introduce safe speed limits around schools and 
other estates (not taken in charge).  
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor Killeen. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that following the implementation of the revised default 60 km/h rural 
road speed limit in early February 2025, the Executive is preparing to bring forward 
proposals to introduce a 30 km/h speed limit in all residential housing estates in County 
Kildare that are taken in charge. The elected members will be provided with 
information about the estates in their Municipal District and a public consultation 
process will commence after elected members are briefed later in Quarter 1 2025.  
The council has no role in the setting of speed limits on private roads and therefore 
estates not yet taken in charge cannot be included. However, a process to incorporate 
these estates periodically, if and when they are taken in charge, will be developed so 
that this can be done in an appropriate and timely manner. 
Finally, the council is awaiting revised mandatory guidance on the setting of speed 
limits which is being prepared by the Department of Transport before revising speed 
limits around schools and other areas of interest. 
Councillor O’Rourke thanked the Director for the report. 
During discussion, the following points were raised by the members:  
• When in Q1 will they be briefed about the proposals to introduce a 30km/h speed 
in all residential housing estates? 
• When is the introduction of safe speed limits around schools (Jakes Law) to be 
implemented? 
• Are estates not taken in charge included? 
 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 21 of 22 
 
Ms Barrett responded to the issues raised confirming they will be guided by the 
Department of Transport in bringing the proposals forward and in rolling it out into 
estates and around schools. She also stated that presently they had no remit in estates 
not taken in charge.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor O’Rourke, seconded by Councillor Killeen 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted.  
 
      19/0225 
 
 
  
 
Purchase of Products in the County 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Mc Donnell was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council purchases sand, gravel and concrete products produced in the 
county of Kildare.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Mc Donnell and seconded by Councillor 
Caldwell. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that it is the responsibility of local authority management to ensure that 
value for money is achieved by establishing and maintaining sound arrangements 
including procedures for planning, appraisal, authorisation and control of resources. 
In respect of procurement, the Council are required to ensure that the decisions it 
makes are the most economically advantageous to get the best value in both good 
and services. The purchase of materials as proposed by Councillor McDonnell could 
be considered only in the context of proper procurement, value for money for Kildare 
County Council and in compliance with national funding and procurement rules. 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that under Capital Works Management Framework (CWMF) procurement rules the 
council is precluded from being so prescriptive regarding the origin of building 
materials.  We are striving, as part of our Building Information Modelling 
Implementation and measurement of embodied carbon, to include suitable green 

Kildare County Council  
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.02.25                             Page 22 of 22 
 
procurement quality criteria in our tender assessment process.  A significant part of 
the scoring of tenders is based on quality.  This should encourage the use of local 
building materials.  
Councillor McDonnell thanked both Directors for their reports and said that there are 
many concrete businesses in Kildare that products were being purchased cheaper in 
Northern Ireland as the 5% micro-levy did not apply there. He asked if Kildare County 
Council could provide figures on concrete purchases for Kildare County Council. 
Ms Barrett stated that in general, Kildare County Council purchase a small amount of 
concrete products. That all work contracts were tendered and therefore the Contractor 
bought the materials. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor McDonnell, seconded by Councillor Caldwell 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
 
The meeting concluded. 
