 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 1 of 26 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 24 November 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
 
                     
Members Present: Councillors C. Kelly (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V. Behan,  
A. Breen, A. Breslin, B. Caldwell, N. Connolly, S. Doyle, 
K. Duffy, G. Dunne, T. Durkan, W. Durkan, A. Feeney,  
D. Fitzpatrick, R. Heather, N. Heavey, I. Keatley, N. Killeen,  
M. Leigh, T. McDonnell, P. McEvoy, P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer,  
B. O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, D. Ryan, D. Trost,  
P. Ward and B. Wyse. 
 
Online: 
Councillors F. Brett, P. Brooks, B. Clear, B. Dooley,  
P. Melrose, S. Moore, P. Mulroe, D. Phelan, R. Power and  
E. Sammon. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillors C. Kelly, V. Behan, K. Duffy, R. Heather and  
B. O’Loughlin. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. Sonya Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms. A. Aspell (Deputy 
Chief Executive), Mr. J. Boland, Mr. A. Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, 
M. Higgins, E. Ryan (Directors of Services), Ms. C. Barrett,  
Mr. D. Creighton (A/Director of Services), Mr. B. Leonard and 
Mr. G. Maher (Senior Executive Officers). 
 
Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Mr. B. O’Gorman 
(Meetings Secretary) and other officials.  
 
 
Councillor C. Kelly (Cathaoirleach) welcomed everyone to the November monthly 
meeting of the Council. The Meeting Administrator read out a notice regarding the 
live streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 2 of 26 
 
00/1125 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised the meeting that she had been informed of the following 
bereavements:  
 
• Patrick (Paddy) Rochford, Husband of Emma Meates 
• Michelle Barrett, Sister of Celina Barrett 
• Brendan Blake, Father of John Blake, Library Headquarters 
• Maureen McGee, Mother of Earnan McGee 
• P.J. Watson, Father of Cormac Watson, and 
• Christiane Coïc, Mother of Liz Coïc and Mother-in-law to Damien (Beau) 
Domican. 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/1125 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended.  
 
Declaration from Councillor Leigh was noted for Item 11 (Section 183) and will 
absent from consideration of this matter. 
 
No other declarations were recorded.  
 
 
02/1125 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 20 October 
2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor Connolly 
and agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the monthly meeting 
held on 20 October 2025 be adopted. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 3 of 26 
 
The progress report was noted.  
 
     03/1125 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 
 
04/1125 
Casual Vacancy in Membership of the Council 
The members considered the casual vacancy in the membership of the council in 
accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended 
following the resignation of Councillor Lumi Panaite Fahey.  
 
The Cathaoirleach confirmed that the members had received due notice on the 20 
November of the nomination of Declan Ryan by the Fine Gael Party to fill the seat 
vacated by Ms. Lumi Panaite Fahey.  It was confirmed that he was a member of the 
party and his consent to the nomination had been received. 
 
Councillor T. O’Dwyer proposed Declan Ryan, a member of the Fine Gael Party to fill 
the casual vacancy following the resignation of former Councillor Lumi Panaite 
Fahey. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor S. 
Doyle and with the agreement of all members present that Mr Declan Ryan be 
coopted to fill the casual vacancy following the resignation of former Councillor Lumi 
Panaite Fahey. 
 
Councillor Declan Ryan took his seat in the chamber and thanked the members for 
his nomination.   
 
The Cathaoirleach and group leaders welcomed Councillor Declan Ryan to the 
council and looked forward to working with him. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 4 of 26 
 
05/1125 
Filling of Committee Vacancies 
The members considered the filling of the following committee and external body 
vacancies following resignation of Cllr Lumi Panaite Fahey: 
• Local Community, Cultural and Integration SPC 
• Twinning Liaison Committee 
• South Western Regional Drugs and Alcohol Taskforce, and 
• Regional Health Forum Dublin Mid-Leinster. 
 
Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor D. Fitzpatrick, proposed Councillor D. 
Ryan for three vacancies as below: 
• Local Community, Cultural and Integration SPC 
• Twinning Liaison Committee, and  
• Regional Health Forum Dublin Mid-Leinster. 
 
Councillor A. Breslin, seconded by Councillor D. Trost, proposed Councillor R. 
Heather for vacancy as below: 
• South Western Regional Drugs and Alcohol Taskforce. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor D. 
Fitzpatrick and agreed by the members present that Councillor D. Ryan fill the 
vacancies on the committees and external body listed below: 
• Local Community, Cultural and Integration SPC 
• Twinning Liaison Committee, and  
• Regional Health Forum Dublin Mid-Leinster. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor A. Breslin, seconded by Councillor D. Trost 
and agreed by the members present that Councillor R. Heather fill the vacancy on 
the South Western Regional Drugs and Alcohol Taskforce. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 5 of 26 
 
 
06/1125 
Draft Section 183 Guidelines 
The members considered the Draft Section 183 Guidelines report circulated 
previously to the members.  
 
Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural Services, outlined 
details of the guidance provided for the Section 183 process, which involved the 
disposal/ lease of Council owned property. He advised members that a two-year 
expiration (Section 3.6) will be the Council’s default position, unless otherwise 
advised by the elected members. The provisions within the guidelines will take 
immediate effect.  
 
Members noted the changes and agreed the guidelines,  
 
 
07/1125 
Section 183 Disposal – Lands at Castlefen, Sallins and Oaklawns, Kilmeague 
The Members considered the report on the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended: 
The disposal of 9.8 square metres of land at Castlefen, Sallins, Co Kildare (Statutory 
notice of 24 October 2025 circulated previously). 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor D. Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor S. 
Doyle and agreed by the members present that the disposal be approved.  
 
The disposal of 8.68 square metres of land at Oaklawns, Kilmeague Co. Kildare 
(Statutory notice of 24 October 2025 circulated previously). 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor D. Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor S. 
Doyle and agreed by the members present that the disposal be approved.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 6 of 26 
 
 
08/1125 
Section 183 Disposal – Harbourfield, Maynooth 
The Members considered the report on the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 06 November 
2025 circulated previously): 
The disposal is by way of (10-year) lease of 0.188 hectares of land at Harbourfield, 
Maynooth, Co. Kildare. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. McEvoy, seconded by Councillor C. 
O’Rourke and agreed by the members present that the disposal be approved.  
 
09/1125 
Section 183 Disposal – 1 Saint Patrick’s Terrace, Naas 
The Members considered the report on the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 10 November 
2025 circulated previously): 
The disposal of property at 1 Saint Patrick’s Terrace, Naas, Co. Kildare.  
 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor G. Dunne, seconded by Councillor C. Kelly 
and agreed by the members present that the disposal be approved.  
 
 
10/1125 
Section 183 Disposal – Rathangan Industrial Estate 
The Members considered the report on the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 07 November 
2025 circulated previously). 
The disposal is by way of 35-year lease of 0.2079 hectares of land at Rathangan 
Industrial Estate (unit to be known as Unit 7). 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 7 of 26 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor B. O’Loughlin, seconded by Councillor K. 
Duffy and agreed by the members present that the disposal be approved.  
 
11/1125 
Section 183 Disposal – Shanrath, Athy 
The Members considered the report on the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 13 November 
2025 circulated previously): 
The disposal of 0.110 hectares of land at Shanrath, Athy, Co. Kildare. 
 
Councillor M. Leigh absented from meeting.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor A. Breen, seconded by Councillor G. Dunne 
and agreed by the members present that the disposal be approved.  
 
 
12/1125 
Annual Financial Statement 2024 
Ms. E. Hanlon confirmed that the following reports on the audit of the Annual Financial 
Statement 2024 were circulated to members as below:  
i. Audit Committee Report in accordance with Section 121 Local 
Government Act 2001, as amended,  
ii. Unmodified Audit Opinion, and  
iii. Local Government Audit Service Statutory Audit Report year ended 31 
December 2024  
The reports were noted.  
 
13/1125 
Loan for Acquisition and Supply of Housing Units 
The members considered the report circulated in advance of the meeting in relation 
to a €12 million loan to finance the acquisition and supply of housing units to 
continue the implementation of the Housing for All Programme. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 8 of 26 
 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor K. Duffy, seconded by Councillor W. Durkan 
and agreed by the members that the raising of a €12m loan to finance the acquisition 
and supply of housing units to continue the implementation of the Housing for All 
Programme be approved. 
 
14/1125 
 
  
Draft Litter Management Plan 2026–2028 
 
Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, Environment and 
Water provided an overview of the preparation and consultation process undertaken 
as part of the preparation of the draft litter management plan.  
 
The plan sets out the Council’s objectives to prevent and control litter as well as 
measures to raise public awareness of litter. The plan for Kildare has been prepared 
in accordance with the requirements of the Litter Pollution Act.  
 
As part of the public consultative process, 39 submissions were received from a 
broad spectrum of groups and individuals. All were considered and have been 
reflected in the plan where appropriate. The range of issues raised in the 
submissions can be broadly categorised as - Public awareness of litter, community 
involvement, waste minimisation and recycling, council/ business/ responsibilities, 
liaison with Tidy Towns and environmental education. 
 
The plan has been considered during 2025 by the Environment and Water Services 
Strategic Policy Committee who recommended that the plan be brought to full council 
for its approval at its November meeting. 
 
Councillor C. Pender asked that specific mention of drug litter management be 
included. Councillor T. O’Dwyer noted the success of the Athy CCTV pilot project 
and was hopeful that this could be extended to other municipal districts (subject to 
funding being allocated). Councillor K. Duffy commended the work of tidy towns 
groups in the county and asked that consideration be given to having more litter 
picks in areas. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 9 of 26 
 
 
M. Higgins thanked members for their support and praised the work of tidy towns 
groups and additional content in the plan now includes details of the county’s recent 
success in the National Tidy Towns Competition. 
 
Ms. Higgins agreed to following amendments: 
• Drug Litter Management referenced 
• Litter Picks – Towns to be listed.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor N. Killeen, seconded by Councillor D. 
Fitzpatrick and agreed by all members present, that the Litter Management Plan 2026-
2028 be adopted, with amendment.  
 
15/1125 
Draft Meetings Calendar for 2026 
The members considered the draft meetings calendar and report circulated previously 
which outlined the proposed dates of meetings for 2026 and proposed changes to 
dates set as per Standing Orders and agreed protocols.  A provisional date had been 
included for the Annual Budget meeting.   
 
Ms. L. Hanratty advised members that some dates have been moved because of 
public holidays, which would have a knock-on effect on deadlines for receipts of 
motions and questions.  Details of these revised dates were contained in the report to 
members. The start time for the Corporate Policy Group was changed from 2:00 p.m. 
to 2:30 p.m.  
 
A discussion took place regarding the start time for the statutory monthly meeting. It 
was agreed that the Meetings Administrator conducts a survey among members.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor N. Killeen, seconded by Councillor S. Doyle 
and agreed by all members present, that the Draft Meetings Calendar for 2026 be 
approved. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 10 of 26 
 
16/1125 
Report from Members appointed to Other Bodies 
The members considered reports from members appointed to Other Bodies, 
pursuant to Section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended). 
 
The following reports were received at the November meeting: 
• Regional Health Forum Dublin Mid-Leinster 
• Monread Community Centre 
 
The reports were noted. 
 
17/1125 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach advised members on the following: 
 
Shackleton Experience 
The official opening of the Shackleton Experience Athy 
took place on 10 October last. The new visitor attraction is 
a must see and celebrates the life of Kilkea born polar 
explorer Ernest Shackleton and includes a local Athy 
exhibition. 
 
  
Women in Enterprise 
This year’s annual event in Newbridge celebrated 
National Women’s Enterprise Day 2025 and was a 
wonderful showcase of entrepreneurial talent in the 
county.  The event was organised by the Kildare Local 
Enterprise Office. 
Biodiversity Conference 
The biodiversity conference, organised by the Council in 
association with Kildare Wildlife Rescue took place in 
Newbridge. There was a great attendance, and the talks 
and workshops were very informative and engaging for 
all.  
Lexington Twinning Trip 
The Cathaoirleach, Leas Cathaoirleach and Chief 
Executive visited Lexington in October, as part of the 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 11 of 26 
 
county’s twinning with the city. The hosts organised a 
very informative itinerary and the Cathaoirleach noted 
how connected the Irish diaspora are in the USA.  
Pride of Place Awards 
The Cathaoirleach attended the National Pride of Place 
Awards. She extended congratulations to the Athy Sing & 
Sign Group who were runners up in the Community 
Wellbeing Initiative category. She also congratulated the 
Leixlip Youth Project who were shortlisted. 
Spirit of Kildare Awards 
Taking place as part of the Brigid – Spirit of Kildare  
 
 
 
 
Festival 2026, the awards will shine a spotlight on people 
 
 
 
 
and organisations whose actions, creativity, and  
 
 
 
 
commitment have made a meaningful difference to  
 
 
 
 
others. The ceremony will also include a Lifetime  
 
 
 
 
Achievement Award, recognising an individual or group 
 
 
 
 
who has helped place Kildare on the national or  
 
 
 
 
international stage. Website www.spiritofbrigid.ie 
18/1125 
Correspondence 
The Meetings Administrator confirmed that nine items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included: 
• Seven (7) resolutions from other local authorities,  
• Letter from Uisce Éireann regarding the notice of motion regarding legacy 
residential estates/ DPI (Ref. 10/2025), and  
• Acknowledgement from South Dublin County Council (10/2025) 
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 
19/1125 
Conferences and Training 
The Meeting Administrator referred to the Conference and Training report which was 
circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 12 of 26 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor C. 
Pender and agreed by the members present that the Conference and Training report 
be approved.  
 
20/1125 
County Kildare Access Network Flag 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Bernard Caldwell was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the County Kildare Access Network flag is flown in specific agreed locations 
within the remit of the council for Kildare Disability Week (30th November until 7th 
December 2025) to incorporate International Day of Persons with Disabilities. 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor B. Caldwell and seconded by Councillor N. 
Connolly.  
A report was received from Mr J Boland, Director of Services, Corporate and Cultural 
Services. This is a matter for the Members to agree. The council can facilitate the 
flying of flags at Aras Chill Dara, Newbridge Town Hall and libraries in the county 
(where flag poles are in place). The Corporate Section can liaise with the County 
Kildare Access Network to receive and distribute flags.   
Councillor Caldwell thanked members and staff for their support.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor B. Caldwell, seconded by Councillor N. 
Connolly and agreed by members present that the County Kildare Access Network 
flag be permitted to fly flags at Aras Chill Dara, Newbridge Town Hall and libraries as 
part of Kildare Disability Week and International Day of Persons with Disabilities. 
 
21/1125 
 
 
  
 
 
Women’s Caucus  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Donna Phelan was considered by the 
members: 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 13 of 26 
 
That the council agrees to establish a Women’s Caucus to provide a formal, cross-
party platform for women councillors to collaborate, share experiences and advance 
gender equality within local government.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Phelan and seconded by Councillor S. 
Doyle.  
A report from Mr J Boland, Director of Services, Corporate and Cultural Services was 
noted. As suggested in the motion, the Council notes commitments at national level 
on the part of the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to support 
initiatives aimed at supporting both the role and participation of women in local 
government. A proposal to establish a women's caucus was presented to the 
Protocol Committee at its most recent meeting on 3 November, 2025. The decision 
whether to establish such a caucus will be a matter for the elected members.  
 
Councillor Phelan welcomed the report and highlighted barriers for participation 
among women in politics. A number of members spoke outlining their experiences 
and suggested that further engagement take place. Councillor Phelan agreed to take 
the matter ‘offline’ and will engage with members.  
 
22/1125 
 
 
  
 
Dedicated Parkour Facility 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Chris Pender was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council supports the development of a dedicated parkour facility in County 
Kildare, and that the executive:  
a) Identifies a suitable location through engagement with young people 
and local community groups, 
b) Carries out a short feasibility process to confirm design, cost, and 
delivery options, and  
c) Engages with specialist providers to ensure quality, value for money 
and a clear timeline for public consultation and delivery.  
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 14 of 26 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor C. Pender and seconded by Councillor N. 
Killeen.  
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces was noted. There is no objection in principle to providing a parkour facility in 
the county. The work required to fulfil the feasibility and possible locations can be 
considered for next year’s works programme. However, this will have to take account 
of an extensive list of existing commitments across the county and the staff 
resources to deliver these. Timelines for engagement with young people, community 
groups and delivery will have to be considered at a later stage subject to staff and 
financial resources after the initial feasibility.   
 
Councillor Pender welcomed the report and engagement. He noted that some groups 
may not have engaged in previous sports and recreation plan consultations.   
  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor Killeen and 
agreed by members present that the matter be considered as part of next year’s 
programme, subject to existing commitments and resources.  
 
 
23/1125 
 
 
  
 
Advertising Planning Applications 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Peter Melrose was listed on the 
agenda: 
 
That this council, in accordance with its powers under Regulation 4 of S.I. No. 
264/2025 of the Planning and Development (Prescribed Newspapers) Regulations 
2025, commits to establishing and publishing a list of approved local newspapers 
and online publications for the purpose of advertising planning applications, and 
require developers to advertise planning applications in at least one such approved 
local publication, either in print or online, in addition to any national newspaper 
prescribed by the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Melrose and seconded by Councillor Killeen.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 15 of 26 
 
A report from Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services was noted. Article 4 of Statutory Instrument 
264/2025 “Planning and Development (Prescribed Newspapers) Regulations 2025”, 
as it pertains to applications for planning permission, would apply to Part 4 of the 
Planning and Development Act, 2024.  Part 4 of the 2024 Act has not yet been 
commenced and therefore Article 4 has no relevance for applications for planning 
permission yet.  
   
The relevant Regulations are the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, as 
amended, specifically Article 18(2).  A list of approved newspapers is available on the 
Planning Applications and Permission page of the Council website and in the 
Planning Department.  If a developer does not advertise their proposed development 
in one of the approved newspapers, the application is deemed invalid in accordance 
with the Regulations.  
   
The Planning Department is reviewing newspapers, including national newspapers, 
which are in circulation in County Kildare, with a view to updating the approved 
list. The updated list shall be displayed in our offices and online before year end.  
 
Councillor Melrose welcomed the report and looked forward to the review being 
completed. He highlighted the importance of information being available online.  
   
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Melrose, seconded by Councillor Killeen and 
agreed by members present that report was noted.  
 
 
 
24/1125 
Streetlamps Under Kildare County Council Management 
The following motion in the name of Councillor William Durkan was considered by 
the members: 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 16 of 26 
 
That the Council outlines how many streetlamps are under Kildare County Council 
management, how many have been replaced with modern LED lamps to date, and 
what plan does the council have to replace the remaining lamps.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor W. Durkan and seconded by Councillor P. 
O’Dwyer. 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces was noted. The Council currently manages 24,129 public lights. To date, 
20,019 of these have been installed or retrofitted with energy-efficient LED lanterns, 
leaving 4,110 lights with older high-energy lanterns.   
The Council is currently undertaking a Public Lighting Energy Efficiency Project 
(PLEEP), which involves the survey, design and retrofitting all old high energy 
lanterns with energy efficient LED lanterns, under its control.  
The Council will continue to retrofit old high energy lanterns with energy efficient LED 
lanterns under the PLEEP and through our public lighting maintenance contract.   
Councillor W. Durkan welcomed the report and queried timeline for the remaining 
4,110 lights. Ms. C. Barrett highlighted technical issues associated with these lights 
including concentric cabling and unbundling requirements. As a result, upgrades to 
these lights were slower and more costly.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor W. Durkan and seconded by Councillor P. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by members present that the report be noted.  
 
 
 
25/1125 
 
 
  
 
Live Streaming of MD Meetings  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Noel Connolly was considered by the 
members: 
 
Go leathnóidh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara a sruthú beo ar chruinnithe chun 
cruinnithe Ceantair Bhardasaigh a áireamh. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 17 of 26 
 
That the council extends its live streaming of meetings to include municipal district 
meetings.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Connolly and seconded by Councillor N. 
Killeen.  
A report from Mr. J. Boland, Director of Services, Corporate and Cultural Services 
was noted. The referral, or otherwise, of this motion to the Procedures and Protocol 
Committee is a matter for the members. The minutes of the meetings of this 
Committee would suggest that its consideration of such matters to date has related 
to the full council. Without prejudice to any recommendation that may subsequently 
emerge, the following aspects would need to be considered: 
- 
The need for amendment of standing orders for Municipal District 
Committee meetings 
- 
The likely introduction of additional protocols  
- 
Streaming could only apply to meetings held in the Chamber (Aras Chill 
Dara) 
- 
Possible implications relating to the future flow of meetings  
- 
The need for consultation with individual MDs, as ultimately there would 
probably be a desirability for consistency of application to either all, or 
none 
- 
The need to consult with relevant staff particularly in the context of any 
new protocols 
- 
Some resource implications, and  
- 
The broader level of demand for such streaming.  
Councillor Connolly welcomed the report. He was of the view that the Council should 
make efforts to make meetings more accessible to the public, which would be 
beneficial in highlighting the work of the municipal districts. Several members spoke 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 18 of 26 
 
in support of the motion and noted that while information on the Council’s meetings is 
available online, live streaming and recording of meetings should be explored.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Connolly, seconded by Councillor Killeen 
and agreed by members present that the request be referred to the Protocol 
Committee for consideration.  
 
 
26/1125 
 
 
Application of a ‘Climate Lens’ to the Annual Budget Book 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Pádraig McEvoy was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the council explores options to apply a ‘climate lens’ to the Annual Budget Book 
as a tool to support informed awareness of climate action across all service areas, to 
communicate progress and improve the visibility of climate-related activities, thereby 
strengthening the monitoring and governance of measures required to reduce 
emissions and to build environmental, social, and economic resilience in line with 
national climate action objectives.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor McEvoy and seconded by Councillor A. 
Feeney.   
A report from Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, 
Environment and Water was noted. The proposal is welcome and would assist in the 
annual Climate Action Plan implementation report to illustrate the progress of 
expenditure in the areas of mitigation, adaptation and energy efficiency alongside 
other essential climate consideration throughout the body corporate such as 
biodiversity for example.  Together with other measures it would continue to show 
Kildare County Council's ambition to achieve the national objectives and targets set 
by the Government.   In turn the data may provide for the wider regional and national 
reporting requirements being advanced. The matter will be listed for specific 
consideration as part of the next statutory budget process of the Council (Budget 
2027).   

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 19 of 26 
 
Councillor McEvoy welcomed the report and highlighted the need for an integrated 
approach as climate action is cross departmental. A number of Councillors spoke in 
support of the motion. 
M. Higgins thanked members for their support of the Council’s climate action plan 
and noted the importance of highlighting the work being carried out across all areas.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor McEvoy, seconded by Councillor Feeney 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted.  
 
27/1125 
Limitation of Single Use, Disposal Cutlery, Cups and Plates 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Brian O’Loughlin was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the council calls for the limitation of single use, disposal cutlery, cups and plates 
in restaurants and cafes where food and beverages are consumed on-site (either 
inside or in designated outdoor seating areas).  
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Loughlin and seconded by Councillor B. 
Caldwell.  
A report received from Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, 
Environment and Water and was noted.  
The EU introduced the Single Use Plastics Directive in 2019. These EU rules on 
single-use plastic products aim to prevent and reduce the impact of certain plastic 
products on the environment, in particular the marine environment, and on human 
health.   
  
Irish Regulations place a range of controls on various types of plastic products and 
on those who manufacture or import these products.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 20 of 26 
 
Since July 2021, the following single use plastic items are among those which are 
banned from being placed on the market in Ireland:  
• 
Cutlery/Plates/Stirrers/Straws  
  
Biodegradable and compostable alternatives made from materials like wood, 
bamboo, or paper are still available for purchase.  
The EPA, who holds the primary enforcement responsibility, has requested the 
assistance of the local government sector in the monitoring of the presence of items 
prohibited under the European Union (Single Use Plastics) Regulations.  
Local authorities are not responsible for taking any enforcement action in relation to 
retailers who are engaged in placing prohibited items onto the market, this function 
remains with the EPA.  
 The Circular Economy model builds on sharing, reusing and reinventing materials to 
meet our needs and replaces the current ‘take, make, dispose’ model.   
In line with measures in the national Circular Economy Programme, businesses and 
others could be reminded and encouraged to use the "Reduce, Reuse, Recycle" 
hierarchy, i.e. reduce consumption first, then reuse items whenever possible, and 
finally, recycle what's left.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 21 of 26 
 
Councillor O’Loughlin acknowledged the report and queried what more could be 
done by the Council. 
M. Higgins noted that as society moves to a circular economy single use was being 
reduced. She highlighted the importance of education and the role of the Green 
Schools initiative as a good example of this. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor O’Loughlin, seconded by Councillor Caldwell 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted.  
 
28/1125 
 
 
 Recycling Collection Points Across County Kildare  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Pat Balfe was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council prepares a report on all recycling collection points across County 
Kildare, to include: 
a) The location and capacity of each site, along with the frequency of 
collections currently in place 
b) Identification of sites where overflowing or access issues are regularly 
reported, including parking or safety concerns, and 
c) Recommendations to address high-usage locations, improve access and 
parking, and reduce littering or maintenance problems.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Balfe and seconded by Councillor N. Killeen.  
Report: The table below details the bring bank network in County Kildare showing 
the locations and number of banks on each site.  Textile banks are operated by 
private companies, usually charitable organisations, independently of the Council.  
  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 22 of 26 
 
               
  
  
  
  
Town   
Location  
Glass  
Cans  
Number 
of banks  
Allenwood  
ACDAL centre  Y  
 
9  
Ardclough  
 
GAA Club  
Y  
Y  
4  
Athy  
Supervalu  
Y  
Y  
13  
Athy  
Gallows Hill 
Recycling 
Centre  
Y  
Y  
3  
Ballymore 
Eustace  
Handball Alley  Y  
Y  
5  
Broadford  
Council Depot  Y  
Y  
8  
Celbridge  
GAA Club  
Y  
Y  
7  
Celbridge  
Tesco  
Y  
Y  
12  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 23 of 26 
 
Celbridge  
Supervalu  
Y  
Y  
8  
Clane  
GAA Club  
Y  
Y  
12  
Clane  
Supervalu  
Y  
Y  
12  
Clogherinkoe  
GAA club  
Y  
Y  
5  
Johnstown  
Main St  
Y  
Y  
5  
Johnstownbridge  GAA Club  
Y  
Y  
3  
Kilcock  
GAA Club  
Y  
Y  
8  
Kilcock  
Tesco Express  Y  
Y  
11  
Kilcullen  
Mart Carpark  Y  
Y  
15  
Kildare Town  
Tesco  
Y  
Y  
14  
Kill  
Beside RC 
Church  
Y  
Y  
7  
Leixlip  
Lidl  
Y  
Y  
16  
Maynooth  
Aldi  
Y  
Y  
7  
Maynooth  
Council 
Carpark  
Y  
Y  
11  
Maynooth  
Tesco  
Y  
Y  
15  
Monasterevin  
Supervalu  
Y  
Y  
6  
Naas   
Tesco 
Monread  
Y  
Y  
10  
Naas  
Tesco  
Y  
Y  
11  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 24 of 26 
 
Naas  
B&Q Retail 
Park  
Y  
Y  
9  
Narraghmore  
St Laurence’s 
GAA  
Y  
Y  
7  
Newbridge  
Lidl  
Y  
Y  
9  
Newbridge  
Tesco  
Y  
Y  
16  
Newbridge  
Greyhound 
Stadium  
Y  
Y  
3  
Newbridge  
Newbridge 
Town FC   
Y  
Y  
4  
Newbridge  
Newbridge 
Town   
Y  
Y  
1  
Nurney  
Spar Carpark  Y  
Y  
6  
Rathangan  
Beside RC 
Church  
Y  
Y  
9  
Rathcoffey  
GAA Club  
Y  
Y  
6  
Sallins  
Waterways 
Centre  
Y  
Y  
8  
Silliot Hill 
Kilcullen  
Recycling 
Centre  
Y  
Y  
8  
Staplestown  
St. Kevins GAA 
Club  
Y  
Y  
6  
  
The majority of bring banks are typically serviced on a weekly basis, with others on 
an as required basis.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 25 of 26 
 
The Council is continually scouting for additional sites and any potential sites that the 
councillors may have in mind will be investigated for suitability.  
Bring bank locations are chosen with parking and access in mind in all cases.  Safety 
for the public and service vehicles including level access, adequate sightlines, 
lighting, etc along with the required setback (50m) from any residences, are other 
considerations in determining suitable sites.    
Reports of parking or safety concerns have not been regularly received from the 
public. CCTV cameras have recently been installed at one bring bank location and 
may be installed at other sites to reduce littering, subject to funding and the 
prescribed protocols.  
General information on how to manage your waste – including all recycling locations 
- is also available on the government website www.mywaste.ie  
Councillor Balfe welcomed the report and queried the servicing schedule for sites.  
Councillor Doyle highlighted a specific objective in the County Development Plan for 
retailers to provide facilities and noted that this should be explored by the Council to 
locate new sites.  
M. Higgins thanked members for their support with the programme and noted the 
willingness to work with Councillors to identify new sites, where the need is identified. 
She noted that the servicing of sites is regularly reviewed. 
Mr. A. Dunney advised that Planning will engage with the Environment Department 
regarding the CDP objective to provide new facilities.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Balfe, seconded by Councillor Killeen and 
agreed by members present that the report was noted.  
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 24.11.2025                 Page 26 of 26 
 
 
