 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 1 of 25 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 26 May 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
________________________________________________ 
                     
Members Present: Councillors K. Duffy (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V. Behan, A. 
Breen, A. Breslin, F. Brett, B. Clear, N. Connolly, S. Doyle, G. 
Dunne, T. Durkan, W. Durkan, A. Feeney, D. Fitzpatrick, R. 
Heather, N. Heavey, N. Killeen, M. Leigh, T. McDonnell, P. 
Melrose, P. Mulroe, P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer, C. O’Rourke, C. 
Pender, D. Phelan, E. Sammon, D. Trost, and B. Wyse. 
 
Online: 
Councillors P. Brooks, B. Caldwell, B. Dooley, I. Keatley, B. 
O’Loughlin, L. Panaite Fahey, R. Power, P. Ward. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillors C. Kelly, P. McEvoy, S. Moore. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms. A. Aspell. Mr. A. 
Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, Mr. E. Ryan, Ms M. Higgins (Directors 
of Services), Ms. C. Barrett, Mr. D. Creighton (A/Directors of 
Services), Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Mr. A. 
Shanahan (Meetings Secretary), and other officials.  
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the May monthly meeting of the Council 
and asked the Meeting Administrator to read out a notice regarding the live 
streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 2 of 25 
 
00/0525 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised the meeting that he had been informed of the following 
bereavements:  
 
Michael (Mike) Carroll, former Community Warden Supervisor for Naas Town 
Council.  
Kevin Wynne, Husband of Annette Dowling, Information Technology. 
Kathleen Daly, Mother of Damian Daly, Planning. 
Patrick (Paddy) Butler, Father of Carol Butler, Finance.  
Tom Malone, Grandfather of Councillor Rob Power.  
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/0525 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0525 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 28 April 
2025 and the special meeting held on 31 March 2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Connolly, seconded by Councillor Caldwell, 
and agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the monthly meeting 
held on 28 April 2025 and the special meeting held on 31 March 2025 be adopted. 
The progress report was noted.  
 
     03/0525 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 3 of 25 
 
04/0525 
Disposal of Lands 
The members considered the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 14 May 2025 circulated 
previously and attached). 
 
• Disposal of 0.014 acres of land at 5 Patrician Ave, Naas, Co. Kildare. 
• Disposal of 0.066 acres of land at 146 Allenview Heights, Newbridge Co. 
Kildare. 
 
Councillor Dunne expressed his gratitude to the Council for resolving long standing 
issues at Patrician Avenue, by means of the disposal.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Feeney seconded by Councillor T. O’ Dwyer, 
and agreed by the members present that the disposal of 0.014 acres of land at 5 
Patrician Ave, Naas, Co. Kildare and 0.066 acres of land at 146 Allenview Heights, 
Newbridge Co. Kildare be approved. 
 
          05/0525 
Draft 2024 Annual Report, including the Annual Service Delivery Plan 2024 
Progress Report and the Corporate Plan Progress Report for 2024 
Mr. Eoghan Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural Services, 
noted that a draft report was circulated prior to the meeting. Mr. Ryan briefed the 
meeting on the report. The members considered the Draft Annual Report. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor Trost 
and agreed by the members present that the 2024 Annual Report be approved.  
 
 
 
06/0525 
 
Kildare Municipal Art Collection, Purchasing and Donations Policy 
Mr. Eoghan Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural Services, 
noted that a draft policy was circulated prior to the meeting. Mr. Ryan briefed the 
meeting on the report. The members considered the draft Policy. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 4 of 25 
 
Councillor Pender asked if a greater presence of public art could be considered in 
the future. He noted that the Arts and Library Services are active in reaching out to 
groups but suggested that the policy supports the display of art in spaces of 
marginalised communities and in rural areas.   
 
Mr Ryan noted that support is specifically given to emerging artists, and that multiple 
funding sources are required to deliver the display of public art which can be 
challenging. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Sammon, seconded by Councillor Doyle, 
and agreed by the members present that the Kildare Municipal Art Collection, 
Purchasing and Donations Policy be approved.  
 
07/0525 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach advised members that he had attended several events recently, 
including: 
• Launch of Biodiversity Week, 9th Irish Military Seminar at the Riverbank, 
Kildare Inclusivity Festival and the Kildare Volunteer Awards in Newbridge. 
 
He also spoke of his admiration for the volunteers represented at the Kildare 
Volunteer Awards and thanked Councillor P. O’Dwyer for attending the Kildare 
Inclusivity Festival at the Curragh Racecourse. Kildare Inclusivity Festival was 
praised by the members.  
 
08/0525 
Correspondence 
The Meetings Administrator confirmed that six items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included an 
acknowledgement from the Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
following motions from April’s meeting, an acknowledgement from the OPW following 
a motion from Councillor C O’Rourke, an invite to Food and Drinks Trail, a reply from 
the Minister of Housing regarding Councillors Doyle March motion, and two 
correspondences seeking nomination as a Presidential candidate. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 5 of 25 
 
Following an enquiry from Councillor Killeen, the Cathaoirleach advised members 
that it was intended to brief members regarding the processes around candidate 
nominations for the Presidential Elections, at the next Council meeting as this was 
due to come before June CPG meeting for discussion.  
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 
09/0525 
Conferences and Training 
The Meetings Administrator referred to the conference and training report which was 
circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
• Councillor Clear sought retrospective approval for attendance at Technological 
University of Dublin for Planning and Design for Active Travel course for six 
weeks in the amount of €255 which represented 50% of the course fees. 
• Councillors Phelan and Mulroe sought approval for attendance at AILG 
Induction Training for newly co-opted Councillors on 29 May 2025 at a cost of 
€90 each. 
• Councillor Phelan sought approval for attendance at free online training AILG 
Housing Agency -Local Authorities and Approved Housing Bodies course on 
23 May 2025. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Brett, seconded by Councillor Fitzpatrick, 
and agreed by the members present that the conference and training report be 
approved. 
 
10/0525 
 
  
 
 
 Unauthorised Developments Meetings 
The following motion in the names of Councillors Fintan Brett, Paul Ward, Brendan 
Wyse, Tim Durkan, Daragh Fitzpatrick, William Durkan and Kevin Duffy was 
considered by the members: 
 
That the council commits to bi-monthly in person meetings to address and work 
through Unauthorised Developments with members.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 6 of 25 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Brett, seconded by Councillor Fitzpatrick. 
 
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that the Executive notes the request 
from the elected members for a commitment to a bi-monthly in person meeting to 
address and work through unauthorised developments in the County.  
 
In this regard the growing concerns of the members relating to a significant increase 
in alleged unauthorised developments throughout the County are shared by the 
Executive who have initiated a number of processes and procedural improvements 
with the aim of addressing these concerns, including the development of new IT 
systems, triaging enforcement cases as received and careful allocation of complaints 
by matching the complexity and severity of the case in question with the experience 
and expertise of enforcement team. Indeed, we have also recently supplemented the 
Planning Enforcement Team in Kildare County Council which now totals 9 full-time 
staff. 
 
For context, the Planning Enforcement Section carries out its enforcement functions 
in accordance with the provisions of Part VIII of The Planning and Development Act 
2000 as amended. Such provisions are an Executive function of the Local Authority 
with Schedule 15 section 151 setting out details in regard to the functions to be 
carried out by a Managers Order including ‘a decision to take legal proceedings.   
The timeframes involved in the enforcement process are set out as follows:  
 
ACTION  
TIMESCALE 
Written complaint received by 
the planning authority  
Start 
Warning letter issues 
Within 6 weeks 
Response from alleged 
unauthorised developer 
Within a further 4 weeks 
Reply issued to complainant by 
planning authority  
Within a further two weeks 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 7 of 25 
 
Planning authority decides 
whether further action is 
required 
Within 12 weeks where possible (Not rigid in 
the eyes of the Court) 
 
In addition to the above, the members will be aware that Alleged Offenders are 
provided with 6 months to remedy the unauthorised situation after which recurse to 
the courts is sought as soon as practicably possible. 
 
Notwithstanding the above referenced improvements, an additional objective of the 
Planning Enforcement Team is to establish a multi-disciplinary approach, with 
relevant state agencies, where a shared and collective aim will be to address specific 
cases of alleged unauthorised development and serial offenders. Such an approach 
is in the early stages of development with initial engagements providing a positive 
basis for dealing with specific cases currently in the system.  
 
Following on from the above, recent process improvements and measures are also 
being currently assessed for their potential to inform and supplement the level of 
information provided to the members through the monthly CE Reports. Such 
information and statistics may include details in regard to New Consultations/Cases, 
the number of cases closed, enforcement notices served, warning letters served, and 
cases referred to solicitors for review and legal proceedings.  
 
Noting the above and the significant workload of the Planning Team, the members 
will recall the Planning Functions Briefing for full council that was held in early 2025 
which outlined the processes and procedures involved in all aspects of the planning 
function including enforcement process as well as a number of case examples and 
timelines.  
 
This initial briefing was a resounding success and as such, and in light of this motion, 
the Planning Department are agreeable to engage with the members through a 
further briefing. It should be noted however that while specifics relating to alleged 
unauthorised development files cannot be discussed, updates in regard to the status 
of active cases from a broad perspective can be provided.   
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 8 of 25 
 
Councillor Brett thanked the Director for the detailed report. He noted that if funding 
for legal expertise was a barrier to progressing cases, that the members were willing 
to commit funding, and addressing shortfalls to deal with the processing of serial 
offenders regarding unauthorised development, should be prioritised.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The report was positive and a space to regularly discuss the issues and 
evaluate the impact of the actions in the report was very welcome. 
• The credibility of the planning process was at stake if this is not addressed. 
• The housing crisis was a major factor in increased unauthorised 
developments. 
• There is reluctance from complainants to progress their complaints. 
• An inter-agency approach was needed, including, for example, the Revenue 
Commissioner, An Garda Síochána and the Criminal Assets Bureau (CAB).  
• Members would like to see data and metrics to track progress in this area. 
• The duration/timeframe of cases is hugely frustrating for constituents. 
• Frustration of constituents due to alleged offenders applying for planning 
permission, to delay or avoid legal proceedings. 
• Triaging should be done on the impact of serial offenders to the public and 
local communities. 
• The activity of staff on the ground is acknowledged, however the Executive 
have proven unable to address the issue. Progress from the actions proposed 
must be seen as soon as possible. 
• Would the creation of an in-house legal team be of benefit? 
 
Director Alan Dunney responded to the members. He shared their frustration but 
noted the scale of development in the County, with over 1,800 planning applications, 
5 Local Area Plans, a County Development Plan Review and in excess of 1 
enforcement case created per day, was putting a strain on resources. He disagreed 
that the Executive were not capable in this area, and that the team involved are 
under pressure. While triaging is done, he noted that every case had to be inspected, 
reports compiled and then actioned.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 9 of 25 
 
He stated that he would consider how data and metrics can be provided to update 
members, without breaching GDPR or compromising any proceedings planned or 
underway. He would continue to pursue inter-agency cooperation to address 
significant cases. 
  
He stated that he was satisfied with the quality of legal representation the Council 
uses but the delays were with the legal system, not the service used.  
He stated that he would commit to one briefing, possibly within the next month.  
 
Councillor Brett thanked the Director, stating he was looking forward to seeing results 
soon.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Brett, seconded by Councillor Fitzpatrick, 
and agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
11/0525 
GDPR in relation to listing Unauthorised Developments 
The following motion in the names of Councillors Evie Sammon, Donna Phelan, 
Carmel Kelly, Robert Power and Veralouise Behan was considered by the members: 
 
That the council clarifies the concern surrounding GDPR in relation to listing 
Unauthorised Developments on the planning portal as was done in previous years.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Sammon and seconded by Councillor 
Phelan. 
 
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that it should also be noted by the 
members that when an Unauthorised Development complaint is received it is an 
allegation of unauthorised development that needs to (1) be examined, (2) have 
proceedings taken under the planning code and where necessary be (3) referred to 
the courts to be proven and adjudicated on and during this process the alleged 
offender is entitled to privacy under data protection and GDPR legislation like any 
alleged offender. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 10 of 25 
 
In this context, Kildare County Council did previously publish details of enforcement 
points and information on the planning portal. However, there are now strict controls 
on the use of information on that register following on from a number of legal 
complaints which were received with respect to this information being made available 
publicly. 
 
These complaints related to, amongst other things, preventing the sale of properties 
where UD complaints had been received, and an Unauthorised Development Case 
was opened but later proven to be vexatious / frivolous or covered by exemptions 
under the planning acts or even ruled out by the Courts.  This occurred because the 
points and information related to UD files prevented some vendors from being able to 
sell their properties. 
 
Following on from the above complaints, the Council’s Legal Team have advised that 
the General Data Protection Regulation trumps many other pieces of legislation 
including the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended) in that it offers many 
more protections to the individual involved in any planning process and that as such 
information on alleged unauthorised developments should not be made publicly 
available. It is noted in this regard that a development remains alleged until proven 
otherwise, which as detailed above sometimes requires recourse to the courts.  
Finally, and to provide some more information for the elected members, the following 
definitions, rights and obligations under the General Data Protection Regulation 2018 
are of relevance: 
 
‘Personal data’: means any information relating to an identified or identifiable 
natural person (‘data subject’); an identifiable natural person is one who can be 
identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier such as a 
name, an identification number, location data, an online identifier or to one or more 
factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or 
social identity of that natural person; 
 
‘Personal data breach’: means a breach of security leading to the accidental or 
unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, 
personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 11 of 25 
 
Rights of individuals: The GDPR grants individuals significant rights regarding their 
personal data, including the right of access, right to restriction and rectification when 
inaccurate data is processed, erasure (right to be forgotten), data portability, and the 
right to object to processing.  
 
Obligations of organizations: The GDPR outlines specific obligations for 
organizations, such as obtaining consent, accuracy of data, storage limitations and 
implementing adequate security and confidentiality measures. 
 
Councillor Sammon thanked the Director for the report acknowledging the 
protections provided under GDPR, the councils legal obligations, and requirements 
for transparency under Planning legislation, emphasising the need to strike a balance 
between the privacy of alleged offenders and the right of the public and elected 
members to be informed. She stated she would welcome clarity on this at the briefing 
agreed under the previous motion, noting that transparency was fundamental to 
public trust. During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The Planning Department should explore the use of anonymous data with 
generalised locations or heat maps to strike a balance in providing information 
on this matter. 
• It was acknowledged, that where an offence is “alleged”, privacy is relevant, but 
it was impacting public trust. A standardised approach should be developed 
among all local authorities. 
• That the pre-legislative process in the Oireachtas should have been used to 
address these issues in law. Could clarity be sought from the DHLGH on 
whether it contradicted the Planning and Development Act.  
Director Alan Dunney responded stating that the Council had to operate within the 
law but would explore ways to provide more detailed and regular data to the 
members to ensure they are informed about overall performance, and to supplement 
the data already provided in the Monthly CE Report.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Sammon, seconded by Councillor Phelan, 
and agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 12 of 25 
 
 
12/0525 
Meeting with Housing Department 
The following motion in the name of Councillors Tracey O Dwyer, Bernard Caldwell, 
Peggy O Dwyer, David Trost, Brian Dooley, Lumi Panaite Fahey and Paul Brooks 
was considered by the members: 
 
That the councils’ Housing Department confirms and provides a date to hold an in 
person meeting with the members to review how the Housing Maintenance and 
Vacant Properties priority lists are managed and the timeline and challenges to 
bringing vacant properties back to use.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Tracey O Dwyer and seconded by Councillor 
Caldwell. 
 
A report from Ms A Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the turnaround of Kildare County Council’s social housing stock, together with 
vacancy rates, is an item on the work programme for the Housing and Regeneration 
Strategic Policy Committee for 2025.  In discussion with the Chair of the Housing and 
Regeneration SPC it has been agreed that this matter will be considered by the SPC 
at their next meeting on 11 September.  Further to the discussion with the SPC, there 
would be benefit in making a presentation to the elected members on the work of the 
Housing Maintenance Team in the context of considering the Budget for 2026. 
Subject to the agreement of the elected members a briefing can be scheduled at that 
time. 
 
Councillor T. O’Dwyer thanked the Director for the report but stated that the visibility 
of vacant properties in many parts of the County, for long periods of time, was a 
source of concern and frustration, especially for persons on the housing list for long 
periods. She also stated that long delays brought properties further into disrepair, 
brought anti-social behaviour, and cost more in public money to rectify compared to 
speedy action if taken. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 13 of 25 
 
• There was an expectation among members that meeting should be scheduled 
earlier than September. 
• Average re-lets costs of €48,000 was high and could a breakdown be given. 
• Turnaround times of vacant and re-let properties needs to improve. Could a 
triage system improve turnaround times. 
• A request for the Minister to attend Full Council to discuss Kildare’s funding 
allocation for housing maintenance and the changes to the Tenant in-situ 
Scheme. 
• Clarity requested on the disparities between each MD, on turnaround times, 
funding allocation and number of vacant properties. 
• Can apprenticeship schemes be considered to address minor works. 
• Are all refurbishment works necessary, could the works be simplified or phased, 
is the extent of works contributing to delays. 
• Members views should be heard before the next SPC meeting.  
 
Director Annette Aspell responded, noting the average vacancy rate in this Council is 
2.5%, equating, at any time, to around 120 properties, out of a stock of almost 6,000. 
She advised time intensive works, such as fire-damage, were included in re-let times, 
distorting performance, that a new Housing Maintenance Framework was in place 
and should, in the coming months, speed up the engagement of contractors.  
 
It was noted that the annual spend is €22million, and that it was expected to be short 
by approximately €2m. She advised a briefing in September was best, as it was in 
advance of the budget-making process.  
In relation to costs, and building standards, she advised that heating, plumbing and 
electrical repair are always a minimum requirement, and typically the upgrade of 
boilers, ventilation, alarms, windows, door, and drainage is included.  
 
In relation to variations between MD’s, she advised that works were prioritised based 
on the property, not the location, and that operationally the County was divided 
North/South and not by MD, for efficiency reasons. She re-iterated that a meeting in 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 14 of 25 
 
September is based on the reasons outlined in the report and to allow for staff 
changes in this work area to take effect.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Tracey O Dwyer, seconded by Councillor 
Caldwell and agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
13/0525 
Data from Traffic Speed Surveys and Driver Feedback Signs 
The following motion in the name of Councillors Nuala Killeen, Paula Mulroe and 
Claire O Rourke was considered by the members: 
 
That the council publishes all data from Traffic Speed Surveys and Driver Feedback 
Signs conducted over the past 12 months in Kildare County Council, details if it has 
led to the implementation of traffic calming measures, confirms whether this data has 
been shared with An Garda Síochána highlighting high volumes of traffic, any excess 
speeding, and any locations and times that are of concern on our roads. That this 
information facilitates an annual review of published data that could inform the 
Community Safety Partnerships so that improvements can be identified and problem 
areas can be highlighted.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Killeen and seconded by Councillor Mulroe. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that Kildare County Council are in the process of compiling our Traffic 
Count Data which will be provided to the Department of Transport and Roads 
Management Office on a centralised basis to assist in understanding the volume of 
traffic, the composition of traffic and when peak flows occur at specific locations. The 
collection and centralisation of this information will allow, over time, the tracking of 
changes to traffic in the local authority area and determine future road improvements 
and road safety measures. The Council uses traffic count data to design road 
improvement and surface dressing projects, in particular in the prioritisation and 
delivery of the municipal district schedule of works.  Periodically, traffic speeds are 
measured to facilitate the traffic management design process, subject to resources 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 15 of 25 
 
being identified. The traffic counters record a limited amount of data i.e. the average 
annual daily traffic (AADT), the average speed and the percentage of heavy goods 
vehicles (HGV).  While data is used at a local level in informing local authority 
decisions, the data is not suitable for the purpose requested. Furthermore, data is 
collected from a limited number of locations which, in most cases, will not necessarily 
correlate with locations where speeding is an issue. Data is not collected from driver 
feedback signage, but this will be reviewed in the context of the centralisation of 
traffic count data. 
 
Councillor Killeen stated that the availability of data on speed and traffic counts is 
strategically important to inform 5–10-year planning, to support An Garda Síochána, 
the Council and plan for investment to tackle known problem locations. During 
discussion, the members raised the following points: 
 
• Accessing and using data, moves the organisation to data-led planning for 
safety and infrastructure. 
• Is the collected data GIS mapped. 
• If the Council and An Garda Síochána were both publishing, sharing and 
analysing the data, it would lead to better informed solutions and support the 
new Community Safety Partnerships. 
 
Director Celina Barrett responded noting that in most cases the data is captured for 
specific purposes and at specific times, typically “average annual daily traffic 
surveys”, to inform road build up specifications and that data collections points are 
not mapped. She also noted that feedback signs were not GIS mapped.   
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Mulroe, and 
agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
14/0525 
Letter to NTA re Review of Bus Services in County  
The following motion in the name of Councillors Chris Pender and Pat Balfe 
was considered by the members: 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 16 of 25 
 
That the council writes to the National Transport Authority (NTA) and other relevant 
organisations requesting that all bus services operating in County Kildare be 
reviewed and realigned where necessary to better support residents who rely on 
public transport for onward travel, school, education, and work. This review should 
include: (1) adjusting local bus timetables to align more effectively with train 
departure and arrival times across key stations to ensure practical and reliable 
connections; (2) reviewing morning and evening services to match school start and 
finish times as well as standard working hours, particularly in areas with limited 
transport alternatives; and (3) identifying and addressing gaps in service frequency, 
especially during off-peak periods, to make public transport a more consistent and 
viable daily option for communities across the county.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Pender and seconded by Councillor Balfe. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces advised the members that this is a matter for the members to agree. The 
scope of the motion falls with the remit of the National Transport Authority and is not 
a matter for Kildare County Council. 
 
Councillor Pender noted that disconnected services, “no shows” and breakdowns, 
especially across certain South Kildare towns, failed public transport users. While 
welcoming Local Link he noted that there were gaps between interventions by 
TFI/NTA and that it was vital the Council and members push these organisations for 
joined up services and multi-modal hubs.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Lack of coordination in train and bus timetables are driving people away from 
public transport, impacting employment opportunities and compounding social 
inequality, where persons cannot afford to be car-owners. 
• These issues compound rural isolation for older persons especially. 
• That even in urban Districts like Celbridge-Leixlip, under Bus-Connects it was 
reported that only 9 outgoing transport services (out of 179) were deemed 
“viable” (defined as less than a 15minute wait for the next link in the journey).   

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 17 of 25 
 
Councillor Doyle requested that the letter includes for a request to hold unreliable 
contracted bus service providers accountable especially in the award of contacts for 
this service. This was supported by Councill Pender and seconded by Councillor 
Balfe. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor Balfe, and 
agreed by the members present that a letter, including Councillor Doyles request 
issue to the National Transport Authority. 
 
15/0525 
Naming Of New Residential Estates Policy  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Doyle was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council amends the naming of new residential estates policy, last reviewed 
in 2018, to require approval of local municipal district committees in confirming 
names to be used, recognising the value of local knowledge and avoidance of 
repetition in achieving function.   
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Doyle and seconded by Councillor Pender. 
 
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services informed the members that the Naming of 
New Residential Developments Policy Document 2018 provides guidance to 
developers in regard the naming of new residential developments. Such policy is 
aligned with the provisions of the County Development Plan seeking to conserve, 
preserve and enhance Kildare’s Heritage.  
 
The policy document sets out that the name of residential and other developments 
shall reflect local heritage by incorporating local place-names or names of 
geographical, historical, or cultural significance to the site location.  
 
In order to ensure the above and to avoid confusion and duplication, the naming of 
developments requires the prior agreement of the Planning Authority which is dealt 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 18 of 25 
 
with by way of planning condition through the Development Management process 
and through planning compliance submissions that are assessed by Kildare County 
Council’s Estate Naming Committee.  
 
Operationally, the Estate Naming Committee meet twice a month to consider 
compliance proposals for the naming of estates and is made up of both experienced 
planning administrative and technical staff, including the Senior Executive Planner 
assigned to the MD in question. The Kildare County Council Irish Officer and Library 
staff are also involved in the process and consulted on proposals for the naming of 
new developments.  
 
With respect to the naming of estates requiring approval of the local Municipal 
District Committee, it is noted that Schedule 14A Parts 1-3 of the Local Government 
Reform Act 2001 (as amended) set out the list of reserved functions for elected 
members. The act states that ‘Every function of a local authority which is not a 
reserved function is, for the purposes of this Act, is an executive function of such 
local authority’.  
 
As such, the Naming of Estates is an Executive Function of the Local Authority and 
remains part of the Development Management process. 
 
 
Councillor Doyle advised that she wasn’t proposing that the members control this 
process, but that they, like the Council, had an interest in ensuring the local heritage 
of areas was meaningfully and reflected in the naming of developments to keep alive 
the history and heritage of an area.  
 
Director Alan Dunney stated he was happy to receive submissions by the members 
to the Committee for naming estates, but that existing staff ensure local heritage is 
considered and that the naming of a development was as important a part of 
planning compliance as design and related matters.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
16/0525 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 19 of 25 
 
Review of Emergency Response 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Clear was considered by the 
members. 
 
That, following the extensive damage caused by Storm Eowyn in parts of County 
Kildare, the council confirms it has undertaken a review of its emergency response to 
identify what improvements could be made, what additional resources - both in terms 
of funding and personnel - have been identified as necessary to effectively respond 
to future severe weather events and confirms if there is a proposal to formally 
integrate Uisce Éireann and ESB Networks into the Council’s emergency planning 
framework. 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Clear and seconded by Councillor P. 
O’Dwyer 
 
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that as the members will be aware, 
Kildare County Council’s Major Emergency Management Committee meets on a 
quarterly basis to review the organisations readiness to respond to various 
emergency scenarios. These meetings are augmented by training exercises to 
ensure that all systems and procedures are robust and tested in advance of any 
emergency scenario that might occur. 
 
With respect to Storm Eowyn, the members will also be aware that national 
coordination structures were engaged in the week leading up to the storm, during the 
event and for several days thereafter to ensure coordination of the emergency 
services at that level.  Regional and local structures were also engaged in parallel to 
ensure Kildare County Council’s response was delivered in an effective and 
appropriate manner. 
 
Furthermore, and as would be normal after any event, a an extensive and detailed 
debrief of Kildare County Council's response to Storm Eowyn has been undertaken 
by the Severe Weather Assessment Team (SWAT). While noting that KCC 
advisories and alerts to the public before, during and after the storm worked well, this 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 20 of 25 
 
exercise focused on areas for further improvement in the Council’s response to 
instances of severe weather, including: 
 
• 
Mitigation steps KCC can take in the future in relation to power outages in Áras 
Chill Dara including, resilience of the Council’s phone networks, formalisation of 
arrangements to receive calls from the public through the Out of Hours service, 
including alerting the Municipal District Offices where appropriate. 
• 
Potential use of power banks by the Crisis Management Team and increasing the 
use of back up generation at Council offices 
• 
Identifying the10 most critical infrastructure sites in county Kildare in relation to 
water and wastewater and liaising with Uisce Eireann who are assessing options 
to improve resilience at the identified sites in conjunction with the ESB. 
• 
The establishment of a network of potential Community Hubs and work is 
currently ongoing to identify and contact community and sports organisations with 
suitable buildings which could be used as Community Support Centres in future. 
Indeed, in future storms, where necessary, a sub-group off the Local Coordination 
Group will be the focal point for any Community Support Centres to feed 
information into KCC and National Guidance on Community Support Centres is 
due to be issued shortly by the National Directorate of Fire and Emergency 
Management which will be used to progress this work.  
 
With respect to the integration of Uisce Eireann and ESB Networks into the Council’s 
emergency planning framework, it is important to note that a national review of the 
Major Emergency Response Framework is ongoing and due to be completed within 
the next 12 months. All local authority Major Emergency Response Frameworks will 
be guided by the outcome of this national review; however, Kildare County Council 
are leading a regional inter-agency major emergency exercise and seminar relating 
to storms and flooding that will be held in Q3 of 2025. Uisce Éireann and ESB 
Networks will both be present and involved in this exercise and seminar. 
 
In addition to the above, Kildare County Council emergency response staff continue 
to collaborate with their counterparts in other local authorities to ensure coordination 
at a regional level and also sharing of best practice and continued learning across 
the Local Government sector. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 21 of 25 
 
 
Councillor Clear thanked the Director for the report and welcomed the recent 
resolution of power issues at Uisce Éireann sites and requested that the views and 
concerns of elected members, arising from the post-Storm Eowyn experience be 
highlighted in the upcoming regional event later in 2025.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Evidence of inter-agency collaboration and preparation was welcomed. 
• Members attention was drawn to very recent helpful resources from the AILG 
regarding briefings from officials from Kerry and Sligo County Councils, 
available to AILG members.  
 
Director Alan Dunney stated that readiness was central to what the sector does, and 
that after each major event, including severe weather there was a review. He noted 
that there is a review ongoing regarding the National Emergency Framework and that 
there were quarterly meetings with other agencies, including An Garda Síochána and 
the HSE, regarding major emergency planning.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Clear, seconded by Councillor P. O’Dwyer 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
17/0525 
Ballydermot Bog Group 
The following motion in the name of Councillor O’Loughlin was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council commissions an independent report on the environmental, heritage 
and tourism/community amenity value of the Kildare portion of the Ballydermot Bog 
Group. The environmental assessment should include the biodiversity potential and 
carbon sequestration of these peatlands to be rehabilitated for present and future 
generations following decades of peat extraction by Bord na Mona and proposed 
wind farm project developments on these boglands. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 22 of 25 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Loughlin and seconded by Councillor 
Pender. 
 
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that the Ballydermot Bog lands are 
under the ownership of Bord na Móna. The members are advised that any 
engagement regarding the preparation of a report on the environmental, heritage and 
tourism/community amenity value and/or any rehabilitation plans or proposed wind 
farm developments at this location is a matter for the landowner and not Kildare 
County Council.  The referral of this matter to Bord na Móna is a matter for the 
Elected Members. 
 
Councillor O’Loughlin stated that this Bog was the largest raised bog in Western 
Europe and partial wetting, as well as the inclusion of infrastructure for Wind Farms 
was not an adequate climate-related response. He noted that the Just Transition 
Fund had proven unsuccessful in Kildare and also stated that any reports related to 
future uses should come from independent sources, not developers and owners.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Disagreement was expressed that this matter is exclusively a matter for Bord 
na Móna as the County Development Plan applies to all lands in the County 
and the Council would be failing to protect the objectives in the County 
Development Plan if independent evaluations for this area are not sought.  
 
Director Alan Dunney referred to the Just Transition Plan for the County which 
proposed a range of proposed uses, advised that the Landscape Character 
Assessment would also inform proposals, and that there were other oversight 
measures, in that the planning process that facilitate public observation submissions 
and that there are requirements for an Environmental Impact Assessment. He 
advised it was not appropriate for the Council to write to Bord na Móna on this 
matter, and this was a matter for the members.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor O’Loughlin, seconded by Councillor Pender, 
and agreed by members present, that the report be noted. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 23 of 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18/0525 
Community Group Campaign 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Heavey was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council runs a campaign to promote, stimulate and encourage citizens to 
support, participate, and volunteer in community groups, projects, and programmes.   
The motion was proposed by Councillor Heavey and seconded by Councillor Doyle. 
 
A report from Ms M Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water stated that Kildare County Council works on an ongoing basis with local 
communities and encourages volunteerism and engagement in community activities 
around the county.  This occurs directly through many aspects of Kildare County 
Council work, including Kildare Sports Partnership, Community Development, Age 
Friendly, Healthy Ireland, Slaintecare Healthy Communities and Brigid Spirit of 
Kildare.  
In particular, Kildare County Council works collaboratively with Kildare Volunteer 
Centre and Kildare Public Participation Network as key vehicles to engage with local 
citizens. Kildare Volunteer Centre has a clear role to promote the value of 
volunteering and increase the range and quality of volunteering in Kildare. It is 
through the Volunteer Centre that Kildare County Council supports promotion of 
volunteering across the county. Kildare Volunteer Centre recorded 9,800 interactions 
with volunteers in 2024, reflecting the high level of support, communication, and 
engagement facilitated throughout the year. In total, 760 volunteers were referred to 
not-for-profit organisations across the county, demonstrating the Centre’s pivotal role 
in strengthening the connection between volunteers and the wider community.  
In 2025, the work continues to promote, expand and develop volunteering in Kildare 
particularly in May, throughout national volunteer week, which is a weeklong 
celebration of volunteering around the county. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 24 of 25 
 
Councillor Heavey noted that Covid, modern life, the cost of living and statutory 
requirements had adversely impacted levels of volunteering, especially among 
younger persons. The result of this was a much older demographic of volunteers, and 
a potentially unsustainable future for many community groups. In looking at this, he 
was not seeking funding for groups directly but awareness and leadership building, 
highlighting the positive difference that volunteering and community groups make to 
local life. He asked that this be possibly referred to the relevant SPC for action.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• A local radio and local newspaper campaign to encourage participation would 
be very positive.  
Director Marian Higgins responded noting the key role played by the Kildare 
Volunteer Bureau. She advised that they gave volunteers the skillset to participate, 
as do many initiatives supported through SICAP and LEADER. She advised that to 
give effect to the motion, she would invite the Kildare Volunteer Bureau to present to 
members at SPC level, and to set out what they do, and what can be done to 
increase volunteering in Kildare.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Heavey, seconded by Councillor Doyle, and 
agreed by members present, that the report be noted. 
 
19/0525 
Land For Greyhound Gallops in the County 
The following motion in the name of Councillor McDonnell was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council identifies council owned available land for community, recreation 
and amenity uses, in particular greyhound gallops in the county.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor McDonnell and seconded by Councillor 
Dunne. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 26.05.2025                          Page 25 of 25 
 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services stated that there are no surplus lands owned by Kildare County Council that 
are available for community, recreation and amenity use or for greyhound gallops. 
Any lands intended for this use are already allocated or and in the process of being 
developed for amenity use. The provision of facilities for greyhounds is akin to 
providing facilities for horse racing, horse sports or indeed field sports, which we 
have no history of providing in the County. The provision of greyhound gallops is a 
matter for greyhound owners and Greyhound Racing Ireland (GRI). 
 
Councillor McDonnell stated that the current use of the Curragh by greyhound 
owners ran the risk of incidents. Given the scale of the Curragh, he stated that a 
letter should issue to the Minister for Defence, to seek an enclosed area for this 
activity.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Disatisfaction was expressed towards the motion due to public reporting about 
alleged animal cruelty in the greyhound racing industry. 
 
Director Eoghan Ryan stated that there was not a role for the Council in this matter 
and that, as set out in the report, the pursuit of the facilities in question were a matter 
for the member to write to the Minister, should he wish.  
 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor McDonnell, seconded by Councillor Dunne, 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
The meeting concluded. 
