 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 1 of 27 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 27 January 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
__________________________________________________ 
                     
Members Present: Councillors K. Duffy (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V L Behan, A. 
Breen, F. Brett, P. Brooks, B. Caldwell, B. Clear, B. Dooley, S. 
Doyle, G. Dunne,  T. Durkan, W. Durkan, D. Fitzpatrick, N. 
Heavey, C. Kelly, N. Killeen, M. Leigh, T. McDonnell, P. McEvoy, 
P. Melrose, S. Moore, P. Mulroe, P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer, B. 
O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, D. Phelan, R. Power, E. 
Sammon, D. Trost, and B Wyse. 
 
Online: 
Councillors A. Breslin, N. Connolly, A. Feeney, I. Keatley, L. 
Panaite Fahy, and P. Ward. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillor R. Heather. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms A. Aspell, Mr. A. Dunney, 
Ms. E. Hanlon, Ms. M. Higgins, Mr. E. Ryan, (Directors of Service), 
Ms. C. Barrett, Mr. D. Creighton, (A/Director of Service), Ms. P. 
O’Rourke, Climate Action Co-ordinator, Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings 
Administrator), Ms. L. Morgan (Meetings Secretary) and other 
officials.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the January monthly meeting of the Council 
and asked the Meeting Administrator to read out a notice regarding the live streaming 
of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 2 of 27 
 
00/0125 
 
 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised he had been informed of the following bereavements and 
requested that a minute’s silence be observed. 
 
Veronica (Ronnie) Kinane, former colleague 
May Morrissey, Mother of Mary Morrissey, Climate Action Officer 
Eamon O'Hara, Father of Eileen Gray, Environment 
Marie Howard, Mother of Catherine Howard, Planning 
Inés Ferreras, Mother of Ruth Ferreras, Integration Support Co-Ordinator 
Margaret Hunt, mother of Mairead Hunt (former colleague) 
Lillian Ann McKay, Mother of Colin McKay, Architects 
 
 
Emergency Response to Recent Severe Weather Events 
 
The Cathaoirleach proposed to suspend standing orders to facilitate briefing by 
Director of Service, Ms. C Barrett, on Kildare’s County Councils Emergency Response 
to recent severe weather events, prolonged cold spell and Storm Éowyn. 
 
This was seconded by Councillor S. Doyle and agreed by the members. 
 
The meeting commenced at 3:45pm. 
 
 
01/0125 
 
 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest or 
pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 2001 
as amended. There were no declarations.   
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 3 of 27 
 
02/0125 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the revised draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 16 
December 2024, the draft minutes of the special meeting held on 19 December 2024 
and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor D. Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor M. Leigh 
and agreed by the members present that the revised draft minutes of the monthly 
meeting held on 16 December 2024 and the special meeting held on 19 december 2024 
be adopted.  
 
The progress report was noted.  
 
03/0125 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executives monthly management report. 
 
04/0125 
 
 
 
Filling of Casual Vacancy of Leas Cathaoirleach 
The members considered nominees to fill the casual vacancy of Leas Cathaoirleach 
following the appointment of Councillor Kevin Duffy to Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillor E. Sammon proposed Councillor F. Brett. This was seconded by Councillor 
I. Keatley. As there were no further nominations Councillor F. Brett was deemed duly 
elected. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor E. Sammon, seconded by Councillor I. Keatley 
and agreed by the members present that the appointment of Councillor F. Brett to the 
position of Leas Cathaoirleach be approved.  Councillor F. Brett was deemed duly 
elected. 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 4 of 27 
 
05/0125 
Filling of Committee Vacancies 
The members considered the nomination, election and appointment of members to 
committees and other bodies following the election of four members to Dáil Éireann. 
 
Prior to nominations Councillor S. Doyle proposed that Councillor D. Fitzpatrick move 
from Housing and Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee to Climate Action 
Strategic Policy Committee and be replaced on the Housing and Regeneration 
Strategic Policy Committee by Councillor D. Phelan. This was seconded by Councillor 
D. Fitzpatrick and agreed by all members present. 
 
 
(i) 
Appointment of two members to the Transportation, Mobility and Open 
Spaces Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
The following were proposed and seconded for appointment to the 
Transportation, Mobility and Open Spaces SPC. 
 
Councillor Paul Brooks was proposed by Councillor T. O’Dwyer and 
seconded by Councillor E. Sammon. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor 
E. Sammon and agreed by members present that Councillor P. Brooks be 
elected to the Transportation, Mobility and Open Spaces SPC. 
 
Councillor N. Connolly was proposed by Councillor P. Mc Evoy and 
seconded by Councillor S. Doyle. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. Mc Evoy, seconded by Councillor 
S. Doyle and agreed by members present that Councillor N. Connolly be 
elected to the Transportation, Mobility and Open Spaces SPC. 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 5 of 27 
 
(ii) 
Appointment of one member to the Environment and Water Services 
Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
Councillor P. Mulroe was proposed by Councillor N. Killeen and seconded by 
Councillor C. Pender. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor N. Killeen, seconded by Councillor C. 
Pender and agreed by members present that Councillor P. Mulroe be 
elected to the Environment and Water Services SPC. 
 
(iii) 
Appointment of one member to the Local Community, Culture and 
Integration Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
Councillor S. Doyle was proposed by Councillor D. Fitzpatrick and seconded 
by Councillor C. Kelly. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor D. Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor 
C. Kelly and agreed by members present that Councillor S. Doyle be elected 
to the Local Community, Culture and Integration SPC, moving from the 
Climate Action SPC. 
 
(iv) 
Appointment of one member to the Audit Committee. 
 
This item was deferred to February Full Council Meeting. 
 
(v) 
Appointment of three members to the Coiste Gaeilge that represent 
Celbridge / Leixlip MD, Clane Maynooth MD and Kildare / Newbridge MD. 
 
The following members were proposed and seconded for appointment to 
Coiste Gaeilge. 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 6 of 27 
 
Councillor D. Phelan of Clane / Maynooth MD was proposed by Councillor S. 
Doyle and seconded by Councillor C. Kelly. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor S. Doyle, seconded by Councillor C. 
Kelly and agreed by members present that Councillor D. Phelan be elected 
to Coiste Gaeilge. 
 
Councillor N. Connolly of Kildare / Newbridge MD was proposed by Councillor 
P. McEvoy and seconded by Councillor S. Doyle. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. Mc Evoy, seconded by Councillor 
S. Doyle and agreed by members present that Councillor N. Connolly be 
elected to Coiste Gaeilge. 
 
It was agreed that the third vacant position be referred to the next 
Celbridge/Leixlip Municipal District Meeting. 
 
(vi) 
Appointment of one member to the Local Community Development 
Committee (LCDC). 
 
Councillor P. Mulroe was proposed by Councillor N. Killeen and seconded 
by Councillor P. Balfe. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor N. Killeen, seconded by Councillor 
P. Balfe and agreed by members present that Councillor P. Mulroe be 
elected to the Local Community Development Committee (LCDC). 
 
(vii) 
Appointment of one member to the Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurance 
Committee 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 7 of 27 
 
Councillor E. Sammon was proposed by Councillor T. O’Dwyer and 
seconded by Councillor F. Brett. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor 
P. Balfe and agreed by members present that Councillor E. Sammon be 
elected to the Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurance Committee. 
 
(viii) 
Appointment of one member to the Kildare Town Heritage Company CLG. 
 
Councillor N. Connolly was proposed by Councillor S. Doyle and seconded 
by Councillor P. Mc Evoy 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor S. Doyle, seconded by Councillor P. 
Mc Evoy and agreed by members present that Councillor N. Connolly be 
elected to the Kildare Town Heritage Company CLG. 
 
(ix) 
Appointment of one member to the Local Authority Members Association 
(LAMA). 
 
Councillor N. Heavey was proposed by Councillor S. Doyle and seconded by 
Councillor A. Breen. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor S. Doyle, seconded by A. Breen and 
agreed by members present that Councillor N. Heavey be elected to the 
Local Authority Members Association. 
 
(x) 
Appointment of one member to the Kildare-Meath Grid Upgrade Community 
Forum. 
 
Councillor D. Phelan was proposed by Councillor S. Doyle and seconded by 
Councillor P. McEvoy. 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 8 of 27 
 
Resolved on the proposal of S. Doyle, seconded by Councillor P. Mc Evoy 
and agreed by members present that Councillor D. Phelan be elected to 
the Kildare-Meath Grid Upgrade Community Forum. 
 
(xi) 
Appointment to the Midlands Regional Transition Team (MRTT).  
 
Representation by Cathaoirleach required. It was agreed by members 
present that Councillor K. Duffy (Cathaoirleach), represent Kildare. 
 
Resolved on the agreement by the members present that Councillor K. 
Duffy (Cathaoirleach) represent County Kildare on the Midlands Regional 
Transition Team. 
 
06/0125 
Nomination to Local Community Safety Partnership 
The members considered the nomination of a Celbridge-Leixlip Municipal District 
member to the Local Community Safety Partnership. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor E. Sammon 
and agreed by the members present that Councillor P. Brooks be nominated to the 
Local Community Safety Partnership.  
 
07/0125 
Implementation of 60 km/h default on Rural Local Roads  
The members considered the report to rescind the special speed limits of 60 km/h on 
rural local roads as adopted by byelaw in accordance with the Local Government Act 
2021, to comply with Section 10E of the Road Traffic Act 2004 (as amended) as per the 
reports schedule of maps. 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 9 of 27 
 
A/Director of Service, Ms. C. Barrett advised that national legislation would be 
implemented on 7 February 2025 reducing the speed limit to 60km/h on rural local 
roads. A number of rural local roads currently had special speed limits of 60km/h and 
members were requested to approve the rescinding of special speed limits of 60km/h 
on rural local roads on the implementation date set by the Department of Transport so 
that there is consistency across the network covered by the default 60km/h. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. Mc Evoy seconded by Councillor S. Moore 
and agreed by the members present that the special speed limits of 60km/h on rural 
local roads as adopted by byelaw in accordance with the Local Government Act 2001, 
to comply with Section 10E of the Road Traffic Act 2004 (as amended) as per the 
reports schedule of maps be rescinded. 
 
08/0125 
Bi-annual Update from Development Control Section 
The members considered the report previously circulated in relation to the taking in 
charge status of residential estates in the County.  
 
The report was noted. 
 
09/0125 
Bi-annual Update on Climate Action 
The members considered the report previously circulated in relation to Kildare County 
Councils Climate Action Plan 2024-2029. 
 
Director of Service, Ms M. Higgins briefed the members on the report. 
 
Ms. P. O’Rourke, Climate Action Co-ordinator, Climate Action Section, gave a 
presentation on the first years progress of Kildare County Councils Local Authority 
Climate Action Plan 2024-2029. 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 10 of 27 
 
Ms. P. O’Rourke stated that the data and information contained within the report offer 
an accurate and transparent picture of progress in the first year of the plan’s 
implementation against the ambition of the plan which is aligned to the Government’s 
National Climate Objective to achieve the transition to a climate resilient, biodiversity 
rich, environmentally sustainable and climate neutral economy by 2050.  
 
The members raised the following points 
• that training and upskilling of members would be required 
• that all aspects of Climate Action needed to permeate beyond the experts and 
queried the possibility of a forum that members could access for information. 
 
Ms. M. Higgins advised that Kildare County Council had a service level agreement with 
the Department to run training courses with CARO and were currently working with the 
AILG to develop these courses.  
 
The report was noted. 
 
10/0125 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach congratulated Kildare’s two new Ministers, James Lawless and 
Martin Hayden on their recent appointments.  He advised Members that he attended 
several local events recently: 
 
• Launch of St Brigid’s Festival 
• Launch of St Brigid’s Tapestry in Ummeras 
• Launch of Monasterevin Drama Festival 
• Athy – ‘He for She – An evening for equality’ 
• Recent contract award for the redevelopment of St Patrick’s Park 
 
He reminded members that the closing date for the nominations for Seanad Elections 
was Thursday 30 January at 11:00a.m, that completed Political Donations Forms were 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 11 of 27 
 
due back Friday 31 January and Annual Ethics Declaration Forms were available 
online and must be completed by 28 February 2025. 
 
11/0125 
Correspondence 
The Meetings Administrator confirmed four items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report.  
A resolution from,  
• Clare County Council requesting urgent contact with the Department of Housing 
regarding the exclusion of fossil flue boilers in housing aid grants, 
• Clare County Council regarding the opposition to GAA admittance charges for 
children under the age of 16, 
• Leitrim County Council regarding a referendum to allow the diaspora vote in the 
next presidential election. 
and local government circular LG 01-2025 Annual Declarations. 
 
The report was noted/ 
 
12/0125 
Conferences and Training 
The Meetings Administrator referred to the conference and training report which had 
been circulated to the members along with the progress report. She advised that some 
members had expressed an interest in attending these conferences and training events 
and was seeking their approval. 
  
Approval was sought for the LAMA Spring Success on 30 and 31 January 2025 in the 
Kilford Arms Hotel, Kilkenny for attendance by Councillor B. Caldwell, Councillor N 
Connolly, Councillor N. Heavey and Councillor T. Mc Donnell at a cost of €245 plus 
travel and subsistence. 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 12 of 27 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor D. Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor C. Kelly 
and agreed by the members present that the above named members be approved to 
attend the LAMA Spring Success Training event. 
 
Approval sought by Councillor C. O’Rourke to attend National Planning Framework 
training hosted by Planning Policy for Ireland on 5 February 2025 at a cost of €350 plus 
VAT.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor C. Kelly, seconded by Councillor S. Moore and 
agreed by members present that Councillor C. O’Rourke be approved to attend the 
National Planning Framework Training 
 
13/0125 
 
 
 
 
 
Meeting with the ESB 
The following motion in the names of Councillors T. O Dwyer, W. Durkan, B.Wyse, E. 
Sammon, P. O’Dwyer, K. Duffy, F. Brett, P. Brooks, L. Panaite Fahey and T. Durkan 
was considered by the members. 
 
That Kildare County Council meets with the ESB for the purpose of agreeing a 
streamlined internal reporting, tracking and payment system to include an agreed 
turnaround timeline for repairs to public lighting.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor T. O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor W. 
Durkan. 
 
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open Spaces 
stated that the public lighting infrastructure consists of approximately 26,000 public 
lights. The maintenance of public lighting is contracted to Killaree Lighting Services who 
are required to address all faults within an agreed timescale. A significant portion of the 
public lighting infrastructure consists of direct fed lighting where there is no interface 
between the ESB infrastructure and the Local Authority infrastructure and in these cases 
the public lighting contractor requires the input of the ESB to repair. Kildare County 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 13 of 27 
 
Council are in communication with the ESB to resolve the ongoing delays in the repair 
of public lighting faults and will arrange to meet with the ESB again in this regard.  
Following discussion, a number of points were raised by the members: 
• significant delays relating to ESB repairs and connections, 
• ESB commitments not delivered, 
• Need to identify why blockages were happening 
Ms. C. Barrett acknowledged items raised noting that the items raised were outside the 
control of Kildare County Council. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor W. 
Durkan and agreed by members present that Kildare County Council write to the ESB. 
 
 
Motions 14, 15 and 16 were considered together by the members as they 
concerned similar issues.  
 
14/0125 
Review of Salting Policies 
 
The following motion in the names of Councillors S.Doyle, R. Power, D. Fitzpatrick, P. 
Ward, D. Trost, B. Caldwell, C. Kelly and V. Behan was considered by the members. 
 
That the council reviews salting policies for the County, having regard to the potential of 
providing salt at appropriate locations for voluntary groups supporting community and a 
needs analysis based on a growing County and that a system be devised that 
recognises new strategic developments that will impact selected routes.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor S. Doyle and seconded by Councillor R. Power. 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 14 of 27 
 
15/0125 
Salt Bin Purchase and Fill Scheme 
The following motion in the names of Councillors P. Melrose and P. Balfe was 
considered by the members. 
 
That the council creates a salt bin purchase and fill scheme for residential housing 
including housing estates and urban/rural clusters of housing.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor P. Melrose and seconded by Councillor P. 
Brooks. 
 
16/0125 
Salting During Freezing Weather 
 
The following motion was proposed by Councillor B. O’Loughlin and seconded by 
Councillor C. Kelly. 
 
That the council prioritises one main road in all small towns and villages in Co. Kildare 
for salting during freezing weather to allow access to emergency services, public 
transport and national roads.  
A report from Mr Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the objective of the Kildare County Council (KCC) Winter 
Maintenance Plan is to keep all principal roads in the County open to traffic, free from 
ice and safe to travel on. Kildare Co Council treat our National Secondary, Regional and 
Local Roads. National Primary and Motorway routes are dealt with by contractors on 
behalf of Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII). 
The Kildare County Council Winter Maintenance Plan and map of routes are prepared 
annually and updated on our website. 
Kildare County Council currently operate ten routes within its Winter Maintenance 
Programme, treating approximately 705km of the Local, Regional and National 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 15 of 27 
 
Secondary Road network in the county. This equates to the treatment of approximately 
26.5 % of Kildare’s Road infrastructure. Including all Motorway and National Primary 
roads treated by TII, 30.3 % of all Public Roads within county Kildare are treated. This 
is higher than our neighbouring counties, who treat between 24-26 % of their road 
network. This requires a significant input of resources, including twenty-four drivers, 
vehicles, equipment, technical and administrative staff and operates at a considerable 
cost. 
Kildare County Council’s salting trucks on all routes are running at capacity at present, 
precluding the Council from adding new roads to the current salting routes without 
removing the service from another area of the County. 
At times of severe weather conditions, Kildare County Council staff, during the working 
day, may give priority to other roads and junctions outside of our standard routes that 
need treatment. This may include snow clearing and salting on additional roads at critical 
locations. 
During the recent severe weather event, which ran from the 2 to 8 January 2025, KCC 
spread 1,320 tonnes of rock salt on the road network (over 35% of all salt used during 
the entire 2023-2024 Winter Maintenance Season). 
This work involved twenty-two salt spreading runs, with drivers and support staff working 
in rotation on day and night shifts, over eight days. 
To minimise the impacts of the severe weather event and maintain traffic movement on 
Kildare’s Road network, there was considerable effort put in by over 30 KCC drivers, 
Municipal District outdoor crews, fitter mechanics, Machinery Yard/Regional Salt Depot 
technical and administrative staff, Municipal District Engineers/staff, and Senior 
Management. 
Given the prolonged nature of this event, all normal Municipal District activities were 
suspended, and all resources were redirected to support the Winter Maintenance Plan. 
The redirection of all staff to Winter Maintenance activities enabled the Municipal 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 16 of 27 
 
Districts to undertake some additional salting activities including key footpaths, 
additional critical locations, and some local roads.  
Due to the enormity of implementing a proposal to create a salt bin purchase and fill 
scheme for residential housing (including housing estates and urban/rural clusters of 
housing) KCC do not have the resources to provide such a facility without removing 
sections of the 705Km of Priority 1 treated Salt Routes.  
The Kildare County Council Winter Maintenance Plan maximises the return from 
current resources.  The only way to add a new route is to remove a route that is 
currently treated.   
A number of Councillors thanked Ms. C. Barrett and the staff for all the hard work during 
the recent prolonged cold spell and severe weather. 
Following discussion, a number of points were raised by the members: 
• 14 Local Authorities provided a salt bin and fill scheme. That the Council explore 
the possibility of a salt bin purchase scheme for housing estates, urban / rural 
areas and schools. 
• Unprecedented events were becoming more common. 
• That the Council prioritise one main road out of each village.  
• That the Council explore a salt bin purchase scheme. 
Ms C. Barrett responded to the items raised and advised that she would request 
Municipal District Engineers to speak to their counterparts in other Local Authorities and 
follow up with feedback.   
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor S. Doyle seconded by Councillor R. Power 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted in relation to  agenda item 
14, 15 and 16.  
17/0125 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 17 of 27 
 
 
 
 
Making Kildare an Autism Friendly County 
The following motion in the name of Councillor D. Phelan was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council outlines what progress has been made to make Kildare an Autism 
Friendly County following a motion passed by Kildare County Council in November 
2023.   
The motion was proposed by Councillor D. Phelan and seconded by Councillor C. 
Kelly. 
 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services informed the members that a huge body of work has been completed to date, 
working towards achieving the vision of making County Kildare inclusive and fully 
accessible to all. This approach looks at disabilities equally ensuring no section of our 
community is left behind and supports the delivery of an Autism Friendly County. 
Some of the initiatives delivered include;  
• 
purchase of two Cubbie Sensory Hubs 
• 
purchase of two sensory Pods 
• 
purchase of 15 sensory boxes with sensory toys for all 15 libraries  
• 
purchase of a mobile Tovertafel 
• 
Toys, Technology Training (TTT) Collection  
• 
Working on a procedure and checklist to host inclusive events/meetings 
• 
Installation of communication boards in playgrounds 
• 
Fully inclusive playground under construction 
• 
Kildare Inclusion Schools Project  
• 
JAM friendly organisation 
 
More recently we have made contact with both ASIAM and Dublin City Council for 
support on achieving our goals. 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 18 of 27 
 
Councillor D. Phelan reported that it was estimated that 9,200 of Kildare’s constituents 
had an official diagnosis of autism, demonstrating the need to implement tangible 
changes that would benefit our Neurodivergent Community. 
Maynooth had made great strides as an autism-friendly town with the generous support 
of Kildare County Council through initiatives like the community grant. This funding 
enabled the purchase of sensory boxes for (SMEs) in the town, creating a more 
comfortable shopping experience for all members of the public with disability including 
autistic individuals. AsIAm Irelands National Charity provided an information link to 
committees, and businesses to educate and raise awareness about autism.  
The Maynooth Autism Friendly Town in association with AsIAm run bi-weekly social 
clubs in Maynooth Community College that cater for children as young as 3 up until 
Autistic Adults over the age of 18. Over 50 families were supported across 5 social 
groups over 2 nights in those 2 weeks.  
One of the standout successes had been the introduction of a quiet zone during the St. 
Patricks Day Parade, now entering its third year. Currently, 35 towns across Ireland are 
participating in the AsIAm Autism-Friendly Town Programme, and Kildare is represented 
by only 2 towns Maynooth and Clane. This highlights the potential for other towns in our 
county to follow suit and adopt similar initiatives. 
A number of councillors expressed their supported for this motion.  Following discussion, 
a number of points were raised by the members: 
• That festival grants forms include a provision for the need for quiet spaces.   
• JAM card (Just a minute) was acknowledged and that Kildare County Council 
invite a representative from As I Am to give a short presentation to the members 
to improve awareness of the members in this regard.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor D. Phelan seconded by Councillor C. Kelly and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted, and a representative from As I Am 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 19 of 27 
 
be invited to attend a full council meeting to give a short presentation on Autism to bring 
more awareness about this condition to the members.  
 
18/0125 
 
 
 
 
Invitation to CEO of Iarnród Éireann 
The following motion in the name of Councillor B. Dooley was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council invites the Chief Executive Officer of Iarnród Éireann to a full council 
meeting to discuss future passenger and freight developments in the County. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor B. Dooley and seconded by Councillor S. Doyle. 
 
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open Spaces 
stated that this is a matter for the Elected Members to agree. 
Councillor B. Dooley informed the members that he would like to hear from the CEO of 
Iarnród Éireann in relation to promises made and whether they would be achievable. 
 
Councillor Mc Evoy noted that the National Rail Review will inform new infrastructure 
investment, and that rail is becoming the backbone of Kildare.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor B. Dooley seconded by Councillor S. Doyle and 
agreed by members present that an invitation would be sent to the CEO of Iarnród 
Éireann to attend a full council meeting to discuss future passenger and freight 
developments in the county. 
19/0125 
 
 
 
 
 
Housing List Breakdown 
The following motion in the name of Councillor B. Clear was considered by the 
members. 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 20 of 27 
 
That the council provides details of the numbers on the housing list compared with the 
same time in 2024, broken down by the number on the medical priority list, details of 
whether they are Irish, EU or non-EU and how many on the list are in emergency 
accommodation. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor B. Clear and seconded by Councillor S. Doyle. 
 
A report from Ms A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated that 
local authorities are required to conduct an annual Summary of Social Housing 
Assessments (SSHA), which records the number of households included on the 
council’s social housing list, HAP households are excluded (currently 1, 741).  The 
results of the SSHA are published by the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, we are awaiting the publication of SSHA 2024, as a result figures are 
being provided for 2022 and 2023.   
Year 
Qualified 
Households 
Irish 
EEA 
Non-EEA 
UK 
2022 3, 008 
2, 214 
584 
201 
9 
2023 3, 450 
2, 456 
681 
284 
29 
 
Each month the Chief Executive’s Report to the Members provides summary homeless 
data, the most recent report indicates that on the 31 December thirty-seven households 
were availing of emergency accommodation. 
Councillor B. Clear stated that he received many requests for clarification regarding 
house builds from residents at election time.  He also queried a review of people on 
housing lists a long time whose income increased over time, pushing them over the 
income threshold.   
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 21 of 27 
 
Ms. A.  Aspell said this was a national form and that the housing income limit would not 
be changed at present, but she said she supports this motion.   She also stated house 
targets for 2024 noting that new targets for 2025 are anticipated. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor B. Clear seconded by Councillor S. Doyle and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
 
20/0125 
 
 
 Guidelines for Strategic Policy Committee Schemes 
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor S. Moore was considered by the 
members. 
 
That this council agree that a letter issue to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, requesting that they review their Guidelines regarding the 
Strategic Policy Committee Schemes, to include a provision that external 
representatives continue to occupy their positions on Strategic Policy Schemes until 
such time as newly appointed representatives take up their appointment, regardless of 
the process of making a new Strategic Policy Committee Scheme. This will ensure the 
continuity of the business of Strategic Policy Committee Scheme, immediately following 
a local election.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor S. Moore and seconded by Councillor C. 
Kelly. 
 
Director of Service, Mr E. Ryan stated that this was a matter for the members to agree. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor S. Moore seconded by Councillor C. Kelly and 
agreed by members present that that a letter issue to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, requesting that they review their Guidelines on the Strategic 
Policy Committee Schemes in this regard. 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 22 of 27 
 
21/0125 
 
 
  
 
Short Term Rental Market Kildare 
The following motion in the name of Councillor N. Connolly was considered by the 
members. 
 
Go dtabharfaidh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara tuairisc do na Comhaltaí ar an ngníomh 
atá á dhéanamh chun rialáil an mhargaidh cíosa ghearrthéarma sa Chontae a fhiosrú 
agus a fhorghníomhú; líon na maoine i gCill Dara atá ar fáil faoi láthair ar cíos trí Airbnb 
agus/nó Booking.com a áireamh; líon na maoine sin atá á ligean ar cíos ar feadh níos 
lú ná 90 lá agus atá cláraithe le haghaidh díolúine; líon na réadmhaoine seo atá á ligean 
ar cíos ar feadh níos mó ná 90 lá agus a bhfuil iarratas déanta acu ar chead pleanála le 
haghaidh athrú úsáide; agus má tá aon áitribh i gCill Dara faoi láthair atá ar ligean 
gearrthéarmach ar feadh bliana. 
That Kildare County Council reports to the Members on the action being taken to 
investigate and enforce the regulation of the short term rental market in the County; to 
include the number of properties in Kildare that are currently available to rent through 
Airbnb and/or Booking.com; the number of these properties that are being rented for 
less than 90 days and have registered for an exemption; the number of these properties 
that are being rented for more than 90 days and have applied for planning permission 
for a change of use; and if there are currently any properties in Kildare that are year-
long short-term lets.  
This motion fell as Councillor N. Connolly was not in attendance. 
 
22/0125 
 
 
 
 
Implementation of Jake’s Law 
The following motion in the name of Councillor C. O’Rourke was considered by the 
members. 
 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 23 of 27 
 
That the council agrees to form a special committee to progress the implementation of 
Jake’s Law in County Kildare to protect pedestrians, cyclists and other vulnerable 
walkers in built up areas and near schools.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor C. O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor N. 
Killeen. 
 
A report received from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and 
Open Spaces stated that as previously advised at Full Council, following the 
implementation of the revised default 60 km/h rural road speed limit in early February 
2025, the Executive will bring forward proposals to introduce a 30 km/h speed limit in all 
residential housing estates in County Kildare that are taken in charge. The elected 
members will be provided with information about the estates in their Municipal District 
and a public consultation process will commence after elected members are briefed later 
in Quarter 1 2025.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor C. O’Rourke seconded by Councillor N. 
Killeen and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
      23/0125 
 
 
  
 
Speed Cameras Pilot Scheme 
The following motion in the name of Councillor N. Heavey was considered by the 
members. 
 
In the context of the impending national reduction of the speed limit on rural roads (from 
80 to 60 km per hour) and the ever increasing volume of traffic on roads in our county, 
this council refers the matter of commissioning a pilot scheme of fixed and or variable 
positioned speed cameras and other technical advances used in other countries, to 
Transport SPC to interact with Road Safety Authority and An Garda Síochána a 
sustainable means of enforcing compliance to speed limits.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor N. Heavey and seconded by Councillor S. 
Doyle. 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 24 of 27 
 
 
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open Spaces 
stated that while Local Authorities have no functions in the setting of Special Speed 
Limits; the enforcement of Speed Limits is a matter for An Garda Síochana.  Once 
established the Local Community Safety Partnership, which replaces the Joint Policing 
Committees, may be a vehicle for a strategic discussion of roads policing.   
Ms C Barrett reiterated that Kildare County Council had no jurisdiction in enforcing speed 
limits in the County and that the matter could possibly be referred to the Local 
Community Safety Partnership. 
Councillor N. Heavey advised that he would raise the issue with the Local Community 
Safety Partnership. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor N. Heavey seconded by Councillor S. Doyle 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted.  
 
24/0125 
 
 
  
 
Pilot High Street Rental Auctions 
The following motion in the name of Councillor N. Killeen was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council establishes a pilot to trial the High Street Rental Auctions in one 
commercial building which has been vacant for more than two years or up to 5 years, 
with the agreement of a landlord, and use the pilot to meet a ‘Local Benefit Condition,’ 
which would demonstrate an economic, social or environmental benefit to the area. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor N. Killeen and seconded by Councillor C. 
Pender. 
 
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Service, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that The Head of Enterprise will 
undertake to research the various retail and high street enhancement initiatives currently 
been deployed both Nationally and internationally, taking best practice she will prepare 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 25 of 27 
 
a discussion paper for the Enterprise and planning SPC for their observations and 
approval ,If the proposals are accepted favourable we can then pilot such an initiative 
with a view to deploying county wide pending success.  
 
Councillor N. Killeen noted the high vacancy rates on main streets and queried advised 
a pilot scheme during 2025. Noting that if one vacant property was removed from the 
Main Street it would make a difference. 
Mr. A. Dunney stated that 2025 would be ambitious but the scheme could be looked at 
through the SPC. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor N. Killeen seconded by Councillor C. Pender 
and agreed by members present that a scheme could be piloted throughout the county 
pending further research and accepted proposals. 
 
25/0125 
Homeless HAP 
The following motion in the name of Councillor C. Pender was considered by the 
members. 
 
That Kildare County Council acknowledges the critical role of Homeless HAP (Housing 
Assistance Payment) in addressing and preventing homelessness and recognises that 
its application in Kildare appears to differ significantly from other local authorities, where 
it is often used as a preventive tool. To address this, the council is requested to provide 
a comprehensive report detailing the current criteria and processes for awarding 
Homeless HAP, the rationale behind these criteria, and how they compare to other 
counties, alongside relevant statistics on its use and outcomes. Furthermore, the council 
is urged to immediately review the existing criteria with a view to expanding its use as a 
homelessness prevention measure, supporting individuals and families at risk of losing 
their homes, and aligning with national best practices.  

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 26 of 27 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor C. Pender and seconded by Councillor N. 
Killeen. 
 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated that 
the Homeless Housing Assistance Payment (HHAP) scheme plays a pivotal role in in 
addressing homelessness by providing financial support to individuals and families who 
are homeless or at risk to homelessness. The existing criteria to qualify for Homeless 
HAP on the Kildare County Council Website erroneously included a condition that 
applicants were required to be engaging with the Homeless team for a minimum period 
of 6 months. This condition was not being enforced, and the website has now been 
amended to reflect this. 
Other criteria as detailed below is consistent with best national practice and Kildare’s 
Homeless HAP Placefinder is part of the National Placefinder network who are in regular 
contact and meet in person on a bi-monthly basis to ensure consistency of practice.   
To qualify for Homeless HAP, the Council must decide that the applicant: 
• is homeless or at risk of homelessness and have no other accommodation 
choices 
• need extra support to get a suitable rental home 
HHAP bridges the gap between what tenants can afford to pay in rent and the actual 
cost of renting a property. The scheme provides additional supports which includes 
deposits and upfront rent payments to help homeless households find a suitable HAP 
tenancy. 
The Place Finder Service includes: 
• help the applicant to find a suitable property to rent 
• pay the deposit for a property to the landlord or agent 
• pay rent in advance to the landlord or agent 
• pay enhanced HAP rent limits (depending on circumstances). 

 
 
 
Kildare County Council 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 27.01.25                                            Page 27 of 27 
 
Applicants are individually contacted and advised regarding the additional supports 
available, including arrangements for property viewings.  
The HHAP Placefinder actively engages with property owners and agents to identify 
suitable properties for those availing of HHAP. To expand the scheme in Kildare, the 
Council is launching a local media campaign in February to highlight the benefits of 
HHAP for landlords.  
Within County Kildare, the following tenancies are currently supported under the two 
HAP schemes: 
• HAP  
 
1,741 
• Homeless HAP 
242 
 
The Homeless Team, when engaging with clients, provide information on the HHAP 
Place Finder Service to applicants. Details are also available from the Housing 
Department (Tel: 045 980230) or online https://www.hap.ie/  
Councillor C. Pender acknowledged the report thanked all for the opportunity to highlight 
this. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor C. Pender, seconded by Councillor P. Balfe and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted 
 
 
 
The meeting concluded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
