 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 1 of 29 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 28 April 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
________________________________________________ 
                     
Members Present: Councillors K. Duffy (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V. Behan, A. 
Breslin, F. Brett, B. Clear, B. Dooley, S. Doyle, G. Dunne,  T. 
Durkan, W. Durkan, A. Feeney, R. Heather, N. Heavey, I. 
Keatley, C. Kelly, N. Killeen, M. Leigh, T. McDonnell, P. 
McEvoy, P. Melrose, S. Moore, P. O’Dwyer, T. O’Dwyer, B. 
O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, D. Phelan, D. Trost, and P. 
Ward. 
 
Online: 
Councillors P. Brooks, B. Caldwell, N. Connolly, P. Mulroe, L. 
Panaite Fahey, R. Power, E. Sammon, and B. Wyse. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillors A. Breen and D. Fitzpatrick. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms. A. Aspell. Mr. A. 
Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, Mr. E. Ryan, (Directors of Service), Ms. 
C. Barrett, Mr. D. Creighton, P. O’Brien (A/Directors of Service), 
Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Ms. L. Morgan 
(Meetings Secretary), and other officials.  
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the April monthly meeting of the Council 
and asked the Meeting Administrator to read out a notice regarding the live 
streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 2 of 29 
 
00/0425 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised he had been informed of the following bereavements:  
 
Marioara Mutiu, wife of Nicolae Mutiu, Transportation. 
Jean O'Dwyer, Mother of Siobhan O’Dwyer, Transportation. 
Marie (Mary) Kelly, Mother of Majella Kelly, Building & Development Control. 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/0425 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0425 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 31 March 
2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Moore, seconded by Councillor Doyle, and 
agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held 
on 31 March 2025 be adopted.  
 
The progress report was noted.  
 
     03/0425 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 3 of 29 
 
04/0425 
Environmental and Water Service Strategic Policy Committee                           
sectoral representation nomination 
The Cathaoirleach advised the members that Kildare PPN, following an election 
process, proposed a sectoral interest candidate representing community and 
voluntary for the Environment and Water Service SPC. He then noted that a 
biography of the nominated candidate had been circulated prior to the meeting and 
that CPG had approved the nomination for consideration at Full Council. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Pender, and 
agreed by the members present that Mr. Denis Logan be appointed as a sectoral 
interest representing community and voluntary to the Environmental and Water 
Services Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
          05/0425 
Retained Local Property Tax (LPT) Allocation Procedures  
Ms. Eileen Hanlon, Director of Service, Finance, Digital Services, Innovation and 
Governance noted that a report on the proposed Retained Local Property Tax (LPT) 
Allocation Procedures, reviewed by the Finance Committee and CPG, had been 
circulated prior to the meeting. Ms Hanlon briefed the members on the report, 
emphasising that the procedures will support good corporate governance and 
transparency in the allocation of public money which will safeguard the members and 
the Council.  
 
Ms Hanlon requested that the members consider approving the proposed Retained 
Local Property Tax (LPT) Allocation Procedures. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Reservations were expressed about transitioning from guidelines to 
procedures. The reservations included. 
o A reduction of Members powers,  
o The unknown and unintended consequences. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 4 of 29 
 
• Further review of the draft LPT procedures, to identify and address concerns. 
• Support was expressed for the introduction of procedures as it would provide 
clarity on the process to new councillors and create a consistent approach. 
 
Ms Hanlon noted that the proposed procedures had been two years in development, 
had previously been sent back to the Finance Committee by CPG and the 
development process was now exhausted.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor McEvoy and seconded by Councillor Breslin to defer 
the approval of the proposed ‘Retained Local Property Tax (LPT) Allocation 
Procedures’ to allow consultation. The members present supported the proposal and 
the Cathaoirleach initiated a vote.  
 
Vote 1: 
Defer the approval of the proposed ‘Retained Local Property Tax 
(LPT) Allocation Procedures’ to allow consultation. 
 
In favour: 
 
12 
Against: 
 
19 
Abstained:  
  7 
 
Result: 
The proposal to defer the approval of the proposed ‘Retained Local 
Property Tax (LPT) Allocation Procedures’ to allow consultation was not carried 
based on the vote results. 
 
It was then proposed by Councillor Doyle and seconded by Councillor T. O’ Dwyer to 
reject the proposed ‘Retained Local Property Tax (LPT) Allocation Procedures’. The 
members present supported the proposal and the Cathaoirleach initiated a vote. 
 
Vote 2: 
Reject the proposed ‘Retained Local Property Tax (LPT) 
Allocation Procedures’. 
 
In favour: 
 
31 
Against: 
 
  4 
Abstained:  
  3 
 
Result: 
The proposal to reject the approval of the proposed ‘Retained Local 
Property Tax (LPT) Allocation Procedures’ was carried based on the vote results. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 5 of 29 
 
The Chief Executive noted that a significant amount of public money was distributed 
by the members under the retained Local Property Tax advising that in the absence 
of members procedures the Executive would draft their own procedures for 
approving payment requests submitted under retained LPT. She also emphasised 
that procedures support good corporate governance and transparency in the 
allocation of public money which safeguards the members and the Executive. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor T. O’ Dwyer, 
and agreed by the members present that the Retained Local Property Tax (LPT) 
Allocation Procedures be rejected. 
 
 
06/0425 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach advised members that he had attended several events recently. 
 
• Launch of Kildare County Council Corporate Plan 2024-2029. 
• Official opening of the Blackrath Housing Scheme, Athgarvan that delivered 
18 beautiful new social homes under ‘Housing for All – A New Housing Plan 
for Ireland’.  
 
The Cathaoirleach also noted the passing of His Holiness, Pope Francis and 
confirmed that the online Book of Condolence with a closing date 2 May 2025 was 
opened to allow the citizens of Kildare express their sympathies.   
 
Online Book of Condolence:  https://kildarecoco.ie/bookofcondolence/ 
 
The Cathaoirleach reminded members that the ‘Kildare Inclusivity Festival’ will take 
place on 11 May 2025, between 11-4pm. 
 
Kildare Inclusivity Festival 2025 – County Kildare Access Network 
 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 6 of 29 
 
07/0425 
Correspondence 
The Meetings Administrator confirmed six items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included two 
resolutions from other County Councils, a reply from Department of Local 
Government and Planning regarding Councillor Moore’s SPC’s motion, an 
acknowledgement from the Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority (AHBRA) 
regarding Councillors Doyle motion, an email from ASIAM confirming a date to give 
presentation, and a letter seeking nomination as a Presidential candidate. 
 
Councillor Killeen requested that the nomination process for the Presidential Election 
be clarified.  The Cathaoirleach advised that a briefing will take place in advance of 
this event. 
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 
 
08/0425 
Conferences and Training 
The Meetings Administrator referred to the conference and training report which had 
been circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
Councillor Heather and Connolly sought retrospective approval for attendance at free 
online AILG Webinar 4 on Social and Affordable Housing in Ireland on 25 April 2025. 
 
Councillors Balfe, Brook, Dunne, Munroe, O’Rourke and Trost sought retrospective 
approval for attendance at free online training AILG Induction Training to members of 
SPC’s on 17 April 2025. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Mc Evoy, seconded by Councillor Killeen, 
and agreed by the members present that the approvals sought in the Chamber and 
the conference and training report be approved. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 7 of 29 
 
09/0425 
 
  
 
 
Accessing External Funding  
The following motion in the names of Councillors Heather, Leigh and Feeney was 
considered by the members: 
 
That Kildare County Council provides a report outlining existing structures and 
opportunities for accessing external funding, including relevant European Union 
programmes, and considers how organisational structures could be strengthened to 
improve success in such funding applications. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Heather, seconded by Councillor Leigh. 
 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services stated that securing additional national funding for strategic projects and 
work programmes is a priority of Council. Kildare County Council actively applies for 
all national funding opportunities as they become available. We have had success in 
securing funding and have been able to deliver a wide range of projects and services 
over the years, including Naas Library, Kerdiffstown Park and Athy Distributor Road. 
We also secured funding for a number of European projects; one of which is the 
Repower the Regions project that started recently and looks set to be a very 
interesting and rewarding project. Further information on this project is available at 
the following link  (1) Repower Regions: Posts | LinkedIn 
In terms of organisational structures, as the members were made aware the 
appointment and assignment of staff is an executive function.  
Councillor Heather thanked the Director for the report and noted the importance of 
availing of all potential funding streams. During discussion, the members raised the 
following points: 
• Role of the regional assemblies in Ireland, and can Kildare County Council 
increase access to development and funding opportunities, 
• Potential for a European Project Funding Officer.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 8 of 29 
 
Mr. Ryan advised the members that Kildare County Council were very active in 
seeking funding but noted that many funding opportunities related to research and 
development and not capital projects. 
He also noted the challenges Kildare County Council were experiencing in staff 
retention and recruitment, that there was an active recruitment campaign and 
maintaining core service delivery was the priority.  
Councillor Heather welcomed the response but noted that the recruitment challenges 
were unfortunate. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Heather, seconded by Councillor Leigh, and 
agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that motions 10,11, and 12 be taken together as they 
were similar. The members present agreed.  
 
10/0425 
 
 
 
 
    
Tenant in Situ Scheme 
The following motion in the names of Councillors Pender and Balfe was considered 
by the members: 
 
That Kildare County Council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage to urgently request a review and increase in the funding allocated to 
the Tenant in Situ scheme, which operates under the Second-Hand Acquisition 
Programme. Given the increasing demand on the scheme and the critical role it 
plays in preventing homelessness, it is essential that adequate resources are made 
available to ensure local authorities can act quickly and effectively where a tenant is 
at risk of losing their home due to a property being placed on the open market. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Pender and seconded by Councillor Balfe. 
 
A report from A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated that 
the members have been provided with a detailed report on the operation of the 
Second-hand Acquisition Programme 2025. The report outlined the council’s 2025 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 9 of 29 
 
funding position, likely budgetary implications arising from the programme and the 
management of notices of termination.   As outlined in the report the council received 
a funding allocation for 2025 of €15 million, this funding is fully committed, through a 
combination of sales to be completed, refurbishment costs and buy and renew 
properties. 
It is a matter for the members if they wish to correspond with the Minister on this 
matter. 
Councillor Pender thanked the Director for the report and emphasised the 
importance of continuously being active in supporting homeless prevention.  
 
11/0425 
 
  
 
Second-Hand Acquisition Programme 2025 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Aoife Breslin was considered by the 
members: 
 
That this Council calls on the Minister for Housing to provide additional funding under 
the Second-Hand Acquisition Programme 2025 to Kildare County Council to ensure 
that the Council can commence acquiring properties when tenants have recently 
received Notice to Quit under the Tenant in Situ Scheme. Furthermore, given the 
changes recently announced for the Buy and Renew Scheme where now it has to be 
funded through the Second-Hand Acquisition Programme the Council will be unable 
to purchase properties under the Second-Hand Acquisition Programme 2025.   
The motion was proposed by Councillor Breslin and seconded by Councillor Feeney. 
 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the members have been provided with a detailed report on the operation of the 
Second-Hand Acquisition Programme 2025. The report outlined the council’s 2025 
funding position, likely budgetary implications arising from the programme and the 
management of notices of termination.   As outlined in the report the council received 
a funding allocation for 2025 of €15 million, this funding is fully committed, through a 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 10 of 29 
 
combination of sales to be completed, refurbishment costs and buy and renew 
properties. 
Regarding the Buy and Renew Scheme, as advised in the report Buy and Renew 
Properties are being funded from the Second-Hand Acquisition Programme 2025 
and an analysis of our existing Buy and Renew Programme is being undertaken.  
We are engaging with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
in an effort to identify an alternative funding mechanism for some of properties 
earmarked for acquisition under this Scheme. 
Councillor Breslin thanked the Director for the report, and emphasised the need for 
increased funding, as families were being impacted. 
 
12/0425 
 
 
 
 
Tenant In Situ Purchase Scheme 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Noel Connolly was considered by the 
members: 
 
Go soláthróidh an Chomhairle tuarascáil do na comhaltaí ar fheidhmiú na scéime 
ceannaigh in situ do thionóntaí, lena n-áirítear ach gan a bheith teoranta dóibh seo a 
leanas: 
1. Líon iomlán na bhfálacha a ceannaíodh in 2024 agus costas iomlán na bhfálacha, 
agus go sonrófar, astu sin, líon iomlán na bhfálacha tionónta-in-situ in 2024 agus 
costas iomlán na bhfálacha sin 
2. Líon na n-iarratas ó thionóntaí in situ in 2024 a cuireadh ar sos go dtí gur 
deimhníodh an leithdháileadh caipitil do 2025, agus an líon díobh a cheannófar anois 
le leithdháileadh caipitil 2025, mar aon leis an gcostas iomlán a bheidh orthu sin 
3. An líon iomlán de na hiarratais sin nach rachaidh chun cinn a dheimhniú, agus an 
méid airgid a bheidh fágtha ó leithdháileadh 2025 tar éis déileáil le hiarratais 2024 a 
dheimhniú. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 11 of 29 
 
That the Council provides a report to the members on the operation of the tenant in 
situ purchase scheme, including but not limited to the following:  
1. Total acquisitions purchased in 2024 and total cost of these acquisitions and from 
within this the total number of tenant-in-situ acquisitions in 2024 and total cost of 
these acquisitions. 
2. Number of 2024 tenant-in-situ applications paused until 2025 capital allocation 
was confirmed and the number of these that will now be purchased with the 2025 
capital allocation and the total cost of these. 
3. Confirmation of the total number of these that will now not proceed and what 
remains from the 2025 allocation when the 2024 overhand is dealt with. 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Connolly and seconded by Councillor 
McEvoy. 
 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, A/Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration 
stated that the members have been provided with a detailed report on the operation 
of the Second-hand Acquisition Programme 2025. The report outlined the council’s 
2025 funding position, likely budgetary implications arising from the programme and 
the management of notices of termination.   As outlined in the report the council 
received a funding allocation for 2025 of €15 million, this funding is fully committed, 
through a combination of sales to be completed, refurbishment costs and buy and 
renew properties. 
 
1. The council closed sixty-two second hand sales in 2024, the majority being 
tenant in situ properties with a small number of purchases for people with a 
disability.  The total cost of these properties was €15.7 million.  While sales 
closed in 2024, not all funds were recouped from the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage in 2024, at year-end we were awaiting 
recoupment of €2.6 million, this amount forms part of the 2025 allocation. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 12 of 29 
 
2. The council did not pause the acquisition programme; however, we ceased 
accepting expressions of interest from landlords in Quarter 4 2024.  At year-
end there was a balance of twenty-two properties where the sale was un-
concluded, the capital cost of these properties was €6.9 million. 
 
3. Twenty-two properties were carried into 2025.  As advised in the report issued 
to the members refurbishment costs form part of the funding allocation along 
with properties purchased under the Buy and Renew Programme.  When all 
outstanding claims are considered, the council is not able to commit to any 
further acquisitions. 
 
 
Councillor Connolly thanked the Director for the report. 
 
During discussion, the members expressed their support for all three motions and 
raised the following points: 
• Concern for tenants, especially families and single people,  
• The need to prioritise homeless prevention,  
• Housing demand was inflating rent values in certain areas,  
• The hard work of the Housing section was commended. 
 
Ms. A. Aspell acknowledged the concerns raised, the challenging situations that 
some tenants were experiencing and advised that the Housing Section is 
continuously active in dealing with all cases. 
 
Motions 10, 11 and 12 were resolved on the proposal of Councillor Connolly, 
seconded by Councillor Evoy, and agreed by members present that a letter be 
issued to Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage requesting a 
review and increase in the funding allocated to the Tenant in Situ scheme. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 13 of 29 
 
13/0425 
 
 
 
 
Lyme Disease Information Signage 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Behan was considered by the 
members: 
 
That Kildare County Council installs Lyme disease information and warning signage 
in all public parks and playgrounds to advise of the dangers of Lyme Disease and 
the steps to take to minimise the risk of contracting this chronic condition. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Behan and seconded by Councillor Heavey. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces advised the members that a social media campaign will be organised to 
highlight the issues with Lyme disease. Signage will be considered but it will have to 
be costed, and a budget identified to cover these. There is no provision in this year’s 
budget for such signage.  
Councillor Phelan thanked the Director for the report stating the importance of raising 
awareness, that Lyme disease is on the rise and cited resources that provide useful 
information and signage templates.  
Lyme Resource Centre (a national charity) 
Home | Lyme Resource Centre    
HSE website  
 
 
 
 
Lyme Disease - HSE.ie   
During discussion, the members the members expressed their support for the motion 
and raised the following points: 
• It is an urban and rural problem, 
• Long-term complications prevented with early diagnoses 
Ms. C. Barrett thanked the members for raising this motion and advised that the 
Council will review media options to raise awareness, and funding options to roll out 
signage.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 14 of 29 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Behan, seconded by Councillor Heavey, and 
agreed by members present that the Council will review media options to raise 
awareness, and funding options to roll out signage. 
 
14/0425 
Planning rules in the provision of childcare facilities 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Doyle was considered by the 
members: 
 
That elements of the Guidance document for planning authorities with regard to 
Childcare facilities dated 2001, be replaced by the development of a county set of 
recommendations of best practice, that have regard to the delivery of quality 
sustainable childcare in our communities. Key requirement for change being the 
recommendation ratio of one creche per seventy-five units, that is a flawed concept, 
misinforming planning decisions to the detriment of a fast-growing County with one 
of the youngest demographics in the State. That in the interim we adopt a policy by 
resolution of this meeting that all planning decisions for the provision of childcare 
facilities should immediately seek to have an appropriately scaled model (at a 
minimum of 80 children) to ensure sustainability and efficiencies that can deliver the 
necessary regulatory standards for quality childcare in County Kildare. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Doyle and seconded by Councillor Ward. 
 
A report from Mr. N. O’Riordan, A/Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services that was presented by Director of 
Service Alan Dunney, stated that the delivery of childcare is not a service directly 
provided by Kildare County Council. As such, the formulation and development of a 
set of county wide recommendations of best practice in the delivery of childcare was 
a matter for the Kildare County Childcare Committee and/or the Department of 
Children, Disability, and Equality.  
The Childcare Facilities Guidelines for Planning Authorities [June 2001] referenced 
above were issued under Section 28 of the Planning and Development 2000 (as 
amended). In relation to new housing areas, the standard required in these 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 15 of 29 
 
guidelines was one childcare facility providing for a minimum twenty childcare places 
per seventy-five dwellings/units. Planning Authorities were statutorily obliged to 
comply with Section 28 Guidelines in the preparation of County Development Plans, 
Settlement Plans and Local Area Plans.  
Any significant deviation from the standard set out in the guidelines would require a 
revision by Government of the relevant guideline. In this regard, the members may 
wish to write to the DHLGH to express their views in advance of any new guidelines 
being prepared. 
Councillor Doyle thanked the Director for the report emphasising the importance of 
providing access to suitable childcare facilities.  
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The need for a public funded model, 
•  Creche size needs to align with demand, 
• Land zoned for housing needs to provide suitably sized childcare facilities, 
• Concerns were expressed regarding long waiting lists in some areas for a 
creche place, staff retention due to low pay, availability of qualified staff and 
viability of service due to changes in child, staff ratios. 
Mr. A. Dunney, Director acknowledged the concerns raised, noting that one size 
would not fit all, and to develop a policy, further review was required. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Ward, and 
agreed by members present that the motion be referred to the Housing and 
Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 16 of 29 
 
15/0425 
As I Am Autism-Friendly Accreditation 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Phelan was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council follows the direction of the Houses of the Oireachtas which achieved 
‘As I Am Autism-Friendly Accreditation’ in 2023 for Leinster House, making it the 
world’s first Autism-Friendly parliament and considers including an objective in the 
next ‘County Kildare Access Strategy’ for Kildare County Council to gain ‘As I Am 
Autism-Friendly Accreditation’ for the Áras Chill Dara headquarters. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Phelan and seconded by Councillor Doyle.  
 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services stated that the council will include an objective in the next ‘County Kildare 
Access Strategy’ for Kildare County Council to gain ‘As I Am Autism-Friendly 
Accreditation’ for the Áras Chill Dara headquarters.   
Councillor Phelan thanked the Director for the report and asked when the review of 
Kildare’s Access Strategy was due. 
Mr Ryan noted that he would confirm the timeline for review of the Strategy.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Phelan, seconded by Councillor Doyle and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and the timeline for the review 
of the Access Strategy be confirmed. 
 
16/0425 
Cairde App and the MapAlert Systems 
The following motion in the name of Councillor T. O’Dwyer was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council explains the difference between the Council owned Cairde App and 
the MapAlert systems and outline why two systems are required to deliver alerts and 
notifications.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 17 of 29 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor T. O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor 
Durkan. 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services stated that MapAlerter is a subscriber-based text and email alerts system 
for notices regarding infrastructure emergencies, and other matters related to 
Council services.  
It is in use by the Council for several years, and the scope of the service relates to 
Council services.   
It is free to individual subscribers, and an App version is also available.  
To date, in this County Council, MapAlerter is used for alerts related to the Weekly 
Planning Lists, Severe Weather events, Road closures, hazards and roadworks by 
Municipal Districts Offices and Library service notices. The App is an important tool 
in our Severe Weather and Emergency Plan, as it communicates alerts to the Fire 
Service, HSE, Gardai and the Council’s Out of Hours Phone Service Provider.  
The service also gives existing subscribers to the Council’s consultation portal the 
option to receive alerts regarding public consultations advertised on that portal. 
The Cairde App is not owned by the Council and was procured more recently than 
MapAlerter and from a separate process, and for a different purpose. The Cairde 
app is used for Community Text Alerts which are issued by An Garda Siochána and 
other users with appropriate access. The app was tendered on an initial 3-year trial 
basis and was funded through Local Property Tax, this trial period will expire in 2025 
and a determination on whether to continue with the use of this app will need to be 
taken. 
Councillor T. O’Dwyer thanked the Director for the report emphasising the benefits of 
having one App. During discussion, the members expressed their support for having 
one App where all information can be accessed. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 18 of 29 
 
Mr. E. Ryan acknowledged the points raised, noting that a review of merging the 
App’s can be considered when developing the brief for a new contract when the 
current contracts expire.   
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor Durkan, 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted and consideration to merge 
the Apps is given when developing the brief for a new contract. 
 
 
17/0425 
Text Alert Scheme for Misuse of Accessible Parking Bays 
The following motion in the name of Councillor P. O’Dwyer was considered by the 
members. 
 
That Kildare County Council adopts the text alert scheme to report misuse of 
accessible parking bays similar to what is already in place in Gorey, Lucan, and 
Rathfarnham.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor P. O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor 
Pender. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that Kildare County Council regulates parking byelaws in twelve 
towns in the County. A maximum stay period operates for all parking bays covered 
by the byelaws including accessible parking bays which are referred to as disable 
parking bays in both the Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997 and in 
the parking byelaws. Traffic wardens employed by our pay parking contractor 
monitor compliance with the byelaws to ensure that the bays are not occupied for 
longer than permitted and that disable person permits are on display where 
appropriate. Outside of the parking-bye-law areas, Kildare County Council traffic 
wardens ensure compliance with parking regulations. The fine for parking in a 
disabled parking bay without an appropriate permit is €150. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 19 of 29 
 
The following table outlines the number of parking fines issued by Kildare County 
Council for illegal parking in respect of disabled parking bays. 
2023 
2024 
2025-Quarter 1 
275 
255 
81 
 
In addition, An Garda Siochána have taken a proactive approach in recent months to 
enforcement which is improving the level of compliance in this regard. 
The Transport Department have noted the awareness campaign launched by the 
Disabled Drivers Association of Ireland (DDAI) in respect of the appropriate use of 
disabled parking bays and are reviewing the situation. While the campaign has 
merit, there are practical implications in respect of the hours of operation of pay-
parking which is limited while disabled bays are in force at all times. The Scheme 
could be looked in the context of the next review of the managed parking services 
contract scheduled for 2026. Furthermore, in the context of the review of parking 
byelaws, the Transport Department will review the locations of disabled parking bays 
to ensure that there are sufficient numbers and appropriately situated bays available 
for the convenience of disabled drivers. Kildare County Council treats the misuse of 
disable parking bays as a serious offence and elected representatives and the public 
are encouraged to contact the parking team in Kildare County Council during office 
hours and An Garda Siochána outside of office hours to ensure adherence to 
byelaws.  
Councillor P. O’Dwyer thanked the Director for the report emphasising the important 
function accessible parking bays provide to the entitled user. During discussion, the 
members raised the following points: 
• Misuse of accessible parking parks was unacceptable. 
• €150 fine was not adequate.   
• Newbridge was suggested for the ‘text pilot scheme’. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 20 of 29 
 
Ms. C. Barrett acknowledged the points raised noting that the text alert functionality 
can be considered when preparing the brief for the ‘managed parking services’ 
contract when due for renewal. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor Pender, 
and agreed by members present, that the text alert scheme for reporting illegal 
parking in disabled parking bays be considered when preparing the brief for the 
‘managed parking services’ contract when due for renewal. 
 
18/0425 
Recyclable Cups at Licensed Events over 5000 Attendees 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Evie Sammon was considered by the 
members: 
 
That Kildare County Council adopts a policy requiring licensed events with over 
5,000 attendees to use recyclable cups, aiming to reduce single-use plastic waste. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Sammon and seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer. 
 
A report from Ms. P. O’Brien, A/Director of Services, Climate, Community, 
Environment and Water stated that current practice, in accordance with the Planning 
regulations, requires the submission of an Event License Application accompanied 
by a draft Event Management Plan (EMP) to the planning department of the local 
authority in advance of a large-scale outdoor event (>5,000 attendees).  
The environment section of the EMP includes a draft Environment Monitoring 
Programme which must be in place before, during and after the proposed event. 
Minimum requirements for the section are details on litter picking provision, 
quantities, and types of infrastructure. 
There is currently no requirement in event licensing applications for strategies 
towards waste prevention and/or waste reduction. However, the council promotes 
best practice in this regard – including the option for implementing a reusable cup 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 21 of 29 
 
system onsite – and works proactively with promoters and event organisers in 
planning their waste management requirements. Consideration is also given to 
reducing or banning other single use items for example, plastic lanyards, plastic 
packaging for merchandise, wristbands, glow sticks, plastic giveaways, rain ponchos 
etc. 
It is also noted that, if a festival or event are selling drinks in plastic bottles, 
aluminium, or steel cans, they will be required to register with Re-turn and operate a 
deposit return system. 
For the members’ information, the Department of the Environment, Climate and 
Communications has recently produced a “Guide to Plastic Free Festivals & Events” 
tailored for event and festival organisers, and which is available online at the 
Mywaste.ie website, Ireland’s “official guide to managing waste.” 
Councillor Sammon thanked the Director for the report. During discussion, the 
members raised the following points: 
• A policy to reduce single-use plastic waste was needed. 
Ms. Paula O’Brien, Senior Executive Officer, Community Section, advised the 
members that Failte Ireland have issued a guide for festivals failte-ireland-
sustainable-festivals-guidelines-2023.pdf, noting that Kildare County Council 
promoted best practice in the area of waste prevention and waste reduction. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Sammon, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer, and agreed by members present that Kildare County Council develop a 
policy to promote the use of recyclable cups and the reduction of single-use plastic 
at licensed events with over 5,000 attendees. 
 
          19/0425 
NDA Guidance on Accessible Documents 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Melrose was considered by the 
members: 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 22 of 29 
 
That the council aligns its documents with the NDA guidance on accessible 
documents.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Melrose and seconded by Councillor Balfe. 
 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services stated that the council has a number of documents which include the 
“Kildare County Council Style Guide”, “First steps in producing accessible 
publications”, “Accessible Publications Guidelines”, “Creating Accessible Content for 
Website” which align with NDA Guidelines. 
Website Accessibility | EU Web Accessibility Directive |  - National Disability 
Authority 
Councillor Melrose thanked the Director for the report, stating that the intention of his 
motion was to allow Members submit a motion or question in accessible formats, and 
that the Executive would provide agenda reports in accessible formats when 
requested. An example of a motion in an accessible format was provided to 
demonstrate Councillor Melrose’s intention. 
Mr. E. Ryan acknowledged the intention of Councillor Melrose’s motion, noting that 
careful consideration was needed to develop a suitable solution, suggesting that the 
motion be referred to the Protocol Committee and included in the Standing Order 
review. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Melrose, seconded by Councillor Balfe, and 
agreed by members present that the motion be referred to the Protocol Committee 
and included in the Standing Order review. 
 
20/0425 
Vacant Homes Schemes 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Dunne was considered by the 
members: 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 23 of 29 
 
That the council provides an update on Vacant Homes Schemes, namely the Buy 
and Renew Scheme, the Repair and Leasing Scheme and the Long-Term Leasing 
initiative to include what funding is available to operate these schemes and what 
support is available from the council to applicants. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Dunne and seconded by Councillor Moore. 
 
A report from Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the Town Regeneration Team are utilising a number of schemes and 
programmes to address vacancy and dereliction and encourage the re-use and 
regeneration of vacant and derelict properties in the county. 
CPO Activation Programme: 
The CPO Activation Programme was launched in April 2023, requiring a proactive 
and systematic approach by local authorities to identify vacant and derelict 
properties and engage with owners to bring those properties back into use, and to 
use legislative powers to acquire vacant and derelict properties, where engagement 
with owners has been unsuccessful. 
Kildare County Council has received a target of 120 properties to enter the CPO 
activation programme and ten compulsory purchases / compulsory acquisitions to 
commence in 2025. 
Targets set for this programme in 2023 and 2024 were exceeded. 
 
Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant: 
A grant of €50,000 is available for the refurbishment of properties which have been 
vacant for 2 or more years.  If the refurbishment costs exceed the standard grant of 
up to €50,000 and the property is derelict, a top-up grant amount of up to €20,000 is 
available.  In 2024 142 Vacant Property Refurbishment grant applications were 
received; 119 were approved and seventy grant payments issued.  To date in 2025, 
38 applications have been received, thirty-two have been approved and thirty-three 
grant payments have issued. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 24 of 29 
 
Buy and Renew Scheme: 
Seven properties have been purchased under the Buy and Renew Scheme since 
2023 and the purchase of a further four properties is at an advanced stage and 
expected to close this year.   
Twelve properties acquired by CPO are approved for funding under the Buy and 
Renew Scheme. Due to funding constraints and, in particular, the inclusion of Buy 
and Renew properties in the Second-Hand Acquisition Programme 2025 allocation, 
the local authority is currently at an advanced stage in discussion with the DHLGH to 
transfer acquisition and refurbishment costs to an alternate funding stream (SHIP 
Renewal) for these 12 properties.  
Repair and Leasing Scheme: 
The Repair and Leasing Scheme is available to refurbish vacant properties in need 
of repair and bring them back into use for social housing.  The maximum repair cost 
under the scheme is €80,000 per unit.  The property is then made available to the 
Local Authority or Approved Housing Body under a direct lease agreement or rental 
availability agreement. The cost of the repairs is offset against the agreed rental 
payment until the value of the works is repaid. 
There are currently three active leases under the Repair and Leasing Scheme, five 
applications for the scheme were received in 2024 and we expect two units to deliver 
this year.  There has been a number of enquiries in relation to the scheme so far in 
2025 and 1 application has been received.  Kildare County Council has been 
allocated a minimum target of 1 Repair and Leasing unit to deliver in 2025. 
URDF Call 3 
Funding under URDF Call 3 has been approved for fifty-six sites in the county.  
Compulsory acquisition of three sites and acquisition by agreement of one site in 
Athy is being finalised.  Documents are being prepared for compulsory acquisition of 
two further URDF approved sites in Kildare Town.  A number of the approved sites 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 25 of 29 
 
have been put up for sale or brought back into use privately, following engagement 
with the Town Regeneration Team. 
Long Term Leasing Programme:  
Long term leasing does not form part of the package of programmes available to 
address vacancy.  Currently no funding is available for long term leasing. 
Councillor Dunne thanked the Director for the report commending the 
comprehensiveness of the report. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Dunne, seconded by Councillor Moore, and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
          21/0425 
Review of acceptance of motions for Plenary Meetings 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Moore was considered by the 
members: 
 
That members would support a submission to the Protocol Committee, the Agenda 
Appeals Committee and the Chief Executive that a review of the scope of 
the conditions of acceptance of motions for Plenary Meetings, should be reviewed 
and widened to allow at least one motion per meeting on matters of national 
importance in order to reflect a position of public concern from public 
representatives. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Moore and seconded by Councillor Clear. 
 
Ms. L. Hanratty, Meetings Administrator stated that this was a matter for the 
members to agree. 
Councillor Moore acknowledged the response from the Meetings Administrator 
noting his frustration with the current Standing Orders, the limitations they place on 
members, and highlighted that a number of motions have been rejected this year 
due to the restrictions within the Standing Orders.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 26 of 29 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• A review of the Standing Orders is due. More scope is needed to allow 
members raise concerns on national matters that affect the electorate they 
represent, 
• Caution was expressed in relation to allowing motions that are not related to 
reserved functions and the effective management of time in the Council 
Chamber. 
• The petition system allows for matters that are not related to reserved 
functions. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Moore, seconded by Councillor Clear and 
agreed by members present that the motion be referred to the Protocol Committee to 
undertake a review of the Standing Orders. 
 
22/0425 
K-Hub Network Meeting Rooms 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Bill Clear was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council requests the K-Hub Network – Kildare’s Innovation and Co-Working 
Space – to consider making meeting rooms available to community groups at no 
cost or at a reduced rate, in recognition of the fact that these facilities have been 
partly funded through the Local Property Tax.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Clear and seconded by Councillor Moore. 
 
A report from Mr. N. O’Riordan, A/Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services and presented by Director of 
Service, Alan Dunney, stated that The Kildare Hubs Strategy which sets out the 
objectives of the K Hub Network was commissioned by Kildare County Council and 
adopted by Elected Members in 2022.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 27 of 29 
 
Within the K Hub Network there is a very varied hub facilities by type, location and 
ownership which is both private and public. These hubs have emerged over time 
through a wide and diverse set of partners, stakeholders, and users. Ownership 
structures vary from community organisations to local authorities, HEI’s, statutory 
agencies and also private ownership and partnership models.  
Hubs while they are much more than workspaces for remote workers, their primary 
function are the conduits for entrepreneurship, enterprise creation and innovation 
and a key instrument in enterprise and industrial policy. The incubation cycle means 
that our enterprise hubs can continuously produce high value employment as clients 
start, grow, scale and exit. Hubs are a primary instrument in stimulating indigenous 
enterprise and promoting innovation across the local SME base. Hubs can also play 
a useful role in the enterprise ecosystem by building partnerships with FDI operators 
and HEI’s to create second sites for expansion projects or placing teams in an 
innovation and collaboration environment.  
There are fifteen hubs in K Hub Network, 10 in private ownership which we have no 
authority to dictate usage, the remaining five are governed by Kildare County Council 
and include  
Merits, The National Equine Innovation Centre, Athy Enterprise Centre and as yet 
completed Model School Food, Drinks and Skills Hub and Monasterevin Fashion and 
Textile Hub. 
Regarding MERITS, community Engagement has occurred during Kildare County 
Councils Family Day, in addition we also host weekly teens CoderDojo camps, just 
to note this can only be facilitated after business hours due to Garda vetting 
requirements also Scoil Phádraig Naofa (again through the Arts Dept in KCC) we ran 
a film workshop for their students FOC. In addition, we annually open the building to 
the public for Arts week and have facilitated Digital Artist in Residence (this is part of 
a free bursary award through the Arts department)  
We have not refused any group free access to this space, however, regarding the 
NEIC, or Athy Enterprise Centre these physical spaces do not lend themselves to 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 28 of 29 
 
being used as meeting rooms, while the other buildings have yet to open but will 
offer their training opportunities in food and textiles to the public.  
In conclusion just to note all these buildings have not only been funding by Kildare 
County Council but all have significant Government funds as employment activation 
centres and the primary function of these spaces is and must always be the conduit 
for job creation. 
Councillor Clear thanked the Director the report emphasising the great work of 
community groups and the importance of supporting their survival. During 
discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The challenges voluntary groups experience when looking for suitable, 
available and affordable meeting rooms, 
• This was an opportunity to support Community Groups, 
• Many voluntary groups have cash-flow issues, 
• Merits is funded by Kildare County Council. 
Mr. Alan Dunney advised the members that it was not practical for the K-Hub 
Network to provide rooms free of charge as there were related running costs in 
administration and security.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Clear, seconded by Councillor Moore and 
agreed by members present that a letter be issued to K-Hub Network requesting that 
they consider making meeting rooms available to community groups at no cost or at 
a reduced rate. 
 
 
          23/0425 
OPW to Present at Full Council 
The following motion in the name of Councillor O’Rourke was considered by the 
members: 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.04.25                    Page 29 of 29 
 
That the council invites the Office of Public Works (OPW) to present their plan for 
heritage restoration and development in County Kildare to the members at full 
council.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor 
Killeen. 
 
Ms. L. Hanratty, Meetings Administrator stated that this was a matter for the 
members to agree. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The great work of the OPW in County Kildare was noted, 
• Understanding the OPWs future plan for sites they manage in the County 
would support informed decision making and representations, 
• The presentation should address each Municipal District. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor O’Rourke, seconded by Councillor Killeen, 
and agreed by members present that a letter of invitation be issued to the Office of 
Public Works (OPW) to present their work plan for the Heritage Sites, landscapes, 
and buildings they manage in the County to the members at full council.  
 
The meeting concluded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
