 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 1 of 20 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 28 July 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
 
                     
Members Present: Councillors C. Kelly (Cathaoirleach), V. Behan, A. Breen, A. 
Breslin, F. Brett, B. Caldwell, N. Connolly, B. Dooley, S. Doyle, 
G. Dunne, T. Durkan, W. Durkan, D. Fitzpatrick, R. Heather, N. 
Heavey, M. Leigh, T. McDonnell, P. McEvoy, P. Melrose, S. 
Moore, P. Mulroe, P. O’Dwyer, B. O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. 
Pender, D. Phelan, E. Sammon and D. Trost. 
 
Online: 
Councillors P. Balfe, P. Brooks, B. Clear, K. Duffy, A. Feeney, I. 
Keatley, N. Killeen, T. O’Dwyer, R. Power, P. Ward, and B. 
Wyse. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillors L. Panaite Fahey 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms. A. Aspell, Mr. J. Boland, 
Mr. A. Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, Ms M. Higgins (Directors of 
Services), Ms. C. Barrett, Mr. D. Creighton (A/Directors of 
Services), Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Ms. L. 
Morgan (Meetings Secretary), and other officials.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach proposed to suspend standing orders to facilitate a refreshment 
break following the conclusion of 3 presentations ahead of the monthly meeting. 
 
This was seconded by Councillor Doyle and agreed by the members present. 
 
The meeting commenced at 3:15. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the July monthly meeting of the Council 
and asked the Meeting Administrator to read out a notice regarding the live 
streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 2 of 20 
 
00/0725 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised the meeting that she had been informed of the following 
bereavements:  
 
Laurence (Larry) Creighton, Father of David Creighton, Director of Services.  
Reggie Lalor, former Kildare County Councillor 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/0725 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0725 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the annual meeting held on 20 June 
2025, the monthly meeting held on 30 June 2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor W. Durkan, seconded by Councillor McEvoy 
and agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the annual meeting 
held on 20 June 2025 and monthly meeting held on 30 June 2025 be adopted. 
 
The progress report was noted.  
 
     03/0725 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 3 of 20 
 
04/0725 
Consideration of Local Property Tax – setting of Local Adjustment Factor 
The members considered the report of the Chief Executive on the setting of a local 
adjustment factor for 2026 and the report on the 7 submissions received during the 
public consultation, previously circulated. 
Ms. E. Hanlon, Director of Services, Finance, Digital Services, Innovation and 
Governance briefed the members on the report and advised, that the members may, 
as a reserved function, resolve to vary the rate of local property tax within its 
functional area by a maximum of +/- 15% for 2026 only or include additional years of 
the remaining council term, and in making their decision have regard to Kildare 
County Councils financial position, the estimated income and expenditure for the 
period that the varied rate will have effect, the financial effect of the varied rate, and 
feedback from the public consultation, which took place from 03 June to 04 July 
where 7 submissions were received.  
She further advised, of the impact, a 1, 10 and 15% variation to the LPT base rate, 
would have on the revenue income for Kildare, and that the executive supported a 
+15% variation, based on the significant capital investment required to deliver the 
much-needed recreation and amenity facilities throughout the county.  
It was proposed by Councillor Killeen and seconded by Councillor Connolly not to 
vary the basic rate of the LPT for 2025 (1 year).  
 
The Cathaoirleach initiated a vote.  
 
Vote 1: 
LPT remain at the base rate for one year.  
 
In favour: 
 
 9 
Against: 
 
25 
Abstained:  
 5 
 
Result: 
The proposal for LPT for 2025 (1 year) to remain at the base rate of 
zero with no increase was not carried based on the vote results. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 4 of 20 
 
It was then proposed by Councillor Doyle and seconded by Councillor Sammon that 
the Local Property Tax rate remain varied upwards by 10% for 2 years, with 
contributions to administration costs associated with retained LPT for the Municipal 
Districts being capped at actual value as of 2025 and all additional revenues above 
those accrued in 2025 to be allocated on a per capita basis. 
The Cathaoirleach initiated a further vote.  
Vote 2: 
Local Property Tax rate should vary upwards by 10% for 2 years. 
In favour: 
 
27 
Against: 
 
10 
Abstained:  
2 
Result: 
The motion was carried. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle and seconded by Councillor Sammon 
that in accordance with the Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012 (as amended) the 
members agreed that the basic rate of local property tax should stand varied 
upwards by ten per cent (10%) for the years 1 November 2025 to 31 October 2027 in 
respect of relevant residential properties situated in the administrative area of Kildare 
County Council, with contributions to administration costs associated with retained 
LPT for the Municipal Districts being capped at actual value as of 2025 and all 
additional revenues above those accrued in 2025 to be allocated on a per capita 
basis. 
 
          05/0725 
 
 
 Bi-annual update from Development Control Section 
The members considered the report previously circulated in relation to the taking in 
charge status of residential estates in the County.  
 
Councillor Doyle acknowledged the work done in preparing this report.  
 
The report was noted. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 5 of 20 
 
06/0725 
Bi-annual Update on Climate Action 
The members considered the report previously circulated in relation to Kildare 
County Councils Climate Action Plan 2024-2029. 
Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Services, Director of Services, Community, Climate, 
Environment and Water briefed the members on the report highlighting the wide 
range of active climate action projects and of their importance in providing a 
sustainable future. 
 
Ms. Higgins highlighted that that the Public Sector Reform and Oversight Group 
(PSROG) endorsed a business case to maintain, strengthen, and secure climate 
action as a recognised function within the local government sector and to regularise 
staff positions across the country to permanent posts.  
 
She praised the Climate Action Team in relation to the ongoing success of the 
Demo-House project located in Maynooth, delivered in partnership with Maynooth 
University, and its successful entry into the Entente Florale Europe competition. She 
also praised the Picnic in the Park which launched the Climate Champions Program, 
celebrating the sustainable work undertaken by community groups and the 
shortlisting of the Grass to Gas project in the eGovernment Awards.  
 
Ms. Higgins advised of the upcoming closing date of the Climate Innovation Fund, 
that preparations for the October Climate Week had commenced, and commended 
the Climate Action Office for representing Ireland at the Cities Forum in Krakow. 
The members acknowledged the range and value of the work by the Climate Action 
Office and thanked the Director for the comprehensive update and report.  
The report was noted. 
 
07/0725 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach advised the members and all present that she had attended 
several events during the past month. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 6 of 20 
 
• Carton House on the 06 July along with the Chief Executive to present the 
winner of the Ladies Irish Open. 
• Photographed with the Local Enterprise Office Team and the food and craft 
producers from Kildare, who will exhibit at Taste of Kildare. 
• Met the judging panel of the Entente Florale Competition. Maynooth has been 
nominated (by the Department of Rural and Community Development) to 
represent Ireland in the Large Town Category. 
• Official opening of the newly refurbished Carbury Village Community Centre 
showcasing collaboration between the Council, elected members and the local 
community. The Cathaoirleach wished them the best of luck and said she 
hoped it could be used as a template for reimagining disused buildings in 
other communities. 
• The Cathaoirleach and the Chief Executive met with the Barbadian 
Ambassador, His Excellency Cleviston Haynes as he visited the Áras on 
Thursday the 17 of July.  
 
08/0725 
Correspondence 
The Meeting Administrator confirmed that ten items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included: 
• Five resolutions from other Local Authorities,  
• From the Department of Health, Guidelines on Interaction with the Tobacco 
Industry, 
• Circular LG 10-2025, Revised Security Allowance for Local Authority Elected 
Members, 
• Three items of correspondence seeking nomination for Presidential Election. 
 
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 7 of 20 
 
09/0725 
Conferences and Training 
The Meeting Administrator referred to the Conference and Training report which was 
circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group.  
• 3 councilors sought training approval for AILG Autumn training seminar at 
a cost of €175 per Councillor,  
• several up-and-coming training events were listed for the members 
information,  
• IPA group training sessions for up to 40 members at a fixed cost. 
o 6 councillors have expressed their interest in the A-Z of Irish Local 
Government training at a total cost of €1272, 
o 4 councillors have expressed their interest in the SPC training at a 
total cost of €318, 
o 3 councillors have expressed their interest in the Induction training 
for elected members at a total cost of €318, 
o 8 councillors have expressed their interest in the Overview of Local 
Government Service area of Finance at a total cost of €318. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor McEvoy, seconded by Councillor W. Durkan 
and agreed by the members present that the Conference and Training report be 
approved. 
 
10/0725 
 
  
 
Proposed Changes to Apartment Standards 
The following motion in the name of Councillors Chris Pender, Nuala Killeen, Pat 
Balfe, Peter Melrose, Paula Mulroe, Claire O'Rourke, Aoife Breslin, Angela Feeney, 
Rupert Heather, Noel Connolly, Bill Clear, Ger Dunne, Pádraig McEvoy and Seamie 
Moore was considered by the members: 
 
That Kildare County Council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage to oppose the proposed changes to apartment standards, which 
reduce local authority discretion and risk undermining the proper planning and 
sustainable development of housing, as well as public confidence in local and 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 8 of 20 
 
national democracy, and seek a meeting to ensure that any future standards 
reflect a locally informed and community-led approach to housing delivery.  
A report from Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that the Design Standards for 
Apartments, Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2025) are applicable to any 
application for planning permission, and to any subsequent appeal or direct 
application to An Coimisiún Pleanála, submitted after the issuing of the Guidelines, 
i.e. from 9 July 2025.  The Guidelines are effective under Section 28 of the Planning 
and Development Act (as amended) and it is matter for the members to agree to 
write to the Minister. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The new guidelines will negatively effect people, families, the quality of 
housing, housing choices, and communities and will not address the housing 
crisis.   
• Lack of consultation and long-term planning. 
• Lack of support from professional bodies, in particular Architects. 
• The end user will not benefit from any savings a developer makes. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor Breslin, and 
agreed by the members present that a letter be issued to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage to oppose the proposed changes to apartment 
standards, and to seek a meeting to ensure that any future standards reflect a locally 
informed and community-led approach to housing delivery.  
 
11/0725 
 
  
Policy on Disposal of Large Nitrous Oxide Canisters 
The following motion in the name of Councillors Peggy O’Dwyer, William Durkan and 
Brendan Wyse was considered by the members: 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 9 of 20 
 
That the council writes to the Department of Climate, Energy, and the Environment 
for a policy on the disposal of large nitrous oxide canisters.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor P. O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor W. 
Durkan. 
 
A report from Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, 
Environment and Water stated that the matter has been discussed at the 
Environment and Water Services Strategic Policy Committee, and it might be helpful 
to provide some background to the issue. 
The safe disposal of potentially dangerous nitrous oxide canisters has in recent years 
become a major issue for the recycling and waste management industry. 
The gas is sold legally for medical, industrial and commercial purposes, and is easily 
obtained online. Revenue has the power to seize canisters of the gas where officers 
believe they are intended for illicit purposes. 
Kildare County Council has no facilities to store and dispose of these canisters, nor 
are they accepted by locally based waste collection operators for health and safety 
reasons.  
Due to the physical nature of the canister, it is difficult to ascertain if the product is 
empty or full. Whilst an empty canister is widely recyclable, if gas remains in the 
container, it may explode if crushed - it cannot be processed through standard 
recycling facilities.  
This issue of disposal is not unique to Kildare and is rather a national issue that 
requires addressing at a nationwide level and therefore supports the members 
request to formally write to the Department on the matter. 
Councillor P. O’Dwyer thanked the Director for her support and stated that nitrous 
oxide has many uses, but guidelines are needed urgently on how to dispose of them 
safely, and responsibly, particularly with regards to the environment. 
Councillor W. Durkan suggested contacting other local authorities to see what 
guidelines and policies are in operation that could be implemented in Kildare.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 10 of 20 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor W. 
Durkan and agreed by the members present, that a letter be issued to the 
Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment for a policy on the disposal of 
large nitrous oxide canisters.  
 
12/0725 
 
 
  
 
Varying Rates Across the County  
The following motion in the name of Councillors Evie Sammon and Tracey O'Dwyer 
was considered by the members: 
 
That the council outlines how the Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 
2019 could be used to vary the annual rate across the county to support town 
centres.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Sammon and seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer. 
 
A report from Ms. E. Hanlon, Director of Services, Finance, Digital Services, 
Innovation and Governance stated that only one commercial rate can be applied 
across the county.  
Section 3 of the Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019 sets out that 
the setting of the annual rate on valuation is a reserved function to be agreed at the 
annual budget meeting.  
Under Section 15 of the Local Government and Other Matters 2019 Act Local 
Authorities have the option to introduce a waiver scheme, only one scheme is 
allowable per year.  
Kildare County Council has operated a Commercial Rates Incentive Scheme (CRIS) 
since 2021. The CRIS currently required that a successful applicant who has moved 
into a vacant premises pay the annual rates of that property in full before being 
refunded 75% of their rates payment as a grant in year one (to a maximum of 
€7500), 50% in year two (to a maximum of €5000) and 25% in year three (to a 
maximum of €2500).   

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 11 of 20 
 
Section 15 of the 2019 Act presents an opportunity for Kildare County Council to 
amend the CRIS from a grant scheme to a waiver scheme.  Section 15 provides for 
one commercial rates waiver scheme to be adopted per year, whereby all or a 
portion of commercial rates due to it by ratepayers may be waived in specific 
circumstances.  Proposals for waiver schemes made under the Act must be 
submitted to the Economic Development, Enterprise and Planning Strategic Policy 
Committee (SPC) by 30 June each year. 
The Economic Development SPC considered and accepted a proposal to amend the 
CRIS from a grant scheme to a waiver scheme. This amendment would eliminate the 
requirement for those rates customers eligible for the CRIS grant to pay their full 
year's rates before receiving the CRIS grant.  Rather, a rates waiver could be applied 
directly to their account, with the customer liable to pay the balance of the account. 
The waiver scheme would be more accessible and beneficial to small businesses in 
their first few years of trading given the reduced initial outlay required to access the 
waiver. 
The waiver scheme aims to encourage reoccupation of vacant commercial premises 
in town and village centres across County Kildare.  The scheme provides for a three-
year waiver of a percentage of commercial rates to eligible entrepreneurs/ 
businesses who occupy a property that has been vacant for a period of at least two 
years. The waiver amounts are:  
Year 1 - 75% of the annual rates (subject to a maximum waiver of €7,500).  
Year 2 - 50% of the annual rates (subject to a maximum waiver of €5,000).  
Year 3 - 25% of the annual rates (subject to a maximum waiver of €2,500). 
The CRIS complements Kildare County Council’s successful Shop Fronts Grants 
Scheme which aims to promote business creation, enhancement of commercial 
spaces and the improvement of the economic welfare of Kildare’s towns and villages. 
At their meeting on the 15 May 2025 the Economic Development, Enterprise and 
Planning SPC agreed to propose the waiver scheme. As required by the regulations, 
the next step in the process is consultation with the public. This consultation is now 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 12 of 20 
 
open, for more details please see the Council’s consultation portal at 
https://consult.kildarecoco.ie/en     
It is proposed to bring this waiver scheme to the members at the September meeting 
for their consideration.  
Councillor Sammon stated the following: 
• In recent months a renewed emphasis has rightly been placed on town and 
village centre regeneration, recognising that vibrant local hubs are vital to 
community identity and economic health.   
• Our town centres are the beating heart of the county, offering unique 
character, face-to-face service, and a network of independent traders.   
• Out-of-town retail parks continue to thrive with their one-stop mix of retail, 
dining, leisure and generous free parking. 
• Customers are drawn to out of town retail parks due to a perception that 
convenience, affordability, and value is available resulting in, reduced footfall 
in our centres, and businesses struggling. Small retailers shoulder the same 
annual rate on valuation as large retail landlords, despite the advantages out 
of town retail parks can provide. 
• This disparity undermines local enterprise, stifles entrepreneurial risk-taking, 
and erodes the vibrant streetscapes we seek to restore.  
• Request for the Planning, Enterprise and Economic Development Strategic 
Policy Committee to explore a dedicated town centre rates waiver. The current 
waiver scheme is excellent, but it now fails to acknowledge the planning 
exemption where a commercial premises may be changed to residential 
accommodation without planning permission. For our main streets to thrive we 
need to be encouraging immediate occupation rather than a scheme that kicks 
in after two years of vacancy. Such a waiver, carefully targeted to qualifying 
businesses in our designated town and village centres, would lower annual 
rate charges and free up vital cashflows.   

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 13 of 20 
 
• By reducing the upfront burden on new occupiers we can accelerate re-
occupation, stimulate commercial activity, and signal our commitment to 
regeneration.  This targeted relief would complement our successful Shop 
Fronts Grant, align with our Local Economic and Community Plan, and 
reinforce wider town-centre-first strategies.   
• It would drive new leasings, increase pedestrian footfall, and safeguard the 
unique character that distinguishes our main streets.   
• By asking our SPC to examine a rates waiver, strategic intent could be turned 
into tangible support for local enterprise.  A waiver and a rate that would see a 
return of the same funds to the Council could be looked at while 
acknowledging that retail business in particular is difficult in our town centres 
currently.   
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Town and Village Centre Regeneration report acknowledged. 
• Local hubs are the centre of our communities and should be protected. 
Pedestrian footfall needs to increase along with improved access to car 
parking to support our urban centres. 
• Out of town retail parks have facilities such as free car parks, coffee shops, 
playgrounds which people find attractive and convenient. 
• Can the Planning, Enterprise and Economic Development Strategic Policy 
Committee (SPC) explore a dedicated Town Centre Waiver Scheme (as a 
change from the current scheme). 
• Financial relief should be provided to new occupiers on our main streets.  
• Some members expressed the view that the Current Waiver Programme 
should remain and monitored and reported on each year. 
 
Ms. E. Hanlon clarified the proposed wavier scheme and how the wavier would be 
applied over the 3 years in comparison to the existing grant scheme. Ms. Hanlon 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 14 of 20 
 
advised that the proposal to amend the existing CRIS from a grant to wavier scheme 
will be brought to CPG and Full Council in September for consideration noting that 
different scheme could be considered in 2027. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Sammon, seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer and agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
 
13/0725 
 
 
County-wide Strategy for Improving Road Junction Sightlines  
The following motion in the name of Councillors Mark Leigh and Anne Breen was 
considered by the members: 
 
That the council adopts a county-wide strategy for improving road junction 
sightlines. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Leigh and seconded by Councillor Breen. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that Kildare County Council has a county-wide strategy for improving 
junction sightlines. This strategy is based on the road safety analysis carried out by 
the Department of Transport Support Office which identified Locations of Interest 
(LOI) in the county based on accident statistics. These Locations of Interest are 
currently used as an evidence-based process for road safety investment in each 
municipal district.  
The Kildare County Council Road Safety Engineer has worked in conjunction with 
the five municipal district engineers to identify Locations of Interest for low-cost 
safety improvement schemes. This has resulted in funding of €385,000 for 16 
Locations of Interest in the county in 2025. The intention is to implement these 
schemes and monitor to see if the accident frequency and severity reduces.  If these 
measures are successful, no further action will be required. The next stage is to carry 
out a larger scheme to implement more substantial road safety interventions. These 
are larger projects that require input from the Capital Projects Team. Funding for the 
delivery of these projects can also be sought from the Department of Transport. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 15 of 20 
 
The Capital Projects Team are also currently progressing a Junction Improvement 
Project that has examined ten junctions throughout the county. Detailed designs are 
being progressed for junctions at Allenwood and Dag Welds with a view to 
implementing improvements in the short term. The intention is to add further 
junctions to this project as funding and resources allow. Future junction 
improvements will be added based on the current list of Locations of Interest. 
Councillor Leigh and Councillor Breen thanked the Director for the report. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Leigh, seconded by Councillor Breen, and 
agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
14/0725 
 
 
 
Budget for Provision of Speed Ramps in 2026  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Bernard Caldwell was considered by 
the members: 
 
That in preparation of the budget for next year, the total spends specifically for the 
provision of speed ramps in 2025 be extrapolated from current budget and this 
amount be doubled for allocation in 2026.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Caldwell and seconded by Councillor Trost. 
 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the installation of traffic calming measures on public roads in 
Kildare is guided by Kildare County Council’s traffic calming guidelines to ensure 
consistency across the county. There are several measures that must be considered 
as part of any traffic calming intervention. It would not be appropriate to ring-fence 
funding specifically for one type of traffic calming intervention. The council deems the 
current budgets for traffic calming in each municipal district to be proportionate. 
In 2025, funding to the value of €21,625 per municipal district was made available for 
traffic measures. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 16 of 20 
 
• Additional measures required to slow traffic down, 
• Identifying the most appropriate traffic calming measure was crucial to 
improve road safety. 
• Schools and locations near public open spaces and estates should be 
prioritised regarding the installation of traffic calming measures. Speed ramps 
needed outside schools.  
• Funding should be ring fenced for traffic calming works across the county in 
the next annual budget and Local Property Tax (LPT) funding allocations. 
 
Ms C Barrett referred to the report previously circulated highlighting the importance 
of identifying the appropriate solution for the specific location.     
Councillor Caldwell thanked the Director for the report but emphasised that more 
needs to be done.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Caldwell, seconded by Councillor Trost, and 
agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
15/0725 
 
 
  
Development of New County Kildare Access Strategy  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Donna Phelan was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council establishes a working group or committee consisting of a 
representative from each municipal district and external stakeholders with relevant 
expertise to develop a new County Kildare Access Strategy. This would ensure all 
public services, facilities and community supports are accessible, autism-friendly 
and inclusive of people with disabilities, neurodivergent individuals, older adults 
and those with additional needs.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Phelan and seconded by Councillor Trost. 
 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, People and Property Management 
stated that this committee is already in existence in the form of the County Kildare 
Access Network (CKAN). CKAN consists of representatives from the 7 local access 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 17 of 20 
 
groups across county Kildare with each Municipal District being represented. The 
local access groups are comprised of disabled people, carers, community volunteers, 
local councillors and disability organisations. CKAN is chaired by Kildare County 
Councils Access Officer. This unique approach ensures that all relevant stakeholders 
voices are heard and helps to inform, identify and action. Our approach is seen as an 
exemplar across the country by organisations such as the LGMA, Disability 
Federation of Ireland, other local authorities and in 2020 was the overall winner of 
the Grand Prix Award at the LAMA, All Ireland Community and Council Awards in 
addition to winning the award in its own category of Best Disability Access and 
Inclusion Initiative. 
Councillor Phelan thanked the Director for the report.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Phelan, seconded by Councillor Trost, and 
agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
16/0725 
Serviced Land in the County for Self-Build Housing Opportunities 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Tom McDonnell was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the council develops and implements a policy to identify suitable serviced 
land across the county to support self-build housing opportunities for families who 
wish to build their own homes.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor McDonnell and seconded by Councillor 
Heavey. 
 
A joint report from Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services and Ms. A. Aspell, Director of 
Services, Housing and Regeneration stated that The Programme for Government 
contains a specific objective regarding the delivery of serviced sites.  Under the 
Ready to Build Scheme “each Local Authority is to develop serviced sites to facilitate 
the construction of 3-10 housing units, within at least three towns and villages in their 
administrative area, on an annual basis”. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 18 of 20 
 
Kildare County Council had already identified serviced sites as a mechanism to 
deliver affordable housing in the county. There are two schemes/policies of 
relevance to the delivery of serviced sites in Co. Kildare: 
(i) County Kildare Serviced Sites Scheme, which was adopted by the elected 
members in May 2023.  Part of the reasoning for this scheme was the desire 
of the elected members to provide people with an alternative to development 
of one-off rural housing. 
(ii) Ready to Build Scheme: Serviced Sites for New Homes (Croi Connaithe 
Towns Fund). 
 
The council’s scheme has two delivery options, council led schemes and 
cooperative/ community led schemes. The council has designated three sites in its 
ownership as council led serviced sites at the following locations in the county: 
• Clogherinkoe  
• Ballitore 
• Kildangan 
 
In terms of Clogherinkoe, in 2024 the council advertised seven sites for sale at a 
price of €45,000 per site (0.13 ha).  This land is in the ownership of the council, 
having been left over from the development of an earlier social housing scheme.   
Two issues emerged with this proposal: 
1. Funding: The council made a submission to the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage for funding under the Ready to Build Scheme 
(maximum €30,000 per site). This application was not approved by the 
Department as it was considered not to meet the Ready to Build Scheme 
criteria for the following reasons: 
(i) There is no outstanding debt on the site; and 
(ii) The scheme was devised for infill sites in towns and villages where 
servicing costs should be relatively low. 
 
2. Rural Housing Policy: As the land is not zoned for residential development 
the rural housing policy requirements, under the Kildare County Development 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 19 of 20 
 
Plan 2023-2029, apply.  Under these criteria, at least one occupant of the 
dwelling must demonstrate a connection of a minimum of 16 years within a 
5km radius of development. Given the rural location of Clogherinkoe this 
requirement has limited the number of suitable applicants to purchase a 
serviced site. This is demonstrated by the limited interest in these suits, with 
only one application deemed viable. 
 
The sites were offered at a competitive price, subvented by the council. However, the 
decision on funding is problematic as it is likely to impact on our decision to progress 
future schemes, as we will not be in a position to continue to subvent costs in order 
to sell at a reasonable cost. 
The council is now considering developing schemes in Ballitore and Kildangan.  
While the rural housing policy will not apply to the scheme in Ballitore, based on our 
experience with Clogherinkoe, we expect that this proposal will not qualify for the 
Ready to Build Scheme as the there is no outstanding debt on the land.  Funding the 
servicing of these sites is problematic, especially as we are now carrying a cost on 
the Clogherinkoe site.   The rural housing policy will apply to the Kildangan site. 
We have identified the following barriers to the delivery of serviced sites on council 
owned land: 
• Restrictive criteria of the Ready to Build Scheme, especially where there is no 
debt outstanding on land and there is significant servicing works required. 
• The rural housing policy limits the number of potential eligible applicants, and 
the council will be exploring options in this regard. 
 
We are engaging with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
on this matter and have asked that an amendment to the Ready to Build Scheme be 
considered, in order to support initiatives being taken by local authorities to bring 
sites, such as those outlined above, to the market.   
The Housing and Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee has listed serviced sites 
as an item for consideration as part of the 2025 work programme and are scheduled 
to discuss this matter at the next meeting of the committee on 11 September. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 28.07.2025                 Page 20 of 20 
 
Councillor Mc Donnell thanked both Directors for the report. He noted his concerns 
regarding the significant number of people on the housing list, the high number of 
young people emigrating and high rents. He queried the possibility of Kildare County 
Council making serviced sites available.  During discussion, the members raised the 
following points: 
• Current practice is not delivering housing units. Can the barriers be identified? 
• Can public interest in proposals for serviced sites improve? Can we seek 
expressions of interest for a group of people that could satisfy the 
requirements to deliver housing through services sites? 
• Can this topic be referred to the Housing SPC or can a committee be formed 
to develop a strategic plan that would facilitate the delivery housing on 
serviced sites?  
• Can we learn from other delivery models, and particularly the Ó Cualann co-
operative housing model.    
• The potential of serviced sites was acknowledged.  
 
Ms. Aspell acknowledged the barriers and advised that this topic is listed in the 
workplan of the Housing and Regeneration SPC.  
 
Mr. Dunney advised that lands in public and private ownership are zoned for serviced 
sites in several locations across the county, and that the Rural Housing Policy does 
not apply to certain sites in Kildare County Council’s ownership.  He also advised 
that the Planning Department are conducting an analysis of refused, ‘one-off’ 
housing applications, to determine the possibility for a group serviced site scheme 
and will update the Housing and Regeneration SPC.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor McDonnell, seconded by Councillor Heavey 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
There being no further issues the meeting concluded. 
