 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 1 of 29 
 
 
       Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 30 June 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
 
                     
Members Present: Councillors C. Kelly (Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, A. Breen, A. 
Breslin, F. Brett, B. Caldwell, S. Doyle, K. Duffy, G. Dunne, T. 
Durkan, W. Durkan, D. Fitzpatrick, N. Heavey, M. Leigh, T. 
McDonnell, P. McEvoy, P. Melrose, S. Moore, P. O’Dwyer, T. 
O’Dwyer, B. O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, D. Phelan, D. 
Trost. 
 
Online: 
Councillors B. Clear, N. Connolly, B. Dooley, I. Keatley, A. 
Feeney, R. Heather, N. Killeen, P. Mulroe, L. Panaite Fahey, R. 
Power, P. Ward and B. Wyse.  
 
Apologies: 
Councillors V. Behan, P. Brooks, E. Sammon. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms. A. Aspell. Mr. A. 
Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, Mr. E. Ryan, Mr. J. Boland, Ms M. 
Higgins (Directors of Services), Ms. C. Barrett, Mr. D. Creighton 
(A/Directors of Services), Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings 
Administrator), Ms. S. Martin (Meetings Secretary), and other 
officials.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the June monthly meeting of the Council 
and asked the Meeting Administrator to read out a notice regarding the live 
streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 2 of 29 
 
00/0625 
Bereavements 
The Cathaoirleach advised the meeting that she had been informed of the following 
bereavements:  
 
Brendan Delaney, brother of Derek Delaney (Kildare Area Office) and uncle of 
Victoria Delaney (Machinery Yard). 
Thomas (Tom) Kelly, former colleague. 
Michael Delmer, former colleague. 
Paula Chatten, sister of David Byrne, NRO.  
Clare Doyle, aunt of Cllr Evie Sammon. 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s silence 
was observed. 
 
01/0625 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0625 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 26 May 
2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Duffy, seconded by Councillor Moore and 
agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held 
on 26 May 2025 be adopted. The progress report was noted.  
 
     03/0625 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 3 of 29 
 
04/0625 
Disposal of Lands 
The members considered the disposal of lands pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 16 June 2025 circulated 
previously and attached). 
 
i. 
Industrial Unit 19/Site 10 (Eircode W12 WND30) 
ii. 
Industrial Unit 19A/Site 10A (Eircode W12 Y886) 
 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Caldwell and 
agreed by the members present that pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, as amended (Statutory notice of 16 June 2025 circulated 
previously and attached) the disposal of Industrial Units 19 and 19A in Newbridge 
Industrial Estate be approved. 
 
          05/0625 
Date for Special Meeting for Presidential Candidates 
The members considered proposed date for a Special Meeting to afford potential 
candidates for presidential nomination the opportunity to present to the members. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor Breen 
and agreed by the members present that a Special Meeting to afford potential 
candidates for presidential nomination the opportunity to present to the members be 
held on Monday 15 September at 3:30pm.  
 
The members considered proposed provisional date for a Special Meeting to 
consider motions for presidential nomination. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor Breen 
and agreed by the members present that a Special Meeting to consider motions for 
presidential nominations be held on the provisional date Monday 22 September at 
2:00pm in advance of full council. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 4 of 29 
 
It was agreed by the members that item 6, 7 and 8 be taken together. 
 
 
 
06/0625 
 
 
 
Audit Committee Charter  
The members considered the Audit Committee Charter. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Dr. Moling Ryan to the meeting and thanked him for his 
work as Chairperson of the Audit Committee. 
 
Dr. Ryan outlined the role and responsibilities of the Audit Committee noting that the 
membership included elected members and nominated members with particular 
skills, to provide independent advice and oversight on financial reporting, risk 
management, and internal controls. Dr. Ryan briefed the meeting on the contents of 
the Charter. 
 
He thanked fellow members of the Audit Committee for their work to date and 
commended the support of the Chief Executive and senior members of the 
executive.  
  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Trost seconded by Councillor Caldwell and 
agreed by the members present that the Audit Committee Charter for 2025 be 
adopted. 
 
 
 
07/0625 
 
 
Audit Committee Annual Report 2024  
Dr. Ryan noted that the Audit Committee Annual Report 2024 was circulated prior to 
the meeting and briefed the meeting on its contents. 
Resolved It was agreed by the members that the Audit Committee Annual Report 
2024 be noted.  
 
 
 
08/0625 
 
 
Audit Committee Work Programme 2025 
Dr. Ryan noted that the Audit Committee Work Programme 2025 was circulated prior 
to the meeting and briefed the meeting on its contents. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 5 of 29 
 
The members considered the Audit Committee Work Programme 2025, observed the 
extent of the work programme, and thanked the Committee for their valuable and 
excellent work. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Moore, seconded by Councillor Brett and 
agreed by the members present that the Audit Committee Work Programme 2025 be 
approved.  
 
 
 
09/0625 
 
EU Local Councillors Network 
The members considered the request from Councillor Heather regarding his 
membership of the ‘EU Local Councillors Network’. 
 
Mr. J. Boland, Director of Services, Corporate and Cultural Services, advised that he 
fully supported this application, that he had researched the Network noting that it 
would be of benefit in terms of networking with other European entities. Both himself 
and the Meeting Administrator consulted with A.I.L.G. as well as the Eastern, 
Midland Regional Assembly. He noted that membership was free, open to all 
councillors, but that Councillor Heather would be considered the lead point of contact 
if he joined first. He also noted that it was considered at the Protocol and Procedures 
Committee who referred it to Full Council for approval. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by the members present that Councillor Heather’s membership of the ‘EU 
Local Councillors Network’ be approved.  
 
 
10/0625 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Cathaoirleach advised members that as she was elected at the Annual Meeting 
on 20 June and had not attended any functions or events as Cathaoirleach of 
Kildare. She thanked the members for putting their trust in her as Cathaoirleach 
noting that she anticipated a full calendar of invites to report on next month.   
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 6 of 29 
 
11/0625 
Correspondence 
The Meeting Administrator confirmed that sixteen items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included, 
• eight resolutions from other Local Authorities,  
• a reply from the Office of Minister James Browne in relation to full council April 
motions on the Tenant in Situ and Second-hand Acquisition Programme 2025, 
(10/0425, 11/0425, 12/0425),  
• acknowledgement from NTA Oireachtas Liaison in relation to full council May 
motion (Councillors Pender and Balfe 14/0525),  
• letter of thanks from the Diocese of Kildare and Leighlin for Kildare County 
Councils book of condolence for the late Pope Francis,  
• four sets of correspondence from Senator Victor Boyhan which advised  
o of a Seanad motion in relation to extending specific operation periods 
of the Civil Law Act,  
o of a CCMA statement on the Challenges Facing the Delivery of 
Housing in Ireland, 
o of a funding allocation for Marine Infrastructure Projects. 
o of a request from the Ombudsman that a specific Child & Family 
Homelessness Strategy be prioritised.  
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 
12/0625 
Conferences and Training 
The Meeting Administrator referred to the conference and training report which was 
circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
• Councillor Brett sought retrospective approval for training on Emergency 
Response - Councils supporting Communities in Crises provided by AILG in 
Tralee in the amount of €90. 
• The meeting administrator advised that the IPA could provide training on a 
group booking basis. She asked that the members review the list, agree 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 7 of 29 
 
collectively what training they want to avail of, and that the Members Services 
team would make the necessary arrangements. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Caldwell, seconded by Councillor Moore and 
agreed by the members present that the conference and training report be approved. 
 
Councillor Moore sought retrospective approval for attendance at a Planning 
Seminar, previously listed at CPG, which took place over one Saturday in Monaghan.  
 
The Meeting Administrator requested that Councillor Moore confirm in writing the 
exact details of the seminar. 
 
Resolved on the proposal Councillor Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor Doyle and 
agreed by the members present that Councillor Moore’s attendance at the above 
seminar be approved. 
 
13/0625 
 
  
 
 
Certificate of Recognition  
The following motion in the name of Councillors Carmel Kelly, Brian O’Loughlin, 
Suzanne Doyle, Noel Heavey, Rob Power, Daragh Fitzpatrick, Paul Ward, David 
Trost, Bernard Caldwell, Veralouise Behan and Brian Dooley was considered by the 
members: 
 
That a Certificate of Recognition be awarded to the Kildare Senior Hurling Team for 
the occasion of winning the Joe McDonagh Cup for the first time. 
A report from Ms L Hanratty, Meetings Administrator stated that this was a matter for 
the members to agree. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The team have done County Kildare proud, and their achievement deserves 
recognition. 
• Their achievement demonstrates what dedication and hard work makes 
possible, 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 8 of 29 
 
• They are a great example of role models for the people of Kildare.  
• Presentation will take place on Monday 28th July in advance of full council. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Healy, and 
agreed by the members present that a Certificate of Recognition be awarded to the 
Kildare Senior Hurling Team for the occasion of Kildare winning the Joe McDonagh 
Cup for the first time. 
 
14/0625 
 
  
 
 
Contract for PPP Bundle 3 
The following motion in the name of Councillors Aoife Breslin, Anne Breen and 
Rupert Heather was considered by the members: 
 
That the members immediately seek a meeting with the Minister for Housing and the 
Department of Housing and Local Government following the announcement that the 
National Development Finance Agency (NDFA) have been instructed by the 
Department not to proceed to award the contract for PPP Bundle 3. Also, the 
Department’s decision to initiate a review of PPP Bundle 4 – to 7 which will have a 
very serious impact on the delivery of social housing in Kildare.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Breslin and seconded by Councillor Breen. 
 
A report from Ms A Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that a decision to write to the Minister was a matter for the Members to decide and 
that the Chief Executive’s monthly report included an update on the PPP scheme. 
 
Extract from Chief Executive’s Report 
On 5 June, the council received notification from the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage (DHLGH) that they had decided not to award the contract 
for PPP Bundle 3 which involved the construction of 486 homes nationally, including 
our site at Ardrew, Athy (73 social housing units and a community building).  The 
Department advised that the decision not to award the contract was made following a 
cost evaluation but that they remain committed to delivering the social housing that 
PPP Bundle 3 was designed to provide.  They indicated that the homes to be 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 9 of 29 
 
provided under PPP Bundle 3 will be delivered by way of an alternative procurement 
and delivery strategy and that the investments already made in securing planning 
consent and progressing design work will not be lost and will in fact facilitate delivery 
of the 486 homes as expeditiously as possible under a new procurement and 
delivery strategy. 
 
As part of the decision not to progress to award the contract for PPP Bundle 3, 
DHLGH advise that they are initiating a review, in collaboration with the National 
Development Finance Agency, of PPP Bundles 4 to 7 to ensure value for money and 
that the most appropriate delivery strategies are used to ensure homes proposed 
under PPP Bundles 4 to 7 are delivered. 
 
Kildare County Council has the following units included in PPP Bundles: 
PPP 
Bundle 
Location 
No. of Units 
Bundle 3 
Ardrew, Athy 
73 social units + community building 
Bundle 4 
Oldtown Mill, Celbridge 
Coolaghknock Glebe, 
Kildare 
60 social units 
99 social units + 32 afford. units 
Bundle 6 
Rathasker Road, Naas 
Rickardstown, 
Newbridge 
104 social units 
98 social units + 40 afford units 
 
Total 
434 social + 72 afford. 
 
End of Extract 
 
Engagement has commenced with the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage (DHLGH) and the National Development Finance Agency (NDFA) to 
discuss alternative options for delivery, particularly in terms of the Bundle 3 site at 
Ardrew, Athy.  As these discussions progress, the elected members will be updated. 
 
Councillor Breslin noted that 15500 people are currently homeless, of which 4000 are 
children. She expressed her disappointment in the Department of Housings recent 
decision not to award the contract for PPP Bundle 3 which included the construction 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 10 of 29 
 
of 73 social housing units in Ardrew, Athy. She highlighted that the scheme would 
have provided much needed housing and created jobs in the South of the county. 
She also stated that the Minister of Housing needs to provide immediate clarity 
regarding the affected housing sites in Kildare.  
 
Councillor Doyle proposed that an amendment to the motion be considered, to 
include in the letter a request for a detailed breakdown of the tendered costs per unit 
and the evaluation criteria used in the tender assessment for this contract. The 
amendment was proposed by Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Breslin and 
approved by the members present. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Is it feasible for Kildare County Council to deliver the scheme based on its 
good track record in delivering housing? 
• The momentum in the delivery of housing through PPP was disrupted by the 
decision not to award the contract. 
• Disappointment and dismay was expressed regarding the Minister’s direct 
communication with some local authorities, but not with Kildare.  
• An urgent meeting in advance of the Dáil recess or early in September was 
requested. 
• Significant concern was expressed regarding  
o the extension of the rent pressure zones across the country,  
o reduced funding of the tenant in situ scheme,  
o the Land Development Agency turning down certain development sites, 
o the social and cost impacts of delays in capital delivery programmes. 
• If the reported unit costs are accurate then the decision to review costs was 
correct.  
 
Director Annette Aspell responded expressing disappointment in the decision as it 
directly affects the programme for delivering social and affordable houses in Kildare.  
She stated that the figure quoted in the media included the 25-year maintenance of 
the developments but further clarification relating to costs was being sought. She 
noted that Kildare had successfully delivered housing units in PPP bundles 1 and 2, 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 11 of 29 
 
and currently, 506 units are included in five schemes in bundles 3,4 and 6. She noted 
that the sites selected for PPP delivery have complex site issues that require the 
input of specialist expertise, additional funding to develop, which would affect the 
final unit cost. She also noted that the impact on the Councils programme was 
difficult to estimate at present, but she will update the members following direct 
communication with the Minister. 
 
Councillor Breslin thanked the Director for the information and asked that the item be 
placed on the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Breslin, seconded by Councillor Breen and 
agreed by the members present, that a letter including the accepted amendment by 
Councillor Doyle be issued to the Minister for Housing and the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage seeking a meeting and that the motion be 
placed on the progress report. 
 
15/0625 
Function of the Cameras on Traffic Lights 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Peggy O’Dwyer was considered by 
the members: 
 
That the council provides details on the function of the cameras on traffic lights and 
confirms if there is an alert mechanism if they are faulty or not working.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor P O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor T 
O’Dwyer. 
 
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that pole mounted vehicle and pedestrian detectors are used by 
Kildare County Council as a form of detection at signalised crossings and junctions 
(see image below).  
These are radar-based detectors using integral radar transceivers to detect vehicles 
and pedestrians. These units do not contain a camera or recorder of any type. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 12 of 29 
 
The operation of the units are monitored by the local traffic signal controller and in 
turn by the fault management systems located at the Traffic Management Centre at 
Áras Chill Dara.  
 
Councillor P O’Dwyer asked if there are currently any live cameras located on any 
traffic lights in Kildare. 
Ms Barrett responded that there are no live cameras located on any traffic lights 
within Kildare at this time.  
Councillor P O’Dwyer thanked the Director for the report. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor P O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor T 
O’Dwyer and agreed by the members present that the report be noted. 
 
 
16/0625 
Mobile Sensory Unit and Mobile Accessible Toilet  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Peter Melrose was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council support the provision of a mobile sensory unit and a mobile 
accessible toilet for future events run by or in association with Kildare County Council 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 13 of 29 
 
that exceed an estimated footfall of 3,000 attendees, to be run as a pilot project with 
a view to extending to events of 500 attendees or more. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Melrose and seconded by Councillor 
Pender. 
 
A report from Mr E Ryan, Director of Services, People and Property Management 
stated that having completed a cost benefit analysis, it would not be advisable to 
purchase and staff our own units, but we would be in a position to fund the provision 
of such units for events exceeding 3,000 attendees on a pilot basis. 
 
Councillor Melrose thanked the Director for the report and requested that the pilot 
included for a survey at the event that collected data regarding the effect of providing 
a mobile sensory unit and accessible toilet on attendance and that the motion be 
referred to the Local Community and Culture SPC for further discussion. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Kildare County Council should lead in providing these facilities at events. 
• Kildare County Council should support the provision of these facilities at both 
council run events, and council supported events. 
• Rural villages who don’t have welfare infrastructure would benefit. 
• The Inclusivity Festival held in the Curragh in May provided these facilities and 
were a great success. 
 
Mr Ryan responded noting that where possible when selecting a venue for Council 
run events, we select venues that can provide these facilities. He advised that they 
could examine the possibility of using a survey with a QR code in the pilot and 
hopefully people will be happy to engage and provide voluntary feedback.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Melrose, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by the members present that the report be noted and that the motion be 
referred to the Local Community and Culture SPC. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 14 of 29 
 
17/0625 
 
 
 
Public Participation in Municipal District Meetings  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Nuala Killeen was considered by the 
members: 
 
That Kildare County Councillors agree to commence a public participation aspect to 
the Municipal District Meetings for 2026 to permit organisations to present to their 
municipal district on issues that concern them that are relating to council functions.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Killeen and seconded by Councillor Pender. 
 
 
A report from Mr J Boland, Director of Services, Corporate and Cultural Services 
stated that the Minister has recently confirmed the establishment of the Local 
Democracy Task Force for the purpose of finalising a programme of reform to 
strengthen local government in Ireland.  It is expected that its recommendations will 
be issued in 6-9 months.  The work of this Task Force will pave the way for the next 
generation of local government reform. 
 
As part of such reform proposals, there will be an emphasis on enhancing 
democracy at local level including a focus on local collaboration [as also 
recommended in the ‘Building Stronger Local Government Report’ of the Association 
of Irish Local Government, Nov 2024].  It is also envisaged that there will be wide 
stakeholder engagement by this new Task Force, so there will be ample opportunity 
to make submissions such as suggested in this motion. 
Therefore, it would be best to await the outcome of this major reform initiative rather 
than advancing significant changes to existing structures in the interim.  In this 
context, the following practical aspects would also need to be borne in mind. 
• The additional resources, particularly staffing, that would be involved in 
organising bimonthly consultation events for the 5 Municipal Districts. 
• The challenges of agreeing composite guidelines as well as amendments to 
existing standing orders. 
• The need to manage public expectations. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 15 of 29 
 
• The impact of such an initiative on existing structures such as the Public 
Participation Network which was established to provide an open, inclusive and 
transparent representative structure for all community groups in the county. 
Indeed, it currently facilitates a process that feeds a broad range of ideas, 
experience, suggestions and proposals from community group member 
groups into policies and plans being developed by decision makers at all 
levels. 
 
Finally, it could also be noted that the Municipal Districts currently have a reasonable 
level of flexibility in managing their own affairs including interaction with the local 
groups. 
 
Councillor Killeen thanked the Director for the detailed report. She queried if it was 
possible to engage with the taskforce and participate into the process.  
 
The Cathaoirleach advised that she was an AILG member and that some of her 
peers in AILG were on the taskforce and that she would bring raise the request with 
them on behalf of the members. 
 
Councillor McEvoy referenced section 127 of the Local Government Act 2001, noting 
that it enabled local authorities promote effective participation by the local community 
in local government and suggested a review of this section by the Protocol and 
Procedures Committee.  
Mr Boland advised that there is reasonable latitude at municipal district level to invite 
the attendance of community groups where appropriate. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Pender, and 
agreed by the members present that the Cathaoirleach engage with the taskforce on 
behalf of the members and the motion will be referred to the Protocol and 
Procedures Committee for further discussion. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 16 of 29 
 
18/0625 
Housing to Support Transitioning from  
Addiction Treatment Centres to Independent Living 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Chris Pender was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council engages with relevant stakeholders, including the South Western 
Regional Drugs and Alcohol Task Force, Cuan Mhuire, Youth for Peace Hostel, the 
Peter McVerry Trust, all Approved Housing Bodies operating within the county, and 
any other appropriate organisations, to identify a suitable property or properties that 
can be used to support individuals transitioning from addiction treatment into 
independent living; a) that the council prioritise properties located near existing 
support services or accessible public transport links to ensure continued engagement 
with recovery programmes; b) that the council explore funding opportunities and 
available schemes, such as the Capital Assistance Scheme, to support the 
acquisition or adaptation of such properties; and c) that a report on this engagement, 
including any potential locations identified and barriers encountered, be brought to 
the Housing SPC within an agreed timeframe.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Pender and seconded by Councillor 
O’Rourke. 
 
A report from Ms A Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that supports for addiction treatment counselling, rehabilitation and integration 
services are provided by the HSE Social Inclusion Team in Kildare and West 
Wicklow.  
Engagement with agencies including the South-Western Regional Drugs and Alcohol 
Task Force, Cuan Mhuire, Youth for Peace Hostel, the Peter McVerry Trust and 
Approved Housing Bodies takes place on a regular basis to support CAS acquisitions 
and acquisitions for general needs housing.  
The Capital Assistance Scheme (CAS) is the relevant funding stream to provide 
accommodation as referenced in this motion.  CAS involves local authorities 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 17 of 29 
 
partnering with Approved Housing Bodies (AHBs) to provide social housing for 
priority groups.  Local authorities can provide funding to AHBs to acquire or construct 
housing, which is then allocated to individuals deemed eligible by the local authority. 
 
In terms of the circumstances outlined in the motion, allocations to properties takes 
place with supports provided by the HSE and other appropriate agencies for 
individuals transitioning from addiction treatment into independent living.   
 
If agreed by the members a presentation from the HSE representative for Social 
Inclusion can be requested for a meeting of the Housing and Regeneration Strategic 
Policy Committee. 
Councillor Pender thanked the Director for the report noting that 23% of people 
entering treatment identified as homeless, and that this percentage is growing each 
year. He also noted that wrap around supports were needed for people exiting 
treatment, that housing locations close to these support services was critical in 
supporting a person’s recovery.  
 
Councillor T O’Dwyer acknowledged that housing needs are complex but noted that 
the Council must not be drawn into the provision of such supports as this is the 
responsibility of the HSE.   
 
Ms Aspell advised the members that CAS acquisitions are include in the second-
hand acquisition programme which has an allocation of €15 million. She advised that 
she took on board the comments and would arrange for the HSE representative for 
Social Inclusion to give a presentation to the Housing and Regeneration Strategic Policy 
Committee.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor O’Rourke, 
and agreed by the members present that the report be noted and a presentation to 
the Housing and Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee be requested from the 
HSE representative for Social Inclusion. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 18 of 29 
 
19/0625 
Creation of New Town in Mid Kildare 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Seamie Moore was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council writes to the National Development Planners and East Midland 
Regional Authority on behalf of the elected members, asking them to consider the 
creation of a new town in mid Kildare, whilst at the same time designating a new 
Economic Corridor between Naas & Newbridge, along the commuter catchment 
route of the M7/M9 and the Dublin-Cork Rail Line, on an axis between Kilcullen and 
Rathangan. This would reduce the indicative expectation of future population 
overload of Naas and Newbridge and allow community amenities and community 
infrastructure facilities to be developed in those already overpopulated towns.  
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Moore and seconded by Councillor Duffy. 
 
A report from Mr A Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that the process for engaging with the 
Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government regarding the National 
Planning Framework and National Development Plan and Eastern Midland Regional 
Assembly regarding the Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy is through the 
various statutory consultations when updates to same are proposed. Kildare County 
Council engage in all consultation processes with both bodies and highlight strategic 
objectives of the Kildare County Development Plan 2023-2029. Regarding the 
creation of a new town in mid Kildare the following objectives of the Kildare County 
Development Plan are of note;  
CS 03; Actively engage with the Eastern Midlands Regional Assembly during the 
mid-term review of the Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy and to inform the 
consideration of how urban settlements, regional growth centres and the retail 
hierarchy are designated within the region.  
While the above is a strategic objective of the KCDP, it should also be noted that the 
NPF and RSES directs a focus on compact growth, the consolidation of our towns 
and villages and the delivery of enhanced urban environments. The National 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 19 of 29 
 
Planning Framework (2018) sets out targets for the development of new homes 
within the built-up footprint of existing settlements, it also seeks to ‘ensure the 
creation of attractive, liveable, well-designed, high-quality urban places that are 
home to diverse and integrated communities that enjoy a high-quality of life and 
wellbeing’ (National Policy Objective (NPO) 4). Particular attention is drawn to 
National Planning Framework Strategic Objective No. 1 (Compact Growth) and 
National Policy Objective (NPO 3c) of the NPF which require 30% of new homes 
within the built-up area of the settlement. In this context, it is important to note that 
there are significant areas for potential consolidation in many of County Kildares 
large towns which will be considered in advance of the designation of a new town. 
The designation of a new Economic Corridor between Naas and Newbridge is 
addressed under Section 2.13.1 of the Kildare County Development Plan which 
states “The Newbridge to Naas corridor is seen as a Strategic Economic Zone in the 
centre of the County, comprising the Tougher Industrial Estate and the industrial 
zone on the northern end of Newbridge. This zone comprises some global names 
such as Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, the Lidl Regional Distribution Centre, DSV, the 
Barola/Primark Distribution Centre (with national and international distribution 
planned) and Dr. Pepper. The overall area is strategically located at the confluence 
of the M7 and M9.A number of these are hyper scaled distribution centres and will 
include the largest of their kind in the country following the granting of Barola/Primark 
with a 68,000 square metre facility. The Industrial Development Authority (IDA) has 
also acquired a strategic bank of land in the zone, which will over time see the 
Tougher area linked back into Newbridge... The long-term vision for this area 
between Naas and Newbridge is for two dynamic and vibrant town centres linked by 
a strong economic corridor focused on the eastern side of the R445. Each town will 
offer a wide range of retail, commercial, leisure, social and cultural enterprises, and 
civic amenities (civic squares/public realm interventions) and a vibrant evening 
economy sustaining a strong residential base that will be served by a future DART 
service (electrification of the rail line from Sallins to Newbridge... The focus for this 
plan period will be to concentrate on the Newbridge end of the corridor linking back 
up to Tougher and this strategy will be developed further as part of the preparation of 
the Newbridge Local Area Plan [Settlement Plan]. The vision will be to provide a 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 20 of 29 
 
higher end profile - i.e. offices and/or strong architectural and landscape treatment - 
with more consistent building lines along the east side of the R445 (Newbridge to 
Naas Road), with more ‘big box’ developments (i.e., logistics, warehousing and 
possibly data centres) to the rear (further east)”. 
Notwithstanding the above, the request to draft a letter to the Regional Assembly on 
this issue and on behalf of the Elected Members is a matter for the Members and can 
be progressed if agreement is reached.  
Councillor Moore thanked the Director for the report but stated that in his view we 
cannot wait for the allocated figures from the National Development Plan and then try 
to work around them. He noted that there are shortfalls in the social and sport 
infrastructure in our major towns, that the population in these areas was growing and 
that additional funding from the government was urgently required. 
Ho also noted the merits of combining housing with economic development, the 
potential benefits that a new town located between Naas and Newbridge could bring 
particularly around sport and community infrastructure which could ease the existing 
pressure of identifying suitable land for these purposes.  
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The creation of a new town may be aspirational, but population numbers are 
continuously increasing, therefore the feasibility of creating a new town should 
be explored.  
• The shortfalls in social and sport infrastructure in Newbridge and Naas was 
highlighted. 
• Strategic thinking was needed from both the members and the executive.  
• High quality compact living standards should form part of aspiration. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Moore, seconded by Councillor Duffy and 
agreed by members present that a letter issue to the National Development Plan 
reviewers and East Midland Regional Authority asking them to consider the creation 
of a new town in mid Kildare and future development plans include for a new 
economic corridor between Naas and Newbridge. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 21 of 29 
 
20/0625 
 
  
 
 
County Kildare Access Network  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Donna Phelan was considered by the 
members. 
 
 
That the council clarifies the role of the County Kildare Access Network (CKAN), and 
its role in engaging with local disability and inclusion advocates operating across the 
county. In particular, does CKAN actively liaise with and support grassroots initiatives 
and groups who are working directly with communities on the ground 
 
This item was deferred until September at Councillor Phelan’s request 
 
21/06525 
 
 
 
Support for Towns in Tidy Towns Competition  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Tracey O’Dwyer was considered by 
the members. 
 
That the council increases its support for the months of May and June in towns and 
villages that enter the Tidy Towns competition by prioritising road sweeping, cleaning 
of path verges, particularly on approach roads and paths to towns and villages to 
further enhance Kildare’s overall results in Tidy Towns and support the volunteers 
involved.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor T O’Dwyer and seconded by Councillor T 
Durkan. 
 
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the municipal districts direct significant resources to street 
sweeping, bin emptying and associated works throughout the towns across County 
Kildare and this is reflected in the achievements in the Irish Business Against Litter 
(IBAL) and Tidy Towns competitions. Naas and Leixlip were recently awarded 1st and 
4th place in the National IBAL survey. Tidy Towns awarded eight gold medals, three 
silver medals and one bronze medal to Kildare towns and villages in 2024. These 
results reflect the level of commitment both by Kildare County Council, Tidy Towns 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 22 of 29 
 
teams and the local communities to their towns and villages. The Municipal District 
offices will continue to deliver these services in 2025, based on the resources 
available. 
Councillor T O’Dwyer thanked the Director for the report and noted that the motion 
was not intended as a criticism of the work carried out by the municipal district staff 
on a weekly basis. She clarified that points in the Tidy Towns competition were being 
lost due to weeds on the approach roads into the rural towns and it was not safe for 
Tidy Town volunteers to remove the weeds due to their location. In addition, a 
change in practice due to climate action initiatives meant that weeding and trimming 
was happening later in the year which was also impacting their scores.  
 
With the agreement of the members, Councillor T O’Dwyer asked that an 
amendment to her motion be considered to include that a letter be sent to Tidy 
Towns Committees asking them to attend a meeting with the elected members and 
the climate officer Paula O’Rourke, to discuss the scoring system and how to better 
align our climate objectives. The amendment was proposed by Councillor W Durkan 
and seconded by Councillor O’Loughlin. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Tidy Town volunteers do amazing work, but volunteer numbers are reducing. 
• Kildare County Council supports the "No Mow May" initiative, encouraging 
residents to delay or reduce grass cutting in May to benefit pollinators. 
• Lessons could be learnt from the larger winning towns of Naas and Leixlip and 
a best practice approach should be developed and shared across the county. 
• Villages like Brannockstown and Athgarvan need additional support as they 
have very rural roads on approach. 
 
Ms. Barrett praised the success of the county in the Tidy Town competitions. She 
noted that support will continue to be provided by Municipal Districts subject to 
resources. She advised that additional outdoor general operatives are to be assigned 
to the parks section, and a review could be undertaken of the approach roads to 
villages.  

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 23 of 29 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor T 
Durkan, and agreed by members present that the report be noted and the accepted 
amendment that a letter to Tidy Town Committees asking them to attend a meeting 
with the elected members and the Climate Action officer Paula O’Rourke to discuss 
the scoring system and how to better align our climate objectives be issued. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22/0625 
 
 
 
Housing Aid for Older People Grant scheme  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Pat Balfe was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council agrees to write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage requesting a review of the recent changes to the Housing Aid for Older 
People Grant scheme, specifically the exclusion of funding for the purchase of new 
fossil fuel boilers, such as oil or gas boilers, effective from 1 January 2025, and 
further: 
a. To express concern that the current grant criteria may disproportionately affect 
older people and low-income households, who may not have the financial 
means to install new heating systems, even if partially funded by a grant. 
b.  To request that the Minister consider reinstating support for like-for-like boiler 
replacements in cases where full system upgrades are not financially viable or 
technically feasible for the applicant. 
c.  To advocate for a balanced approach that ensures the transition to sustainable 
energy sources does not inadvertently disadvantage vulnerable populations, 
particularly during the winter months when reliable heating is essential. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Balfe and seconded by Councillor Pender. 
 
A report from Ms A Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that under S.I. 749 of 2024 of the European Union (Energy Performance of Buildings) 
Regulations 2024 (3), from 1 January 2025 public bodies were directed not to 
provide any financial incentives for the installation of stand-alone boilers powered by 
fossil fuels.   

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 24 of 29 
 
Under the Housing (Adaptation Grants for Older People and Disabled People) 
Regulations 2024 (S.I. 612 of 2024), funding is available for repair costs, provided 
that a report from a qualified heating contractor confirms the existing central heating 
system can be repaired. 
Grants may be approved for the repair of an existing standalone fossil fuel boiler or 
installation of a second-hand fossil fuel boiler. The Grant will provide for the 
installation of alternative heating solutions, such as electric heaters and wood pellet 
stoves which are based on electricity or biomass. Another alternative that qualifies 
for grant funding is a HVO Boiler and it is recommended that applicants speak with a 
Heating contractor regarding the best options for their home and needs. 
As we understand it, the DHLGH would not be able to make amendments to an EU 
Directive. 
Councillor Balfe thanked the Director for the report noting that he fully supported the 
transition from fossil fuels for climate reasons, but the Government need to review 
the grant criteria to allow flexibility in hardship cases, and if legally it was not possible 
additional funding should be made available to support households financially to 
carry out the necessary works for a full transition from fossil fuels.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
 
• The cohorts affected by these changes are on fixed incomes and do not have 
the means to fund the necessary transition works. 
• Full transition works are expensive and require expert advice. 
• As a 2020 signatory to the EU Covenant of Mayors on Climate Action and 
Energy, Kildare County Council is committed to ambitious climate targets and 
a just, inclusive energy transition. 
• From January 2025, public bodies are legally prohibited from offering financial 
incentives for new fossil fuel boilers. 
• We need to scale up support for renewable systems, ensuring that the 
transition is not only climate-smart but also fair, just and accessible to 
everyone. 
 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 25 of 29 
 
Ms Aspell advised the members that it was not within her remit to amend the grant 
support criteria and noted that she supported the members request to write to the 
Minister.    
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Balfe, seconded by Councillor Pender, and 
agreed by members present, that a letter be issued to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage requesting a review of the recent changes to the Housing 
Aid for Older People Grant Scheme.  
 
23/0625 
 
 
 
Wind Energy Development Guidelines  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Mark Leigh was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
to urgently request the publication of updated Wind Energy Development Guidelines. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Leigh and seconded by Councillor Breen. 
 
A report from Ms L Hanratty, Meetings Administrator stated that this is a matter for 
the members to agree. 
 
Councillor Leigh advised the meeting that a letter should be written to the Minister 
requesting the urgent publication of the Wind Energy Development Guidelines as the 
current guidelines were issued in 2006. He observed the attendance of a number of 
community groups in the gallery who sought to highlight lighting their frustration 
arising from the delay. There were similar frustrations arising in the planning system. 
 
 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Leigh, seconded by Councillor Breen, and 
agreed by members present that the council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to urgently request the publication of updated Wind 
Energy Development Guidelines. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 26 of 29 
 
24/0625 
 
 
 
Credit for Time Spent on Housing List 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Noel Connolly was considered by the 
members: 
Go scríobhfadh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara chuig an Aire Tithíochta, Oidhreachta 
agus Rialtais Áitiúil á iarraidh air polasaí a cheapadh agus a rointt do na Comhairle 
uile maidir le creidmheas as an am a chaitear ar an liosta tithíochta don pháirtí a 
fhágann teach teaghlaigh atá faoi úinéireacht na Comhairle i gcás briseadh síos 
caidrimh. 
That the council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
asking him to formulate and share a policy to all Councils in relation to credit for time 
spent on the housing list for the partner that leaves an allocated Council owned 
family home in the event of a relationship breakdown.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Connolly and seconded by Councillor 
Caldwell. 
 
A report from Ms A Aspell, Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that housing applications are assessed in accordance with the Social Housing 
Assessment Regulations 2011, as amended.  There is currently no provision within 
the Regulations to allow a housing applicant credit for time already accrued on the 
social housing list in the circumstances outlined in the motion.   
While it is a matter for the elected members if they wish to correspond with the 
Minister on this matter, allowing such credit could create complications for example: 
• The individual’s housing need was met; in effect a new household is being 
created and their housing need would require assessment. 
• The individual/new household may no longer qualify for social housing. 
• If the original housing application predated the current Housing IT system 
(iHouse), it would be difficult to establish time already spent on the list. 
• The individual may never have spent time on the list as they may have 
received permission to reside. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 27 of 29 
 
• Allowing credit for time already spent on the list could, in effect, offer an 
advantage over existing housing applicants. 
 
Councillor Connolly thanked the Director for the report and referenced a case he had 
encountered previously of a constituent whose relationship had sadly broken down, 
which resulted in the person becoming homeless as they had to start from the 
beginning with their housing support application.  
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The report highlighted administrative difficulties, but these are not 
insurmountable. 
• This issue also applies to housing transfer applications.  
• Flexibility should be afforded to vulnerable applicants who are in difficult 
situations.  
• Should be sent to the Housing and Regeneration SPC for further discussion. 
 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Connolly, seconded by Councillor Caldwell, 
and agreed by members present that a letter be issued to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage asking him to develop a policy regarding credit for 
time spent on the housing list in the event of a change in family circumstances, and 
that the motion also be referred to the Housing and Regeneration SPC . 
 
25/0625 
 
 
 
Changeover of Council Fleet to Electric Vehicles  
The following motion in the name of Councillor Bill Clear was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council provides an update on progress made to date to change the council 
fleet of vehicles to Electric Vehicles, confirm if tenders have been sent out and the 
expected timeframe for completion of the process. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Clear and seconded by Councillor Pender. 
 
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the Kildare County Council Machinery Yard currently has seven 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 28 of 29 
 
electric vehicles (EVs) in operation across the county, five delivered in 2024 and one 
in 2025. The Fire Service has three fully electric vehicle and one hybrid vehicle.  
There are currently 14 electric vehicles procured, ordered and are due to be 
delivered by Quarter 3 2025. It is proposed to commence procurement on another 
three vehicles prior to the end of 2025. This will bring Kildare County Councils 
electric vehicle fleet to 27. It is proposed to further increase the electric fleet in 2026, 
subject to resources. 
Councillor Clear thanked the Director for the report and asked could an allocation of 
electric vehicles to community and litter wardens be examined.  
Councillor T Durkan noted current studies around hydrogen vehicles may also be 
worth considering. 
Ms Barrett advised the members that all new electric vehicles have significant 
branding identifying KCC zero emissions vehicles, which also highlights the work 
being done. She also noted that compressed natural gas as an alternative source 
was being investigated which links into our grass to gas project. A report in relation to 
the progress of these projects will be given in the coming year. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Clear, seconded by Councillor Pender, and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
26/0625 
 
 
Introduction of 30 km/h Speed Limit in Urban Areas 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Claire O’Rourke was considered by 
the members: 
 
That, following the welcome introduction of the 60 km/h speed limit on Rural Local 
Roads in February this year, the council provides a progress report on the 
introduction of the 30 km/h speed limit in urban areas and when is it anticipated that 
a definition of urban areas be available to enable the council to progress this.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor 
Moore. 

 
 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 30.06.2025                 Page 29 of 29 
 
A report from Ms C Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the Department of Transport is currently finalising an update of 
the “Guidelines for Setting and Managing Speed Limits in Ireland” which is 
mandatory guidance on the issue.  The update will require Ministerial approval and 
once circulated can be used in the preparation of changes to speed limits on urban 
roads and streets. 
It is expected that Local Authorities will amend speed limits in urban areas by way of 
special speed limit bye-laws, which are a matter for the elected members to vote 
upon. 
Kildare County Council will shortly commence a statutory public consultation process 
for amending the speed limits in urban housing estates, that are taken in charge. 
This is expected to commence in July 2025.  
Councillor O’Rourke thanked the Director for the report. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• How will the public be notified of the statutory public consultation process? 
• Existing signage within estates should be reviewed and removed if not 
needed.  
• Any changes to speed limits will require a public education element.  
 
Ms Barratt asked the members to take the time to review the maps of the proposed 
estates and if they observe the omission of any estates to notify the Roads 
Department.  She advised that a media campaign will be run through the appropriate 
channels to inform the public of the proposed changes and that she would engage 
with the municipal district engineers to request that they review existing road signage 
within estates.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor O’Rourke, seconded by Councillor Moore, 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
There being no further issues, the meeting concluded. 
