 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 1 of 26 
 
 
Minutes of meeting of Full Council held at 3:00 p.m. 
Monday 31 March 2025 in the Council Chamber 
Áras Chill Dara, Devoy Park, Naas, Co Kildare 
   
 
________________________________________________ 
                     
Members Present: Councillors F. Brett (Leas-Cathaoirleach), P. Balfe, V. L. Behan, 
A. Breen, A. Breslin, P. Brooks, B. Caldwell, B. Clear, S. Doyle, 
G. Dunne,  T. Durkan, W. Durkan, D. Fitzpatrick, R. Heather, N. 
Heavey, I. Keatley, C. Kelly, N. Killeen, T. McDonnell, P. 
McEvoy, P. Melrose, S. Moore, P. Mulroe, P. O’Dwyer, T. 
O’Dwyer, B. O’Loughlin, C. O’Rourke, C. Pender, D. Phelan, E. 
Sammon, D. Trost, and P. Ward. 
 
Online: 
Councillors N. Connolly, B. Dooley, A. Feeney, M. Leigh, L. 
Panaite Fahey, R. Power, and B. Wyse. 
 
Apologies: 
Councillor K. Duffy. 
 
Also Present:  
Ms. S. Kavanagh (Chief Executive), Ms. A. Aspell. Mr. A. 
Dunney, Ms. E. Hanlon, Ms. M. Higgins, Mr. E. Ryan, (Directors 
of Service), Ms. C. Barrett, Mr. D. Creighton (A/Directors of 
Service), Ms. L. Hanratty (Meetings Administrator), Ms. L. 
Morgan (Meetings Secretary), and other officials.  
 
 
Iarnród Éireann Presentation 
The Leas-Cathaoirleach proposed to suspend standing orders to facilitate 
presentation by Iarnród Éireann. 
 
This was seconded by Councillor C. Kelly and agreed by the members present.  
 
The meeting commenced at 3:20pm. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 2 of 26 
 
The Leas-Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the March monthly meeting of the 
Council and asked the Meeting Administrator to read out a notice regarding the live 
streaming of the meeting to the Council’s YouTube channel. 
 
00/0325 
Bereavements 
The Leas-Cathaoirleach advised he had been informed of the following 
bereavements:  
 
Susan Dowling, mother of Martin Dowling, Planning Department and Kevin 
Dowling, Kildare Town Library.  
Seamus O’ Neill, father of Eimear O’ Neill, Architects 
The Leas Cathaoirleach requested that a minute’s silence be observed. A minute’s 
silence was observed. 
 
01/0325 
Declaration of Interests 
The Cathaoirleach sought from the members any declarations of conflicts of interest 
or pecuniary or beneficial interests under Section 177 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended. There were no declarations.  
 
 
02/0325 
Minutes and Progress Report 
The council considered the draft minutes of the special meeting held on 27 January 
2025, the monthly meeting held on 24 February 2025 and the progress report.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Caldwell, seconded by Councillor Moore and 
agreed by the members present that the draft minutes of the special meeting held on 
27 January 2025 and the draft minutes of the monthly meeting held on 24 February 
2025 be adopted.  
 
The progress report was noted.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 3 of 26 
 
     03/0325 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report 
Councillor Clear sought clarification regarding the International Refugee Protection 
Programme (IRPP). 
 
Mr. D. Creighton, Acting Director of Service, Integration explained how the 
programme resettled refugees into Approved Housing Bodies (AHB) and Kildare 
County Council housing units during 2024 and will continue to resettle refugees 
through to 2026.  
 
The members noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management report. 
 
04/0325 
Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan 2025 
The members considered the draft Annual Service Delivery Plan 2025. 
 
Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural Services informed 
the members that Section 50 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014 requires 
Council to prepare an Annual Service Delivery Plan, for adoption by the Members by 
31 March 2025.  
 
He noted that the Plan sets out the priority objectives for service delivery and 
performance standards to be achieved by Kildare County Council in 2025; that the 
Plan contains extensive data on metrics and indicators of activity linked to both 
Corporate Plan gaols and the UN Sustainable Development Goals, and that CPG 
had agreed it go to Full Council for approval.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Moore and 
agreed by the members present that the Annual Service Delivery Plan 2025 be 
approved.   
 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 4 of 26 
 
          05/0325 
Annual Financial Statements (AFS) for 2024                                                    
and additional expenditure (Appendix 9 AFS) 
The members considered the Annual Financial Statements (AFS) for 2024 and 
approval of the additional expenditure for the year ended 31st December 2024 
(Appendix 9 AFS).   A detailed report had previously been circulated to the 
members. 
 
Ms. E. Hanlon, Director of Services, Finance, Digital Services, Innovation and 
Governance provided a detailed account of the previously circulated report. She 
informed the group that Kildare County Council Annual Financial Statement for the 
year ended 31st December 2024 was presented to the Finance Committee on March 
21, CPG on the 24 March and that CPG had agreed it go forward to Full Council for 
approval. 
She noted that the Revenue Account for 2024 shows an overall surplus of €7.2k and 
a closing surplus of €20k. Revenue expenditure was €276m up from €219m in 2023. 
Capital expenditure was €218m. Total spend of €495m for 2024. Expenditure in each 
programme group increased and Housing had the biggest spending programme of 
€101m with €45m of this on social leasing up €11m on budget.    
Fixed assets increased by €164m with the most notable additions being 287 houses 
at €93m and Athy Distributor Road at €44.8m.  
Collection rates for 2024 increased. Rates up 4% to 92% (€67m collected), Rents up 
2% to 95% (€21.9m collected) and Housing Loans up 3% to 78% (€4.2m collected).  
She also noted that Appendix 9 of AFS shows the division where there was excess 
of expenditure to the budgeted figure, but these have been funded by additional 
income or savings. One additional expenditure of note is the ICOB and Power up 
grants of €16.9 m in Division D Development Management administered and paid 
out to business by KCC on behalf on Department of Enterprise Trade and 
Employment. Overall, a surplus was achieved in 2024 of €7.2k. Approval of this 
schedule is now being sought. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 5 of 26 
 
The local government auditor will commence his audit of the AFS 2024 in July 2025 
and is expected to complete the audit by end of October 2025 so that his audit report 
can be presented to the November Full Council meeting.  
She also noted that the Finance Committee asked that she notify the members that 
the decision in relation to the variation of the LPT needs to be made at the July 
council meeting as the Revenue Commissioners are carrying out their revaluation of 
the bands this year (this is done every 4 years) and Revenue needs to be notified of 
the decision to vary LPT by the 31 August 2025.  
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Fitzpatrick, seconded by Councillor Kelly 
and agreed by the members that the Annual Financial Statements (AFS) for 2024 be 
noted and that the additional expenditure (Appendix 9 AFS) for the year ended 31 
December 2024 be approved.  
 
06/0325 
       Roads Programme 2025 
The members considered the Roads Programme 2025, and the report circulated in 
advance of the meeting.  
 
The report was noted. 
 
07/0325 
Cathaoirleach’s Business 
The Leas-Cathaoirleach noted that the Cathaoirleach provided a report detailing his 
attendance at events during the previous month. The report noted his attendance as 
follows: 
• The official opening of the Council’s energy-efficient "DemoHouse" in 
Maynooth on March 6, 2025, as part of its Decarbonising Zone initiative, 
showcasing sustainable living practices and demonstrating a commitment to 
national targets. 
• Meeting with the IDA and Enterprise Ireland. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 6 of 26 
 
• Meeting with Kildare’s twelve partners from ten European countries, under the 
Repower Regions project which was officially launched in Naas on 20th 
March 2025. 
 
The report also gave the itinerary details of the official visit to New York.  
 
• Mass in St. Patrick’s Cathedral, New York. 
 
• St Patrick’s Day Parade in New York and participation in the parade walking 
with the Kildare Association through New York City. 
 
• Meeting with the Kildare Association, an amazing chance to meet so many 
wonderful people living in New York for decades. There was a visit to the 
graves of Jack Murray (1877-1932) and his brother Michael Murray (1882-
1957) Calvary Cemetery, New York; and a discussion on the potential of 
commemorating these two amazing Kildare men and the achievement of all 
this 1905 County Team. 
 
08/0325 
Correspondence 
The Meetings Administrator confirmed eighteen items of correspondence had been 
circulated to the members along with the progress report. These included six 
circulars from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, as 
follows: 
• Circular letter: F.03/25 Re: 31 March 2025 deadline for the reporting of 
political donations by third parties 
• Circular letter: F.10/13 Re: Revised forms and guidelines in connection with 
annual reporting requirements on political donations for elected members of 
local authorities. 
• Circular letter: F.10/13 Re: Third Party Guidelines on political donations. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 7 of 26 
 
• Circular LG 05-2025 Re: Amendment to the Maternity Protection Act 1994 
under the Maternity Protection, Employment Equality and Preservation of 
Certain Records Act 2024. 
• Circular LG 06-2025 28 February 2025 Re: Increase to elected members’ 
annual remuneration on 1 March 2025 
• Circular LG 07-2025 Training Events for Elected Members. 
Six resolutions were received from other County Councils, a reply from NTA to 
present to full council and acknowledgements from ESB and Iarnród Éireann re 
invitation to present to Full Council, two emails from Kildare PPN and one from 
Maynooth University.  
 
The correspondence and report were noted. 
 
09/0325 
Conferences and Training 
The Meetings Administrator referred to the conference and training report which had 
been circulated to the members and recommended by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
Retrospective training approval sought for Councillor Phelan’s attendance at the 
AILG Webinar 2 An Effective Communication Tool to Enhance Engagement with 
Constituents at zero cost, on Friday 28 February 2025. 
Retrospective training approval for Councillors Brett and Councillor Kelly attendance 
at AILG Module 2 Embracing Equality - Cultivating Inclusive Local Communities, 
held in the Clayton Hotel, Galway on Saturday 22 March 2025 at a cost of €90 per 
councillor. 
Approval sought for Councillors Killeen, Phelan, Pender, Mulroe, O’Rourke, Clear, 
Trost, O’Loughlin and T. O’Dwyer to attend AILG – Póca Productions - New Video 
Content Creation at a cost of €450 per councillor.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 8 of 26 
 
Approval sought for Councillors Brett, Connolly, Kelly and O’Dwyer to attend the 
Annual Conference Training in Limerick Strand Hotel, Limerick on 2 and 3 April 2025 
at a cost of € 175 per councillor  
Approval sought for Councillor Wyse to continue his BA Local Studies in Maynooth 
NFQ Level 8 from January 2025 to January 2026 at a cost of €410 which represents 
50% of the fees for the academic year. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Trost, seconded by Councillor Caldwell and 
agreed by the members present that the above requests as set out in the training 
and conference report be approved. 
 
10/0325 
Reintroduction of Joint Policing Committee Meeting 
The following motion in the names of Councillors T. O'Dwyer, P. O'Dwyer and 
Sammon was considered by the members: 
 
That the council reintroduces Joint Policing Committee meetings until the Local 
Community Safety Partnerships are formally commenced and that the council writes 
to the Minister of Justice seeking clarity as to when that will be.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by Councillor P. 
O’Dwyer. 
 
A report from Ms M Higgins, Director of Services, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water stated that the new Community Safety Strategy aims to ensure 
communities are safer by making community safety a priority for government, to be 
delivered through Local Community Safety Partnerships (LCSPs). They will be 
supported by a national governance structure to support the aim of repositioning 
community safety as the provision of adequate and appropriate social services 
consistent with local needs.  
Local Community Safety Partnerships (LCSPs) will bring all services and the 
community together at local authority level. The LCSP will build on the work 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 9 of 26 
 
undertaken through the Joint Policing Committee, and importantly will add other 
critical stakeholders, enabling a more holistic approach to community safety.  
Kildare County Council is aware that the implementation of the Local Safety 
Community Partnerships has been ongoing for a number of months, however, these 
delays have been outside of the Local Authorities control and the release of these 
regulations are expected imminently. There is ongoing communication between 
Kildare County Council and the Department of Justice.  
Kildare County Council has been proactively working to ensure that once the 
regulations are available, the Local Community Safety Partnership will be able to 
move quickly to complete the membership and commence its work. In this regard, 
the political representation from the Elected Members of Kildare County Council 
have been appointed, the administrative requirements for the operation of the Local 
Community Safety Partnership have been appointed or are in the process of filling 
the appropriate position.  
Kildare County Council is proactively engaging with An Garda Siochana to schedule 
meetings with elected members from each municipal district, while waiting for the 
implementation of the LCSP. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Members are dissatisfied with the delay in establishing the LGSP, 
• Members are concerned about a lack of meetings with An Garda Siochana, 
• That the members be kept informed of updates from the Department of Justice. 
• That each MD is treated equally when the LCSP are being established. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor T. O’Dwyer, seconded by P. O’Dwyer and 
agreed by members present that that the report be noted and that members be kept 
up to date on progress with the Department of Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 10 of 26 
 
11/0325 
 
 
 
 
   Social Housing Allocations 
The following motion in the names of Councillors Pender and Balfe was considered 
by the members: 
 
That Kildare County Council provides a detailed report on all social housing 
allocations over the past five years, specifically examining whether allocations have 
been made in accordance with the principle of ‘time on the list’ as outlined in the 
Councils Allocation Scheme for Social Housing Support. To include (a) a statistical 
breakdown of allocations (categorising them by the reason for allocation, order of 
priority, and the length of time applicants had been on the housing list before 
receiving an offer.), (b) An analysis of compliance with the Allocation Scheme, 
(including the percentage of allocations made strictly based on time on the list versus 
those made under priority categories). 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Pender and seconded by Councillor Balfe. 
 
A report from Ms S Scully, A/Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the Allocation Scheme for Social Housing Support was adopted by Kildare 
County Council in February 2023. The purpose of this Allocation Scheme is to 
provide a means of determining the order of priority to be afforded in the allocation of 
social houses. 
Applicants for social housing are considered having regard to the period of time 
which has elapsed since they were included on the social housing list, this is known 
as ‘time on the list’. In certain circumstances, overall priority may be given to 
applicants who satisfy the criteria listed below; applicants afforded priority will be 
further prioritised based on ‘time on the list’ and subject to the availability of a 
suitable property.  
• Age Friendly: Accommodation  
• Dangerous Buildings  
• Displacement  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 11 of 26 
 
• Exceptional Medical Grounds: Where priority is being claimed on medical 
grounds, the HMD-Form 1 or any successor form must be completed.  
• Homeless Priority: Individuals/Households rendered homeless through no 
fault of their own as defined under Section 2 of the Housing Act 1988 as 
amended.  
• Members of the Travelling Community where the accommodation being 
provided is Traveller specific. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, all households awarded overall priority are subject to the 
terms of the councils Anti-social Behaviour Strategy and Assessment of Bedroom 
Requirements. Applicants may be assessed for more than one of the above criteria 
e.g. where a family is assessed as Homeless with medical priority. 
It is not possible to provide analysis of the length of time on the list from our housing 
system I-House, however this will be raised with our provider for possible inclusion in 
future reporting upgrades. 
The following table gives a breakdown of allocations in the period 2020-2024: 
YEAR 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
KCC Units 
420 
472 
494 
600 
399 
AHB Units 
337 
315 
328 
650 
271 
TOTAL Allocations 
757 
787 
822 
1,250 
670 
Allocations via CBL/Time on 
the List 
73 
78 
126 
432 
200 
General Allocations/ Time 
on the list 
508 
590 
493 
415 
184 
Time on List Percentage 
77% 
85% 
75% 
68% 
57% 
Medical 
110 
52 
75 
110 
87 
Homeless 
56 
56 
121 
274 
186 
Travellers 
10 
11 
7 
19 
13 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 12 of 26 
 
Priority Categories 
Percentage 
23% 
15% 
25% 
32% 
43% 
No of Offers Refused 
249 
210 
164 
305 
151 
 
Councillor Pender thanked the Director for the report. During discussion. The 
members raised the following points: 
• Clarification on the ‘age-friendly’ criteria on the housing waiting list. 
• The refusal rate of 1 in 4 is extremely high; can we establish why? 
• Can the SPC review the refusal rate and ‘time on the list’. 
 
Ms. A. Aspell advised the members that age-friendly criteria represent the over 55’s, 
that the housing refusal rate is high, and that this needs to be tackled at a national 
level. She also stated that a tenant can be suspended if they refuse two offers made 
in the same year.  
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Pender, seconded by Councillor Balfe and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and that a request to review the 
refusal rate and ‘time on list’ be referred to the Housing and Regeneration SPC. 
 
12/0325 
 
  
 
 
 
Accessibility Initiatives 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Phelan was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council sets out what additional resources it intends to use to progress 
accessibility initiatives, compliance with national and international disability 
legislation and ongoing engagement with stakeholders, including people with 
disabilities and advocacy groups.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Phelan and seconded by Councillor 
McEvoy. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 13 of 26 
 
A report from Mr. E. Ryan, Director of Services, Corporate, People and Cultural 
Services stated that a major challenge we are faced with is the lack of direct funding 
from central government to support local authorities in delivering accessible services, 
employing Access Officers, and providing disability awareness training. In Kildare 
County Council, the remit for Accessibility falls under our Health and Safety 
Team.  That team has recently completed an action plan as part of the Strategic 
Workforce Plan, in which there is a request for additional staff to meet the growing 
needs being placed on the section and in particular Accessibility.  This is currently at 
evaluation stage.  Both staffing and other initiatives will be subject to funding. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Kildare is ahead of other counties in progressing accessibility initiatives and 
engaging with stakeholders. 
• Are there alternative funding options available to recruit a Disability Officer.  
Mr. E. Ryan said he would explore if alternative funding options were available to 
fund resources in this area and revert in due course. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Phelan, seconded by Councillor Mc Evoy 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted and that alternative funding 
options would be explored to fund resources in this area. 
 
13/0325 
 
 
 
Nominees to Approved Housing Bodies 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Doyle was considered by the 
members: 
That the council write to the Minister for the Department for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage requesting that direction be given to all Approved Housing 
Bodies managing properties in excess of 500 units within any county to provide a 
seat on their Board for a nominee from each County Council where units in excess of 
500 are located. These nominees shall be approved by the members and should be 
a member of a Housing SPC or be an agreed nominee with relevant experience.  
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 14 of 26 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Phelan and seconded by Councillor 
Fitzpatrick. 
 
A report from Ms S Scully, A/Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that two Approved Housing Bodies have 500 or more units in Kildare, they are Cluid 
(734) and Tuath (906 units).  It is a matter for the Members if they wish to issue 
correspondence on this matter and you may wish to consider corresponding with the 
Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority, which is the body responsible for 
the regulation of Approved Housing Bodies. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• There are no tenants on AHB Boards and this should be considered? 
Ms. A. Aspell, Director of Service, Housing and Regeneration advised the members 
that there is a Regulator in place for Approved Housing Bodies and being a board 
members carried responsibilities.   
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Doyle, seconded by Councillor Fitzpatrick and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and a letter be written to the 
Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 
 
14/0325 
 
 
 
 
Futureproofing of School Capacity 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Mulroe was considered by the 
members: 
 
That Kildare County Council provides a detailed report on the extent to which its 
Planning Department collaborates with the Forward Planning Section of the 
Department of Education to ensure the futureproofing of school capacity across the 
county. This report should outline how Local Area Plans (LAPs) and other strategic 
planning documents account for the provision of educational infrastructure, including 
the identification of lands earmarked for schools and the assessment of projected 
population growth in determining future school place needs.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 15 of 26 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Mulroe and seconded by Councillor Pender. 
A report from Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services advised the members that the Forward 
Planning Team engage with the Department of Education at regular intervals when 
information is required from the Department or vice versa under a Memorandum of 
Understanding between the City and County Managers Association [CCMA] (on 
behalf of Local Authorities) and the Department.   
As advised at the Elected Members Briefing on 22 January 2025, the provision 
(design and construction) and progression of school delivery projects is a matter 
wholly for the Department of Education. Kildare County Council, or any local 
authority for that matter, has no role in the delivery of such projects save for ensuring 
sufficient lands are zoned in each settlement and the subsequent assessment of 
planning applications, including all technical submissions therein. The Department 
provide ongoing updates with respect to specific projects on their website 
https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/d73cb-building-works-for-the-construction-extension-
and-refurbishment-of-schools/#school-building-projects-large-scale-additional-
accommodation-scheme-current-status-lists. All Local Area Plans and County 
Development Plan and Settlement Plans are informed by the preparation of a Social 
Infrastructure Audit (SIA) (published alongside the plan) which outlines the existing 
and estimated future requirements for School, Childcare, Healthcare and other 
community facilities over the plan period. These SIAs are stress-tested through the 
Forward Planning Teams engagement with the Department and as a result, with 
specific reference to education provision, a series of locations are identified for 
Primary and Post-Primary Schools and are zoned for Community and Educational 
purposes.  
Councillor Mulroe thanked the Director for the report. During discussion, the 
members raised the following points: 
• The increase in houses being built increases the demand on school place. 
• There is a disconnect between Forward Planning and the Department of 
Education. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 16 of 26 
 
• Local Authorities need to capture information to inform the future school 
places demand for the Department of Education. 
• That sufficient land is zoned in the right locations for schools. 
 
Mr. A. Dunney advised members that school delivery is not within the council’s remit.  
Kildare County Council is responsible for ensuring sufficient land is zoned. He 
advised that Kildare County Council meet the Department of Education quarterly and 
more frequent for Local Settlement Plans (previously known as Local Area Plans).  
At present, there is a substantial amount of land in Kildare zoned for future school 
development. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Mulroe, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
15/0325 
 
 
 
 
External Security Lighting 
The following motion in the name of Councillor William Durkan was considered by 
the members: 
That the council extends the eligible works under the Housing Aid for Older People 
Grant to include the provision of external security lighting.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Durkan and seconded by Councillor T. 
O’Dwyer. 
 
A report from Ms S Scully, A/Director of Services, Housing and Regeneration stated 
that the Housing Aid for Older People Grant Scheme is available to assist older 
people living in poor housing conditions to have necessary repairs or improvements 
carried out to their homes.  It provides financial assistance to households to carry out 
essential repairs. 
 
On receipt of this motion, the Housing Department contacted the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage to enquire if security lighting can be 
funded; they were advised that security lighting is not eligible for funding. 
Councillor Durkan and T. O. Dwyer thanked the Director for the report.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 17 of 26 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Durkan, seconded by Councillor T. O’Dwyer 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
16/0325 
Art Competition to Redesign "No Dog Fouling" Signs 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Killeen was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council establishes an art competition to redesign "No Dog Fouling" signs. 
This would serve as an opportunity to engage communities, bring attention to the 
problem and foster community engagement on the issue in residential estates and 
public open spaces.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Killeen and seconded by Councillor Pender.  
 
A report from Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Service, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water stated that Kildare County Council is keen to promote responsible dog 
ownership and to encourage dog owners to pick up after their dog, bag the waste 
and safely bin it. 
One of the measures aimed at raising awareness of the issue, the council ran a 
schools poster competition (in 2023) encouraging pupils in Kildare primary schools to 
design a new sign reminding dog owners to clean up after their pet.  
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 18 of 26 
 
The winning design (from a pupil in Rathmore National School) pictured above was 
subsequently turned into signs that are available free-of-charge to all community 
groups to install at key locations to raise awareness at local level. 
The council will investigate running a fresh competition during the next 12/18 
months, or earlier, if possible, subject to work programme considerations and 
funding availability.    
Councillor Killeen thanked the Director for the report. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• dog fouling was an environmental hazard and could cause serious infections. 
• signage was needed in open spaces. 
• mobility scooters, wheelchair users and buggies are affected by dog fouling. 
• Another issue was the dumping of used dog waste bags in open spaces. 
Ms. M. Higgins advised the members that dog fouling is the responsibility of the 
owner, and that Kildare County Council are committed to bringing education and 
awareness of the issue to the community.  Competitions are run on a 2-year basis 
for dog-fouling signage. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Killeen, seconded by Councillor Pender and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
17/0325 
Sites Zoned for Residential Development 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Clear was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council provides the members with a report outlining all sites zoned for 
residential development across County Kildare under Local Area Plans (LAPs) and 
the County Development Plan, specifically for developments of over 10 units. 
The report should detail the status of each site in relation to its development 
progress, categorised as follows: 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 19 of 26 
 
• No progress 
• Planning commenced 
• Planning complete 
• Appealed to An Bord Pleanála 
• Construction commenced 
• Construction completes 
 
Additionally, please include the number of units proposed for each site as per the 
relevant development plans.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Clear and seconded by Councillor Killeen. 
A report from Mr. A. Dunney, Director of Services, Planning, Enterprise, Economic 
Development and Emergency Services stated that the Land Use Zonings pertaining 
to the various settlements across County Kildare are contained within the respective 
Local Area Plan or Volume 2 of the Kildare County Development Plan 2023-2029.  
The associated Core Strategy tables identify an estimated housing unit yield for both 
the residentially zoned lands and other zonings with the capacity to delivery housing 
units. The number of units proposed for each specific site are calculated on the basis 
of an average density range. The actual units permitted/delivered are dependent on 
a series of site specific technical and other planning considerations including but not 
limited to visual impact, transport considerations, active travel, SUDs, environmental 
issues etc. There is no readily available dataset or information portal which can 
provide dynamic information on the performance of any specific site. 
Information with respect to “planning commenced”, “planning complete” and 
“appealed to An Bord Pleanála” is available through the Kildare County Council 
Planning Register (Planning Enquiry System). Details of Commencement Notices 
can be obtained from the Building Control Management System (BCMS) website, 
completion data is also available through this system. Kildare County Council 
Planning Team rely on verified Central Statistics Office (CSO) data with respect to 
housing completions, which are publicly available by quarter. The Members are 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 20 of 26 
 
advised that the CSO information, while independently verified is settlement-based 
and does not address individual sites.  
The systems identified above are not integrated and to develop a system to provide 
the information requested would involve unestablished links between systems such 
as IPlan, Eplan, Myplan, BCMS and the CSO, none of which are capable of 
integration. In addition to foregoing, such data collation would require the 
commitment of extensive on-site human resources.  
It is to be noted however, that the Local Government Sector, through the offices of 
the Local Government Management Agency (LGMA), are in the process of 
developing a new National Planning System. While this new system may not provide 
all of the information listed above on a site-by-site basis, it will ensure consistency of 
data amongst the various planning authorities, including An Bord Pleanála, and will 
allow for the digitalisation of all the various statutory functions of planning and 
development at a site-by-site level, from pre-planning right through to taking in 
charge including consent, compliance, enforcement and monitoring / core strategy / 
housing targets. The Business Case for this project has been completed by the 
LGMA and the project is moving forward. 
Following on from the above, County Wide and Settlement based information on 
housing delivery is readily available. This was provided in the 2023 Annual 
Monitoring Report for the KCDP (published May 2024) and the 2 Year Progress 
Report on the Implementation of the KCDP (published February 2025), both of which 
have been circulated to the Elected Members and are available on the Kildare 
County Council website.  
Councillor Clear thanked the Director for the report. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• The ability to extract data should be simplified, and available,   
• Information should be available on a site-specific basis, 
• LAP’s that identify sites that cannot be developed ahead of other sites do not 
assist in the delivery of houses.  
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 21 of 26 
 
Mr. A. Dunney advised the members that presently we can provide statistical 
information on a county level easily but was time consuming at a site-specific level. 
An IT solution is being reviewed at National level. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Clear, seconded by Councillor Killeen and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and that the matter be referred 
to the Housing and Regeneration SPC. 
 
18/0325 
Food Production Schemes for Students 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Heavey was considered by the 
members. 
 
That the council identity scheme opportunities to support second-level students/ 
communities to learn how to produce food by growing food plants in schools, home 
gardens and allotments throughout our county. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Heavey and seconded by Councillor Behan. 
 
A report from Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Service, Climate, Community, Environment 
and Water stated that the Green-Schools Programme operated by An Taisce has a 
Global Citizenship Food and Biodiversity theme.   
By working on this theme, students, teachers, and the wider school community 
produce, prepare and eat their own food, whilst also investigating the impacts that 
the worlds current food production system has on the natural world. Participants 
learn how to reduce the environmental impact of their food choices and have the 
opportunity to enhance their personal well-being, through increased time spent 
outdoors, eating freshly harvested food, and developing life-skills and resilience 
associated with being able to grow, prepare and cook their own food.  
Schools often require support such as guidance, supply of seeds, equipment, and 
funding for places to sow the seeds. This is a new theme/flag on the Green-School’s 
Programme so few schools are at this stage.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 22 of 26 
 
Kildare has three schools working on this theme now based in Leixlip, Clane, and 
Celbridge. 
Councillor Heavey thanked the Director for the report. A number of councillors 
expressed their support for this motion. During discussion, the members raised the 
following points. 
• The cost of living and cost of food is accelerating rapidly. 
• Meath County Council have been operating a scheme that could be mirrored. 
• Can the Climate Action SPC support scheme opportunities. 
• Educated communities in horticulture is important. 
• Members referred to the Leixlip Allotment Site and its success. 
• Can the council provide more allotments and support a self-sufficient society. 
• Small agricultural holdings are in decline.  
 
Ms. M. Higgins acknowledged the concerns raised and the benefits of communities 
growing food. She referred to the existing food growing schemes in schools, Kildare 
Seed Library Scheme and Kildare Allotment and Community Garden Strategy 
currently under review. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Heavey, seconded by Councillor Behan and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted and that the Climate Action 
SPC explore scheme opportunities. 
19/0325 
Uisce Éireann Infrastructure Projects 
The following motion in the name of Councillor O’Rourke was considered by the 
members: 
 
That Kildare County Council formally calls on Uisce Éireann to prioritise the 
infrastructure projects it has committed to commence in Q1, and to provide a clear 
timeline for the replacement of water pipes in Co Kildare. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor 
Killeen. 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 23 of 26 
 
Director of Service, Mr. E. Ryan stated that this is a matter for the members to agree. 
 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Timeline for replacement infrastructure should be put in place. 
• Ongoing issues in Celbridge. 
• Pipes are old and need replacing. 
• Newbridge water pressure could be extremely low. 
• Uisce Éireann were not mandated to grow infrastructure in line with additional 
houses being constructed.  
 
Ms. M. Higgins, Director of Service, Climate, Community, Environment and Water 
Services advised the members that water and wastewater are no longer a function of 
Local Authorities; this is in the remit of Uisce Éireann. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor O’Rourke, seconded by Councillor Killeen 
and agreed by members present that a letter is issued to Uisce Éireann regarding 
the timelines of infrastructure projects and replacement of pipes. 
 
          20/0325 
Keep-Cup Initiative 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Noel Connolly was considered by the 
members: 
 
Go lorgóidh Comhairle Contae Chill Dara léirithe spéise ó ghnólachtaí sa chontae 
d’fhonn tionscnamh cupán coinneála a bhunú i gceann amháin dár mbailte ar a 
laghad, cosúil leis an tionscnamh a fheidhmítear i mbaile Chill Áirne, Co. Chiarraí. 
That Kildare County Council seeks expressions of interest from businesses in the 
county with a view to setting up a keep cup initiative in at least one of our 
towns, similar to that which operates in the town of Killarney, Co. Kerry. 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Connolly and seconded by Councillor 
Killeen. 
 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 24 of 26 
 
A report from Ms. M. Higgins, A/Director of Services, Climate, Community, 
Environment and Water Services stated that the initiative in Killarney was community 
driven with support from other agencies. The overall aim in Killarney is to eliminate 
single-use plastics cups.  Kildare's Climate Action Plan (CAP) shares the ambition to 
eliminate waste and encourage the circular economy. The 2GoCup is a business 
model which provides keep-cups to local eateries and other establishments who 
offer beverages.  The business model requires a financial input from the businesses 
to avail of the scheme and the branded cups are procured by the customer through a 
deposit scheme.  
The topic was raised recently with the Climate Action Office regarding a 2GoCup 
scheme for a location in Kildare.  Based on various research gleamed it appears a 
keep-cup needs to be used circa 1,000 times to make it sustainable (the use of keep 
-cups is sustainably superior to single-use plastic cups).   
The majority of homes have keep-cups and many have a supply surplus to their 
needs.  By utilising the circular economy, patrons could be given a reduction in the 
cost for their chosen beverage by presenting their own keep-cup.  Secondly, given 
the surplus of keep-cups in circulation a collection locally could provide cups for 
those who forget to bring a keep-cup or have no keep-cup at a very low charge to 
help fund the promotion of the local initiative.  The washing and care of the keep-
cups in establishments would be in accordance with the food safety standards that 
already exist.   
Councillor Connolly thanked the Director for the report. During discussion, the 
members raised the following points: 
• Kilcullen did a pilot scheme recently and found that many cups were not 
returned. 
• Some of the cups offered in the scheme were not to everyone’s taste. 
• Businesses have concerns related to branding. 
• Cost of ‘to-go cups’ expensive. 
• Suggest that the Local Enterprise Office (LEO) assist 
• Large amounts of wate generated by cups.  

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 25 of 26 
 
• The importance of education and awareness. 
• Request that the Climate Action SPC review. 
 
Ms. M. Higgins stated that education, and awareness is needed to change people’s 
behaviour in relation to this issue.  The ‘grab and go’ culture needs to change its 
approach. The Climate Action Team will follow up with Kilcullen on their scheme. 
The role of the Local Authority is in educating the community to bring awareness of 
reduce, re-use and recycle. 
The CE noted concerns regarding the number of items being referred to SPC’s. 
 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Connolly, seconded by Councillor Killeen 
and agreed by members present that the report be noted and that the Climate Action 
SPC review possible initiatives for actioning. 
 
21/0325 
 
 
  
Delisting of Projects from Capital Plans 
The following motion in the name of Councillor Power was considered by the 
members: 
 
That the council clarify that information provided and presented to members in 
relation to project status in Capital Plans is accurate at the time of approval and that 
any delisting of projects from Capital Plans would involve consultation with 
members.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Power and seconded by Councillor Kelly. 
 
A report from Ms. C. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Transport, Mobility and Open 
Spaces stated that the Capital Programme is a three-year rolling programme 
prepared during the annual budget process and presented to the members for noting 
in October.  As part of the process, members are given an opportunity in May each 
year at municipal district meetings to identify projects of importance in the various 
directorates and municipal districts for consideration.  The delivery of projects under 
the Capital Programme is contingent on a number of factors including: 

 
 
 
Minutes of Kildare County Council meeting 31.03.25                             Page 26 of 26 
 
• the availability of funding sources such as grants or the anticipated collection 
of development contributions during the lifetime of the Programme. 
• the successful completion of statutory processes such as compulsory 
purchase orders and planning consent. 
• changing priorities.  
• the business case for the project. 
• the achievement of value for money in all decisions made by the Council 
  
All Directorates will continue to work with the elected members on the delivery of the 
Capital Programme 2025-2027 and will endeavour to provide relevant updates on 
changes of the programme as they occur. 
During discussion, the members raised the following points: 
• Information received by the members needed to be accurate. 
• Members needed to be consulted when changes were made to the Capital 
Programmes. 
• Concern was expressed regarding the distribution of funds where a project 
was not proceeding. 
Ms. C. Barrett advised the members that the Capital Programme was noted at the 
Full Council Meeting in May 2024.  The availability of funding and resources can 
affect a Capital Programme. She also stated that information presented to members 
was accurate. 
Resolved on the proposal of Councillor Power, seconded by Councillor Kelly and 
agreed by members present that the report be noted. 
 
The meeting concluded. 
