MINUTES OF ANNUAL MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON FRIDAY, 20th JUNE 2025 
 
 
PRESENT 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle in the chair and subsequently an 
tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir F. Dennehy in the chair. 
 
NORTH EAST  
Comhairleoirí, J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. 
Moran, N. O’ Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. 
Collins, B. McCarthy.  
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL  Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, N. O’ Connor. 
 
 
SOUTH WEST  
Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’ 
Brien, C. O’ Connor. 
 
ALSO PRESENT 
Ms. V. O’ Sullivan, Chief Executive.  
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management & Climate 
Action. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator.  
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
 
1.  
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An Chomhairle unanimously agreed to suspend standing orders to allow media 
cameras into the Council Chamber for the handover of the Lord Mayor’s chain, and 
to allow the meeting to be streamed and recorded. 
 
2.  
AN tARDMHÉARA’S ADDRESS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle addressed the meeting as follows:- 
 
Councillors, Chief Executive management team, people of Cork, it has been the  
greatest honour of my time in public life to have served as Ardmhéara Chorcaí. Ours 
is a great city that can stand tall with many of the great cities of this world. There may 
be some, not of Cork, who might be amused by the confidence we have in ourselves, 
but for those of us who are Cork or have come to be Cork, we know that that pride of 
place is more than justified.  

A Chomhairleoirí, a Phríomhfheidhmeannach, a fhoireann bhainistíochta, muintir 
Chorcaí, ba é an onóir is mó i mo shaol poiblí a bheith mar Ardmhéara Chorcaí. Is 
Cathair iontach í Corcaigh atá i measc na mór-chathracha ar fud an domhain. Bhféidir 
bheadh daoine ann, nach Corcaíoch iad, a bheith ag gáire faoinár bhféinmhuinín ach 
dúinn agus do dhaoine a tháinig go Corcaigh, tuigimid go bhfuil cúis mhaith leis an 
mbród áite seo. 
Having had the honour of representing the city, in meeting with those who have come 
to visit; those who have come to engage with us either through business, culturally or 
through sporting or community engagement, I have always been pleased to hear what 
our visitors have to tell me about the city.  
When I have represented the city abroad, particularly in our Twin Cities, Shanghai and 
San Francisco, I have been pleased to hear similar opinions being said. 
Our great strength, what is recognised as our great strength, is our ability to work with 
all groups in the city, to give such groups a voice, and have each contribute in helping 
our city become a better place. Cork City Council, through working with other public 
bodies, business groupings, civic and community organisations, has made this a model 
that works in identifying problems that may affect our city; finding resources and the 
wherewithal to deal with such problems, and to plan for a better future. 
The greatest privilege I’ve had as Lord Mayor has been in meeting many of the 
wonderful people of our city, people engaged in activities that involves doing good for 
others, for their communities and ultimately for the city itself. Wonderful people doing 
excellent things that it has been my privilege as Ardmhéara to acknowledge. 
With the Community and Civic Awards I had the particular honour of acknowledging 
such people. One of whom, Siobhán O’Dowd, we lost shortly after that event. 
Voluntary commitment is at the heart of life in Cork. I have had the honour of 
celebrating that.  We should never lose sight that our city would not be able to operate 
without such commitment. 
Our various festivals, some of which had significant anniversaries such as the Life Long 
Learning Festival, were run to the usual high standards. In addition, the city had the 
privilege of hosting European Maritime Day, on behalf of and working with the 
European Commission. The city has never looked finer. 
We also had the opportunity of marking the 30th anniversary of the passing of our 
cultural icon, Rory Gallagher. I am grateful to the people in the City Council whose 
work helped make that such a wonderful celebration of his life. 
The prime focus of the office of Ardmhéara must rightly be on the life and on the people 
of the city. Part of the function of the role also includes Cork’s place in the wider world. 
The limitations of local government being understood, this Council has stated its 
concerns about the lack of justice found in many places across the globe. 
It is right that the Council does so. In doing that we are reflecting the international 
concern given to Cork and Ireland over a century ago, when as a nation we sought 
independence, during which our city was burned after the deaths of two honoured 

wearers of this chain and holders of this office, Tomás MacCurtain and Terence 
McSwiney. The international support and solidarity offered then must be returned and 
given to those who are undergoing injustice undermining their right to be. 
The Palestinian people are being slaughtered by an amoral government that denies that 
people the right to exist. Cork stands with Palestinian people, and calls for governments 
around the world to condemn and remove any traces of support from an evil 
government that continues to subject Palestinian people to what are nothing less than 
war crimes. 
Similarly the malevolent aggression of Russia against Ukraine must be brought to an 
end. We have warmly taken in a significant number of Ukrainians into our city, and our 
city is immeasurably better for their being here. As our guests, for them we must 
constantly call out the unacceptable invasion of their country. 
As a city of welcome, a city of inclusion, we must continue to build upon the positive 
movement of people, of new communities into our city, people whose decisions to 
work, learn and live among us have made this city a better and stronger place to be. 
Our other international responsibility is to live up to our obligation of being a Climate 
Neutral and Smart City, with the added lustre of having an EU Mission label. The 
climate emergency remains the essential issue of our time. Our ability to deal with the 
threats imposed, is not only necessary, if successfully done it can be to our benefit. 
We are planting close to five thousand trees a year. We are improving the public realm 
in the city in a people centred way. The Marina Promenade, which I had honour of 
opening, enhancing the jewel that is Marina Park. 
The proposed development of Douglas Street, now at public consultation, has the 
potential to re-invent that neighbourhood. These are the ways in which we will make 
our city better. 
The greenest buildings are those already built. The more vacant and derelict building 
brought back into use, the more people living in the city centre, the better our city will 
be. We are making progress, but that needs to be faster. 
The same is true of our public transport infrastructure. Significant announcements have 
been made over the last twelve months. It is vital that these projects are financed and 
quickly brought quickly into being. 
As my time as Ardmhéara draws to a close, there are people I must thank for helping 
me do this role to the best of my ability. There is our Deputy Lord Mayor, Cllr. Honore 
Kamegni, whose historic election has been more than justified with the dignity in which 
he has performed his role. I have huge pride for the ways my daughter, Saoirse, has 
performed her role as Lady Mayoress. 
The office of the Lord Mayor is excellently served by Nicola O’Sullivan and Finbarr 
Archer. I am so grateful in how they have helped me to define my time in office. 
Similarly key people in Corporate and Community Affairs steered me in all the right 
directions. 

I thank you Comharleoiri for how we have collectively discussed and decided how 
our city can best reach its potential. 
Local government in Ireland is not what it can be and less than what it should be. 
Within the confines that exist I have tried to represent this city as best as I could. It 
has been the greatest honour of my life to have done so. 
To conclude I will repeat the words I said in finishing my acceptance speech on taking 
this office on June 21st, 2024. 
Is í an uaillmhian atá agam ná an Chathair bhródúil seo a leiriú. Cathair atá ag dul 
chun tosaigh sna laethanta atá le teacht. Corcaigh bródúil. Corcaigh níos fearr. 
Corcaigh nua, agus lean ar aghaidh, Corcaigh abú 
Go raibh maith agaibh go léir. 
 
3.  
ELECTED MEMBERS ADDRESS  
 
 
Comhairleoirí O Moran, N. O’ Flynn, S. Martin, J. Lynch, S. O’ Callaghan, K. 
McCarthy, J. Maher, and T. Tynan addressed the meeting on behalf of their respective 
groups.  
 
4.            CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ADDRESS   
 
 
The Chief Executive, Valerie O’ Sullivan addressed the meeting. 
 
5.            ELECTION OF AN tARDMHÉARA 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle requested nominations for the office of 
Ardmhéara for the coming year. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher and seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Coleman, Comhairleoir F. Dennehy was nominated for the office of Ardmhéara for 
the coming year.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Tynan and seconded by Comhairleoir B. 
McCarthy, Comhairleoir B. McCarthy was nominated for the office of Ardmhéara for 
the coming year.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Kerins and seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
Comhairleoir M. Gould was nominated for the office of Ardmhéara for the coming 
year.  
 
A vote was called for where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR F. DENNEHY 
 
Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, N. O’ Flynn, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. 

Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. 
Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’ Brien, C. O’ Connor (23) 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR B. MCCARTHY 
 
Comhairleoirí T. Tynan and B. McCarthy. (2) 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR M. GOULD 
 
Comhairleoirí M. Gould, K. Collins, F. Kerins, N. O’ Connor, J. Lynch. 5) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting for Comhairleoir F. Dennehy were greater than those voting for 
Comhairleoirí B. McCarthy and M. Gould, An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle 
declared Comhairleoir F. Dennehy elected to the office of Ardmhéara for the coming 
year. 
 
6.           AN tARDMHÉARA’S ADDRESS 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir F. Dennehy addressed An Chomhairle as follows:- 
 
 
A Phríomhfheidhmeannach, a Fheisirí de Pharlaimint na hEorpa, a Theachtaí Dála, a 
Sheanadóirí, a Chomhairleoirí, a Dhaoine Uaisle, a aíonna oirirce, a chairde agus 
clann. 
Chief Executive, MEP’s, Deputies, Senators, Councillors, Ladies and gentlemen, 
distinguished guests, friends, and family, 
Standing before you tonight as the incoming Lord Mayor of Cork fills me with both 
profound humility and immense pride.  
To me, this role is not just a title; it is a sacred trust bestowed upon me by the people 
of this great city. I am deeply honoured to accept it and fully aware of the 
responsibility it carries. 
As I assume this office, I am conscious of the legacy I step into. Cork has been 
graced by leaders of vision and courage, none more so than 2 of our city’s greatest 
hero’s Terence MacSwiney and Tomás Mac Curtain.  
Their sacrifices remind us that this position is not merely about governance; it is 
about service, about embodying the values, aspirations, and resilience of the people 
of Cork. 
I wish to pay tribute to our outgoing Lord Mayor, Councillor Dan Boyle. We are 
extremely fortunate in Cork to have had exceptional Lord Mayors over the years and 
Cllr Boyle has very much maintained this standard. 

Throughout his term, he represented Cork with pride and distinction on both national 
and international stages. His commitment to initiatives including advocating of 
converting derelict buildings into housing, expansion of green spaces, sustainable 
transport and the circular economy has set a standard that I pledge to uphold and build 
upon. Thank you, Cllr Boyle for your dedication to our city. 
I also want to recognize the outgoing Lady Mayoress Saoirse Hurley for her 
remarkable contributions, especially her wonderful fundraising efforts for local 
organizations.  
To outgoing Deputy Lord Mayor Councillor Honore Kamegni, your dedication and 
commitment to Cork have been inspiring. Achieving so much in such a short time is a 
testament to your resilience and vision. Thank you for your exemplary service. 
Tonight, I am very proud and privileged to honour another former Lord Mayor John 
Dennehy. 42 years ago you helped lead Cork through one of its most extraordinary 
years: the Cork 800 celebrations. Your leadership and collaboration with businesses 
and communities laid the foundation for a year of pride and achievement that still 
resonates in Cork.  
From twinning Cork with San Francisco to representing us nationally as a Dail 
member, your legacy is very evident both in the city and in your local community. 
Thank you for your continued service and dedication to our city and of course thank 
you for everything that you have done for me as my father in both my political and 
personal life. 
Today, Cork stands at a crossroads, facing challenges that demand bold vision and 
decisive action. Housing is among our most pressing concerns. With a huge projected 
population growth in the coming years, we must ensure every citizen has access to 
quality social and affordable housing. This requires collaboration across all sectors, 
and I commit to accelerating development while preserving the unique character of 
our city. 
Our transport and infrastructure are undergoing transformative change. Projects like 
the Luas light rail and BusConnects promise to make Cork more connected and 
sustainable. However, we must ensure these initiatives serve all residents equitably 
and protect our environment for generations to come. 
Safety in our city centre is another priority. Cork’s heart must be a place where 
everyone feels welcome and secure. By working closely with An Garda Síochána, 
businesses, and community groups, we will maintain confidence and vibrancy to our 
city centre. I very much welcome the recent appointment of a Director with specific 
responsibility for the city centre and also the collaboration with the CBA to provide 
city centre wardens. I will work closely with all of the stakeholders to achieve our 
goals here to make our city even safer. 
Cork’s opportunities are as significant as its challenges. We are taking bold steps to 
become a global leader in sustainability, with initiatives like Local Green Deals and 
investments in renewable energy and green spaces. These efforts are investments in 
our children’s future, and we as a community, will continue to build on them. 

Economically, Cork is poised for considerable growth with plans for thousands of 
new jobs in the coming years. We are already seeing huge investment in our public 
realm and there is much more to follow. The Cork Docklands redevelopment aims to 
transform the area into a vibrant, sustainable urban quarter with residential, 
commercial, and cultural spaces, prioritizing connectivity, green infrastructure, and 
economic growth 
But growth must be inclusive, lifting all citizens and all communities. We will 
prioritize education, skills training, and support for local businesses to ensure that 
everyone benefits. 
For me, Cork has always been about its people and communities. Everything we do as 
a city council must be guided by their needs and aspirations. I will continue to work 
closely with community groups, sporting organizations, our elected representatives 
and the voluntary sector to strengthen the bonds that have already made this city so 
special.  
One of my priorities will be to make City Hall more accessible to all our citizens. It is 
not my City Hall; it is yours. I would love to invite every citizen to share in its beauty, 
history, and vision. Obviously it would be physically impossible for me to bring all 
230,000 citizens in over the next year, but together with the city executive, I will work 
to make this a reality for the future. 
In summary, I pledge to work to acknowledge and strengthen our beautiful 
communities, to work with our young people to ensure that they can be the best that 
they can be, to collaborate with each and every elected member here across the 
political spectrum, to work closely with our executive and officials and to work with 
all stakeholders to make this city a place that all Corkonians can be proud of. 
Finally, I want to express my deepest gratitude to the citizens of Cork for placing your 
trust in me. I accept this mantle with a profound sense of responsibility and a 
determination to honour the legacy of those who have come before me. 
 
7.           ELECTED MEMBERS ADDRESS 
 
              Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, C. O’ Connor, D. Cahill, N. O’ Flynn, K. McCarthy, J. 
Lynch, T. Tynan, and A. Deasy addressed the meeting on behalf of their respective 
groups.  
 
 
8.           CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ADDRESS   
 
 
The Chief Executive, Valerie O’ Sullivan, addressed the meeting. 
 
9.  
ELECTION OF LEAS ARDMHÉARA 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir F. Dennehy requested nominations for the office of 
Leas Ardmhéara for the coming year. 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan and seconded by Comhairleoir M. R. 
Desmond, Comhairleoir M. McDonnell was nominated for the office of Leas 
Ardmhéara for the coming year. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy and seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Tynan, Comhairleoir T. Tynan was nominated for the office of Leas Ardmhéara for 
the coming year. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould proposed and seconded by Comhairleoir 
J. Lynch, Comhairleoir N. O’ Connor was nominated for the office of Leas Ardmhéara 
for the coming year. 
 
A vote was called for where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR M. MCDONNELL  
 
Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. 
Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, 
P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, 
T. Coleman, G. O’ Brien, C. O’ Connor (22) 
 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR T. TYNAN 
 
Comhairleoirí T. Tynan and B. McCarthy. (2) 
 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR N. O’ CONNOR 
 
Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, F. Kerins, N. O’ Connor, J. Lynch. 
(6) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting for Comhairleoir M. McDonnell were greater than those voting for 
Comhairleoirí T. Tynan and N. O’ Connor , An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir F. Dennehy 
declared Comhairleoir M. McDonnell elected to the office of Leas Ardmhéara for the 
coming year. 
 
 
An Leas Ardmhéara, Comhairleoir M. McDonnell addressed the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
