MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 9th MARCH 2026 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, 
N. O’Flynn.  
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, 
N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Ms. N. Carroll, A/Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Mr. J. Stapleton, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Lane family on the death of Jim Lane. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Gerald McCarthy. 
• The O’Mahony family on the death of Rosarie O’Mahony. 
• The Delea family on the death of Edward (Eddie) Delea. 
• The Kenny family on the death of Martin Kenny. 
• The Wilson family on the death of Colin Wilson. 
• The O’Riordan family on the death of Claire O’Riordan. 

• The McCarthy family on the death of Frances McCarthy. 
• The White family on the death of Joe White. 
• The Gaffney family on the death of David Gaffney. 
• The Notley family on the death of Barry Notley. 
• The Canty family on the death of Austin Canty. 
• The Kearney family on the death of Marian Kearney. 
• The Andrews family on the death of Angela Andrews. 
• The Cronin family on the death of Kathleen Cronin. 
• The Long family on the death of Margaret Long. 
• The Broderick family on the death of Brefney Broderick. 
• The Hegarty family on the death of Donal Hegarty. 
• The Herlihy family on the death of Mary Herlihy. 
• The Hinchy family on the death of Edward James Hinchy. 
• The O’Connor family on the death of Frank O’Connor. 
• The Power family on the death of James Rodger Power. 
• The Ronan family on the death of Jim Ronan. 
• The Wycherley-Clifford family on the death of Raymond Wycherley-
Clifford. 
• The Cremin family on the death of Con Cremin. 
• The Cunneen family on the death of Kathleen Cunneen. 
• The Murray family on the death of Eileen Murray. 
• The Carroll family on the death of Sandra Carroll. 
• The Higgins family on the death of Dylla Higgins. 
• The Allen family on the death of Simon Allen. 
• The Hickey family on the death of Kathleen Hickey. 
• The Atkinson family on the death of Peter Atkinson. 
• The White family on the death of Eileen White. 
• The Foley family on the death of Ian Foley. 
• The O’Donoghue family on the death of Maura O’Donoghue. 
• The Cooke family on the death of Ronnie Cooke. 
• The Foran family on the death of Leo Foran. 
• The O’Flaherty family on the death of Frank O’Flaherty. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Josephine O’Sullivan. 
• The Barry family on the death of Denis Barry. 
• The Kelly family on the death of Noel Kelly. 
• The Murray family on the death of Siobhan Murray. 
• The Lande family on the death of Thomas Lande. 
• The Gavin family on the death of Michael Gavin. 
• The McMahon family on the death of Vincent McMahon. 
• The Cosgrave family on the death of Chris Cosgrave. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Rose Murphy. 
• The Leddin family on the death of John Leddin. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Mary Crilly on receiving the jury’s Special Recognition at the 2026 Mayor 
Paweł Adamowicz Award. 

• Gaelscoil na Dúglaise on the ‘Gaeltacht na Dúglaise’ campaign. 
• Joe Cunningham on stepping down as General Secretary of SIPTU. 
• The ACA Performing Arts Academy on their success at the Excel Dance 
Events Championship in Coventry. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
LORD MAYOR LED DELEGATION 
 
 
An tArdmhéara noted the success of the recent Lord Mayor led delegation to the 
United States and thanked all who took part. 
 
3.2 
CONDUCT AT COUNCIL MEETINGS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara requested that debates during Council Meetings not be personalised, 
and that members ensure that their contributions during Meetings relate solely to 
Agenda items. 
 
3.3 
ST. PATRICK’S DAY 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members of St. Patrick’s Day arrangements which have 
been circulated. 
 
3.4 
WOMEN’S CAUCUS 
 
 
An Chomhairle received a report from the Women’s Caucus presented by 
Comhairleoir C. O’Connor.  
 
3.5 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir K. Collins to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
‘There are ongoing daily protests on Knockpogue and Knockfree Avenues 
That schools, local businesses and sporting organisations have publicly, and privately, 
expressed their opposition to the project in recent days 
Attempts at informal engagement by Council with these stakeholders, and local 
residents, has not worked 
Stationing security guards at a site in a residential area is negative and further damages 
the relationship between communities and Cork City Council 
And agrees that: 
All non-formal avenues have now been exhausted 
Formal, independent and agreed mediation is the most credible next step to rebuild 
trust and engage with stakeholders constructively.’ 
 
An tArdmhéara advised that the Meeting Administrator’s advice was that this matter 
had been debated at a recent meeting of An Chomhairle, so the motion couldn’t be 
taken again for six months, as per standing orders. 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. 
Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, N. 
O’Connor, J. Lynch. (13) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, 
D. Cahill, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, T. Coleman. (8) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí P. Horgan, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (3) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the  
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the  
proposal defeated. 
 
3.6 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir N. O’Connor to address An Chomhairle on 
motion 46 on Appendix 1, Cork City Central Library:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees with the 10 "Must Have" points put forward by the 
voluntary Cork Library Action Group, namely: 
 
1. Ample physical space to meet the needs of a world class, 21st century library 
befitting a modern European city. This must be no less than the 7,700m2 
envisioned in the URDF funding application. A building of stature. The new 
library must be a landmark location. A building of style and scale. A cathedral of 
learning with architecture in keeping with surrounding buildings. 
 
2. An accessible city centre location. The library is the most used cultural building 
in Cork and must remain in a location that is widely accessible to all, both day and 
night. It should be connected to at least two streets and have a large public façade. 
The design should be neurodivergent friendly and include a sensory space. 
 
3. Different spaces to meet different needs. The best modern libraries provide three 
distinct environments, spread across interconnected floors. 
a. An entrance floor that acts as a new enclosed City Square and connects to 
the public realm at the front of the building. This space will allow people 
to meet, chat and connect. 
b. A middle floor designed to feed and spark the imagination with dedicated 
spaces for children and young people that can host workshops/clubs (e.g. 
Lego clubs, art clubs, computer clubs etc) 
c. A top floor with a focus on life and learning with space for workshops, 
classes, study rooms, project rooms and at least 175 study spaces. 
 
4. A mix of cultural spaces to include a lecture and performance space, exhibition 
space, meeting rooms for bookclubs and other cultural groups. 
 

5. An enhanced Rory Gallagher Music Library with sufficient space for 
collections, recitals, rehearsal and recording. 
 
6. An enlarged Centre for Cork Local Studies that holds the collective memory of 
the people of our city. 
 
7. Sustainability at its heart. This includes effective use of natural light, a reduced 
environmental impact and a green rooftop garden. It should also include floor to 
ceiling windows that take in views of the river. 
 
8. More than a collection of books; it should be a library of things. A place where 
you can borrow a guitar, a sewing machine or a chessboard. 
 
9. Facilities for all. This means accessible baby changing facilities, toilets, a small 
kitchen, a breastfeeding room and places for people to sit and relax in warmth. A 
space for all. 
 
10. The support of the people therefore we call on Cork City Council to urgently 
undertake a public consultation on this important project. 
 
Cork City Council therefore agrees to write to the Minister with responsibility for 
libraries to seek his urgent engagement on making these calls a reality as part of a new 
world class city library, befitting the republic’s second city.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. N. O’Connor, Cllr. D. Boyle, Cllr. B. McCarthy, Cllr. J. Sheehan, 
Cllr. J. Maher, Cllr. F. Kerins, Cllr. C. O'Connor 26/169) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, 
a vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. 
O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, C. O’Connor. (16) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, F. Dennehy, T. 
Coleman. (11) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the  
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the  
proposal defeated.  
 
An Chomhairle noted that the motion will be considered, as referred by the Meetings 
Administrator, by the Community, Culture & Placemaking Strategic Policy 
Committee. 
 
 

4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
None received. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 9th February 2026. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
FUNDING APPLICATION TO NTA OR TII 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive whether Cork City Council has prepared, assessed or 
submitted, at any time, a funding application to the National Transport Authority or 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland for the provision of public lighting and associated 
pedestrian and road infrastructure between Blarney, Paud’s Cross and Tower, a stretch 
of approximately 1.3km, and if not, to set out the reasons no application was made? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The road in question is a regional road for which Cork City Council is responsible 
since the boundary extension process. The route is also, however, identified as a 
primary cycle route in the Cycle Connects Plan and, as such, funding support for 
related improvements can be sought under Active Travel Programme of the National 
Transport Authority. 
 
In this context, the City Council has had ongoing engagement with National Transport 
Authority relating to the delivery of active travel infrastructure in the North West of 
the City. As part of this process, funding has recently been provided for the delivery 
of the Knockpogue Ave/Knockfree Ave Improvement scheme as well as the 
completion of Rapid Delivery Pedestrian Improvement Scheme (covering works at 
Fairfield, John F Connolly Rd, Churchfield Rd, Monacnappa etc) and the new active 
travel connections to the Blarney Business Park. Funding support has also been 
provided for the design and planning of additional improvement schemes including 
those for Kerry Pike, Nashs Boreen, Glenryan Rd, Cattlemarket Ave, Blarney and the 
Northern Distributor Road.  
 
The proposals for Blarney extend across the existing urban area and are at an advanced 
stage of development. The related preliminary designs will be presented to Members 
shortly and then published for public consultation under the Part 8 planning process. 
When the proposals for the new active travel infrastructure in the Blarney urban area 
advance beyond the planning approval and design stages, Council will be able to seek 
approval to commence preliminary design/feasibility work for the onward 
connections including those westwards towards Tower as suggested. Members will be 

kept appraised of ongoing progress in relation to the development of related proposals 
and the delivery of the overall capital works programme. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.2 
PROMOTING THE REVITALISATION OF OUR NATIVE LANGUAGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Re. Motion 22/060 
  
I wish to ask the CEO what actions the Council intends to take to promote an Irish 
Language Day to coincide with Saint Patrick’s Day as per a previous response by the 
then CEO Ann Doherty to Motion 22/060 (May 2022). I fully appreciate that much is 
done through (Seachtain na Gaeilge) during the month of March however the spirit of 
the said motion is to encourage the people of Cork to use the Irish Language when 
and where possible or as appropriately on the Eve of the Saint Patrick’s Day Festivities 
(March 16th) thereby revitalizing the Irish Language overall and over time. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council through the Community Team and the Irish Language Officer are 
proactive in encouraging the people of Cork to use the Irish Language when and where 
possible. Cork City Council will host over 35 events throughout its library network 
during the month of March as part of Seachtain na Gaeilge (1st-17th March). This will 
include the distribution of a booklet of recent poems from the award-winning Peann 
agus Pár creative writing in Irish workshop which celebrated its ten year anniversary 
in 2025. 
 
This year, to celebrate St. Patrick’s Eve 16th March as Lá na Gaeilge in the city, Cork 
City Council, in conjunction with the partner organisations, is delivering the 
following: 
 
• Lá na Gaeilge Ciorcal na gCiorcal conversation circle in the Millenium, City 
Hall with surprise musical guest at 11.00 a.m. 
• The distribution of a bilingual phrasebook to clients of Cork Chamber, Cork 
Business Association and Local Enterprise Offices to encourage companies 
and customers alike to conduct business using standard Irish phrases. These 
will also be available through our Library Network as they were in 2025. 
• An intercultural exchange on language preservation and cultural continuity 
with Fundación Cultural Ayllu Tarabucomanta, Bolivia in the Council 
Chamber, City Hall. 
• Oiche Gaelach in the Clayton Hotel on the evening of 16th March le Gaelgóirí 
Cois Laoi. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 

Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.3 
BISHOPSTOWN PRIMARY CARE CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
With construction of the Bishopstown Primary Care  Centre at Ardrostig set to 
commence shortly, and in light of the concerns identified in Planning 
Ref. 24/43027 regarding pedestrian safety, cyclist access and public transport 
connectivity at the busy N71 Bandon Road / roundabout junction, what specific off-
site active travel, pedestrian safety and universal accessibility improvements will Cork 
City Council and/or  in conjunction  with TII and the NTA, require and deliver on the 
public road network to ensure the centre is safely and equitably accessible to 
vulnerable users, including older people, wheelchair users, families and those 
attending mental health and oncology services? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Planning permission for a new Primary Care Centre at Ardrostig, Bishopstown was 
granted on the 4th February 2024 subject to 24 conditions. As of yet no commencement 
notice has been submitted for the application and compliance with the conditions of 
planning remains outstanding. The planning application, like all applications 
submitted to Cork City Council, was subject to a full and detailed assessment by the 
Planning Authority in line with the policies and objectives of the City Development 
Plan and further to input from all relevant internal and external reporting bodies on all 
relevant issues including transportation, access and connectivity. The final decision to 
grant permission was made in the above context with the Planning Authority satisfied 
that the proposed development is in accordance with the proper planning a sustainable 
development of the area.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
6.4 
PUBLIC LIGHTING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the overall number of public lighting poles that require 
structural intervention across the city broken into wards in tabular form, the overall 
cost of such repairs and the timelines available of the repairs of same from the ESB 
and other agencies. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The 2021 Public Lighting Strategy for Cork City identified the need to replace a total 
of 11,500 public lighting columns due to structural deterioration, electrical cable 
non-compliance etc. 

 
Phase 1 requires Cork City Council to replace 1,000 of the highest-risk columns.  
 
Progress to date is as follows: 
 
• 
479 columns have been fully replaced and energised. 
• 
179 columns are scheduled for civil works completion in Q2 2026. 
• 
The remaining 342 columns will be progressed when funding is available 
 
In parallel, work has also begun on Phase 2 which focuses on the 5,000 worst-affected 
columns citywide. A detailed breakdown of these columns per Local Electoral Area 
(LEA) is available. 
 
To date, the average cost per column replacement is €10,000, which includes: 
 
• 
Column replacement 
• 
Replacement of associated cabling 
• 
Ducting 
• 
Reinstatement works 
 
Based on delivery to date, the indicative programme for each estate is as follows: 
 
• 
Civil and electrical works: approximately 4–6 weeks per estate 
• 
ESB energisation and de-energisation works: currently subject to a 9-month 
lead time following completion of civil and electrical works 
• 
Decommissioning and removal of old columns occur after ESB works are 
finalised 
 
These programme durations reflect the significant national pressures on ESB 
Networks scheduling, combined with the scale and complexity of citywide public 
lighting upgrades. 
 
John Stapleton, 
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate.  
 
6.5 
TRAFFIC SURVEYS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of locations in the city in the last three years 
where there have been road traffic surveys conducted (e.g. traffic number counts, ‘free 
speed’ surveys, etc.); and that the results of these be shared with elected members? 
 
REPLY 
 
Road traffic surveys including but not limited to traffic number counts, speed surveys 
etc are carried out for several reasons across different Directorates. These surveys are 
typically held within the individual project files. The surveys are currently filed on a 

project basis as opposed to a locational basis and are currently not held within a central 
repository. 
 
The RMO are in the process of creating a national shared database of traffic surveys 
including those within Cork City. Members will be advised when this database is 
complete. Specific information relating to a particular location can be made available 
upon request.  
 
John Stapleton,  
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate.  
 
6.6 
ROAD SAFETY CONCERNS – SHOURNAGH GROVE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the CE if Cork City Council is aware of serious road safety concerns held by 
residents of Shournagh Grove in Togher owing to the fact the estate is being used as 
a short-cut by motorists to by-pass the Togher Road/Clashduv Road junction; and if - 
in light of these serious concerns (and the fact the estate has not been taken-in-charge 
by Road Operations) - the Council's Housing Directorate will arrange for the 
installation of appropriate traffic calming measures in the estate, in consultation with 
residents. 
 
REPLY 
 
Following the taking-in-charge process Shournagh Grove will be added to the list of 
locations for assessment of traffic calming needs. Each year Roads Operations present 
all requests for traffic calming to each LAC. Members then select locations in 
conjunction with the engineering advice received and subject to funds being available. 
Accordingly, the measures sought for Shournagh Grove can be brought forward 
through this established mechanism.  
 
John Stapleton, 
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate.  
 
Nicky Carroll, 
A/Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.7 
BUS INTERCHANGE AT BLACK ASH PARK AND RIDE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on development of a bus interchange 
at the Black Ash Park and Ride, given Part 8 planning approval by this Council at its 
public meeting of June 9th, 2025? 

 
 
REPLY 
 
The NTA’s BusConnects Network Redesign team is advancing the detailed design of 
the Black Ash Bus Interchange, with the aim of completing the construction tender 
process later this year. Construction would then follow, subject to funding and other 
required consents. 
 
John Stapleton, 
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate. 
 
6.8 
HOUSING HOMELESS AGENCIES FINANCE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for the breakdown of finance given to housing homeless agencies in 
the city in 2025 & for 2026? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
This information is published annually on the Department of Housing Local 
Government and Heritage’s website.  
 
2025 expenditure is due to be published shortly and can be viewed at the following 
link  Homelessness data 
 
Funding for 2026 is under consideration and can be supplied in Q2 2026. 
 
Nicky Carroll, 
A/Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.9 
CAR PARKING SPACES – CITY COUNCIL STAFF 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail how many free car-parking spaces are made 
available to Cork City Council staff, including at City Hall, North Main Street car 
park, and elsewhere, not including the Black Ash Park & Ride, and whether Cork City 
Council could charge a token sum for these car-parking spaces to lead by example by 
removing the perverse fossil fuel subsidy of free car parking. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Council currently makes parking available to staff based on business need, 
seniority and length of service.  As a significant number of staff are required to visit 
sites across the city, the Council has 6 electric bikes, 1 cargo bike and 2 electric 

vehicles available to staff for these visits.  Nonetheless, many staff are still required 
to use their personal vehicles during their work day.   
 
Ninety parking spaces in the basement of the New Civic Offices are used by City 
Council employees, Councillors and contractors.  A further 40 spaces are available at 
Anglesea Terrace, and 43 spaces are available in Union Quay car park. In addition, 86 
spaces are available on the roof of the New Civic Offices. While there is no fixed 
number of spaces allocated to City Council staff in North Main Street car park, in 
2025 an average of 36 staff parked there per day.  The provision of parking to staff is 
the subject of an agreement reached through WRC conciliation and accordingly 
cannot be changed unilaterally by the Council.  
 
The City Council promotes the Bike to Work and Taxsaver schemes to all staff and in 
2025 approved 47 applications for the Bike to Work Scheme and 54 applications for 
Travel Pass Scheme. A cycling confidence course was organised to enable staff who 
had not cycled for some time to reengage in a safe environment.  We participated in 
the NTA’s Ready Set Cycle programme and three City Council teams placed in the 
top 5 nationally for the number of trips made by bicycle.  The Council has two 
dedicated months during which walking is promoted and was selected to participate 
the Smarter Travel Scheme led by the Department of Transport and the National 
Transport Authority where staff could avail of a free €100 Leap for commuting in and 
out of work. 
 
Mike Larkin, 
Director of Services, 
People & Organisation Development. 
 
6.10 
OPERATIONAL INEFFICIENCIES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive outline where she sees the biggest operational inefficiencies 
within the Cork City Council structure, and what specific plans she has to improve the 
Council's overall cost base without sacrificing the quality or level of the principle 
important services provided to the public? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
As Chief Executive, I am committed to the prudent stewardship of public funds and 
resources, ensuring that the City Council exercises rigorous and ongoing oversight of 
all Council expenditure and the achievement of value for money. This approach is 
fundamental to the effective management of a large public organisation. From the 
Department level down to the internal audit function, Local Government Auditor, 
Audit Committee & the National Oversight & Audit Commission (NOAC), a 
comprehensive audit system is in place within public bodies like the Council, 
reinforcing accountability and transparency throughout the organisation.  
 
In addition to robust internal controls, the City Council is subject to both external and 
internal audits, which maintain consistent scrutiny over operational expenditures and 

the Council’s cost structure. Over recent months, measures such as the reduction of 
overtime and reduced Foreign Travel have been further strengthened, supported by a 
dedicated team that continuously monitors expenditure and work practices across the 
Council 
 
Valerie O’Sullivan 
Chief Executive 
 
6.11 
HOLLYWOOD DRIVE & BRAMBLE COTTAGES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE provide an update on the tender for the completion of homes at Hollywood 
Drive and Bramble Cottages, the date that security was contracted for Hollywood 
Drive, the cost of this security, who is paying for this security and when these homes 
will be completed. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Following the unfortunate liquidation of its original contractor, the Council was 
required, in accordance with standard procedures for public contracts, to take 
immediate steps to safeguard public assets valued at just under €3 million. Under the 
terms of the initial contract, the Council has access to an insurance bond and a 
significant retention fund which it holds in trust, both of which provide financial 
coverage that far exceeds the Council’s security expenditure. This expenditure will be 
included in the Final Account submission to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage, the project’s funding authority, and will be easily offset by 
credits from the bond and retention fund as per the process. 
 
Securing the site of a publicly funded housing scheme is both a prudent and necessary 
action and aligns with established contractual norms in situations where a contractor 
enters liquidation. Separately, the Council has completed the procurement process for 
the outstanding work at Hollywood Drive and Bramble Cottages, and a new contract 
has been awarded. The homes at Hollywood Drive are scheduled for completion in 
June 2026. 
 
It would not be appropriate to make public comment on final project costs including 
security until all matters have been taken into account and finalised between the 
Council, Bondsman and the appointed liquidator. 
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.12 
HOUSING PROGRESS COMPLETION REPORTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of properties that were identified as completed or 
substantially completed in the last 3 Housing Progress Completion Reports by ward 
that have been allocated and are occupied and the number that remain unallocated or 
unoccupied in tabular form. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Development 
Status 
Errigal Heights  
Allocated 
Ballincrokig, 
Ballyvolane  
Allocated 
Glen Ryan Rd  
Allocated 
Hollywood Estate  
 
Substantially 
complete. Previous 
contractor went into 
receivership. A new 
Contractor has been 
appointed to finish 
the works. 
Madonna House 
(Phase 2) 
Ballincollig 
Allocated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development  
Dominick Street  
 
Status 
Lease in progress 
with service 
provider. 
Bramble Cottage 
 
Substantially 
complete.  Previous 
contractor went into 
receivership. A new 
Contractor has been 
appointed to finish 
the works. 
Lower John Street  
 
Allocated 
Millfield Cottages 
Allocated 
Baker St., 
Ballincollig  
Allocated 
Fairfield View 
Allocated 

Link Road, 
Ballincollig 
Allocated 
Riverside Farm, 
Model Farm Road  
Allocated 
Strawberry Hill 
 
Allocations in 
Progress 
Glanmire Lodge, 
Glanmire 
Allocated 
Jacobs Island, 
Mahon  
Allocated 
Ashbrook, Glanmire  
 
Allocations in 
Progress 
5 Smithgrove 
Terrace 
Allocated 
 
Barretts Lane 
 
Substantially 
completed 
Waterfall Heights  
Allocated 
Longview, 
Ballyvolane 
Allocated 
Spancel Rise,  
Fairfield Road 
Nominations with 
AHB to progress. 
Rockbrook, 
Sallybrook  
 
Recently completed. 
Nominations to 
issue. 
 
Nicky Carroll, 
A/Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.13 
ST. AUGUSTINE’S CHURCH 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive will she arrange a meeting with the Diocese of Cork and 
Ross to discuss potentials of immediate use for St. Augustine’s Church. This space is 
in the heart of the city & we should investigate whether it can be used for a 
community/ arts space, museum or event location in the short term while deciding a 
long-term plan, in conjunction with the Diocese, this space should not remain vacant. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
St Augustine’s Church is owned by the Diocese of Cork and Ross. Cork City Council 
notes the recent announcement by the Diocese in relation to St. Augustine’s. As this 
is a privately owned building Cork City Council does not have a remit in terms of the 
future use of the building. The local authority can make itself available to the Diocese 
to advise and assist as appropriate in their consideration of future uses for the building.   
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 

Planning & Integrated Development 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.14 
BUS STOPS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE who is responsible for the enabling works for a New Bus Stop and the 
enhancement of an existing Bus stops. 
 
Currently the responsibility seems to go from the NTA, Busconnects and Cork City 
Council which makes progress on these issues challenging. 
 
REPLY 
 
New Bus Stops to be provided via Bus Connects 
The NTA launched its new design for the Cork Metropolitan Bus Network in June 
2022. The Network Redesign Project, part of BusConnects Cork, is intended to 
transform the public transport network across the Cork Metropolitan Area. The new 
network will involve the creation of new bus routes and improved bus frequencies to 
help transform the public transport network to meet anticipated growth and future 
demand in the region. The NTA are providing new bus stops across the city as part of 
this project. 
 
The NTA Bus Stop Enhancement Programme will also enable Cork City Council, to 
enhance existing bus stop facilities within its administrative area, including the 
provision of bus shelters where appropriate. Cork City Council carry out the required 
enabling works at the bus stop and the NTA then install any required bus shelters, 
through a central supply contract.  Note the NTA is responsible for the subsequent 
maintenance of these bus shelters. 
 
John Stapleton, 
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS  
 
7.1 
ROAD SAFETY IMPROVEMENT WORKS AT THE JUNCTION OF FRIAR 
STREET (L5186), TOWER STREET (L5106) AND FRIAR’S WALK (L5026) - 
APPROVAL UNDER SECTION 38 OF THE ROAD TRAFFIC ACT 1994 (AS 
AMENDED) 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
A/Director of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 4th February 
2026, following public consultation, on the proposed Road Safety Improvement 

Works at the Junction of Friar Street (L5186), Tower Street (L5106) and Friar’s Walk 
(L5026), pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 
46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
7.2 
ROAD SAFETY IMPROVEMENT WORKS AT THE JUNCTION OF THE 
R608 MAGAZINE ROAD, THE R849 GLASHEEN ROAD AND THE L98492 
COOLGARTEN PARK - APPROVAL UNDER SECTION 38 OF THE ROAD 
TRAFFIC ACT 1994 (AS AMENDED) 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
A/Director of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 4th February 
2026, following public consultation, on the proposed Road Safety Improvement 
Works at the Junction of the R608 Magazine Road, the R849 Glasheen Road and the 
L98492 Coolgarten Park, pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as 
amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
7.3 
TAKING IN CHARGE OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT HERBERT 
LAWN, BELMONT, MONFIELDSTOWN, ROCHESTOWN, CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate, dated 4th February 2026, in 
relation to the proposed taking in charge of roads serving the development at Herbert 
Lawn, Belmont, Monfieldstown, Rochestown, Cork.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Having considered the report of the Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations Directorate, 4th February 2026, and the provisions of Section 11 (1) of 
the Roads Act 1993, it is now hereby declared by this Order that the said roads serving 
Herbert Lawn, Belmont, Monfieldstown, Rochestown, Cork, are public roads.” 
 
7.4 
TAKING IN CHARGE OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT CLUAIN 
CHAOIN, KERRY ROAD, COOLFLUGH, TOWER, CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate, dated 4th February 2026, in 
relation to the proposed taking in charge of roads serving the development at Cluain 
Chaoin, Kerry Road, Coolflugh, Tower, Cork.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Having considered the report of the A/Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations Directorate, 4th February 2026, and the provisions of Section 11 (1) of 
the Roads Act 1993, it is now hereby declared by this Order that the said roads serving 
Cluain Chaoin, Kerry Road, Coolflugh, Tower, Cork are public roads.” 
 
 

7.5 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 26th 
February 2026 on the following property disposal:- 
 
1. Disposal by way of lease of property situated at Former Mahon Health Centre, 
Lakeland Crescent, Mahon, Cork, to Rainbow Club Cork Centre for Autism CLG, 
c/o Comyn Kelleher Tobin Solicitors, No. 2 George’s Quay, Cork for a term of 4 
years and 9 months subject to a rent of €750.00 per annum. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir H. 
Kamegni, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.6 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: EDEL HOUSE, GRATTAN STREET, 
CORK - GOOD SHEPHERD CORK CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 12th February 2026 in relation to a loan facility for Good Shepherd 
Cork CLG in respect of the provision of 37 units of accommodation at Edel House, 
Grattan Street, Cork.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €8,406,891.21 (previously 
€8,349,127.44) be granted to Good Shepherd Cork CLG, subject to the terms of the 
Capital Assistance Scheme for the provision of 37 units of accommodation at Edel 
House, Grattan Street, Cork.”  
 
7.7 
COONEY’S LANE PEDESTRIAN IMPROVEMENT SCHEME - SECTION 38 
APPROVAL  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded by Comhairleoir P. 
Dineen, An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of 
the Director of Services, Infrastructure Development, following public consultation, 
on the proposed Cooney’s Lane Pedestrian Improvement Scheme pursuant to Section 
38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport 
Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
7.8 
BIKE LIBRARY POLICY 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Bike Library Policy. 
 
7.9 
ARCHITECTURAL CONSERVATION AREA GRANT SCHEME 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation 

of the A/Director of Services, Planning & Integrated Development, dated 12th 
February 2026 on the Architectural Conservation Area Grant Scheme. 
 
7.10 
COMMUNITY HERITAGE & BIODIVERSITY GRANT SCHEMES 2026 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir M.R. 
Desmond, An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation 
of the A/Director of Services, Planning & Integrated Development, dated 12th 
February 2026 on the Community Heritage and Biodiversity Grant Schemes. 
 
7.11 
2026 
TWINNING 
GRANT 
APPLICATIONS 
– 
RECOMMENDED 
ALLOCATIONS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, on twinning grant applications received for 2026 
and recommendations for allocations. 
 
7.12 
CORK DOCKLANDS COMMITTEE 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 19th February 2026 on the establishment 
of a Cork Docklands Committee.  
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoirí S. Martin, 
T. Shannon, C. Kelleher, M.R. Desmond, O. Moran, P. Horgan, K. McCarthy, P. 
Dineen, D. Cahill, J. Kavanagh and K. Collins to the Cork Docklands Committee. 
 
7.13 
JOINT CORK CITY & CORK COUNTY COMMITTEE 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 26th February 2026, in relation to the 
establishment of a Joint Cork City and Cork County Committee. 
 
 
An Chomhairle further considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir H. 
Kamegni to the Joint Cork City and Cork County Committee. 
 
7.14 
VACANCIES ON BOARDS AND COMMITTEES 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir N. O’Connor 
to the Holding Committee of Wandesford Quay Arts Centre following the resignation 
of Comhairleoir F. Kerins. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 2nd MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 2nd March 2026. 

 
8.1 
ANNUAL SERVICE DELIVERY PLAN 2026 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Annual Service Delivery Plan for 2026. 
 
8.2 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31st JANUARY 2026  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/01/2026. 
 
8.3 
MOTIONS 
 
8.3.1 
CORK CITY ALERTS SYSTEM 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 26th February 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will review the Cork City Alerts system and invite comment 
from the public on the operation of the flood and severe weather warning system in 
the city, and suggestions for other warnings to include (e.g. air quality).’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 26/077) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that during 2026 Cork City Council will 
review the MapAlerter Public Messaging System with a view to evaluating usage of 
the system.  At present a number of alerts issue through this system including weather, 
flooding and road closures. Options to further develop this system will also be 
reviewed during this review. 
 
8.3.2 
INCREASED REPRESENTATION ON EXTERNAL AGENCIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 26th February 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That this Council seek increased representation on external agencies, such as the 
Southern Regional Authority and the Education and Training Board, to better reflect 
increased population within its administrative area.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 26/098) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Meetings Administrator will write 
to the following organisations seeking an increase in representation on those boards:- 
 
Southern Regional Assembly 
HSE Regional Health Forum 
Cork Education and Training Board 
 
 

8.3.3 
IMPROVED COMMUNICATION WITH STAKEHOLDERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Assistant Chief Executive, 
dated 26th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council review its public consultation process following a project 
going out for public consultation in our city and improve our communication with all 
stakeholders when the final decision is made.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 26/101) 
 
The report of the Assistant Chief Executive stated that it has been agreed at the Party 
Whips meeting of the 23rd February that a workshop with the elected members of 
Council would be facilitated to review the existing City Council’s Part 8 Planning 
Process. This workshop(s) will now also be broadened to include the issues raised in 
this motion. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 23rd FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 23rd February 2026. 
 
9.1 
MOTIONS 
 
9.1.1 
WINTHROP ARCADE 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development, dated 19th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would put plans in place to acknowledge, commemorate and 
celebrate the 100-year Anniversary of the opening of the Winthrop Arcade Retail 
Centre in Cork City.  
 
This beautiful iconic retail centre is located in Cork City Centre and runs between 
Oliver Plunkett Street and Winthrop Street, and it was officially re-opened on May 1st 
1926 by the Lord Mayor of the day, Sean French. The original retail outlets at this 
particular location had been destroyed by British forces in December 1920 during the 
Burning of Cork. 
  
Can I also ask that Cork City Council erect a commemorative plaque at a suitable 
location in the Winthrop Arcade, acknowledging its 100-year history, and maybe 
include a QR code on the plaque which would include details of the history of the 
Winthrop Arcade in our city centre. This would be of keen interest to many residents 
of our city and of course the many tourists who also visit our city.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 26/015) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that in line with the motion, agreement 
has been sought and formally received from the owner of the Arcade to proceed with 
the installation of a commemorative plaque within the premises. The Arcade owner 

has expressed support for the project and has granted permission for the erection of 
an appropriately designed plaque. Work is currently underway to investigate suitable 
plaque options, including materials, design, and the potential inclusion of a QR code 
providing historical information about the Winthrop Arcade. This review will ensure 
that any plaque installed is durable, visually appropriate for the setting, and accessible 
to the public. To support delivery of the project, funding will be sought under the 2026 
Local Authority Commemorative Grant Funding Allocation. Preparation of the 
funding application is in progress, and the project will advance in line with available 
resources. Further updates will be provided to the Elected Members as design options 
are finalised and funding arrangements confirmed. 
 
10. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – 16th 
FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 16th February 2026. 
 
10.1 
MOTIONS 
 
10.1.1 
ANPR CAMERA TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, and A/Director of Services, Local Area Development & 
Operations, dated 4th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council commence the process of evaluating, procuring and tendering 
for ANPR camera technology to enforce key traffic regulations, including: 
 
• Bus lane restrictions (e.g. Coburg Street), 
• Yellow box junction compliance on the city quays, and 
• The private car ban on St. Patrick’s Street. 
 
Those who follow the rules currently feel like fools, while persistent breaches face no 
meaningful sanction. Effective automated enforcement is now essential to restore 
fairness, safety and proper traffic flow across the city.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/604) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that Automatic Number Plate 
Recognition (ANPR) is a tool that can be used in modern road safety and enforcement.  
An Garda Síochána utilise ANPR in cork city in roving patrol cars to identify vehicles 
that are untaxed, uninsured, or stolen in real-time.  
 
This new addition to policing is integrated into patrol cars allowing officers to 
automatically cross-reference number plates against the PULSE database and the Irish 
Motor Insurance Database to detect high-risk road users. 
 
It is the Gardaí Síochána currently who hold the sole power to issue fines for moving 
traffic violations. This includes: 

• 
Driving through the St. Patrick’s Street 
• 
Driving in a bus lane illegally. 
• 
Yellow Box Compliance: Entering and stopping in a yellow box junction 
without a clear exit.  
  
It is however noted that the National Transport Authority (NTA) understands the need 
for future enforcement on Bus Connects routes using camera-based ANPR systems to 
automatically identify and fine unauthorized vehicles using these dedicated Bus 
corridors. However, it has recently been reported that the installation of traffic 
cameras at junctions in Dublin city to catch motorists who break red lights has been 
shelved by the NTA in favour of providing a system that can be scaled and operated 
appropriately.   
 
Reference https://www.irishtimes.com/ireland/dublin/2026/01/01/plan-for-cameras-
to-catch-motorists-breaking-red-lights-in-dublin-is-
shelved/?utm_source=Civi+CRM+linked+mailing+list&utm_campaign=ca6e154b8
5-DN_IRE+02%2F01%2F26&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_-ca6e154b85-
199737722 
 
The introduction of such technology can have a high capital and ongoing costs to 
ensure that penalty points for such illegal activity can be proven and upheld in Court 
under the Roads Act. These resources would be required to be allocated by NTA/RSA 
as part of the Bus Connects/Road safety budget as is the case for speed enforcement. 
Cork City Council will liaise with the NTA who are the lead agency on this issue to 
outline that Cork City is available for any pilot of any future technology which may 
assist for the above violations. 
 
10.1.2 
REVIEW OF PARKING BYE-LAWS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 4th February 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That a review of Cork City Council's parking bye-laws be undertaken so that 
appropriate parking restrictions are in place within the confines of car parks serving 
the city's parks to ensure that appropriate enforcement can be undertaken.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/620) 
 
The report of the A/Director of Services stated that Cork City Council will review the 
parking bye-laws and other appropriate legislation to identify appropriate enforcement 
measures that could be put in place. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.1.3 
MEETING INVITATION TO THE NTA AND BUS ÉIREANN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 16th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council invite the NTA and Bus Éireann to an in-person meeting of 
the Transport and Mobility Strategic Policy Committee to discuss the performance of 
the bus services in Cork City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/633) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Bus Eireann is presenting to the 
Transport and Mobility Committee on Monday 16th February and the NTA have 
advised that they will present to the Committee at one of the next two meetings.  The 
Committee will be advised when a date has been finalised. 
 
10.1.4 
ROADS POLICING OVER THE CHRISTMAS PERIOD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development & Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs, dated 16th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes that: 
• Traffic chaos has caused gridlock in the city centre and across Cork city 
• Decades of underfunding and the failure to deliver the Northern Ring Road 
has left Cork’s road infrastructure unable to cope with increased demand post-
Covid 
• Unreliable public transport forces commuters into cars and increases traffic  
• There are still significant issues with illegal parking and road usage across 
Cork city. 
 
And agrees to: 
• Convene an urgent meeting of the Transport & Mobility Strategic Policy 
Committee and the Cork City Roads Policing Unit to produce a plan for roads 
policing over the Christmas period.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/639) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that requests in relation to roads policing 
is managed by An Garda Siochana who have presented previously to this Committee 
and are part of the Cork City Local Community Safety Partnership. 
 
The Cork City Local Community Safety Partnership (LCSP) has now been established 
and as a statutory committee of the Dept. of Justice, Home Affairs and Migration, is 
mandated to meeting 6 times a year. You will find information regarding meeting 
dates, membership and approved minutes here: www.corkcity.ie/communitysafety. 
The Cork City LCSP will be developing a Cork City Local Safety Plan 2026-2029 
and we would like to invite the SPC to make a submission during the Stakeholder 
Engagement phase of the Plan. This is due to take place in April and May of this year. 
We will reach out to you at the time of launching the public consultation phase with a 

link to make your submission. It is the aim of the LCSP that a bespoke stakeholder 
engagement session will be organised for all Cork City Elected Reps during the Public 
Consultation. The Coordinator of the LCSP is happy to attend an upcoming meeting 
of the Transport and Mobility SPC to deliver a presentation to members. 
 
10.1.5 
LOCAL SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL INITIATIVE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 16th February 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would develop and implement its own Safe Routes to School 
programme, aimed initially at schools that did not apply for the An Taisce-
administered scheme introduced four years ago. 
 
This local initiative would: 
• Be coordinated directly by Cork City Council, in partnership with local 
schools and communities. 
• Seek direct funding from the National Transport Authority (NTA), thereby 
removing the need for An Taisce as an intermediary. 
• Prioritise improvements in walking, cycling, and safe access infrastructure 
around schools. 
• Ensure that all schools in the city, regardless of previous participation, have 
the opportunity to benefit from safe, sustainable travel routes. 
• Purpose: To accelerate delivery of safe, child-friendly active travel routes to 
schools across Cork City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/646) 
 
The report of the A/Director of Services stated that Traffic Operations would welcome 
the opportunity to develop a local safe route to schools’ initiative and did request 
budget for 2026 to develop a number of smaller interventions at front of school 
(bollards etc) which was not granted. Noting that there are approximately 120 schools 
within Cork City Council administrative boundary, a local safe route to schools’ 
initiative would require the corresponding human resource and funding input. 
Currently there is one person assigned to schools within the Traffic Operations team. 
An Taisce carries out all the survey work with schools required to develop the delivery 
plan for each school which forms the basis of each SRTS scheme and the NTA fund 
the works. It is unlikely that the NTA would fund an additional school’s programme 
outside of their own current programme. The current SRTS scheme has 4 schools at 
the construction stage in Cork City with a further 10 at various stages of development. 
 
10.1.6 
SAFER ROADS AND SPEED LIMIT REVIEW 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 4th February 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council acknowledges the 190 lives lost on Irish roads in 2025, 
embraces its responsibility as a road authority to play its full part in halving road 

deaths and serious injuries by 2030 and achieving Vision Zero, that is zero road deaths 
or serious injuries, by 2050, consistent with Ireland’s Government Road Safety 
Strategy, and will respond to the review of speed limits in built-up and urban areas by 
preparing the most ambitious possible 30km/h speed zones, consistent with the Love 
30 Campaign, including in the city centre at a scale at least consistent with those 
already implemented in Limerick and Galway city centres, and will accompany these 
with a GIS map of colour-coded roads for different speeds to give a full view of the 
city on a single interactive map to illustrate text in Speed Limits Bye-Laws.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 26/044) 
 
The report of the A/Director of Services stated that as instructed by the Department of 
Transport in October 2025, Cork City Council is currently proceeding with Phase 2 of 
the National Speed Limit Review and the change in speed limits in Built-up and Urban 
Areas. 
 
30 km/h speed limits have been implemented on many urban roads in Cork City over 
the past number of years particularly in housing estates supported by funding from the 
Department of Transport. The majority of streets within the city centre island have 
had a 30 km/h speed limit for many years. This phase of speed limit changes will build 
on this positive work and proposes to introduce further 30km/h speed limits as 
follows. 
 
• 
All housing estate roads 
• 
Residential streets 
• 
Roads adjacent to schools 
• 
Roads in the urban area where there is significant and regular interaction with 
vulnerable road users 
 
Higher speed limits may apply within the urban area as follows: 
 
• 
50 km/h for National, Regional, arterial roads and key public transport routes 
• 
60 km/h on Transition zones on National, Regional, arterial roads and key 
public transport routes 
• 
Urban arterial roads with a high design speed such as motorway, certain dual 
carriageways and roads with limited access 
 
A lower speed limit of 20 km/h may apply on pedestrian zones, shared spaces and 
narrow laneways. 
 
Key messages in relation to the changes from the Department include: 
 
• 
Lower speeds in built-up and urban settings improves road safety, particularly 
for vulnerable road users such as pedestrians and cyclists, promotes sustainable 
and active travel mobility, reduces noise, and presents opportunities to make 
improvements to the public realm. 
• 
The risk of a vulnerable road user being killed or seriously injured is much 
greater for collisions between a car and a vulnerable road user at 50 km/h when 
compared to the same type of collision at 30 km/h. 

• 
To be effective speed limits need to be credible, self-regulating, and should be 
regarded as appropriate by road users. Otherwise, they will tend to not be 
adhered to, which in turn will lead to enforcement issues for An Garda Síochána. 
• 
It is therefore in the interest of safety for all road users that speed limits are set 
in accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in the updated Guidelines 
for Setting and Managing Speed Limits in Ireland 2015 (as amended) to ensure 
consistency and credibility. 
• 
A 30km/h speed limit equates to 18.6 miles per hour. 
 
The proposed date set by the Department of Transport for implementation of the speed 
limits is the 31st March 2027. Special speed limit bye laws are now required to be in 
colour coded map format, and this will be delivered in tandem with the proposed 
changes. A non-statutory public consultation is open until Friday 13th February to 
collect the views of the public and stakeholders regarding speed limits on public roads 
in built-up and urban areas.   
 
10.1.7 
INDOOR BIKE PARKING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development & Operations, dated 3rd February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council detail what progress, if any, has been made in the provision of 
secure indoor bike parking in the City Centre.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 26/052) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that The National Transport Authority 
are currently developing a strategy for secure bike parking which will identify 
potential locations in Cork city and are working in partnership with Cork City Council 
on this strategy. 
 
10.1.8 
EQUITABLE EXPANSION OF PARK AND RIDE PROVISION FOR CORK 
CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 16th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will engage with the National Transport Authority, including 
its Park-and-Ride Office, and with third-level institutions such as University College 
Cork and Munster Technological University, to actively identify and progress Park-
and-Ride solutions serving the northside of Cork City, addressing the current 
imbalance whereby existing facilities are primarily accessible via southside 
approaches, and ensuring any proposals are integrated with BusConnects Cork, rail 
services and active-travel networks, support students, staff and commuters, reduce 
congestion and car dependency in the city centre, and contribute to the Council’s 
climate-action objectives, with a report back to Council on feasible locations, delivery 
models and timelines.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 26/058) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that CMATS includes a policy objective 
supporting the delivery of Park and Ride in Cork area including indicative locations. 
The National Transport Authority have established a Park and Ride Office to Deliver 
Park and Ride services nationally and they are currently developing proposals for 
Cork in conjunction with their proposed collaboration with Cork Bus Connects 
Project.  When further details are received by the City Council they will be sent to 
Council for consultation and discussion. 
 
10.1.9 
REVIEW OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 9th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘To mark World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on the third Sunday 
in November, to reflect that cyclists have priority over turning vehicles when 
travelling straight through junctions, and to be consistent with the example of Dublin 
City Council, that Cork City Council will review its traffic lights to include flashing 
amber arrows for left-turning vehicles at junctions, and to synchronise the timing of 
both general and bike-specific traffic lights so that cycling may continue for the full 
time that general traffic lights are green, including specifically for eastbound 
movement from Parnell Bridge to Eamon de Valera Bridge along Albert Quay, and 
for westbound movement from Brian Boru Bridge to Christy Ring Bridge along Saint 
Patrick’s Quay and Camden Place.’   
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/521) 
 
The report of the A/Director of Services stated that as new active travel schemes are 
funded by the NTA, the design process will consider the relevant guidance and recent 
circulars as part of the overall design methodology in support of sustainable transport.  
 
The consideration of specific cycle heads will be considered in newly designed 
junctions in the context of site suitability, the future implementation of Bus 
Connects/abortive works and overall priorities for the scheme delivery. 
 
11. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH 
- 
STRAITÉISEACHT, 
FORBAIRT 
EACNAMAÍOCH, 
FIONTAR 
& 
PLEANÁIL – 16th FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 16th February 2026. 
 
11.1 
MOTIONS 
 
11.1.1 
COMPULSORY SALES ORDER FOR VACANT 
AND DERELICT 
PROPERTIES 
 

 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
to legislatively introduce Compulsory Sales Order as a mechanism to force vacant and 
derelict properties into direct and productive use.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/585) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there is no present legal or statutory 
mechanism available to Local Authorities to compel owners of vacant and derelict 
sites to commence a sale. Cork City Council applies the powers afforded to it by the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990, including compulsory purchase and the application of levies. 
 
11.1.2 
PLANNING ENFORCEMENT COMPLAINTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That the CE provide a report on the number of planning enforcement complaints 
received in the years 2025, 2024 and 2023; setting out how many of these have been 
resolved, how many remain ongoing, and how many have resulted in court action 
being brought against the subject of complaints.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 26/027) 
 
The report of the Director of Services provided the following information: 
 

 
11.1.3 
COMMERICAL UNITS ON PATRICK STREET 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Recognising the impact of 'fast-fashion' and related business models on the 
environment, and the importance of supporting local businesses identified in the city 
centre strategy - that it shall be an objective of Cork City Council that 33% of 
commercial units on Patrick's Street will be occupied by local and slow or circular-
economy businesses; and that this policy shall be incorporated into the next Cork City 
Development Plan.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 26/037) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that planning legislation and guidance 
does not currently differentiate between ‘fast fashion’ and circular economy business 
models. However, the associated environmental and waste consequences of ‘fast 
fashion’ are a focus of national and EU circular economy policies and strategies. The 
City Development Plan supports indigenous businesses and the principles of the 
circular economy. The independent retail sector is also supported in other ways, 
including through the Local Enterprise Office through financial support, skills 
training and mentoring. The most recent national guidelines on retail planning date 
from 2012 and are incorporated into the current City Development Plan. Any 
revision or update to these guidelines will be examined to establish alignment with 
the City Development Plan. 
 
11.1.4 
COMPULSORY SALE ORDER FOR TACKLING DERELICTION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council seeks the advice of its Legal Advisers on the use of 
Compulsory Sale Order (CSO) as a mechanism to force the sale of Derelict Site 
Registered properties by requiring property owners to sell such properties at public 
auction to the highest bidder without the burden of compensation costs to Cork City 
Council. This mechanism is used in other jurisdictions, as an adjunct to Compulsory 
Purchase Orders (CPOs).’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 26/042) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there is no present legal or statutory 
mechanism available to Local Authorities to compel owners of vacant and derelict 
sites to commence a sale. Cork City Council applies the powers afforded to it by the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990, including compulsory purchase and the application of levies. 
 
 

12. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS 
STRAITÉISIGH - TITHÍOCHT – 17th FEBRUARY 2026  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 17th February 2026. 
 
12.1.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Housing Progress report for December 2025. 
 
12.2 
MOTIONS 
 
12.2.1 
ACCELERATE THE OPENING OF DAY CENTRE FOR HOMELESS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
  
‘That Cork City Council will proactively cooperate with the HSE to accelerate the 
opening of Cork’s first purpose-built Day Centre for homeless people and will not 
wait to lead the opening of a supervised injection facility, recognising that it is in all 
our interests - socially, economically and environmentally - to respond to the reality 
of addiction and support those in need to make Cork a living city.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. H. Kamegni, Cllr. D. Boyle 26/043) 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that a joint application for funding 
was sent to the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage (DHLGH) and 
the Department of Health on 3rd October, 2024 as a joint partnership between Cork 
City Council and the HSE Social Inclusion Cork Kerry. The application is awaiting 
approval.  
 
€912,000 was sought by Cork City Council in Section 10 funding from the DHLGH.  
Following receipt of approval, discussions will commence with partners for the 
delivery and operation of this facility. 
 
12.2.2 
USE OF A SPECIFIC TELEPHONE NUMBER WHEN CALLING 
RESIDENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th February 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would pilot the use of a specific telephone number when 
calling residents in relation to housing maintenance and/or Council matters and not 
use a private number. People will not answer private numbers as they fear scam 
calling. As a result, people have missed calls which may have been from the Council 
and are not at home for call outs for Council staff. If a specific number cannot be used, 
then a text alert system notifying residents of when Council will be calling should be 
considered.’ 

  
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 26/113) 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the new National Asset 
Management System for local authority housing, AddJust, is presently being 
developed. It is envisaged that the new system will be integrated with the City 
Council’s existing customer relationship management system. The AddJust system, 
as well as providing an asset management system, is to provide for the on-going 
management of communication between the local authorities and the tenants which 
will include the scheduling of inspections/repairs. 
  
While it is not possible at present to give timelines around the customer interaction 
element of the system, it is developing at pace with significant national funding. The 
Housing Directorate will keep the Housing Strategic Policy Committee informed as 
to the functionality of the system. 
 
13. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - CAIDREAMH 
IDIRNÁISIÚNTA & TURASÓIREACHT – 18th FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 18th February 2026. 
 
13.1 
REPORT ON VISIT TO CORK BY THE MAYOR OF NABLUS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 11th February 2026, on the visit to 
Cork of the Mayor of Nablus. 
 
14. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 10th FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 10th February 2026. 
 
15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd February 2026. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd February 2026. 
 
16.1 
INTRODUCTION OF PAY PARKING IN BISHOPSTOWN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
Director of Services, Local Area Development & Operations, dated 23rd February 
2026, in relation to plebiscite voting on the introduction of pay parking in the Uam 
Var Estate, Elton Lawn and Chestnut Grove areas in Bishopstown. 

 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd February 2026. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd February 2026. 
 
19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th February 2026. 
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the LAMA Spring Seminar, held at Connacht Hotel, 
Co. Galway, 28th - 29th January 2026. 
• Comhairleoirí S. Martin and D. Boyle at the AILG Module 1, Supporting 
disabled people and ageing population, held at Hotel Kilkenny, Co. Kilkenny, 
21st February 2026. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Module 1, Supporting disabled people 
and ageing population, held at Fairways Hotel, Dundalk, Co. Louth, 19th 
February 2026. 
• Comhairleoir C. Kelleher as part of the Cork City Council’s delegation visit 
to Shanghai, China, 15th - 22nd November 2025. 
• Comhairleoirí D. Boyle, J. Kavanagh and S. Martin at the Association of Irish 
Regions Conference, held at Inishowen Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal, 25th - 
26th February 2026. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the AILG/Maynooth University Field Trip, held at 
Maynooth University, 1st March 2026. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
• Comhairleoir P. Horgan – HSE Regional Forum – Q3 2025 and Q1 2026. 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – Cork Drugs and Alcohol Taskforce – Q4 2025 to Q1 
2026.  
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – Cork ETB – Q4 2025 to Q1 2026. 
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
 

23.1 
IPB EGM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the attendance of 
Comhairleoir S. Martin at the IPB EGM, held in Athlone on 21st November 2025. 
 
23.2 
IPI ANNUAL PLANNING CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attendance of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh 
at the IPI Annual Planning Conference, taking place in the Radisson Blu, Athlone on 
Thursday 16th and Friday 17th April 2026. 
  
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for January 2026. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS 
 
27.1 
EU GDP GROWTH 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council expresses concern at the persistently low rate of economic 
growth across the European Union over the past two decades, particularly when 
compared with other major global economies. The GDP is averaging 1% per year, 
falling well behind China at 5% and America at 2.8%. When Ireland joined the EU, it 
was averaging 6%. 
 
Council calls on the Government of Ireland to formally petition the European 
Commission to provide a clear and detailed strategy outlining how it intends to 
significantly increase EU GDP growth in the coming years. This should include 
specific measures to improve competitiveness, attract investment, and raise 
productivity across member states. 
 
Council further requests clarity on what concrete steps the EU will take to reduce 
bureaucratic and regulatory burdens that are widely seen as constraining enterprise, 
innovation, and economic expansion.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Flynn 26/068) 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, K. McCarthy, P. Dineen, A. Deasy. (4) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, P. Horgan, S. 
O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor. (19) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí H. Kamegni, F. Dennehy. (2) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
27.2 
REINSTATEMENT 
OF 
THE 
YOUGHAL/CORK 
RAIL 
LINE 
VIA 
MIDLETON 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘I ask that we as duly elected members of Cork City Council write to the following 
Government officials: An Taoiseach Mr. Micheál Martin, the Minister for Transport 
Mr. Darragh O’Brien, the Minister of Public Expenditure Mr. Jack Chambers and the 
Minister of State Mr. Jerry Buttimer, Department of Rural & Community 
Development asking that they would publicly support the reinstatement of the 
Youghal/Cork rail line via Midleton. In the all island rail review there was no mention 
of the Youghal/Cork rail line via Midleton, a rail line that is very much needed and a 
rail line that would benefit the whole East Cork area including the townlands of 
Castlemartyr and Killeagh. It would also be of immense benefit for Cork City by 
providing easy reliable connectivity to the city and dramatically lowering the amount 
of vehicles on the N25, all of which converge at a pinch point at Dunkettle. At a time 
when we talk about using alternative transport needs the rail connectivity that the 
reinstatement of this rail line would yield is enormous not only by way of providing 
alternative transport but also by way of boosting tourist footfall in the seaside town of 
Youghal, which should be viewed as a lifeline for the town. The reinstatement of the 
Youghal train station would also permit the realisation of a much needed Park & Rail 
system which would add to the attraction and also be of immense benefit to those who 
live in the Ardmore / Dungarvan areas of Waterford should they wish to travel to Cork 
City or beyond by rail. 
 
I thank you for your support of this motion.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Dineen 26/124) 
 
27.3 
CORK CITY MISSING PERSONS SEARCH AND RECOVERY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek approval from all relevant national authorities and 
Government Departments including the IAA and the National Co-Ordination Group 

for Emergency Planning to designate Cork City Missing Persons Search and Recovery 
(CCMPSAR) as a blue light organisation without delay so that they are exempt from 
any airspace restrictions currently now and in the future imposed on drone operations 
and surveillance in Cork City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 26/128) 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting 
past 8pm. 
 
27.4 
INHERITANCE TAX 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Taoiseach’s office calling for an end to 
discrimination in Inheritance Tax for childless citizens, single people and their 
families.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 26/142) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, K. 
McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Dineen, F. Dennehy, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien. 
(11) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, 
T. Coleman. (13) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir C. O’Connor. (1) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
27.5 
PROVISION OF SPECIAL NEEDS ASSISTANTS (SNAS)  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
 
- 
Recognises the invaluable work of Special Needs Assistants (SNAs), who provide 
essential care and support to pupils in Cork City's schools, enabling pupils with 
additional needs to access education; 
 

- 
Notes the recent attempt by the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) 
- acting under the restrictive and outdated "care model" criteria of Circular 
0030/2014 - to remove SNA posts from schools who desperately need them; 
 
- 
Commends all those who campaigned for these unjust cuts to be halted, by forcing 
the government to u-turn on the plan by the NCSE to remove SNA posts from 
schools next year; 
 
- 
Acknowledges that serious issues remain with regards the allocation of SNA 
postings for the 2027/28 school year and that the threat of cuts still hangs over 
schools in the city and across the State; 
 
- 
Sets out its view that the government must commit to a root-and-branch review 
and replacement of the outdated Circular 0030/2014 by developing a new, fit-for-
purpose framework that recognises the evolving and essential role of the SNA in 
supporting the holistic needs of children; 
 
- 
Calls on the government to take immediate steps to significantly increase the 
number of SNA posts and special class places, to address the chronic and unmet 
demand - ensuring no child is left without an appropriate school place; 
 
- 
Further calls on the government to guarantee that no future changes to SNA 
provision will be made without meaningful, constructive and transparent 
engagement with schools, parents and SNAs themselves, ensuring their voices 
and expertise are central to decision-making; and 
 
- 
Shall write to the Minister for Education communicating the contents of this 
motion to her.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 26/147) 
 
27.6 
SOLIDARITY WITH CUBA 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council expresses solidarity with Cuba and its people, and will write 
to the United States Ambassador in Dublin, Mr. Edward S. Walsh, expressing the 
Council’s opposition to and condemnation of the ongoing US blockade of the island.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 26/148) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, 
N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (16) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, N. O’Flynn, P. Dineen, F. Dennehy, A. 
Deasy. (5) 

 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boylan. (1) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
27.7 
T2 GEOZONE IN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Irish Aviation Authority in relation to the 
T2 geozone in the city, expressing concern about the impacts the proposed geozone 
will have on local commercial, community, and voluntary activity by prohibiting open 
category UAS operations in the city; and that this message will be forwarded to the 
Minister for Transport.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. O. Moran, Cllr. D. Boyle, Cllr. D. Boylan 26/157) 
 
27.8 
BOYCOTT ST. PATRICK’S DAY VISIT TO THE WHITE HOUSE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘In the context of the genocide in Gaza, the kidnapping of Nicolas Maduro, the attacks 
on Iran and the information coming from the Epstein files, it is completely 
unacceptable that Taoiseach Micheál Martin is still planning on visiting the White 
House on St. Patrick’s Day to smile and shake Donald Trump’s hand and give him a 
gift of shamrock on behalf of the Irish people. 
 
This Council call on all parties and politicians to send a strong message by boycotting 
the visit to the White House on St. Patrick’s Day.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 26/179) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí O. Moran, B. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor. 
(5) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, K. McCarthy, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (9) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí K. Collins, F. Kerins, F. Dennehy, G. O’Brien. (4) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
 
 
 

This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
