 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 17th October, 2019  
Multimedia Meeting Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Bernie Connolly  
PPN 
Garret Kelleher  
Councillor 
Ger Keohane 
 
Councillor 
Ger Canning 
 
CETB 
Joe Curtin 
 
PPN 
Laurence Owens 
CBA 
Michael O’Connell 
Cork City Partnership 
Nora O’Donovan 
PPN 
Priscilla Lynch  
HSE 
Siobhan Goulding 
DEASP 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Chief Officer 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Ruth Lynch Cork City Council 
 
Apologies: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, Ann Doherty, Catherine Kennedy, Chief Supt. Barry 
McPolin, David Ronayne, Eddie Mullins, Fiona Finn. 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted. 
 
2. Minutes 
On the proposal of G Canning, seconded by G Keohane, the minutes of 19th September 2019 
were approved. 
 
3. Correspondence 
1. T Power outlined that Nasc were successful in their application for further round of 
funding under the Asylum, Migrant Integration Fund. Matched funding of €26K 
being provided by HSE and Cork City Council. The fund allows for a worker and allow 
for the development of an Integration Strategy for the City.    
 
2. The Department of Rural and Community Development have issued a notification of 
two changes to the SICAP Programme, allowing up to 5% underspends in annual 
budget to be carried forward to following year and a potential increase in overall Lot 
Budgets.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
 
1. Healthy Ireland Fund round 3: Action plan submitted and awaiting final approval. 
 
2. CEP 2019: Payments currently being processed 
 
3. CEP Men’s Shed Fund 2019: Following from the previous Men’s Sheds approval there 
was a funding shortfall and a revised awards report was approved by LCDC and further 
agreed that if additional funding could be sourced before end of year that the full 
amounts sought would be awarded. 
5. SICAP  
a) Sicap Annual Plan 2020 
The timeline for submission and evaluation of Annual Plan 2020 was outlined. 
The programme Implementer submitted a report on proposed KPI’s and Emerging needs 
for 2020.  
Following a discussion where no alternative emerging need was clearly identified, the 
KPI’s were approved and it was agreed that the existing emerging needs would continue 
and further discussions would take place with PI on the Plan. 
 
b) Pobal Engagement Meeting 
Following the annual engagement meeting with Pobal, a brief report outlined the result 
of the meeting. It was noted that the Distance Travelled Tool, “My Journey” was going to 
be rolled out in 2020. It was noted that work carried out by the PI is not fully reflected in 
the SICAP reporting mechanisms and acknowledged by Pobal. 
A statistical analysis of Cork City prepared by Pobal was presented and this will be 
circulated to full LCDC Membership. 
 
c) Video Case Study, SICAP 2019 submission 
The case study for 2019 was developed as a video under a pilot by DRCD and video was 
presented to LCDC. The theme of case study was emerging needs, Older People. The 
presentation was approved by the LCDC. 
 
6. Public Participation Network Report 
B Connolly gave a verbal report on the PPN to members.  
 
7. LCDC Updates  
a. It was confirmed that officials from the Department of Rural & Community 
Development will be visiting Cork on the 14th and 15th November and joining the 
LCDC at its next meeting. 
b. A template for members Bio’s will be circulated for completion. 
c. Members were informed that protocols were being developed with all major inter-
agency initiatives in Cork City.  
8. A.O.B. 
a) A meeting with South Cork LCDC re SICAP in extended boundary areas to be 
arranged. 
b) Cork City Council is conducting public survey on it’s new Corporate Plan and the link 
will be circulated to members. 
c) P Lynch extended invitation to upcoming Health and Hobbies open day. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
