 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Tuesday, 26th February, 2019 – 
Multimedia Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Ann Doherty 
Chief Supt. B. McPolin  
Paul Moynihan 
Bernie Connolly 
Siobhan Goulding 
Fiona Finn 
Nora O’Donovan 
Ger Canning 
Priscilla Lynch 
Mick O’Connell 
Joe Curtin 
Cllr. PJ Hourican 
Adrienne Rodgers 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
 
Apologies: 
Eddie Mullins, Cllr. Chris O’Leary, David Ronayne, Lawrence Owens, 
Catherine Kennedy 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted.  
 
2. Minutes 
The minutes of 13th December, 2018 were considered and on proposal of Fergal Dennehy, 
seconded by Nora O’Donovan were approved with no matters arising. 
 
3. Correspondence 
T Power noted the following: 
a) Dr. Catherine Forde, UCC has extended her thanks to the LCDC for supporting their 
research study.  P Moynihan acknowledged the valuable work that Dr. Forde and UCC is 
undertaking. 
b) Pobal has confirmed that a three month extension to Health Ireland Funding Round 2 
has been granted to 30th June, 2019. 
c) The Department of Rural and Community Development has selected Cork City LCDC to 
pilot a new model, Place Based Leadership from Q3, 2019. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund 2018 
In addition to the three month extension to HIF Round 2, T Power confirmed that all 
Healthy Ireland Round 2 Actions are ongoing. P Lynch confirmed that there will be no 
reduction in Health Ireland Funding for Round 3.  
 
b) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) 2018 
T Power confirmed that the SICAP Sub Group met on 23rd January, 2019 to assess the 
remaining CEP applications and approved the allocation of remaining CEP funds. A list of 
approved projects totalling €284,384 was circulated to members. T Power sought the 
LCDC’s approval for the reallocation of €2,000 grant from ref CEP2018/31 - Blackpool, 
Glen, Farranree Community Training Centre to CEP2018/66 - Cork City Council (play 
facility in Fairfield Meadows and Lawn).  Grant reallocation was approved by the LCDC. 
 
c) National Community Weekend – May, 2019 
T Power confirmed that the National Community Weekend Event Funding will be 
advertised this week. T Power sought the LCDC’s approval for the SICAP Sub Group and 
any interested members to assess applications and make grant recommendations to the 
LCDC for approval at its March meeting. It was noted that the HSE will match National 
Community Weekend funding with €10,000 for community events.  
 
5. SICAP 
Due to conflict of interest M O’Connell, G Canning, A Rodgers and B Connolly excused 
themselves from the meeting while this agenda item was discussed. 
 
a) SICAP Annual Performance Review 2018 
The SICAP Sub-Group met with the Programme Implementer and reviewed the SICAP 
EYR Reports and T Power presented their findings. The Sub-Group also considered the 
Pobal parallel review where no issues were raised. The Sub-Group recommended the 
Annual Performance Review 2018 for LCDC approval. On the proposal of F. Dennehy and 
seconded by PJ Hourican, this was approved.  
b) SICAP Annual Plan 2019  
The Chief Officer informed members that he had been in contact on numerous occasions 
with the Department of Rural and Community Development (DRCD) regarding the 
apportionment of salaries, highlighted verbally by the LGAS auditor. He noted that in 
successive audits, this issue was not raised. 
 
The DRCD gave the Chief Officer an undertaking that they would assume responsibility 
for finding a solution to the issue, acknowledged that it was a structural issue and a 
national issue. The DRCD stated that it was not reasonable for this national issue to 
prevent the LCDC in approving the Annual Plan 2019. 
 
The LCDC expressed its concerns on signing off on the Annual Plan 2019, and noted for 
the record that they had issues approving plan without national solution.  
 
It was agreed that the Chief Officer would highlight their concerns in writing to the DRCD 
and provide an update at the next meeting.  
 
The Chief Officer advised the LCDC that it could approve pan on understating the DRCD 
had acknowledged and taken responsibility for resolving the issue.  
 
On the proposal of F Dennehy and seconded by PJ Hourican, the SICAP Annual Plan 2019 
was approved.  

 
 
 
 
 
c) B SICAP LCDC End of Year Report 2018  
T Power noted that the SICAP LCDC End of Year Report is due on 8th March, 2019. T 
Power to circulate report template. 
 
d) New Requirements on SICAP Monitoring   
T Power confirmed that Cork City Council now has responsibility for the auditing 
function of SICAP, which will be conducted by Internal Audit. 
 
 
6. Public Participation Network Report 
R Loughry confirmed that a new PPN coordinator will commence in March, 2019.  
 
7. Boundary Extension  
An update from the Department of Rural and Community Development on the delivery of 
SICAP was circulated. The Chief Officer explained that the programme will continue to be 
delivered and managed by the current contract holders. This will be subject to a written 
arrangement being entered into before the transfer day between Cork City Council/LCDC 
and Cork County Council/South Cork LCDC confirming arrangements for the continued 
delivery of SICAP 2018-2022 in accordance with Funding Agreements in place. The Chief 
Officer sought LCDC approval to this course of action, and it was approved by the LCDC.  
 
8. LECP 
R Loughry confirmed that a review of the LECP will be undertaken following the local 
elections. R Loughry outlined that a desktop review of the LECP will take place in Q2 2019 
and post June 2019, full review with public consultation will commence in Q3 2019. 
 
9. A.O.B. 
Copies of Cork City Profile were circulated to members.  
The Chair congratulated Cork City Partnership on their annual Enterprise Awards and their 
Men’s Shed event in 2018. 
T Power confirmed that 2 LCDC surveys had been completed for the Department - SICAP 
Distance Travelled Tool Survey and Community Enhancement Programme 2018 survey. 
T Power confirmed the LCDC schedule of meetings for 2019, agreed by LCDC. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, 
Chairperson 
