 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 2nd May, 2019 –  
G12 Meeting Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Siobhan Goulding 
Nora O’Donovan 
Priscilla Lynch 
Cllr. PJ Hourican 
Cllr. Chris O’Leary 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Lawrence Owens 
Catherine Kennedy 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
 
Apologies: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, Ann Doherty, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, Eddie Mullins, 
David Ronayne, Ger Canning, Mick O’Connell, Bernie Connolly, Fiona Finn, 
Joe Curtin, Paul Moynihan 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Vice Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted.  
A Rodgers confirmed that Cork City Council are in the process of establishing a new 
directorate called Community, Culture and Place Making and that the Director (A Rodgers) 
will be appointed as new LCDC Chief Officer.  
 
2. Minutes 
The minutes of 21st March, 2019 were considered and on proposal of Cllr C. O’Leary, 
seconded by Cllr PJ Hourican were approved with no matters arising. 
 
3. Correspondence 
T Power noted the following correspondence was received from the Department of Rural 
and Community Development: 
1. An invitation to stakeholder consultation events on Rural Policy. T Power to circulate 
email to members.  
2. Confirmation that the review of the LECP is to be deferred until later in the year.  
3. Draft LCDC Review. Recommendations from this review will be implemented from Q4. 
 
T Power invited members to the Big Hello (National Community Weekend) events and to the 
Launch of LGBTI week on Monday, 13th May. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund 2018 
T Power noted that Healthy Ireland Round 2 Actions are ongoing.  
 
b) National Community Weekend – May, 2019 
T Power confirmed that National Community Weekend Event funding had been paid. A 
final list of approved grants totalling €15,000 was circulated to members. 
 
c) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) 2019 
T Power confirmed that the CEP 2019 will be advertised on 17th May and that a joint 
advertisement will issue from both Cork City and Council LCDC’s. The advert will include 
information in relation to the transition area.  
 
R Loughry confirmed workshop details for Friday, 3rd May.  
 
5. SICAP 
 
Boundary Extension 
R Loughry confirmed that the draft Service Level Agreement (SLA) between Cork City LCDC 
and South Cork LCDC will be circulated to members for comment. SLA to be signed by Chief 
Officer and Chair of each LCDC by the end of May.  A committee will be formed to monitor 
the SICAP programme in the transition area for the duration of the current contract.  
 
 
 
6. Public Participation Network Report 
C Kennedy gave a report on the PPN to members.  
  
7. Boundary Extension  
A Rodgers will give a presentation on the boundary extension at the LCDC workshop on 3rd 
May. Presentation will be circulated to all members.  
LCDC membership will be reviewed post June, 2019. 
 
8. LECP 
 
Environment presentation was deferred until the next meeting.  
 
9. A.O.B. 
R Loughry confirmed that the Chief Executive and Minister Harris and Minister Byrne had 
been written to in relation to the public toilet issue raised at the last LCDC meeting. 
P Lynch noted that May is Green Ribbon (Mental Health Awareness) Month.  
Cllr O’Leary noted that there is a Summer Lecture Series run by Cork Volunteer Centre 
running from 3rd May to 28th June, 2019. T Power to circulate information to members.  
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Aaron O’Connell, 
Vice Chairperson 
