 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 25th July, 2019 –  
Multimedia Meeting Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chariperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Catherine Kennedy 
Joe Curtin 
Priscilla Lynch 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Bernie Connolly 
Eddie Mullins 
Mick O’Connell 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Ruth Lynch, Ruth Griffin 
 
Apologies: 
 
Ann Doherty, Chief Supt. B. McPolin,  Cllr. Garret Kelleher, Cllr. Ger Keohane 
David Ronayne, Ger Canning, Nora O’Donovan, Fiona Finn, Lawrence Owens, 
Siobhan Goulding 
 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted.  A Rodgers introduced 
and welcomed Ruth Griffin from the ETB and Ruth Lynch who has recently taken over from 
Susan McCarthy. A round of introductions was made. 
 
 
2. Minutes 
On the proposal of J Curtin, seconded by A O’Connell, the minutes of 20th June 2019 were 
approved. 
 
 
3. Correspondence 
T Power circulated meeting request re Pobal’s Annual Engagement meeting with Cork City 
LCDC scheduled for Wednesday, 18th September at 3pm. Cork City Partnership are invited to 
attend around the presentation of statistical analysis on Cork City conducted by Pobal. 
 
An invitation from Comhairle Na Nóg was extended for their “Turning Tides Youth Event” to 
be held on the 24th of August 2019. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund 2018/2019 
T Power circulated Healthy Ireland Round 2 Final Report to the LCDC. 
Round 3 notification received.  The main changes this year are: Round 3 will run from 1st 
July, 2019 to 30th June, 2021. Cork City LCDC has been allocated €184,000 to implement 
a programme of works over a two year period. Subject to Departmental approval, 
€107,000 was allocated for year one and €77,000 for year two.  €37k of which is to be 
allocated for a Healthy Ireland City Co-ordinator.  However, it was noted that it may be 
difficult to retain a co-ordinator when there is uncertainty surrounding future funding. 
 
Additional funding for Round 3 is available for joint submissions between CYPSC and the 
LCDC.  
 
b) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) 2019 
T Power gave an outline of the report in relation to the applications for the CEP.  It was 
noted that no additional funding was made available to Cork City Council due to the 
extension of the boundary. 
 
The recommendation of grant awards by the Sicap Sub-Group in relation to the 
allocation of funds was agreed, proposed by A O’Connell, seconded by B Connolly. 
 
c) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) - Men’s Shed Fund 2019 
The LCDC has been notified that €19,620 has been ringfenced for the Mens Shed (and 
Womens Shed) movement for 2019.  There are currently 15 Mens Sheds in Cork City.  
€1,308 will be available for each shed however they still must apply.  The closing date 
was extended from the 9th of August to the 30th of August to allow more time for 
applications.  
 
 
 
 
5. SICAP  
Mid-Year Review 
T Power confirmed that the SICAP Mid-Year Review was complete.  The SICAP Sub-group 
met with Cork City Partnership and considered the review in conjunction with Pobal’s 
parallel review and report progress is good and SICAP are achieving targets and KPI’s and all 
financial considerations are on target and within budget parameters. 
 
The SICAP sub-group report was recommended to LCDC for approval and on the proposal of  
A O’Connell, seconded by Joe Curtin the LCDC approved the mid-year review. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Public Participation Network Report 
A O’Connell gave a report on the PPN to members.  
  
 
7. Extended City Areas  
T Power noted that a national review of LCDC’s is due to be published in Q3. Cork City LCDC 
membership will be reviewed following this.  
 
 
8. LECP 
Ruth Griffin gave a presentation on youth from the CETB at the beginning of the meeting. 
 
 
9. A.O.B. 
P Lynch noted the vast amount of community and voluntary services available and 
questioned whether there was a type of area based service directory available which would 
showcase all the fantastic work available in a particular area. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
