 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 20th June, 2019 –  
Multimedia Meeting Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Catherine Kennedy 
Cllr. Garret Kelleher 
Cllr. Ger Keohane 
David Ronayne 
Fiona Finn 
Joe Curtin 
Lawrence Owens 
Priscilla Lynch 
Siobhan Goulding 
Adrienne Rodgers 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
 
Apologies: 
 
Ann Doherty, Bernie Connolly, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, Cllr. Fergal Dennehy,  
Eddie Mullins, Ger Canning, Mick O’Connell, Nora O’Donovan 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Vice Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted.  The Vice Chairperson 
introduced and welcomed Cllr. Garret Kelleher and Cllr. Ger Keohane who were recently nominated 
to the LCDC following the local elections. A round of introductions was made. 
 
 
2. Minutes 
The minutes of 23rd May, 2019 to be amended to include ‘Youth’ as a ‘Key principle of 
funding were discussed targeting themes’ under agenda item 6. LCDC Workshop Feedback.  
 
On the proposal of P Lynch, seconded by C Kennedy, subject to the above amendment being 
made, the minutes of 23rd May, 2019 were approved. 
 
 
3. Correspondence 
A O’Connell updated members on the LCDC’s meeting with Minister Byrne on 14th June, 
2019. 
 
P Lynch requested that a list of the recently ETB funded projects targeting the five 
blackspots in the city be circulated to members.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund 2018/2019 
T Power noted that Healthy Ireland Round 2 Actions are ongoing and will all be 
completed by the deadline of 30th June, 2019. 
T Power confirmed that the Department had issued correspondence regarding Round 3 
which will run from 1st July, 2019 to 30th June, 2021. Cork City LCDC has been allocated 
€184,000 to implement a programme of works over a two year period. Subject to 
Departmental approval, €107,000 was allocated for year one and €77,000 for year two.  
Additional funding for Round 3 is available for joint submissions between CYPSC and the 
LCDC.  
 
It was agreed that a report on the outcomes of Round 2 and a presentation from one of 
the projects funded would be given at the next meeting.     
 
b) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) 2019 
T Power confirmed that three public CEP information sessions were held in June in 
partnership with the PPN.  
 
T Power sought the LCDC’s approval for the SICAP Sub Group and any interested 
members to assess applications and make grant recommendations to the LCDC for 
approval at its July meeting. This was agreed.  
 
c) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) - Men’s Shed Fund 2019 
The LCDC is waiting on official notification regarding the CEP – Men’s Shed Fund 2019.  
 
d) Youth Club Grant Scheme 2019 
Details of the ETB Youth Clubs Grant Scheme was circulated to members. 
 
 
5. SICAP  
a) Service Level Agreement 
T Power confirmed that the SICAP Service Level Agreement (SLA) agreed amendments have 
been accepted by South Cork LCDC and that the updated SLA was signed by the Chairperson 
and Chief Officer.  
 
b) Mid-Year Review 
T Power confirmed that the SICAP Mid-Year Review is on-going. The SICAP Sub Group will 
meet to assess the Mid-Year Review and report to the LCDC at its next meeting.  
 
T Power noted that Pobal had requested to meet the LCDC in September. T Power to 
circulate a number of dates for consideration.  
  
 
6. Public Participation Network Report 
J Curtin gave a report on the PPN to members.  
  
 
7. Extended City Areas  
A Rodgers gave an update on the extended city areas. 
 
T Power noted that a national review of LCDC’s is due to be published in Q3. Cork City LCDC 
membership will be reviewed following this.  
 
On behalf of the LCDC, the Vice Chairperson expressed thanks to Paul Moynihan, Cllr PJ 
Hourican and Cllr C O’Leary for their contribution to Cork City LCDC. The LCDC agreed to 
write and thank all for their work. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8. LECP 
 
The Youth presentation was deferred until the next meeting. 
 
 
 
9. A.O.B. 
R Loughry noted that Bonfire Night is 23rd June and that there are 8 community events 
scheduled across the city.  
 
Cork Business Association outlined a research project undertaken by St. Angela’s College on 
City Centre Business and Youth.  
 
A letter from the Department on the importance of consulting with Comhairle na nÓg was 
noted.  
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
Aaron O’Connell, 
Vice Chairperson 
