 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 21st March, 2019 – 
Multimedia Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Paul Moynihan 
Bernie Connolly 
Siobhan Goulding 
Fiona Finn 
Nora O’Donovan 
Priscilla Lynch 
Joe Curtin 
Cllr. PJ Hourican 
Cllr. Chris O’Leary 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Lawrence Owens 
Catherine Kennedy 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Susan McCarthy 
 
Apologies: 
Ann Doherty, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, Eddie Mullins, David Ronayne, Ger Canning, 
Mick O’Connell, Tony Power 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted. The Chairperson 
introduced and welcomed Catherine Kennedy to the LCDC who will be representing the PPN. 
 
2. Minutes 
The minutes of 21st February, 2019 were considered and on proposal of Nora O’Donovan, 
seconded by PJ Hourican were approved with no matters arising. 
 
3. Correspondence 
None received. 
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund 2018 
R Loughry noted that Healthy Ireland Round 2 Actions are ongoing.  
 
b) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) 2018 
R Loughry confirmed that Community Enhancement Programme 2018 funding has been 
paid out. A final list of approved grants totalling €459,524 was circulated to members. 
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
c) National Community Weekend – May, 2019 
R Loughry confirmed that 31 National Community Weekend event applications have 
been received. R Loughry sought the LCDC’s approval for the SICAP Sub Group and any 
interested members to assess applications and award grants. Meeting details to be 
circulated to the SICAP Sub Group and all LCDC members inviting them to attend this 
meeting. Approved projects will be circulated to the LCDC at its April meeting for 
information.  This was approved by the LCDC. 
 
5. SICAP 
The LCDC SICAP End of Year Report 2018 was circulated to members.  
 
 
6. Comhairle na nÓg 
Cork City Comhairle na nÓg members Bernadette Gabuya, Seamus Ryan and Salma Waleed 
gave a presentation to the LCDC. Cork City Comhairle na nÓg coordinators Joy Cantwell-
Moore and Carolyn Collier and can be contacted via email on joycantwellmoore@gmail.com 
and Carolyn.collier@ymca-ireland.net   
 
On the proposal of L Owens, the LCDC agreed to endorse Cork City Council’s motion of 28th 
May, 2018 in relation to item 17.1 ‘Safe Talk’ Training Programme and write to Minister for 
Health and Minister of State with responsibility for Mental Health to assess the possibility of 
introducing a tailor-made ‘safe-talk’ training programme, relevant to young people aged 16-
18, to tackle the issue of youth suicide, that potentially could be rolled out as a guest 
speaker series in post-primary schools. 
 
7. Public Participation Network Report 
A. O’Connell gave a report on the PPN to members.  
  
A number of concerns were raised in relation to injecting drug use in Cork City including the 
temporary closure of the public toilets on the Grand Parade and the need for a collaborative 
coordinated public health response to the matter. Members noted that while the fact that 
these toilets are frequented by injecting drug users is not the ideal situation, the support 
mechanism that is in place around this facility has enabled the delivery of a public health 
response to the matter and has limited negative impact elsewhere in the city centre. The 
LCDC agreed to write to the Chief Executive, Cork City Council requesting that the toilets be 
reopened as soon as possible.  
A discussion took place on the need for a Safer Injecting Facility in Cork City, similar to the 
one planned for Dublin and it was agreed to write to Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD 
and Minister of State, Catherine Byrne TD to invite them to meet with the LCDC to discuss 
the potential for the development of same in Cork city. 
 
8. Boundary Extension  
P Moynihan gave an update on the boundary extension. 
 
8. LECP 
R Loughry confirmed that a workshop around the strategic focus of LCDC funding will be 
arranged for April, 2019. Members will be contacted regarding agreeing a suitable date for 
this workshop. 
 
A review of specific LECP themes for April and May meetings was agreed – Environment and 
Youth respectively.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
9. A.O.B. 
In response to the boundary extension, P Moynihan confirmed that Cork City Council will 
reconfigure all its functions. A new community directorate ‘Community, Culture and Place 
Making’ will be established.    
 
J Curtin raised concerns over reductions in funding to youth services in Cork. It was agreed 
to invite the new ETB Chair to meet with the LCDC to discuss further. The Chief Officer 
confirmed that he will liaise with the Cork City Council‘s European Officer regarding 
identifying potential EU funding opportunities.  
 
B Connolly noted that the Transport and Mobility Forum will hold a seminar of sustainable 
travel in the Council Chamber, City Hall on 29th March, 2019. 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, 
Chairperson 
