 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 19th September, 2019  
Multimedia Meeting Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Bernie Connolly 
Catherine Kennedy 
Chief Supt. Barry McPolin 
Garrett Kelleher 
Ger Keohane 
David Ronayne 
Eddie Mullins 
Fiona Finn 
Ger Canning 
Joe Curtin 
Priscilla Lynch 
Siobhan Goulding 
Adrienne Rodgers 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Ruth Lynch, Stephen Murphy, Denise Cahill 
 
Apologies: 
 
Ann Doherty, Lawrence Owens, Mick O’Connell, Nora O’Donovan 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted. 
 
2. Minutes 
On the proposal of G Kelleher, seconded by F Finn, the minutes of 25th July 2019 were 
approved. 
 
3. Correspondence 
 
Dealt with under AOB 
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund 2018/2019 
R Loughry gave an update on HIF Round 3 outlining the process for developing the round 
3 action plan and outlining a few changes to this round. Round 3 will run from 1st July, 
2019 to 30th June, 2021. Cork City LCDC has been allocated €184,000 to implement a 
programme of works over a two year period. There is an additional fund specifically 
around Mental Health @ €62,500. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Stephen Murphy and Denise Cahill outlined the action plan for round 3 to be submitted 
to HIF by 20th September. On the proposal of G Canning, seconded by F Finn the LCDC 
approved the submission of the action plan to Healthy Ireland Fund. 
b) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) 2019 
T Power gave an update on the programme.  Payments have started to the successful 
community groups.  There is a possibility that additional funding may become available.  
Current applications will be revisited.   
 
c) Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) - Men’s Shed Fund 2019 
T Power presented report on the proposed grants to Men’s Sheds under the CEP Men’s 
Shed Fund 2019 with funding of €19,634. There are 15 Men’s Sheds in Cork City and all 
were invited to apply, thirteen valid applications were received. It was noted that 2 
men’s Sheds did not apply. 
On the proposal of B McPolin, seconded by A O’Connell the LCDC approved the CEP 
Men’s Shed grant awards 2019.  
 
5. SICAP  
Following the transfer of the Audit function of SICAP to Cork City Council, Internal Audit is 
currently carrying out an audit of SICAP at Cork City Partnership Clg. 
A meeting will be scheduled with South Cork County LCDC in relation to oversight of mid-
year review of SECAD in the extended areas. 
6. Public Participation Network Report 
J Curtin gave a report on the PPN to members. A O’Connell noted that PPN membership on 
the Cork City Councils SPC is at a minimum compared to most other Local Authorities. The 
Chief Officer undertook to review guidelines on PPN membership of SPC’s. 
 
7. Extended City Areas  
A Rodgers commented on the success of the three Family Fun days in conjunction with 
Redfm.  There have been requests for similar days from other parts of the City.  One to one 
meetings with community groups are being arranged as requested. 
 
8. A.O.B. 
1. Cork City LCDC was asked to participate as an Urban Pilot in Placed Based Leadership model 
being delivered by the Dept of Rural & Community Development. They will provide training 
for LCDC and the proposed dates at the moment are 25th and 26th November. 
2. It was proposed that we include bio’s of all members for our website and this will be 
facilitated over the coming weeks. 
3. The Healthy Ireland fund round 3 application will be submitted Friday 20th September. 
P.Lynch informed the members that the model of engagement and management of Healthy 
Ireland in Cork is considered as best practice nationally. 
4. Following a meeting between the Chief Officer and DRCD, the Dept have expressed a wish to 
visit Cork again and attend an LCDC meeting. This was agreed. 
5. It was proposed and agreed that a letter would issue from the LCDC to the PPN Co-ordinator 
wishing her well on her forthcoming maternity leave. 
6. Members were reminded that the annual engagement meeting on SICAP with Pobal is 
scheduled for Wednesday, 25th September at 1pm in room G12, City Hall. This meeting will 
include a presentation from Pobal on statistical analysis of Cork carried out by Pobal. 
7. Members were informed that Dormant Account Funding was made available through the 
DRCD for LGBTI+ organisations and LINC and Cork Gay Project benefited by €25k each to 
deliver programme of work. 

 
 
 
 
 
8. The CETB have funding for the delivery of courses in Knocknaheeny and invited anyone with 
ideas to approach the CETB. 
9. Members were informed of a Healthy Cities collaboration with Environmental Research 
Institute, EPA, SHEP Earth Aware, Cork City Council & EcCoWell Cork of two upcoming 
events,  
“Cork: a Healthy City in a Changing Climate? – Public Seminar & Discussion”          Cork 
University Business School, 1 Lapps Quay on 30th September from 6.30pm to 9.30pm 
“Cork: a Healthy City in a Changing Climate? – Local Actions Workshop”                  Millennium 
Hall, Cork City Council on 1st October 2019. 
Free events but registration through eventbrite. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
