 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 14th November 2019  
Multimedia Room, New Civic Offices, Cork 
 
 
In attendance: 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Bernie Connolly  
PPN 
Catherine Kennedy 
PPN 
Garret Kelleher  
Councillor 
Ger Keohane 
 
Councillor 
Joe Curtin 
 
PPN 
Laurence Owens 
CBA 
Nora O’Donovan 
PPN 
Priscilla Lynch  
HSE 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Chief Officer 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Ruth Lynch, Cork City Council, 
P Geraghty, B Reape DRCD, 
Karen Fitzgerald, Catherine Kelly, Corporate Plan Presentation 
Cathy Buchanan, Elaine Winters, Meithal Mara Presentation 
 
Apologies: 
Ann Doherty, Chief Supt. Barry McPolin, David Ronayne, Eddie Mullins, Fiona 
Finn, Ger Canning, Mick O’Connell, Siobhan Goulding 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the committee members, P. Geraghty and B. Reape from the 
DRCD.  Round table introductions were made and apologies were noted. 
 
D. Ronayne has resigned from the LCDC, he has taken a new role on Cork City Councils Audit 
Committee.  L. Owens expressed for the record the appreciation of the LCDC for his 
contribution to the committee since its inception.  
 
Presentation on Corporate Plan  
Catherine Kelly, Senior Executive Officer gave a presentation to the Committee on the 
Corporate Plan 2020-2024.  Submissions are currently being accepted.  Requested the 
committee to submit a co-ordinated submission at the next meeting.   
 
2. Minutes 
On the proposal of P Lynch, seconded by G Keohane, the minutes of 17th October 2019 were 
approved. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
3. Correspondence 
1. AMIF – Integration strategy to be developed on foot of funding granted to Nasc.  
2. Placed based Leadership workshop 25th , 26th November – This is a piloted workshop 
presented by Dr. Rob Worrall of the IPA on behalf of DRCD.  T Power to circulate 
documentation on workshop to committee.  T Power outlined the theme and 
stressed that attendance is recommended.   
 
4. Funding Streams Update 
 
a. Healthy Ireland Fund round 3:  T Power circulated report to committee for 
consideration.  Query arose as to when funding becoming available, the Department still 
considering the action plan following submission of clarifications sought by the 
Department of Health. Funding expected by the end of November. 
 
b. CEP 2019 & CEP Men’s Shed Allocation update: T Power circulated report to the 
committee for consideration. One payment not issued yet due to outstanding 
paperwork.  
 
P Geraghty commented on the excellence of the City Council HIF submission to the 
department.  Thanked the council for their work on the CEP and Mens Sheds.   
 
B Connolly commented on the difficulty in retaining good staff while waiting on funding 
to come through. 
 
F Dennehy commented on the fact that the city had expanded but we did not receive 
any extra funding through the CEP. P Geraghty responded by saying the 2019 allocations 
had been decided before the expansion but this would be taken into consideration for 
the 2020 allocation. 
 
5. SICAP  
a) Sicap Annual Plan 2020 update 
The Department of Rural and Community Development have given a 3% increase for 
Cork in the sum of €37k.  Cork City Partnership has been informed and the deadline for 
submissions has been extended to facilitate the increase in funding.  The total available 
is now €1.27m. 
 
P Geraghty acknowledged that it is a chronically underfunded program and they 
achieved the 3% increase by squeezing funds from other budgets.  He understands that 
it is still not enough but the department have not adjusted the KPI’s with the awarding 
of the 3% increase as they understand the difficulties. 
 
b) Timelines for SICAP End of Year review 
The National SICAP Annual Report 2018 has been published. T Power to circulate link to 
LCDC.   
SICAP End of year deadline is 14th January for submission of end year reports and final 
approval by LCDC by 28th February 2020. 
In relation to meeting South County Cork LCDC in relation to monitoring group re SICAP 
in the Boundary areas, they currently have a vacancy to fill prior to setting a meeting. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
7. Public Participation Network Report 
J Curtin/C Kennedy outlined the monthly PPN report.  F Dennehy thanked and congratulated 
them for a comprehensive report.  T Power confirmed that funding has been received again 
for a PPN support worker.  Cork City Council will match this funding in the sum of €5k. 
Clann Credo attended the PPN Plenary and have expressed interest in presenting to the 
LCDC, this was agreed and will be arranged in the new year. 
 
8. LECP, Meithal Mara Presentation 
 
Cathy Buchanan and Elaine Winters gave a presentation on Meithal Mara.  
P Lynch paid a visit to Meithal Mara and was very impressed after the visit. It was suggested 
that at a future LCDC meeting time would be given to discuss supporting Meithal Mara in 
developing a Maritime centre. It was  also agreed that LCDC would visit Meithal Mara in the 
New Year.  
 
 
L Owens commended all the work being done. 
 
P Geraghty congratulated Meithal Mara on all their hard work. 
 
 
9. LCDC Updates  
a. Unicorn Project.  An EU initiative where students get credits for Community work.  This 
is a good opportunity for community groups to jointly develop a training module with 
UCC to aid the community. 
 
P Lynch congratulated Cork City Council on securing funding. 
 
b. Update from LCDC National Meeting Tullamore, 9th November – B Connolly suggested 
the committee will get this at the Placed Based Leadership Workshop.  P  Gerraghty 
commented that he would have preferred if there was more attendance at the national 
meeting. 
 
10. A.O.B. 
a) L Owens confirmed the launch of the Sensory Hour is the 8th of December 2019.  This 
is one hour on a Sunday where persons with sensory difficulties are accommodated 
in all stores that are participating in the initiative. 
b) C Kennedy confirmed that World Aids day park run is coming up.  Details to be 
forwarded to T Power for circulation. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
