Comhairle Cathrach Chorcai
Cork City Council
LCDC*
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobait Åitiüil
Chathair Chorcai
Cork City Local Community Development
Committee
Minutes of the LCDC meeting of Thursday, 15th of December 2022
In attendance:
Cllr Fergal Dennehy
Ann Doherty
Adrienne Rodgers
Helen Murphy
Joe Curtin
Thomas Myers
Catherine Kennedy
Denis Leamy
Cllr Gareth Kelleher
Also in attendance:
Held on Microsoft Teams
Chairperson
Jacqueline Crotty, Rebecca Loughry, Kieran O'Connell, Ruth Lynch
Apologies
Eoin Gunn, Niall O'Keeffe
1. Presentation from St Vincent's Secondary School
This presentation was postponed as the meeting was moved online due to weather
conditions.
2.Welcome
The Chairperson, Cllr Fergal Dennehy welcomed the committee members.
3. Minutes
The minutes of the 17th of November 2022 were proposed as read by Cllr Kelleher and seconded by
Catherine Kennedy. There were no matters arising.
4. Ukraine Community Response Forum Update: 'Glance Back — Look Forward' Event Invite
Cork City Council's Ukrainian Response Coordinator gave an update on the Ukraine Community
Response Forum.
600 Ukrainians spread across 6 different facilities in Cork. NASC are setting up a Psychosocial
metal health and wellbeing programme for Ukrainian women. Together Razem have provided
a smart phones programme and support the psychotherapy phoneline by providing support
software and Babushki Razem are continuing their weekly support group for older Ukrainian
citizens. program. Cork City Partnership have organised family day trips, Safe Pass training
and customer service courses.
There is a new Ukrainian Choir in Cork who were featured on RTE News. They were involved
in the Christmas event in City Hall, of which over 400 Ukrainians attended. Cork ETB and Cork
Academy of Music have set up a new "Music and Language School" in the North Mon Campus
for young people's music, games and language in an informal setting.
The application to Healthy Ireland for funding was successful and will be used towards the
health and wellbeing of Ukrainians. Let's Play Together, Cork and Cork Healthy Cities will host
several workshops and play events across the city.
5. For Information:
(a) Community Enhancement Programme Funding will be advertised on 16th
Jan with a closing date of 10th Feb. The amount is 353,332 awarded to the
Community Support Fund as launched by the Dept in Nov. 50% of this
funding will be targeted towards the RAPID areas.
6. PPN Report: LCDC PPN Representatives
Circular from dept confirms an award of €10,000 increase for each PPN in core funding 2023.
7.
8.
SICAP-
a) Annual Plan 2023 — Additional €10M for Ukraine Response
DRCD announced an overall increase of 3% (€1.4 million in total)
b) Cork City Partnership Request on Ukraine Response Funding
The Chairperson reported on the request from Cork City Partnership on
refocusing funding to the a Ukraine migrant resource worker.
Migrant worker role has been approved and advertised as agreed with SCAP
sub-group.
LCDC
9.
a) LCDC Audit (CEP and SICAP 2021)
No Report yet.
b) New Membership Two new PPN representatives were elected at the last plenary —
Melissa Cotter from Glanmire Community Association (Community Pillar) and Majo Rivas
from NASC (Social Inclusion Pillar) Brenda Cahill will also replace Mick O' Connell as the
Cork City Partnership member on the LCDC.
Strategic items:
a) Slåintecare Healthy Communities/Healthy Ireland Fund
Slaintecare launch successfully together with assistance of The Cabin, Niche and Let's
Grow Together. Funding has been confirmed for 2023.
b) Cork City LECP Update-
The Social Inclusion Development Officer gave an updated presentation to the
meeting on the "Local Economic & Community Plan 2023-2029" Draft high level goals
have been approved by the JPC, and next Monday it will go to the Economic
Development SPC for approval. There will be a consultation phase in the first quarter
of 2023. There will be a need for a full quorum for sign off of stage one at the next
meeting in Jan.
10. AOB-
Joe Curtin highlighted that the LGBT+ Youth in city UPCork Youth Project funding is ending at
the start of 2023.
The next meeting will be an online meeting on the 26th of January 2022 from 4 p.m.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
ennehy
Chairperson.
15thDecember 2022