Comhairle Cathrach Chorcai
Cork City Council
LCDC'&
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Åitiüil
Chathair Chorcai
Cork City Local Community Development
Committee
Minutes of the LCDC meeting of Thursday, 26th of January 2023
In attendance:
Cllr Fergal Dennehy
Ann Doherty
Adrienne Rodgers
Joe Curtin
Thomas Myers
Catherine Kennedy
Denis Leamy
Brenda Cahill
Majo Rivas
Cllr Ger Keohane
Siobhan Goulding
Gabrielle O'Keeffe
Eoin Gunn
Also in attendance:
Sandy McGoarty
Held on Microsoft Teams
Chairperson
Rebecca Loughry, Kieran O'Connell, Stephen Murphy, Richard McCarthy,
Apologies
Helen Murphy, Melissa Cotter
1. Welcome & Apologies
The Chairperson, Cllr Fergal Dennehy welcomed the committee members and the new
members Majo Rivas (PPN) & Brenda Cahill (CCP).
2. Minutes
Majo mentioned the need to amend the NASC community support description in the minutes. There
were no other matters arising. The minutes of the 15th of December 2022 were proposed by Cllr
Dennehy and seconded by Denis Leamy.
3. Declaration of Interest
The Social Inclusion Specialist (RL) in the Community section highlighted the importance of returning
the declaration of interest forms and the need for members to declare a conflict of interest where it
arises. The person/s who declare a conflict must then remove themselves from any particular
discussion or decision pertaining to their interest.
4. For Information:
(a) Community Enhancement Programme Funding will be advertised shortly.
The total amount allocated to Cork City is €353,332.00 This year's fund is
the Community Support Fund. Details of the fund were delivered to the
meeting by the Social Inclusion Specialist (KöC).
(b) LCDC Audit (CEP & SICAP 2021) Social Inclusion Specialist (KOC) gave a
report that all is in order and reports were positive all round.
(c) Workshop for the LCDCs on Inclusive Community Engagement in Planning
and Decision Making. 11.00-2.00 pm on Tuesday 28th Feb in Council
Chambers. Members were asked to consider attending this important
training morning.
(d) Community Recognition Fund 2023 is a new fund and will circulate details.
Closing date the 15th of March. Social Inclusion Specialist (RL) gave an
overview of this new fund and how Cork City Council intend to maximise
its use for the benefit of the communities across the city.
5. PPN Report: LCDC PPN Representatives
The new PPN representatives were welcomed by Joe Curtain.
6. Strategic Items:
(a) Slaintecaire Healty Ireland/Healty Ireland Fund
Social Inclusion Specialist (SM) gave a background report on all the projects
through the Healthy Ireland fund and SEED Funding.
In relation to LCDC Slaintecaire is just for informative purposes, feedback,
and oversight.
7.
8.
Healthy Ireland Fund must be signed off on by LCDC and draft documents
will be sent to the LCDC.
SICAP sub group agreed to oversee Healthy Ireland projects and will report
back to LCDC group.
(b) Cork City LECP Update-
The Social Inclusion Development Officer (SmG) gave an updated
presentation to the meeting on the "Local Economic & Community Plan 2023-
2029" Draft high level goals which has been approved by the Community,
Culture & Placemaking SPC and the Strategic Economic Development SPC with
no changes.
Motion to approve stage 1) of the Cork City LECP was proposed by B. Cahill
and seconded by A Doherty.
AOB — Schedule of meetings discussed and agreed.
SICAP -
a) Annual Plan 2023 — Motion to approve to next stage.
Proposed •by Cllr Fergal Dennehy and seconded by Denis Leamy
b) cork City Council SICAP Audit 2021
Positive feedback from audit especially being undertaken during pandemic.
The next meeting will be in person meeting on the 23rd of February 2022 from 4 p.m. at Cork City
Hall.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Fergal Dennehy
Chairperson.
26thJanuary 2023