Comhairle Cathrach Chorcai
Cork City Council
LCD
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Åitiüil
Chathair Chorcai
Cork City Local Community Development
Committee
In attendance:
Cllr Fergal Dennehy
Ann Doherty
Thomas Myers
Cllr Ger Kelleher
Sandy McGroarty
Denis Leamy
Also in attendance:
Apologies
1. Welcome
Minutes of the LCDC meeting of Thursday, 21st of July 2022
Teams Meeting
Chairperson
Chief Executive
Richard McCarthy, Rebecca Loughry, Kieran O'Connell
Adrienne Rodgers, Siobhan Goulding, Michael O'Connell, Denis
Barrett, Niall O'Keeffe, Gabriel O'Keeffe, Eoin Gunn, Nora
O'Donovan.
The Chair welcomed the committee members
2. Minutes
On the proposal of Fergal Dennehy, seconded by Ann Doherty the minutes of 19th of May
2022 minutes were approved with no matters arising.
3. Ukraine Community Response Forum Update:
Ann Doherty gave an update on the Ukraine crisis and what Cork City have in place in dealing with
refugees. The Covid response team are meeting fortnightly. Student accommodation needs to be
vacated shortly. We must be very careful in re-housing the refugees so not to be re-traumatising
them. The subgroups are working very well. Roughly 43,000 Ukrainian refugees in Ireland which is
far more than initially thought. There is uncertainty about lease holdings and there will be a call for
pledged properties.
4. For information:
a. SICAP 2022 United Nations Public Service Award
Kieran congratulated the Cork City SICAP Sub-Group, the LCDC and Programme
Implementor for its part in the overall DRCD SICAP Award. This is a hugely significant inter-
national award.
b. New Community Staff
Kieran/Fergal welcomed Sandy to the team
5. PPN Report
Kieran New appointment of Orla Burke and she has started & she will give a report at one of
the meetings. Employing Support workers at the end of July. Quarterly PPN supervisory group
meeting going forward.
6 SICAP
Fergal the SICAP Sub-Group met before this meeting and deliberated on the report of
additional SICAP Lot funding for the Ukrainian supports. Fergal proposed that the LCDC would
pass final approval to the SICAP Sub-Group on the addition of the Ukraine supports
programme and funding distribution. The SICAP Sub-Group would then approve these
changes to the 2022 SICAP Annual Plan pending a full report from Kieran in mid-August. A full
LCDC members meeting will not take place before the deadline for changes to the SICAP
Annual Plan need to be made. This was proposed by Fergal Dennehy and seconded by Denis
Leamy.
7. LCDC Annual report Report 2021: Defer
8. Strategic Items
a. Slaintecaire Healty communities/ Healthy Ireland fund
Rebecca Loughry Slaintecare €250,000 — working through projects, The Glen awning project
is finished. The 16th September will launch and show model of practices and will be a launch
pad for overarching group.
Healthy Ireland Fund shortlisting next week.
b. LECP Update
Sandy gave a presentation on the LECP 6 different stages, and the group suggested a bi-
annual report to keep the group more informed.
9. Denis Leamy gave details of the "reach fund" which is closing on the 31st of July for any
types of support and details will be circulated.
iness of the me • g•
ded the
This co
gal Dennehy
21thJuly 2022
Chairperson.