 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 20th February 2020  
Multimedia Room, New Civic Offices, Cork 
 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Catherine Kennedy 
PPN 
Ger Keohane 
 
Councillor 
Fiona Finn                         PPN 
Laurence Owens 
CBA 
Nora O’Donovan 
PPN 
Siobhan Goulding 
Joe Curtin 
Priscilla Lynch 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Cork City Council 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Rebecca Loughry, Francis Freyne 
 
Apologies: 
Ann Doherty, Ch. Supt. Barry McPolin, Eddie Mullins, Mick O’Connell, Fergal 
Dennehy, Garret Kelleher 
 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Vice Chairperson welcomed the committee members. Round table introductions were 
made and apologies were noted.  
 
2. Minutes 
On the proposal of A O’Connell, seconded by L Owens, the minutes of 12th December 2019 
were approved. 
 
3. Update on Vacancies  
T Power gave update on three vacancies on the LCDC. These three vacancies will be filled 
from the Local Enterprise Office, IBEC and the PPN. LEO and IBEC are currently in progress of 
selecting a candidate. A vote will be held within the PPN to select a new candidate. 
 
4. Funding Streams  
a) Healthy Ireland Fund round 3 update:   
Healthy Ireland funding has been issued and is in progress. 
b) Community Enhancement Programme 2020 Update:  
The community Enhancement programme will not be advertised until a government is 
formed and a minister appointed. No guarantee for men’s shed funding this year, at 
discretion of the minister. 
No ‘Big Hello’ funding stream this year. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
5. SICAP  
a) Cork South County LCDC Update 
A meeting is being arranged of the joint monitoring group in conjunction with SECAD, the 
programme Implementer of SICAP in the new city areas. 
 
b) SICAP Annual Plan 2020  
SICAP subgroup met and reviewed the SICAP Annual Plan 2020 and presented their report to 
the LCDC recommending approval of the plan to the LCDC with the following caveat; 
• 
The SICAP subgroup would engage with the Programme Implementer to continue 
discussions around the following; 
o Area based planning with a view to include other areas 
o Collaboration and Partners, expand on these themes 
o Groups being targeted and identifying potential emerging needs for 2021. 
 
The LCDC formally approved the SICAP Annual Plan 2020. 
  
c) SICAP 2019 Annual Performance Review 
SICAP subgroup met and reviewed the SICAP 2019 Performance Review reports and 
presented their report to the LCDC recommending approval of the review. 
 
The LCDC formally approved the SICAP 2019 Annual Performance review. 
 
 6. Public Participation Network Report 
The Public Participation Network report was circulated and discussed. 
 
7. A.O.B. 
a) G Keohane raised issue with SECAD and Glanmire re contract. Funding available from County 
Council and to be followed up with County and SECAD.  
b) P Lynch offered thanks for engagement with consultation on the development of corporate 
plan for the HSE. Congratulations to ECOWELL and CCC on recent events held. 
c) P Lynch requested that work on mental health and Meitheal Mara to be included in future 
agendas with a view to discuss what role the LCDC can play. 
d) L Owens offered congratulations to the Careers and Jobs fair. Attendance, engagement and 
inclusiveness praised. 
 
8. Presentation Cork City Local Community Development Committee Review  
A presentation was given by A Rodgers on Cork City Local Community Development 
Committee. This prompted discussions on the role and operation of the LCDC. It was agreed 
that at each meeting, time would be set aside for strategic considerations and this exercise 
of reflection should be continued. 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
_______________ 
Aaron O’Connell  
Vice Chairperson 
