 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 17th September 2020 
Teams Meeting 
 
 
In attendance: 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Catherine Kennedy 
Cork Sexual Health 
Laurence Owens 
Cork Business Association 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Chief Officer 
Denis Leamy 
 
CETB 
Fiona Finn 
 
Cork City PPN 
Mick O’Connell  
Cork City Partnership 
Priscilla Lynch  
HSE 
Paul McGurk 
 
LEO 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Rebecca Loughry, Ruth Lynch, Denis Barrett 
 
 
Apologies: 
N O’Donovan, Cllr. G Keohane, A Doherty, Chief Supt B McPolin, 
Cllr G Kelleher, J Curtin, S Goulding 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the committee members and apologies were noted.  The 
retirement of Aaron O’Connell was noted and appreciation for his contribution to the LCDC 
was acknowledged. 
   
2. Teleconference Etiquette 
 
The Chairperson outlined teleconference etiquette.  
 
3. Minutes 
On the proposal of C Kennedy, seconded by L Owens the minutes 23rd of July 2020 were 
approved with no matters arising. 
4. For information: 
a. Cork City Council Community Response Forum update  
T Power gave an update on the Community Response Forum.  The area teams are 
currently on pause but ready to reactivate at short notice.  Twenty-five Community 
Newsletters have been published and issued across the Community Sector with a 
reach of over 2,500 people. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
b. Funding Streams 
T Power had circulated a report on the current funding streams.  
Healthy Ireland activity and financial returns for year one of the Healthy Ireland 
Fund Programme are being compiled.  
CEP 2020 – 68 applications received with an ask of €183k.  
CEP 2020 - Community and Voluntary Buildings reopening costs.  Not advertised yet 
but will be advertised mid-September. 
 
R Loughry We need to take a collaborative approach when making funding 
applications to ensure we are getting the biggest bang for our buck.  This will also 
reduce the risk of duplicate applications.   
 
D Leamy Does the LCDC have a role at some level to look at co-ordination of 
applications.  We could receive more funding if we had a combined and co-ordinated 
effort. 
 
F Finn agreed with D Leamy and commented on the number of applications being 
received from groups for PPE through the PPN. 
 
M O’Connell SICAP small grants targeted at restart and re-opening grants. Twenty-
five groups have been awarded a total of €16,000.  
   
c. SICAP Mid-Year Review 
 
The Chief Officer signed off on SICAP Mid-year on the 10/09/2020.  All targets were 
exceeded despite the Covid lockdown.  The Pobal parallel review was also fine.  The 
SICAP narrative review on targets for the end of the year noted that KPI 2 may prove 
challenging. Discussions are currently underway Nationally on how deal with 
potential under achievement of KPI’s resulting from Covid.  
 
Nationally KPI’s 1 & 2 were exceeded by 116%.  After the mid-year review, Pobal have 
completed documents for discussion by the Department.  ESRI did an evaluation on 
SICAP.  The findings acknowledged that working with individuals takes time but 
delivers positive and effective results. 
 
F Dennehy huge congratulations should be extended to the Partnership for achieving 
this. 
 
d. Public Participation Network Report  
The PPN report was circulated and Catherine Kennedy outlined details of report. 
5. Strategic Items: 
D Barrett gave an update on the Community Response Forum and the Digital Divide.  
F Dennehy acknowledged that funding will be the issue but collaboration between the 
different agencies was to be commended. 
 
M O’Connell Friendly call are in the process of engaging with the Digital group to acquire 
laptops for the elderly.  They have courses running for vulnerable families and for the elderly 
to help them get online.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
6. AOB 
A O’Connell has retired from the PPN and the LCDC and is a great loss.  He had the highest 
attendance record of any committee member.  His background brought huge experience.  The 
Committee will write to thank him for his contribution. 
 
P Lynch gave an update of where the HSE are at with Covid.  Cork is currently doing very well 
in the fight against the virus.  Testing has quadrupled and positive cases are still at a low level.  
There will be mass testing in the long term in residential settings and in meat processing 
plants.   
Be Winter Ready, Influenza Campaign, Minding your Wellbeing and Stress Control campaigns 
have all been launched to coincide with World Mental Health week. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
_______________ 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17th September 2020 
