 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 23rd July 2020 
Teams Meeting 
 
 
In attendance: 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Joe Curtin 
 
Cork City PPN  
Cllr. Garrett Kelleher 
Cork City Council 
Catherine Kennedy 
Cork City PPN 
Eddie Mullins 
 
ICTU 
Mick O’Connell  
Cork City Partnership 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Chief Officer 
Denis Leamy 
 
CETB 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Rebecca Loughry, Ruth Lynch, Fearghal Reidy, Lorcan Griffin 
 
 
Apologies: 
A O’Connell, A Doherty, P McGuirk, B McPolin, G Keohane, F Finn, L Owens, 
N O’Donovan, P Lynch, S Goulding 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the committee members and apologies were noted.   
   
2. Teleconference Etiquette 
 
A Rodgers outlined teleconference etiquette.  
 
3. Minutes 
On the proposal of C Kennedy, seconded by E Mullins the minutes 25th of June 2020 were 
approved with no matters arising. 
 
4. For information: 
a. Cork City Council Community Response Forum update  
T Power gave an update on the Community Response Forum.   
C Kennedy acknowledged the work being undertaken by the committee with 
responsibility for the digital divide in relation to families and older people but queried 
whether anyone was in contact with the Direct Provision centres.  
  
D Leamy suggested that Denis Barrett make a presentation on the Digital Divide at 
the next meeting. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
T Power following a question from F Dennehy, T Power confirmed that the Covid 
Emergency Fund could be used for sanitary equipment in the re-opening of buildings 
and services. 
 
A Rodgers confirmed that the Department had issued guidance on the re-opening of 
services but also suggested that the Committee write to the Department requesting 
extra funding for groups to re-open. 
 
R Loughry currently there is not much funding to support groups.  The Committee 
needs to press the Department for more funding. 
 
F Dennehy requested that the guidelines for re-opening of groups published by the 
Department to circulated to the Committee. 
 
J Curtain queried whose responsibility it would be if a person contracted Covid-19 in 
a community building. 
 
b. DRCD Community Emergency Fund update  
Two reports were circulated to the Committee.  A change to the scheme allows people 
to apply for PPE and safety equipment.  The awards for tranche 2 were circulated.  
There has been €42k of the Emergency Funding allocated so far. 
   
c. SICAP Mid-Year Timeline  
A report on the SICAP Mid-Year Update was circulated to the Committee.  Despite the 
onset of Covid-19 all KPIs continue to be met. 
 
d. Public Participation Network Report  
The PPN report was circulated and Catherine Kennedy outlined details of report. 
5. Strategic Items: 
a. Issues Paper 
T Power informed the committee that the CEP 2020 would be advertised at the end 
of the month with a closing date of the end of August/start of September. 
Healthy Ireland Fund – reporting for year 1 has been postponed to allow re-allocation 
of budgets due to covid-19.   
 
b. Cork City Development Plan 
F Reidy gave a presentation on the Cork City Development Plan public consultation 
process. 
 
R Loughry commented on the solid foundations that have been formed and 
relationships through the Community Response Forum.  These should be utilised 
when the LCDC are making their submission to the Development Plan. 
 
F Dennehy noted that only twelve months have passed since the boundary was 
extended.  A lot has been done but still a lot to do. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. AOB 
E Mullins is stepping down for the 31st of July 2020.  The Committee acknowledged his position 
as an important pillar in Cork.  His calibre of experience and the extensive contribution he has 
made will be missed.   
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
_______________ 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23rd July 2020 
