 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 25th June 2020  
Teams Meeting 
 
 
In attendance: 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
Joe Curtin 
 
Cork City PPN  
Fiona Finn 
 
Cork City PPN 
Cllr. Garrett Kelleher 
Cork City Council 
Catherine Kennedy 
Cork City PPN 
Cllr. Ger Keohane 
Cork City Council 
Paul McGuirk 
 
LEO 
Eddie Mullins 
 
ICTU 
Mick O’Connell  
Cork City Partnership 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Chief Officer 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Rebecca Loughry, Ruth Lynch 
 
 
Apologies: 
Denis Leamy, Priscilla Lynch, Nora O’Donovan, Siobhan Goulding 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the committee members and apologies were noted.   
   
2. Teleconference Etiquette 
 
A Rodgers outlined teleconference etiquette.  
a. LCDC Decision making Validity on Teleconferencing 
The LCDC agreed that any decisions made through online meetings would be valid per DRCD 
communication 25th March 2020. Proposed by G Kelleher, seconded by Joe Curtin and 
agreed by the LCDC. 
3. Minutes 
On the proposal of A O’Connell, seconded by G Kelleher the minutes of 23rd of April 2020 
were approved with no matters arising. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
4. For information: 
a. Cork City Council Community Response Forum update  
T Power gave an update on the Community Response Forum.   
A Rodgers noted that some areas in the country had cut their helplines back to five 
days a week however Cork City Council are maintaining their helpline seven days a 
week from 9am to 5pm even though the caseloads have reduced to practically zero. 
The Food Distribution Group is continuing to work with food providers.  They are 
linked in with over 250 families. 
 
The Digital Divide Group are investigating the difficulties, challenges and demands 
being faced by communities.  There have been some solutions progressed through 
education and other organisations.  Cork City Council are working on a project to allow 
laptops to become available through our libraries.  These can be loaned out to schools 
and schools can identify groups and or people who can avail of the laptops. 
 
The Community page on the website has a new “Community Wellbeing” button.  This 
has become a valuable tool for the community and has evolved throughout the crisis. 
The ETB have taken the lead on the Youth Response project which is chaired by Denis 
Leamy.  There is now a huge focus on Youth and we are actively building a program 
around that. 
 
F Dennehy commended the Community Section for all the positive work done 
throughout Covid-19. 
 
b. DRCD Community Emergency Fund update  
Three reports were circulated to the Committee.  There has been €20k of the 
Emergency Funding allocated so far.  The applications were approved by the SICAP 
subgroup.  A further tranche of applications are currently being assessed and are 
almost ready for approval.  This fund is targeted at the area teams in the 16 locations 
throughout the City.  The HSE also have an input into the assessment process. 
 
i. LGBTI DRCD Funding €200K Nationally  
A report on dormant Accounts funding available for LGBTI+ groups was 
circulated. Cork Gay Project, Cork Sexual Health Centre and LINC have applied 
for this funding administered by the DRCD.   
 
ii. Community Enhancement Programme 2020 
This fund was announced on Monday 22nd June 2020.  There has been a 
significant reduction in funding on previous years.  €70,666 is available this 
year for Cork City over 50% reduction on last year. 
R Loughry outlined the process and priorities 
➢ Strategic overview/value for money 
➢ SICAP Subgroup plus interested members would adjudicate 
➢ 50% allocated to RAPID ABC 
➢ Potential for match funding 
➢ Cross reference with other funding streams/avoid duplication 
➢ Utilise the 16 Community Area teams linkages 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The CEP will be advertised towards end of July so as not to clash with other 
funding streams currently live.  
It was noted that an additional issue this year were community & voluntary 
groups trying to re-open and costs associated with Covid -19. Following 
discussion it was agreed that the LCDC would write to the DRCD outlining the 
need for funding for re-opening costs and funding towards PPE, Signage etc. 
iii. Community Integration Fund 
Information was circulated on the launch of a community Integration Fund 
administered directly by the Department of Justice. This notice has been 
widely circulated through the PPN and relevant organisations. 
 
c. SICAP Mid-Year Timeline  
As a result of COVID, the Mid-Year Review process will be replaced by a Mid-Year 
Check, which will be desk based and will require less reporting than the normal Mid-
Year Review process completed in the past.  The LDC must submit the Fin & Mon 
reports and upload associated documents on IRIS by Tuesday 14th July.  The reports 
will be reviewed and completed by Friday, 11th September.  The process can be signed 
off by the Chief Officer and the LCDC agreed to the chief officer approving the review. 
M O’Connell confirmed the LDC are back open for business from last Monday 22nd 
June 2020.  Staff have been redeployed to a number of areas including Friendly Call, 
Meals on Wheels, the 16 area teams etc.  They have been involved in schools with 
distributing books, organising graduations etc. The Partnership are also giving a lot of 
assistance to Start Up businesses.   
F Dennehy acknowledged the great work being done by Friendly Call.  It has been the 
highlight of Covid and connected a lot of vulnerable people in the community with 
this great service. 
d. SICAP Pobal Annual Engagement  
The SICAP Pobal annual engagement will be held in September and a decision on tele-
meeting or physical will be made closer to the time.  
 
e. Public Participation Network Report  
The PPN report was circulated and Joe Curtin outlined details of report. 
5. Strategic Items: 
a. Role of LCDC and Community Response Teams  
A Rodgers suggested that the LCDC may be the new ‘home’ for the Community 
Response Teams.  They have formed a good base on the ground.  The LCDC is best 
placed to take advantage of all the good relationships that have been formed and 
think about how they can be developed and maintained.   
F Dennehy agreed and this will be reviewed over the next few months. 
 
b. LECP Baseline analysis 
T Power briefed members on the upcoming review of the Cork City development Plan 
and how the baseline analysis will inform the LECP review process. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
6. AOB 
a. Cork City Development Plan 
 
An email has been circulated inviting the public to make submissions in relation to the 
review of the City Development Plan.  The closing date for submissions is the 31st of 
August 2020.  T Power suggested that the LCDC should make a submission to the plan. 
The link is to be circulated to the members and Planning Policy should be asked to 
present at the next meeting. 
 
b. Letter to Minister re Nora and PPN Report on Cocooning.  
Nora O’Donovan’s letter was sent to the Minister for Health and the Minister for 
Community and Rural Development.  A verbal acknowledgement was given but the 
cocooning rules relaxed soon afterwards. 
 
c. Black Lives Matter Webinar feedback  
Organised by the Cork Migrant Centre, teenagers from direct provision and migrant 
origin related their experiences of Racism in Cork. The panel included the ombudsman 
for children and all public agencies were represented. Future webinars are being 
planned. 
 
d. Lord Mayor’s Community Recognition event, acknowledgement/feedback  
Four online events were held on four different nights, Civic awards, Cultural awards, 
Community & Voluntary recognition event and Youth awards. The online videos were 
very well received and acknowledged. 
F Dennehy thanked the SICAP Committee for assessing and approving the Covid 
Emergency Grant. 
J Curtin acknowledged the Community Response Teams, and how well they worked.  
He was part of the Gurranabraher team and commented on how great it was to work 
with everyone in all agencies who he wouldn’t normally work with. Would like to work 
towards getting the youth voice heard on the new City Development Plan. 
F Dennehy commented on how the Community Response Teams had made a real 
difference to real lives and he had seen this himself by being part of the Bishopstown 
team. 
G Keohane acknowledged the impending completion of a project in Glanmire funded 
by the County Council pre boundary extension.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
_______________ 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23rd July, 2020 
