 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 23rd April 2020  
Teams Meeting 
 
 
In attendance: 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
Joe Curtin 
 
PPN 
 
Laurence Owens 
CBA 
Denis Leamy 
 
CETB 
Eddie Mullins 
 
ICTU 
Catherine Kennedy 
Cork Sexual Health Centre 
Pricilla Lynch 
 
HSE 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Cork City Council 
Paul McGurk 
 
LEO 
Barry McPolin  
Gardaí 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Rebecca Loughry, Ruth Lynch, Denis Barrett 
 
 
Apologies: 
Ger Keohane, Fiona Finn, Nora O’Donovan, Siobhan Goulding 
 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the committee members. Round table introductions were made 
and apologies were noted.   
   
2. Teleconference Etiquette 
 
A Rodgers outlined teleconference etiquette.  
 
3. Minutes 
On the proposal of P Lynch, seconded by C Kennedy, the minutes of 20th February 2020 were 
approved. 
 
4. Community Response Forum  
 
T Power gave an update on the Community Response Forum.  A Community Response 
Helpline has been set up which is open for calls from 8am to 8pm seven days a week.  A 
framework document was published nationally to give guidance on how the forum should 
operate.  Cork added other stakeholders to the already recommended groups.  The response 
to the forum has been extremely positive with the Cork response being second to none. 
 
A Food Poverty Committee has been established meeting once a week.  The focus is to bring 
all the food distribution stakeholders e.g. Penny Dinners, Feed Cork, SVP etc together for 
discussions on how best to meet the current need to avoid duplication and to consider how 
the services can continue into the long term. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Phase 2 of the Community Call will be focussing on Wellbeing.  A large section of the 
population have now been cocooning for weeks.  The need has changed from essentials such 
as food and pension delivery to emotional support such as conversation.  The Community 
Section are now publishing the Community Response Newsletter.  This contains useful 
phone numbers and information on mental and physical health activities. 
 
P Lynch noted that type of calls are more psycho social and wondered could the HSE do 
something to support that.  Perhaps supporting individuals who are taking the calls.  She will 
speak further about this to Denis Barrett. 
E Mullins offered his staff supervisors who are prepared to help with any services needed eg 
Meals on Wheels etc. 
5. Local Area Community Response Teams 
D Barrett outlined the structure of the teams.  City has been divided into 16 areas.  Each 
area has a City Council Lead in conjunction with a HSE Lead and with local team of 
volunteers on the ground.  Some areas are more familiar with accessing supports than 
others but strong connections have been made and needs to be maintained for the long 
term.   
A Rodgers advised that Community Supports are available for businesses that are suffering.   
6. DRCD Community Emergency Fund 
A €92K Community Emergency Fund has granted to Cork City Council for the issuing of small 
grants to cover costs in a range of areas during the Covid Emergency.  There are a number of 
categories that groups or organisations can apply under.  The Application process will be on 
a rolling basis and the SICAP sub-group will sign off on recommendations of assessment 
team. 
A O’Connell expressed thanks to the Community and to the Gardai for all the work being 
undertaken during the crisis.   
R Loughry expects the HSE and City Council will match some funding and therefore there 
should be more than €92k available.  
 7. Public Participation Network Report 
 
The Public Participation Network report was circulated and discussed. 
 
F Dennehy acknowledged Nora O’Donovan for a wonderful piece at the end of the PPN 
report.  It was agreed that the report should be forwarded to Minister for Health. 
 
P Lynch acknowledged that Nora’s comments were hard reading.  However, the precautions 
are in place to protect our most precious and there are risks in breaching those precautions. 
 
A O’Connell also acknowledged Nora’s comments as reflective of the Age Friendly 
community.  Suggested teaming cocooners up with younger people to form relationships.  
This problem is going to be a challenge for us for months ahead.   
 

 
 
 
 
 
F Dennehy accepts the comments of the committee but suggested the blanket ban on over 
70s being allowed out should be revised.  People need an outlet.  Suggested that everyone in 
the committee should make a phone call to Nora to keep in touch.  Her permission should 
also be sought to forward her letter to the Minister. 
 
8. Members Input 
 
F Dennehy expressed thanks to Adrienne Rodgers and Cork City Council.  The Community 
response has been incredible. 
 
9. SICAP Delivery 
Cork City Partnership submitted their SICAP Response plan for Covid-19 which was circulated 
for information. 
 
10. AOB 
A general discussion took place on pendant alarms for people cocooning and the operation 
of Meals on Wheels service. 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
_______________ 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
