 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the LCDC meeting on Thursday, 12th December 2019  
Multimedia Room, New Civic Offices, Cork 
 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
 
Bernie Connolly  
PPN 
Catherine Kennedy 
PPN 
Ger Keohane 
 
Councillor 
Fiona Finn                         PPN 
Laurence Owens 
CBA 
Nora O’Donovan 
PPN 
Ch. Supt. Barry McPolin An Garda Síochána 
Denis Leamy                     CETB 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Rebecca Loughry, Susan Skelly McGovern, Cork City Council 
 
Apologies: 
Ann Doherty, Eddie Mullins, Mick O’Connell, Siobhan Goulding, Fergal Dennehy, 
Garret Kelleher, Joe Curtin, Priscilla Lynch, Adrienne Rodgers 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Vice Chairperson welcomed the committee members. Round table introductions were 
made and apologies were noted.  
The Vice Chairperson extended a particular welcome to Denis Leamy, new member to the 
committee representing the Cork Education and Training Board. 
 
2. Minutes 
On the proposal of L Owens, seconded by C Kennedy, the minutes of 14th November 2019 
were approved. 
Referring to item 10. A.O.B of the minutes, L Owens reported that there has been a great 
take up from retailers to the Sensory Hour initiative. The launch was well covered by the 
media and the overall response has been very positive.  
R Loughry said the feedback from the recent visit of the Department of Rural and 
Community Development was very positive. It was acknowledged that a lot of good 
groundwork had been done by the LCDC. 
 
3. Correspondence 
T Power gave details of a two day Trauma Training by Dr. Karen Treisman being hosted by 
the Lord Mayor of Cork on 8th and 9th January 2020.  It will focus on ‘Moving towards being 
and sustaining an adversity, culturally, trauma-informed, infused and responsive 
organisation.’ 
R Loughry gave details of the background to it and encouraged attendance and participation. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
4. Funding Streams  
a) Healthy Ireland Fund round 3 update:   
The Healthy Ireland Round 3 Programme of Work has been agreed by Healthy Ireland. R 
Loughry said we were delighted to get the full allocation of €245,450 over 2 years. It is a 
really good outcome for the working group that devised the programme of Cork City actions 
(details circulated to committee). The grant agreement has been received, signed and 
returned to Healthy Ireland. The amount of funding due in year one is €152,725 and we 
expect the first tranche of this payment before end of year.  
b) Community Enhancement Programme 2019 Allocation Update:  
Community Enhancement allocation of €149,240 plus HSE matched funding of €24,000 
giving total fund of €173,217. 
Total applications were 112, of which 56 were funded. To date, €143,317 has been paid out, 
1 application still being processed. 
c) Community Enhancement Programme – Men’s Shed Fund 2019 Update 
Men’s Shed Funding allocation of €19,634. There are 15 Men’s Sheds in Cork City. 13 applied 
and all grants have issued. 
 
5. SICAP  
a) Cork South County LCDC Update 
R Loughry reported that since the extension of the City boundary a Memorandum of 
Understanding had been signed. The establishment of a liaison group was agreed, with 
Chairs and representatives of both LCDCs to be members of it. It is planned that SICAP would 
meet that liaison group twice a year. This has not happened yet but hoped the first meeting 
will take place at the beginning of January.  
b) SICAP Annual Plan 2020 Update 
T Power outlined the details of the SICAP Annual Plan 2020. It was submitted by Cork City 
Partnership on 22nd November and reflects the increased budget of €1,273,145. 
KPI 1 Local Community Groups  
Target 56 
KPI 2 Individuals 
 
 
Target 813 
Emerging Needs 
 
 
Older People  
The Plan contains 10 actions under 2 goals, Local community Groups and Individuals. 
Timeline for Annual Plan 2020 review 
A. LCDC reviews the plan and provides feedback to Pobal by 31st January 2020.  
B. Pobal conduct a high level review and feedback to LCDC by 5th February 2020. 
C. Final approval of Annual Plan by LCDC by 28th February 2020, subject to End of Year 
2019 Review being satisfactory. 
c) Timelines for SICAP End Year Review 
Guidelines and timelines for End of Year process have not issued yet but in keeping with 
previous year’s timelines, end of year reports normally submitted 10 working days after start 
of New Year, 15th January 2020. 
Review to be conducted and final approval by 28th February 2020. 
T Power reported on a regional support event for SICAP he recently attended in Limerick. He 
will circulate  ‘My Journey; A Distance Travelled Tool’ to committee members for 
information which will be launched in 2020. 
 
 6. Public Participation Network Report 
B Connolly outlined the December PPN Report to the LCDC which focussed on three key 
points regarding: 
1. Feedback on recent training session 
2. Participatory budgeting 
3. Timeline of the review of the LECP 
 
R Loughry responded that the LECP is due for review next year. Formal guidance is awaited 
from the Department as to whether it is to be a review of the current plan or a new plan.  

 
 
 
 
 
It was agreed to reissue the LECP to committee members and set time aside at the January 
meeting to discuss same. It was also agreed to circulate the link to the Cork City Profile. 
 
7. LCDC Updates 
a) Feedback from Workshop 
Vice Chairperson A O’Connell invited feedback from participants.  
B Connolly said the PPN was well represented but disappointed there were not as many 
from the LCDC. It was really worthwhile, valuable training. More like that would be helpful 
for the LCDC to work better as a team.  
N O’Donovan enjoyed it very much and found it helpful to get to know people better.  
C Kennedy said that among the members of the LCDC there were enough skill sets to enable 
us to facilitate workshops ourselves. 
T Power found the workshop a very worthwhile exercise. There was great engagement and a 
lot learned from the round table discussion. He added that he will circulate Standing Orders 
with a view to them being overhauled as well as reviewing roles and commitment at the 
January meeting.  
R Loughry found a major benefit was networking.  Also it gave focus on how we view Cork 
now and into the future. With that focus from the workshop combined with the outcome 
from the planning day exercise we did earlier this year, we have the bones of a new LECP 
already. 
In conclusion, the Vice Chairperson A O’Connell said that the workshop highlighted the idea 
of systems thinking and the need to be more strategic and well done to everybody who 
participated. There is the need for all to buy into high level delivery mechanism. There is a 
huge variety of skills and experience around the table and we need to deliver our plan 
together.  
b) Meetings Schedule 2020 
T Power drew attention to the proposed schedule for Cork City LCDC meetings for 2020. An 
August meeting has been provisionally scheduled depending on the time line for the 2020 
Community Enhancement Programme funding. 
 
8. A.O.B. 
a) F Finn reported that NASC had successfully applied for funding under the Asylum, Migration 
and Integration Fund (AMIF) administered by the Department of Justice. The amount is 
€237,824 over three years. This represents 75% with 25% match funding from Cork City 
Council and HSE. A synopsis of actions would be circulated to LCDC.  
b) L Owens raised the following points regarding events such as the workshop: 
▪ 
Months of advance notice needed as very difficult to devote two days 
▪ 
Need buy-in before an event is planned 
▪ 
Need to change location of meetings 
▪ 
Need to bring people in who challenge what we do 
c) F Finn asked about increasing the visibility of the LCDC. T Power said that it will be addressed 
in the next few weeks and that R Lynch and the CCC Communications team will be working 
together on website. 
d) T Power asked for comments on the City Council’s draft Corporate plan. TPower to draft 
response to Corporate Plan. 
 
The Vice Chairperson A O’Connell ended the meeting by wishing a Happy Christmas to everyone. 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Aaron O’Connell  
Vice Chairperson 
