Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 8th February 2018 
Multi-Media room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
In attendance: 
Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
Paul Moynihan  
Chief Officer 
Priscilla Lynch 
Dan Boyle 
Lawrence Owens 
Nora O’Donovan 
Bernie Connolly 
Dave Ronayne  
Eddie Mullins  
Fiona Finn 
 
Also in attendance: R. Loughry, T. Power 
Apologies: 
Chief Supt. B. McPolin, G. Canning, Cllr. C. O’Leary, Ann Doherty, Brenda Cahill,  
Cllr PJ Hourican, Adrienne Rodgers 
 
 
Welcome 
 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies noted. 
1. Minutes 
The minutes of 14th December 2017 were considered and on proposal of L. Owens, seconded 
by D. Boyle were approved with no matters arising.  
2. Funding Stream Updates 
 
a) Healthy Ireland Funding Stream Update 
R. Loughry presented a progress report on the Healthy Ireland Fund. The meeting 
was informed that there would be a new round of HIF in Q2 2018 with tight turn 
around again. It was noted that there might be an under spend on three actions of 
approx €2k each, as a result of the shortened timeframe to deliver projects, and the 
LCDC was asked to allow the SICAP Sub-group sign off as necessary on the re-
allocation of under spend within the same actions. The LCDC approved this course of 
action. 
 
 
b) Recast RAPID Capital Funding Scheme 
R. Loughry presented an update on the RAPID funding allocated. A discussion took 
place on being strategic in the allocation of any funding streams available in 2018. L. 
Owens proposed that projects should be showcased, before and after showing 
success of funding. This was agreed by LCDC. 

3. SICAP EYR 2017 Report 
The SICAP sub-group met with the Programme Implementer and reviewed the SICAP EYR 
Reports and T. Power presented their findings. The SICAP sub-group recommended the 
report for LCDC approval. On the proposal of F. Dennehy and seconded by F. Finn, the End 
Year Report of SICAP 2017 was approved.  
4. SICAP Annual Plan 2018 Presentation. 
The SICAP Annual Plan 2018 presentation was postponed to the next meeting of the LCDC.  
5. LCDC Membership review. 
The Chief Officer outlined the process of review and informed committee that it would be 
completed by end Q1 and reported back to LCDC at meeting in April. 
6. AOB. 
 
a) LCDC review workshop Tullamore. 
Fergal Dennehy attended and gave feedback on the meeting. Some of the points 
raised were; 
 
Promotion and greater recognition of LCDC’s 
 
Grants and funding streams, short time frames raised nationally as an issue 
 
Need for greater on-line resources, website for LCDC 
 
Planning and bi-monthly meetings 
 
Continuous monitoring of LECP in smaller segments 
 
Associate membership of LCDC’s without voting rights 
 
LCDC attending PPN forum meetings 
A general discussion took place and the following noted; 
 
The importance of being strategic and sustainable 
 
Greater emphasis on wellbeing and mental health from the LECP 
 
LCDC website should contain bio’s photos of LCDC members 
 
Positive PR on solid achievements should be presented to business sector, 
creating greater exposure to business 
 
Role in promoting pay restoration nationally 
 
Intercultural agenda, voter registration project, newcomers guide 
b) Schedule of meetings 
 
A schedule of meetings for 2018 was circulated. 
This concluded the business of the meeting and the next meeting scheduled Thursday 15th March 
at 4pm.  
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, 
Chairperson 
