MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 14th OCTOBER 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. 
McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, 
P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, P. Rice, F. Kerins. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. Harmon, 
A. Deasy, T. Coleman.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Deputy Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Housing 
Operations.  
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing Delivery & 
Regeneration. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Community, Culture & 
Placemaking. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Roads & Environment 
Operations. 
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations. 
 
APOLOGIES 
 
Comhairleoir K. McCarthy.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Langlois family on the death of Tony Langlois. 
• The O’Donoghue family on the death of Paul O’Donoghue. 
• The Singleton family on the death of Will Singleton. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of John O’Sullivan. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Mary O’Leary. 
• The O’Connell family on the death of Michael O’Connell. 
• The O’Neill family on the death of Martha O’Neill. 

• The Harding family on the death of Peter Harding. 
• The Watson family on the death of Anne Watson. 
• The Mullane family on the death of Tom Mullane. 
• The Callaghan family on the death of Charlotte (Shirley) Callaghan. 
• The Dineen family on the death of Keith Dineen. 
• The Gayer family on the death of John Gayer. 
• The O’Halloran family on the death of Beatrice O’Halloran. 
• The Dillon family on the death of Kitty Dillon. 
• The O’Regan family on the death of Harriet O’Regan. 
• The Fitzgerald family on the death of Christopher Fitzgerald. 
• The Frost family on the death of George Frost. 
• The Barrett family on the death of Siobhan Barrett. 
• The Feehan family on the death of Gerald Feehan. 
• The Murray family on the death of Des Murray. 
• The O’Brien family on the death of Dominica O’Brien. 
• The Noonan family on the death of Tom Noonan. 
• The Foulkes family on the death of Denise Foulkes. 
• The McCullagh family on the death of Lil McCullagh. 
• The O’Brien family on the death of Joe O’Brien. 
• The Duggan family on the death of Dan Duggan. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Billy O’Sullivan. 
• The Slattery family on the death of Jim Slattery. 
• The Nugent family on the death of Patricia Nugent. 
• The Kinsella family on the death of Marjorie Kinsella. 
• The Callanan family on the death of Margaret Callanan.  
• The Foley family on the death of Tom Foley. 
• The O’Neill family on the death of Terry O’Neill. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Lottie O’Driscoll on reaching the Junior Eurovision Final and coming second 
overall. 
• The Gay Project on the purchase of the first community owned LGBT 
community centre. 
• The Kabin Crew on being longlisted for a Grammy Award. 
• Donal O’Keeffe on his series being awarded ‘Best News Series’ at the Local 
Ireland Media Awards. 
• David Courell on his appointment as Chief Executive Officer of the FAI. 
• U16 St. Michael’s LGFC on being crowned U16 County Champions. 
• U16 Blackrock Hurlers on being crowned U16 County Champions. 
• 96FM on winning gold for the Giving for Living Radiothon at the 2024 
IMRO Radio Awards. 
• Ciara Dennehy on winning the RIBBF 2024 National Body Building Title. 
• St. Finbarr’s Camogie Club on winning the 2024 County Final.  
 
 
 
 

3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
CIVIC RECEPTIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of Civic Receptions for: 
 
• Cork County Board Pitch & Putt, to mark their success at recent championships 
in Bagenalstown, Co. Carlow. 
• The Kabin Studio to mark their success over recent months. 
3.2 
ICLRD ANNUAL CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald to 
the ICLRD Annual Conference from 24th – 25th October 2024 in Belfast. 
 
3.3 
NEW CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that the new Chief Executive of Cork City 
Council, Valerie O’ Sullivan would commence her role on 15th October 2024, and that 
he looked forward to welcoming her. 
 
3.4 
EXTENSION OF THANKS TO BRIAN GEANEY 
 
 
An tArdmhéara thanked Brian Geaney for his guidance and direction as Acting Chief 
Executive over the past number of months. 
 
3.5 
LORD MAYOR’S TRAVEL  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of an tArdmhéara 
Comhairleoir D. Boyle to the Committee of the Regions in Brussels from 7th – 9th 
October 2024.  
 
3.6 
LOCAL ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY PLAN (LECP) 
 
 
The Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP) was distributed to Elected 
Members. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
PROPOSED HOLDING OF AN EVENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 10th 
October 2024 on the proposed holding of a Pageant to mark the start of the Christmas 
Season and the switch on of the Christmas lights, on 15th November 2024 in Cork City 
Centre.  
 
 
 
 
 

5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir G. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 9th September 2024. 
 
An Chomhairle considered the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 25th September 2024. 
 
An tArdmhéara read the corrected Resolution that was agreed at the Ordinary 
Meeting. On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir C. 
Kelleher, An Chomhairle approved the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of An 
Chomhairle held, 25th September 2024, including the corrected Resolution. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Special Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 30th September 2024. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
COMPULSORY PURCHASED PROPERTIES IN 2024 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
How many properties are Cork City Council currently Compulsory Purchasing and 
how many properties have Cork City Council Compulsory Purchased to date in 2024. 
 
 
REPLY  
 
Three properties have been acquired under the Derelict Sites Acquisition process 
(Derelict Sites Act 1990) and have vested in Cork City Council’s ownership to date 
in 2024.  
 
In addition, notice of intention to acquire derelict properties have been served in 
relation to six other properties under the Derelict Sites Act, 1990 to date in 2024.  
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & Internation Relations. 
 
6.2 
JACK LYNCH TUNNEL 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To request information on the following points regarding the Jack Lynch Tunnel: 

 
1. How many nights has the Jack Lynch Tunnel been closed for repairs or any other 
works from 2020 to date? 
 
2. Could you also provide an estimate of the total number of hours the tunnel has been 
closed due to repair work or maintenance during the same period? 
 
REPLY 
 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) manage the Jack Lynch Tunnel and are 
responsible for all road closures associated with same. 
 
The questions above have been forwarded to TII for response. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate 
 
6.3 
PENNEYS IN CITY CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE outline to the Council, what time frame is it aware of for the planned 
works of Penneys in the city centre. When last the Executive engaged with Penneys 
to progress this vitally important project for the city centre? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
This relates to the permitted development of the Penneys expansion– permitted under 
21/40435. In June 2022, the decision to grant permission was appealed to An Bord 
Pleanala. The Board granted permission in November 2023 (ref. ABP – 313756-23).  
The process of Extinguishing the Public Right of Way at Elbow Lane has been 
completed, which is key to the commencement of this permitted development, and 
discussions are ongoing with the developers regarding same. 
 
It is understood that the developers are progressing with the work on planning 
compliance documentation and construction drawings with a view to commencing 
construction work early in 2025. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
 
 
 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director Of Services, 
 
 
 
Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations 
 
 
 
 
 

6.4 
NEW PUBLIC LIGHTING SYSTEM AT THE FAIRFIELD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the work commence to install a new public 
lighting system at the Fairfield? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
New lighting at the Fairfield is proposed to be completed as part of the Rapid 
Deployment Pedestrian Scheme North West.  Construction is proposed to commence 
on this project in Q4 of 2024. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.5 
EVENT CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the specific legal issues that have further delayed the Event 
Centre progressing to funding approval, if he believes that it may be out of date by the 
time it is built and to detail the engagement has been made between the consortium, 
City Council and/or Secretaries General of Government Departments involved, 
including the Attorney General. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The City Council has engaged with all stakeholders including the appropriate 
Government Department. The Council understands that the present position is that up-
to-date data and advice related to the Event Centre project has been submitted to the 
cabinet for consideration. The Council and others are awaiting a cabinet decision on 
the matter. 
 
Live Nation have assured the Council that the most up to date equipment and 
technology has been included in the detailed design so as to ensure that the Events 
Centre will be fit for purpose once completed.  
 
Brian Geaney, 
Deputy Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.6 
CNWQR MASTERPLAN 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE give an update on the CNWQR Masterplan Implementation Update, the 
work that has been undertaken to date, whether public consultation will form part of 
this, whether it will still be published by year end, if not why not and on what date 
will it be published. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
 
Cork 
City 
Northwest 
Quarter 
(CNWQR) 
Regeneration 
Masterplan 
and 
Implementation Report was adopted by Cork City Council 14th November 2011. The 
Masterplan sets out the implementation strategy for the area’s regeneration.  The 
strategy is designed in the context of an advancing programme of work (construction, 
social, economic & environmental) to allow for Cork City Council to adapt to 
emerging challenges and opportunities. The CNWQR Implementation programme is 
evolving and not subject to regular published reviews or public consultation processes. 
The Housing Delivery & Regeneration Directorate regularly updates local councillors 
through Regeneration meetings and informs the community via a local newsletter. 
These communications document the progress made and detail completed and 
upcoming public consultations on socio-economic, relocation, demolition, and 
construction matters. Additionally, Part 8 planning processes include public 
consultations and local information events as needed. 
One proposed communication initiative by the Regeneration team is to hold bi-annual 
walk-in clinics for CNWQR residents, providing programme updates and addressing 
individual concerns. This initiative is planned to be advertised in November, when 
further communication will issue to local councillors and the public. 
 
In conclusion, the CNWQR Regeneration Masterplan is a comprehensive and 
evolving strategy, with three phases currently under construction, two phases at tender 
stage, and with further phases currently being designed, together with a strong SEEP 
(Social, Economic, Environmental Plan) implementation programme.  We continue 
to remain focused on regeneration of this area, while keeping the community informed 
and involved through various communication channels and consultation processes. 
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery and Regeneration 
 
6.7 
ESTATE RESURFACING & FOOTPATH REPAIRS IN CORK SOUTH EAST 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
“I am Requesting for Information on Estate Resurfacing and Footpath Repairs in Cork 
South East since 1974 to 2024. Could the Chief Executive please provide a 

comprehensive list of all residential estates within the Cork South East that have 
undergone resurfacing and/or footpath repairs since 1974? Also, for each estate, please 
include: 
 
A - The name of the estate. 
B - The type of work carried out (resurfacing, footpath repair, or both). 
C - The year or years in which the work was completed. 
 
This information will help us better understand the council's ongoing commitment to 
infrastructure maintenance and provide insight into the historical improvements made 
across the ward.” 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
Cork City Council does not retain maintenance records going back 50 years.  As such 
the full breath of the requested information cannot be supplied.  It must also be noted 
that more than two thirds of the South East Local Electoral Area only be became part 
of the City Council’s administrative area 5 years ago.  Thus the City Council would 
have no records for this area prior to May 2019.  
In order to answer the question as fully as possible for the entire Local Electoral Area, 
a list of contract works over the past 5 years has been collated below.  
 
The estates specific roads resurfacing contract commenced in 2020.  A list of all 
estates resurfaced in the South East Ward from 2020 to date are shown in the table 
below: 
 
Estate Name 
Type of Work 
Year 
Marian Park  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Maryville (first arm)  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Maryville (second arm)  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Pic du Jer Park  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Ballybrack Heights  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Broadale  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Dundannion  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Clontarf Estate  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Upper Kensington  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Kiltegan Lawn  
Resurfacing 
2024 
Carrigmore Park  
Resurfacing 
2023 
Woodview, Pinecroft  
Resurfacing 
2023 
Delford  
Resurfacing 
2023 
Dundannion  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Ferney Grove  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Yorkboro  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Marian Park  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Avondale Park  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Berkley, Templevale  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Manor Grove  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Manor Avnue  
Resurfacing 
2022 

Belgard Downs  
Resurfacing 
2022 
Ballinure Avenue  
Resurfacing 
2021 
Barnstead Drive  
Resurfacing 
2021 
Glenview  
Resurfacing 
2021 
Manor Villas  
Resurfacing 
2021 
Meadow Grove  
Resurfacing 
2021 
Seamus Quirke Park  
Resurfacing 
2021 
Pic du Jer Park  
Resurfacing 
2020 
 
Similarly, a list of all footpaths replacement locations completed by contract over the 
last five years is below: 
 
 
 
Location 
Type of Work 
Year 
Upper Kensington (No 34-42) 
Footpath Upgrades 2024 
Maryborough Avenue (No 1-5) 
Footpath Upgrades 2024 
Ballybrack Heights 
Footpath Upgrades 2024 
Maryborough Avenue (No 54-59) 
Footpath Upgrades 2023 
Lyndon Crescent (No 5) 
Footpath Upgrades 2021 
Calderwood Road (No 35) 
Footpath Upgrades 2021 
Montpellier Road (No 1-21 Rosegarth) 
Footpath Upgrades 2021 
Belgard Downs (main spine entry) 
Footpath Upgrades 2021 
Manor Dene (No 2) 
Footpath Upgrades 2021 
The Orchard Ballincurrig Park 
Footpath Upgrades 2020 
Rochestown Rise (No.58) 
Footpath Upgrades 2020 
Manor Heath Thornbury Hts (No. 2) 
Footpath Upgrades 2020 
Calderwood Road (No. 38-40) 
Footpath Upgrades 2020 
Kingslea (main spine entry) 
Footpath Upgrades 2019 
Calderwood Drive (No 2) 
Footpath Upgrades 2019 
Somerton Park (No 16-29) 
Footpath Upgrades 2019 
Somerton Park (No 5 – 42) 
Footpath Upgrades 2019 
 
In addition to the above there were many individual footpath repairs undertaken 
during this time in housing estates across the Local Electoral Area.  These are carried 
out by Cork City Council direct labour crews and a complete list of these are recorded 
monthly in the Chief Executive’s Management Report that is presented to Council 
each month.  
I trust this will give insight into the recent improvements made and Cork City 
Council’s ongoing commitment to infrastructure maintenance across the electoral 
area. It is a credit to the members that an extensive financial investment has been made 
in housing estates in the area in recent years.  
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Operations Directorate. 
 
 
 

6.8 
FLOODING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir L. Harmon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans are in place to protect homes and businesses in 
Cork City and suburbs from flooding (including homes by the Glasheen River), what 
actions have been taken to support local businesses affected by recent flooding and if 
the Chief Executive will meet with any businesses affected, in person on site? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Operations Directorate manages and maintains surface and storm water 
infrastructure across the City.  This involves the regular maintenance/clearing of 
debris from water courses, culverts and trash screens.  All of this work is undertaken 
as preventative measures to endure that the infrastructure in place functions optimally 
during sever weather events. 
 
The Operations Directorate, in conjunction with the City Council’s Fire Department, 
Civil Defence and other Principal Response Agencies, also provides emergency 
response services during sever weather events, such as the orange rain event that 
occurred on the 5th of October.  This involved reacting to incidents as they occur across 
the City during an event. 
 
The Office of Public Works (OPW), with the support of the Cork Local Authorities is 
currently advancing the design/planning for two major flood protection schemes. The 
Lower Lee Flood Relief Scheme will provide protection to circa 2,100 properties in 
Cork city when constructed. The scheme extends from approx. 15 km from west of 
Ballincollig to the eastern edge of Cork City Centre Island. The Blackpool Flood 
Relief Scheme will protect approx 293 properties from a one in one-hundred-year 
flood event when constructed. The proposed scheme consists of flood defence 
measures and conveyance improvements in particular along the Commons Road and 
in Blackpool Village. Plans are also under preparation separately for culvert 
replacement/augmentation and associated remedial works to the Magazine Rd culvert 
(Glasheen River). Following completion/approval of corresponding plans the 
construction works will proceed in accordance with TII/OPW funding. 
 
The Infrastructure Development Directorate, supported by OPW, is also currently 
overseeing the construction the Glanmire Flood Relief Scheme. The scheme extends 
over approx. 4 km of the Glashaboy River and lengths of various tributaries. The 
scheme is designed to protect approx 103 properties from a one in one-hundred-year 
flood event in Riverstown/ Glanmire area. This scheme follows on from the 
completion of the flood protection schemes in Douglas (2022) and Togher (2023).  
The Council is also overseeing the construction of the Morrison’s Island Public Realm 
and Flood Defence project with improvements from Parnell Bridge to Parliament 
Bridge. It will provide protection from a one in one-hundred-year tidal flood event for 
approx 400 properties in a part of the city that experiences regular tidal flooding.  
 
The Department of Enterprise have announced an Emergency Humanitarian Flooding 
Scheme for Small Businesses for those affected by flooding in Cork over the weekend 

of the 4th to the 6th of October.  This scheme is being administered by the Irish Red 
Cross on behalf of the Department.  The specific details of same can be obtained from 
the Irish Red Cross Website which contains both the scheme details and the 
applications forms.   
 
The appropriate officials will meet with any businesses affected. 
 
David Joyce,  
 
 
 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
Director of Services, 
Roads/Environment Operations. 
 
 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.9 
PARLIAMENT BRIDGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:-  
 
To ask the CE for an update on the repair of Parliament Bridge. 
 
REPLY 
 
Parliament Bridge is included in the Record of Protected Structures and is listed on 
the National Inventory of Architectural Heritage. 
 
Following a vehicular impact, approximately eight linear metres of the southwestern 
parapet at Parliament Bridge sustained complete or partial collapse. The area was 
immediately made safe, and all elements of the damaged parapet were subsequently 
retrieved from the riverbed by specialist contractor. 
 
An assessment of the damaged parapet elements was undertaken by stone 
conservation specialists. This assessment is now complete, and works have 
commenced on the repair and replacement of damaged or missing parapet elements. 
All works will be undertaken in accordance with established conservation best 
practice methods under the supervision of a Grade 1 Conservation Architect. It is 
anticipated that these repair works will be completed at the workshop of the stone 
conservation specialists by early December 2024. 
 
Structural engineers were also engaged to assess the damage to Parliament Bridge and 
to assist in the design of the remedial works. Tender documents are currently being 
finalised and it is anticipated that a tender for the main works contract will issue in 
early November to include for the reinstatement of the repaired parapet elements and 
will also include for the upgrade/replacement of both footways and for the 
replacement of the parapet lighting. Members will be kept appraised of ongoing 
progress. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
 
 

6.10 
HOW MUCH SPENT ON SHUTTERS FOR DERELICT PROPERTIES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Rice, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how much was spent each year, for the past 5 years, on 
shutters to secure council-owned vacant and derelict properties? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Over the past 5 years Cork City Council spent the following amounts on the security 
of vacant housing units in regeneration areas including Noonan Road, vacant units 
under repair etc. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
 
Director of Services  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Housing Operations. 
 
 
 
The following amounts were spent on the shuttering of derelict properties by Property, 
Corporate Affairs as part of the acquisition of derelict sites from 2019 – 2023: 
 
Year 
€ 
2019 
16,250.41 
2020 
  8,573.95 
2021 
  4,099.84 
2022 
  4,116.54 
2023 
  5,806.84 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations. 
 
6.11 
ACTIVE TRAVEL MEASURES ON LEO MURPHY ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
That the CE provide an update as to the installation of active travel measures on Leo 
Murphy Road, Ballincollig. 
 
 
 
 
Year  
€ 
2020 
140,468 
2021 
169,045 
2022 
190,375 
2023 
169,687 
2024 to end Sept 
182,246 

REPLY  
 
 
The City Council has prepared plans for the installation of active travel facilities on 
Leo Murphy Road. The plans were the subject of public consultation and approved by 
Council under Section 38 of the Roads Traffic Act 1994. 
 
The scheme is currently at detailed design stage and the related work is supported by 
way of grant funding from the National Transport Authority (€50,000 in 2024). The 
scheme will continue to be progressed in accordance with grant funding allocations 
and details of the next round of funding and the related works to be supported will be 
circulated to Members on receipt early in the New Year. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.12 
BDS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Following on from the confirmation last month that Cork City Council will no longer 
be using products from HP could the executive confirm whether or not they have any 
business or contracts with any other companies or institutions on the BDS list? 
 
The full list of companies that have ties to the Apartheid Israeli regime can be accessed 
on the BDS movement website but it includes companies such as Intel, Siemans, 
Google and Amazon. Having any business with companies that are complicit in, 
support and profit from the genocide being inflicted on Gaza and the occupation of 
Palestinian land would fly in the face of the declaration of Cork City as an apartheid 
free zone by this council in October 2022 and other motions passed in support of 
Palestine. BDS is a proven tactic and has led to success with G4S, Veolia, Orange, 
Ben & Jerry’s and Pillsbury all being compelled to end their complicity with Israeli 
state war crimes. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council has a number of existing business and/or contracts and services 
with companies that are listed on the BDS movement website.  
 
Cork City Council ICT Dept procures ICT Hardware and ICT services through the 
OGP Framework (national frameworks for public sector) and in accordance with 
National procurement guidelines.  
 
Cork City Council is committed to drawdown as per the terms and conditions of 
Contract and in accordance with the overarching framework. ICT Dept is obliged to 
honour existing contractual commitments as well as the governing legislation and 
guidelines.  
 
John Hallahan, 

Chief Financial Officer. 
 
6.13 
WATER QUALITY OF GLEN RIVER 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if a measure exists of the water quality of the Glen River; 
and how this is affected by outlets entering the river in the Glen River Park? 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
As part of Cork City Council’s ambient water quality monitoring programme samples 
are periodically taken from the Glen River. 
 
At present the Council is not aware of any water quality issues on this river. 
 
It should be noted that any water entering a river from another source has the potential 
to cause issues depending on the nature of the in-flowing water. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate. 
 
6.14 
NORTHERN DISTRIBUTOR ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Northern Distributor Road route 
selection & the dates for the work commencement on the Ballyvolane strategic 
transport corridor?  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Strategic Assessment for the Northern Distributor Multi-Modal Route was 
approved by the National Transport Authority in December 2023. The Options Report 
for the route is currently being finalised and the draft report will be submitted to the 
NTA & the Dept of Transport in the coming weeks. Following approval, the public 
consultation process will be undertaken on the emerging preferred route. Following 
confirmation on the preferred route and subject to continued grant funding, works can 
progress on the preliminary design phase of the scheme. 
The tender documentation for the Ballyvolane Strategic Corridor has recently been 
submitted to the National Transport Authority for approval to proceed with 
procurement of a contractor. Subject to approval and adequate funding being 
available, construction works could be commenced on site in Q2 2025 with an 
estimated construction period of 18 months. In the meantime, City Council is 
engaging with landowners and progressing the close out arrangements for the transfer 
of the lands required for the scheme. 

 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.15 
LOCAL AUTHORITY INTEGRATION TEAM 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
Can the Chief Executive confirm what sum is provided for in the 2024 and 2025 
Budgets to fund the Local Authority Integration Team, including confirmation of the 
number of team personnel. 
 
In addition, can the Chief Executive confirm what provision, if any, has or will be 
made to contribute to fulfilling the request for housing provision under the Irish 
Refugee Protection Programme 2024/2027, and at what estimated cost? 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council, in common with every Local Authority in the country, has 
employed a Local Area Integration Team (LAIT), made up of a Coordinator, 2 
Support Workers and an Administrative Worker. The team works in parallel with 
existing integration initiatives to ensure that local integration support is provided for 
International Protection Applicants (IPA), IPA with status, Programme Refugees 
(IRPP) and Beneficiaries of Temporary Protection. The LAIT complements and 
strengthens existing services that are active in Cork city. 
 
The LAIT are funded on a recoupment basis – this is cost neutral for Cork City Council 
as all monies are recouped on a quarterly basis from the Dept. of Children, Equality, 
Disability, Integration & Youth. 
 
2024 is the first year of the LAIT in Cork City Council so final figures for recoupment 
are not available yet but are expected to be in the region of: €240,000. 
 
The Cork City Council budget allocation for drawdown for the LAIT in 2025 is: 
€251,800. 
 
The most recent Irish Refugee Protection Programme (IRPP) was signed off by the 
Irish Government in March 2024 and committed Ireland to welcoming 2,400 
programme refugees between 2024 and 2027. Each Local Authority has been assigned 
an allocation and between 2024 and 2027 Cork City Council expects to accommodate 
57 people through the IRPP Programme. This will be Cork City Council’s first time 
participating directly in the Irish Refugee Protection Programme. 
 
Rebecca Loughry 
Director of Services 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
 
 

6.16 
FLOODING ON BANDUFF ROAD 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Tynan was deferred to the 
next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 11th November 2024:- 
 
 
 
In relation to my following questions from November of last year, I am again asking 
the acting CEO for an update on this issue, especially in light of the recent flooding 
affecting the area. 
 
Questions to the CEO: 
 
1. In light of the persistent flooding on Banduff Road, I am asking if the flooding 
was exacerbated by the dumping of hundreds of tonnes of demolition material, 
such as concrete, taken from Merchant's Quay and Douglas Village shopping 
centre onto the bog floodplain of the Glen River Valley located adjacent to the 
Banduff Road, over a twelve year period from the 1990's to the early 2000's? 
 
2. Is Cork City Council actively investigating this issue? 
 
3. Are there any plans being drawn up to remove the dumped demolition material 
from the Glen River Valley? 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
GLANMIRE TO CITY CYCLE ROUTE (PHASE 2) - PART 8 PLANNING   
 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 179 (4) (a) of Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed 
Glanmire to City Cycle Route (Phase 2) Scheme and the attached report of the Director 
of Services, Infrastructure Development, thereon, as required under Section 179 (3) 
of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development viz. Glanmire to City Cycle Route (Phase 2) Scheme and the report of 
the Director of Services, Infrastructure Development, thereon, it is hereby resolved 
pursuant to the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000, as amended, that the Glanmire to City Cycle Route (Phase 2) Scheme be carried 
out as recommended in the said report of the Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development Directorate, Cork City Council, which was put before Council on the 
19th September 2024.” 
 
7.2 
PART 8 PLANNING PROPOSAL – MAYFIELD LIBRARY & ST. JOSEPH’S 
COMMUNITY CENTRE EXTENSION & RENOVATION   
 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 179 (4) (a) of Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed 
Mayfield Library & St. Joseph’s Community Centre project and the attached report of 

the Director of Community, Culture & Placemaking thereon, as required under 
Section 179 (3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended). 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development viz. the Mayfield Library & St. Joseph’s Community Centre scheme and 
the report of the Director of Community, Culture & Placemaking  Directorate, Cork 
City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions of Section 179 
(4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the Mayfield 
Library & St. Joseph’s Community Centre be carried out as recommended in the said 
report, which was put before Council on the 14th October 2024.” 
 
7.3 
PROPOSED 
RESIDENTIAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
AT 
RAILWAY 
APARTMENTS 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed residential 
development at Railway Apartments, Albert Quay, in the City of Cork and the report 
of the Chief Executive thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000, as amended, dated 10th October 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir D. 
Boylan, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Railway Apartments, Albert Quay, in the City of Cork and the report 
of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to 
the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Railway Apartments, Albert Quay, in the City of 
Cork be carried out as recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork 
City Council, which was put before Council on the 14th October 2024.” 
 
7.4 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 5 LOWER GRATTAN HILL, LOWER 
GLANMIRE ROAD, CORK - GALTAN CLG 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 18th September, 2024 in relation to a loan 
facility for Galtan CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of accommodation at 5 
Lower Grattan Hill, Lower Glanmire Road, Cork. 
  
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €257,114 be granted to Galtan 
CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for the provision of 1 one 
bed unit of accommodation at 5 Lower Grattan Hill, Lower Glanmire Road, Cork.” 
 

7.5 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 1 DOMINICK COURT, DOMINICK 
STREET, CORK - FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 18th September, 2024 in relation to a loan 
facility for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 1 Dominick Court, Dominick Street, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €303,342 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 two bed unit of accommodation at 1 Dominick Court, Dominick 
Street, Cork.” 
 
7.6 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 2 DOMINICK COURT, DOMINICK 
STREET, CORK - FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 18th September, 2024 in relation to a loan 
facility for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 2 Dominick Court, Dominick Street, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €339,796 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 three bed unit of accommodation at 2 Dominick Court, Dominick 
Street, Cork.” 
 
7.7 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 28 ST. FINBARR’S PLACE, PROBY’S 
QUAY, CORK - CORK SIMON COMMUNITY CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 18th September, 2024 in relation to a loan 
facility for Cork Simon Community CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 28 St. Finbarr’s Place, Proby’s Quay, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Rice, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €275,924 be granted to Cork 
Simon Community CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 one bed unit of accommodation at 28 St. Finbarr’s Place, Proby’s 
Quay, Cork.” 

 
7.8 
DRAFT STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE SCHEME 
 
An Chomhairle considered the report of the Director of Service, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations, dated 10th October 2024, on the Draft Strategic Policy 
Committee Scheme 2024 – 2029 and External Nominations to Strategic Policy 
Committees. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle approved the Draft Strategic Policy Committee Scheme 2024 – 2029 with 
the following amendments:- 
  
• that the titles/names of all SPCs be in their bilingual form - Irish and English  
• that the minutes of the Grúpa Forbartha Gaeilge meetings be reported to the 
Community, Culture and Placemaking SPC.  
 
An Chomhairle further approved the External Nominations to Strategic Policy 
Committees. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 7th OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 7th October 2024. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/08/2024  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/08/2024. 
 
8.2 
BANK OVERDRAFT FOR Y/E 31/12/2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer, 
dated 30th September 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“That Cork City Council approves, pursuant to Section 106 of the Local Government 
Act, 2001, an overdraft facility of €25m (twenty-five million euro) for the twelve-
month period to 31st December 2025”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8.3 
MOTIONS 
 
8.3.1 
COMMEMORATION IN HONOUR OF MOTHER JONES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 3rd October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will commemorate the centenary of the publication of the 
autobiography of Mother Jones with the naming of an appropriate location or 
development or other suitable commemoration in her honour in 2025.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/447) 
 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Mother Jones was born Mary Harris 
in Cork City in late July 1837 and went on to become a significant figure in the labour 
rights movement in North America. This significance is celebrated in Cork every year 
through the Spirit of Mother Jones Festival. In 2025 the centenary of the publication 
of the autobiography of Mother Jones is significant and worthy of marking. In this 
regard the Library Services will reach out to the Festival organisers to explore the 
opportunity to include a City Council event that will specifically mark the publication 
centenary as part of their 2025 Festival Programme.  
 
8.3.2 
JOINT CORK CITY COUNCIL/CORK COUNTY COUNCIL COMMITTEE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Chief Financial Officer, dated 
3rd October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
              ‘That Cork City Council write to Cork County Council requesting that a meeting of 
the Joint Cork City Council/Cork County Council Committee be convened in 
September to: 
 
-        discuss the fact that the City Council now has to pay an extra €3 million per 
annum to the County Council under the boundary extension agreement because 
of inflation in addition to the €13 million that the City Council is already 
obligated to pay the County Council every year under said agreement; 
 
-        enable the City Council members to make submissions to the County Council 
members outlining how the additional €3 million annual payment is 
unsustainable from the City Council’s point of view; 
 
-        discuss whether a recommendation should be made to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, Darragh O’Brien to re-establish the Oversight 
Committee in accordance with section 24 of the Local Government Act 2019; 
and 
 
-        discuss whether a recommendation should be made to Minister O’Brien that the 
most efficient and practical course of action to take to resolve the issue would 
be for Minister O’Brien to direct that the Department make an annual payment 

of €2 million to Cork City Council for the next 5 years so as to alleviate the 
crippling inflation associated with the annual payment to Cork County Council.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/377) 
 
The report of the Chief Financial Officer stated that legal provisions and mechanisms 
for dealing with issues associated with the extension of the City boundary are provided 
for in the Local Government Act, 2019. The Act provided for the establishment of the 
Cork Boundary Alteration Implementation Oversight Committee to steer the planning 
for and implementation of the various matters and measures entailed in the extension 
of the city boundary. Section 24 of the Act specifically deals with the issue of the 
compensation payment by the City Council to Cork County Council. Section 24(3) 
provides that in the event of the Chief Executives of the Cork local authorities 
disagreeing with one another as respects the amount of the annual contribution in 
respect of any year, either of them may refer the matter to the Oversight Committee 
for a recommendation with regard to the matter. Cork City Council is in 
communication with Cork County Council as regards the increasing annual 
compensation amount payable and I will report further to the Elected Members when 
our engagement with the County concludes. Given the statutory requirements for 
dealing with the compensation payment and the role of the respective Chief 
Executives in same, the convening of a meeting of the Joint Cork City Council/Cork 
County Council Committee is not the means to deal with the matters referenced in the 
motion. 
 
8.4 
DRAFT STRATEGIC POLICY SCHEME 2024-2029 & SECTORAL 
NOMINATIONS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the draft Strategic Policy Scheme 2024-2029 
and proposed places on Committees for Sectoral Nominations. 
 
8.5 
ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the meetings proposed to be reckonable for calculating 
attendance for this Council term. 
 
 
An Chomhairle agreed that meetings for the paying of tributes following a passing, 
such as those for former Lord Mayors will be recategorized from special meetings to 
‘special memorial meetings’ and therefore will be removed from the 80% calculation. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the amended listing of meetings.  
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 23rd SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 23rd September 2024.  
 
 

10. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 17th SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 17th September 2024. 
 
11. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 19th SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 19th September 2024. 
 
12. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 10th SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 10th September 2024. 
 
13. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd September 2024. 
 
14. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd September 2024. 
 
15. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd September 2024. 
 
16. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd September 2024. 
 
17. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th September 2024. 
 
18. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
 
 
 
 

19. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn as part of the Cork City Council Delegation visit to 
San Fransisco, USA, 1st - 8th March 2024. 
• Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald at the WHO Healthy Cities Political Network 
Committee Meeting, held at Brno, Czech Republic, 4th - 6th September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Autumn Training Seminar, held at 
Hillgrove Hotel, Co. Monaghan, 11th - 12th September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at La Touche Legacy Weekend, held at Greystones, 
Co. Wicklow, 20th - 21st September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald at the National Healthy Cities and Counties 
Network Meeting, held at Strand Hotel, Co. Limerick, 10th September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Training Seminar, Overview of the 
Planning System, held at Horse and Jockey Hotel, Co. Tipperary, 26th 
September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the AILG Autumn Training Seminar, held at 
Hillgrove Hotel, Co. Monaghan, 11th - 12th September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the AILG Training Seminar, Overview of the 
Planning System, held at Bridge House Hotel, Tullamore, Co. Offaly, 28th 
September 2024. 
 
20. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received.  
 
21. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
21.1 
IPB ENGAGEMENT CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the attendance of 
Comhairleoir S. Martin at the IPB Engagement Conference, held in Mullingar, 4th 
October 2024. 
 
21.2 
ICSH FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir A. Deasy to the 
ICSH Finance and Development Conference from 16 - 17th October 2024 in Sligo. 
 
22. 
TRAINING 
 
None received.  
 
23. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORT 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
reports for May, June, July and August 2024. 
 
 

24. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 46, 
Former Hollyhill Inn Public House, be referred to the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
25. 
MOTIONS 
 
25.1 
LOCAL PROPERTY TAX (LPT) BASELINE FUNDING 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion, noting the opposition 
of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council again write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, Darragh O’Brien urging him to re-consider his decision to only allocate 
an extra €1.5 million in Local Property Tax (LPT) baseline funding to Cork City 
Council, in circumstances where, 
 
-      the City Council now has to pay an extra €3 million per annum to the County 
Council under the boundary extension agreement because of inflation in addition 
to the €13 million that the City Council is already obligated to pay the County 
Council every year under said agreement; 
 
-     the City Council Executive have advised that, due to inflation, there will be a 
deficit of approximately €3 million in the City Council budget for next year; 
 
-      the City Council Executive have advised that the €3 million shortfall will 
necessitate either a 3% increase in commercial rates or dramatic cuts to services; 
 
-     businesses in Cork, particularly small and medium enterprises, are already 
experiencing a lot of extra costs and pressures, including increased energy costs, 
a rise in the cost of materials, minimum wage increases and an increase in the 
number of sick days; 
 
-      an increase in commercial rates at this stage could therefore have a devastating 
effect on small and medium enterprises, many of which are already struggling; 
and 
 
-     dramatic cuts to services could result in vital works in areas such as footpath 
repair, road re-surfacing and housing maintenance being delayed or scaled down.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/493) 
 
 
 
 

25.2 
ENACT THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES BILL 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion, noting the abstention 
of Fianna Fáil members:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council, in light of the recent ruling by the International Court of 
Justice on the illegality of Israeli settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territories, calls 
on the Irish Government to enact the Occupied Territories Bill, to cut Irish trade ties 
with Israeli goods and services produced in these illegal settlements.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/496) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Shannon, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
25.3 
REQUEST FOR A WALKTHROUGH BRIEFING WITH THE NTA 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to the NTA to request a walkthrough briefing in person, 
on site, with the NTA on plans for an emerging preferred route for the Cork Luas and 
associated Bus Connects intersections in all the areas affected which can be attended 
by all interested Public Representatives.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/497) 
 
25.4 
ATTACKS AND INCURSIONS BY ISRAEL ON LEBANON 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this City Council condemns the attacks and incursions by Israel on Lebanon and 
seeks to ban any future entry to Cork City by the Prime Minister of Israel, the President 
of Israel or any member of the Israeli Government including its ambassadors for as 
long as illegal occupation of Palestine and bordering countries continues and war 
crimes are being perpetrated by the Israeli State and that such measures would be 
communicated to the President, Taoiseach and Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign 
Affairs.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/498) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, J. 
Lynch, L. Harmon. (14) 
 

AGAINST: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, 
M.R. Desmond, S. Martin, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (8) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, D. Boylan. (2) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
25.5 
HOST EURO 2018 IN CORK 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this City Council will write to the FAI and UEFA to outline the benefits that 
hosting Euro 2028 in Cork would bring to the Competition and offer as much 
assistance as possible to ensure its success.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/500) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, An Chomhairle approved the motion 
revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That this City Council will write to the FAI, UEFA and the GAA to outline the 
benefits that hosting Euro 2028 in Cork would bring to the Competition and offer as 
much assistance as possible to ensure its success.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/500) 
 
25.6 
SIGNALISED PEDESTRIAN CROSSING AT FLYNN'S CROSS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the National Transport Authority requesting that a 
signalised pedestrian crossing be installed at Flynn's Cross, West Village, Ballincollig 
as part of ‘BusConnects Cork’.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 24/506) 
 
25.7 
MOBILE PHONE POUCHES 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Education urging her to scrap plans 
to spend €9 million on mobile phone pouches and to allocate this funding instead to 
special education provision.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 24/508) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Lynch, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 

FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, J. Lynch, L. Harmon. (11) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, S. Martin, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (9) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
 
25.8 
CUTS TO BUS SERVICES  
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘Council calls on Bus Éireann to immediately reverse the planned unacceptable cuts 
to the 202, 202a, 205, 208 and 220 services. Bus Éireann must tackle the recruitment 
and retention crisis in Cork with good pay and conditions for all workers.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/520) 
 
25.9 
SEAT ON THE BOARD OF THE NTA 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to the Minister for Transport to seek a permanent seat on 
the Board of the NTA for the Chief Executive in order to protect and represent Cork’s 
interests in public transport.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/526) 
 
25.10 
DEPLOYMENT OF A TRANSPORT POLICE SECTION 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council writes to the Garda Commissioner and Minister for Transport 
requesting the deployment of a transport police section to be established for Cork bus 
services to protect both public transport workers and commuters from anti social 
behaviour.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/527) 
 
An Chomhairle unanimously approved the motion revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That this Council writes to the Garda Commissioner, Minister for Transport and 
Minister for Justice requesting the deployment of a transport police section to be 
established for Cork bus services to protect both public transport workers and 
commuters from anti social behaviour.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/527) 

 
25.11 
HOUSING PROJECTS IN THE DOCKLANDS AREA 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to seek to meet in person with the Land Development 
Agency to discuss their plans for housing projects in the Docklands area.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/528) 
 
25.12 
FULL BUS SHELTER OUTSIDE ROSSBROOK ESTATE, BISHOPSTOWN 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will request an expedited process for the installation of a full bus 
shelter outside Rossbrook Estate, Bishopstown and request the NTA provide a 
programme of bus shelters being installed in Cork City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/529) 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
