MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 10th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, 
N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate and 
Community Affairs. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development.  
Ms. A. O’ Rourke, Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate & Community Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Neill family on the death of Michael O’Neill. 
• The O’Halloran family on the death of Phyllis O’Halloran. 
• The Power family on the death of Donal Power. 
• The Buckley family on the death of Mary Buckley. 
• The Harrington family on the death of Margaret Harrington. 
• The Lehane family on the death of Patrick Lehane. 
• The Griffin family on the death of Raymond Griffin. 
• The Plunkett Blyth family on the death of Grace Mary Plunkett Blyth. 
• The Fitzgerald family on the death of John Fitzgerald. 

• The Theron family on the death of Agnes Theron. 
• The O’Driscoll family on the death of Esther O’Driscoll. 
• The Diggin family on the death of Olive Diggin. 
• The Hogan family on the death of Eddie Hogan. 
• The Tobin family on the death of Teresa Tobin. 
• The Desmond family on the death of Finbarr Desmond. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Senator Laura Harmon on her election to Seanad Éireann. 
• Senator Garret Kelleher on his election to Seanad Éireann 
• Cian Ducrot on winning a Grammy Award for songwriting. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
ELECTION TO SEANAD ÉIREANN 
 
 
An tArdmhéara extended congratulations to Senators L. Harmon & G. Kelleher on 
their election to Seanad Éireann and called on them to address An Chomhairle. An 
tArdmhéara further confirmed that co-options would take place at the Ordinary 
Meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 10th March 2025. 
 
3.2 
INTELLIGENT CITIES CHALLENGE CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir O. Moran to 
Brussels from 5th – 6th March 2025 for the Intelligent Cities Challenge Conference. 
 
3.3 
LORD MAYOR LED ANNUAL UNITED STATES VISIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara D. Boyle and 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon and C. Kelleher to the United States from 3rd – 10th March 
2025 as part of the Lord Mayor led annual United States visit to continue and advance 
discussions on shared learnings between the two cities. 
 
3.4 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR THE KABIN STUDIO 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that a Civic Reception for the Kabin Studio 
would take place on 20th February at 6.30pm in the Council Chamber. 
 
3.5 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CIAN DUCROT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Cian 
Ducrot on winning his first Grammy Award. 
 
3.6 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CÓRAS IOMPAIR ÉIREANN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Córas 
Iompair Éireann (CIE) on 80 years since its formation. 
 
 

3.7 
ANNUAL DECLARATION FORMS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle of the need to complete and return Annual 
Declaration Forms. 
 
3.8 
SPECIAL MEETING OF COUNCIL  
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that a Special Meeting of Council would be 
scheduled in the coming weeks to consider issues relating to Uisce Éireann and water 
quality in the City. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1  
PROPOSED HOLDING OF AN EVENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive on the 
proposed holding of the St. Patrick’s Day Parade on 17th March in Cork City centre. 
 
4.2 
FLOODING EVENT AT MONAHAN ROAD AND CENTRE PARK ROAD 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Chief Executive on the recent 
flooding event at Monahan Road and Centre Park Road. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 13th January 2025. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Special Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 20th January 2025. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
FENCE & GATE AT ARDPATRICK AVENUE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise and provide an update on the current status of the proposed 
and approved status on the installation of the Fence and Gate at the cul de sac at the 
end of Ardpatrick Avenue in Blackpool. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
A referral under Section 5 of the Planning Act in April 2024 was made to An Bord 
Pleanala in April last year as to “whether the proposed erection of a fence and gate is, 

or is not, exempted development within the meaning of the Planning and Development 
Acts, 2000 (as amended) (PDA) and the PDR, whether such development would result 
in the segregation of the estate, and the control, and or prohibition, of access through 
Ardpatrick, and whether this would represent development that would materially alter 
the terms of the parent planning permission, as amended, and the interruption of a 
recreational amenity currently enjoyed by residents and members of the public.” 
 
A decision on the referral is awaited. Once the decision is made it will be advised to 
the Local Area Committee for consideration. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.2 
STREET PERFORMER BYE LAWS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I ask the CEO to provide details of the current enforcement measures that are in place 
if any with regard to our current street performer bye laws. 
 
I further ask as to how many fines have been processed if any thus far to performers 
who overstay their allotted time at any particular stand (approved performance 
location) and for those who use amplification over and above the allotted the 100 
decibels permitted under the updated bye laws.   
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Since the introduction of the Street Performer Bye- Laws on the 20th May 2024 a total 
of 84 permits have been issued ( 55 Annual permits & 29  Short term permits (3 
month). Enforcement of these bye-laws takes place via two methods:- 
 
1. Non-routine street inspections. 
2. Responding to complaints received from members of the public, businesses, or 
other performers.  
 
In 2024 a total of 58 inspections were carried out which resulted in: 
 
• The issuing of 4 fines in relation to performing without a valid permit.  
• 1 written warning issuing to a performer who had not adhered to the correct times 
and locations 
 
Enforcement Officers also engaged with several performers in relation to performance 
times and the performers moved on amicably. 
 
No fines or warnings were issued in relation to volumes exceeding the 75dB limit 
permitted in the bye-laws.  
 
Paul Moynihan, 

Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.3 
BAKERS ROAD FLATS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE to include the flats on Bakers Road in the North West Regeneration 
Scheme. This would include the demolition of the flats and the construction of new 
homes.  
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
The City Council is currently engaged in the delivery of the Cork City Northwest 
Regeneration Masterplan & Implementation Report (‘Masterplan’), which was 
adopted by Council, with funding being made available for the delivery of the contents 
of the Masterplan only by the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage. 
 
The Bakers Road flat complex does not fall within the Regeneration Masterplan, but 
as part of a larger portfolio of flat complexes across the city.  Cork City Council is 
reviewing all such complexes currently with a view to identifying solutions for their 
longer-term refurbishment and regeneration. The Bakers Road complex is included in 
this review.  
   
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.4 
HOUSING OFFICERS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of Housing Officers employed by Cork City Council, the 
number of Housing Officers per Housing Area, and the number of tenancies for which 
each Housing Officer is responsible? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Housing Directorate has a total of 14 Housing Officers assigned to its three Area 
Housing Offices across the City. These Housing Officers are responsible for managing 
over 11,000 City Council owned properties. The table below details the number of 
properties managed by each of the Housing Officers. 
AREA HOUSING OFFICE 
NUMBER OF PROPERTIES 
MANAGED 
NORTH EAST (NE) – 4 no. Housing Officers 
 
NE Housing Officer 1 
653 

 
 
 
 
The work of the Housing Officers includes the management of tenancies on a daily 
basis, including: 
• Allocation of Property: On receipt of a recommendation from the City 
Council’s Allocations Officer, interviewing and carrying out background 
checks on prospective tenants, organising viewing of properties, signing up 
tenancies for applicants, determining the rent for new tenancies based on 
household income, providing information to tenants on rent payment methods, 
going through the key points of the tenancy agreements and responsibilities in 
renting a City Council property, etc.; 
• Tenancy Management: Managing the tenancy including updating household 
composition, where applicable, dealing with estate management issues and 
tenancy breaches in conjunction with the Tenancy Compliance Team, 
processing of tenancy surrenders in the event of the departure of a tenant, 
engaging with next-of-kin in the case of deceased tenants, liaising with the 
Housing Assets Management Team in relation to inspections of properties as 
required; 
• Liaising with An Garda Síochána and other statutory agencies, e.g. HSE, 
Tusla, medical professionals, CSPCA on an ongoing basis in relation to 
tenancy and welfare issues. 
 
There is a further portfolio of Cork City Council-owned property, where the Council 
has engaged the services of a number of Approved Housing Bodies, e.g. Tuath, Focus 
Ireland, Sophia Housing and Clúid, to manage an additional number of City Council 
owned developments and individual properties across the city. 
 
NE Housing Officer 2 
665 
NE Housing Officer 3 
709 
NE Housing Officer 4 
644 
TOTAL NUMBER OF PROPERTIES 
2,671 
NORTH WEST (NW) – 5 no. Housing Officers  
 
NW Housing Officer 1 
819 
NW Housing Officer 2 
706 
NW Housing Officer 3 
732 
NW Housing Officer 4 
884 
NW Housing Officer 5 
769 
TOTAL NUMBER OF PROPERTIES 
3,910 
SOUTH (S) – 5 no. Housing Officers 
 
S Housing Officer 1 
1,043 
S Housing Officer 2 
883 
S Housing Officer 3 
922 
S Housing Officer 4 
840 
S Housing Officer 5 
1,027 
TOTAL NUMBER OF PROPERTIES 
4,715 
OVERALL TOTAL NUMBER OF PROPERTIES 
11,296 

It is proposed to undertake a review of Area Management in 2025 in the context of 
the expanding portfolio of Council-managed properties, and the expected and 
projected pipeline in the coming years.  
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.5 
SHANDON BELLS & TOWER 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE provide a breakdown of the costs involved in the repair and refurbishment 
of the clock faces and associated works to Shandon Bells and Tower.  This is a huge 
part of our heritage and attracts large numbers of tourists to the area year on year.  Can 
a timeline be provided on when these works are due to start and be completed. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The costs of repairs to the Shandon clock are estimated to be in the region of €400,000. 
Final costs will be determined prior to any works commencing. These repair works 
involve several specialists in conservation, horology and structural repair. Cork City 
Council is applying for funding under the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage Historic Structures Fund to contribute towards these costs. The timeline 
for these works is dependent on the outcome of the funding application, however Cork 
City Council is committed to carrying out the required repair works to this historically 
important landmark. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin 
Director of Services 
Planning and Integrated Development 
 
6.6 
PUBLIC LIGHTING ON CASTLE ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive about progress adding public lighting on Castle Road from 
Ringmahon Road to St. Luke's Home? It was understood that public lighting was to 
be added here as part of the Mahon Cycle Scheme, but this has not been done. Please, 
address. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The last Mahon Scheme update to the South East LAC Members, indicated that 
approved works for Castle Road were programmed to commence in March 2025.  The 
works on Castle Road include the provision of new footpaths, drainage systems, 
public lighting, road resurfacing etc. The delivery of the scheme works is currently 
ahead of programme and as such the works on Castle Road are now expected to be 

commenced in late January/early February. It is anticipated that the works in this area 
will be complete in April 2025 and Members will be kept updated on related progress. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.7 
PEDESTRIAN WORKS FOR CATHEDRAL WALK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE give a timeline and date when the promised pedestrian works that were 
promised for Cathedral Walk in terms on Bollards and other safety measures on the 
footpaths to protect pedestrians, especially school children from North Pres Primary 
School from cars parking on the footpath. These works were promised over a year 
ago? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Arrangements were in place to commence these works in December 2024. However 
the carrying out of the works was delayed due to the presence of underground cables. 
Liaison is required with ESB to determine a safe manner to execute the works and 
contact has been made with the ESB to progress the matter.  
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.8 
WATER QUALITY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if they have engaged with Uisce Éireann, the EPA and the 
HSE in relation to the worrying issues raised on the episode of Prime Time which 
aired on the 30th day of January 2025 in relation to water quality in Cork City. In 
particular, has the Chief executive engaged with the relevant bodies in relation to the 
failure to report excessive levels of manganese in the water and if so what was the 
result of that engagement. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
 
There has been and there continues to be ongoing engagement with Uisce Eireann in 
relation to issues relating to water quality in Cork City as referenced in the recent 
Prime Time programme. Engagement with the relevant regulatory authorities on 
matters of water quality and reporting requirements in relation to same are matters for 
Uisce Eireann which has the statutory responsibility for delivery of water services. I 
understand that there is regular engagement by Uisce Eireann with these authorities. 
 

Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.9 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSERVATION STRATEGY - CARR’S HILL 
GRAVEYARD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update to the archaeological conservation strategy for Carr’s Hill 
graveyard? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Since the completion of the transfer of ownership of the Carr’s Hill graveyard to Cork 
City Council a review of all surveys and information pertaining to the site is 
being undertaken in order to inform a sustainable maintenance and management 
strategy for the site. An archaeological conservation strategy is not currently being 
undertaken.  
 
A number of non-intrusive archaeological surveys have been carried out including 
GPR (ground penetrating radar) and drone photogrammetry surveys which have 
created a detailed 2D and 3D model of the physical landscape and features at Carr’s 
Hill. A bio-diversity study for the site was completed late last year. Further analysis 
of these surveys and studies is ongoing and Members can be updated as matters 
progress. 
 
In the meantime the graveyard has been included in our Parks work programme for 
2025 and grass-cutting on the site will commence next month. 
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
 
 
 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
Local Area Development                      
& Operations. 
 
6.10 
FORMER VITA CORTEX SITE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update re the former Vita Cortex site to include the current 
planning status and timelines for future development of the site. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
A proposal for the redevelopment of this site is currently being progressed under the 
LRD process. 
 

The Planning Authority assessed documentation submitted by the applicant as part of 
the first “Opinion” stage of the LRD process and issued an Opinion report to the 
applicant on Wednesday 18th of December 2024. 
 
The LRD opinion will be valid for 6 months and allows the applicant to progress to 
the application stage i.e. a planning application must be submitted within 6 months of 
receipt of the LRD opinion. Otherwise the applicant must re-commence the 
pre[1]application consultation process again. 
 
Niall O Donnabháin 
Director of Services 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
6.11 
DATA PROTECTION STANDARDS FOR TENANTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what security and data protection standards are provided 
to tenants where data is collected on the inspection of private rented accommodation 
under Housing (Standards For Rented Houses) Regulations 2019, including those 
standards required from third-party inspectors? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council receive data regarding tenant information from the RTB in order 
to carry out inspections of private rented accommodation under Housing (Standards 
for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. This is subject to a Data Sharing Agreement in 
accordance with the General Data Protection Regulation (Regulation (EU) 2016/679) 
which details the requirements in regard to the use, sharing and security of this 
information. 
 
In regard to third party inspectors a Data Processing Agreement exists between Cork 
City Council and the third-party provider again in accordance with GDPR. 
 
The Data Protection measures include personnel measures, physical security and 
network security measures in accordance with the agreements. 
 
Data collected on site is subject to the same protection measures. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.12 
EVENTS CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to publish the minutes and attendance of the project 
development board meeting on the Event Centre on January 24th, if the Board 
will Accept submissions on the subject from the sectors the Event Centre seeks to 
operate in and when a Briefing of Elected Members will take place? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Project Development Board (PDB) is a high-level governance and decision-
making body required by the Government to oversee the procurement, planning, 
development, and delivery of the Cork Events Centre by Cork City Council. The PDB 
has representation from relevant Government Departments, Agencies, Cork City 
Council, and members with relevant experience / expertise from stakeholders and the 
private sector. Its remit is to provide a platform for high-level coordination and 
governance, enabling the effective alignment of project activities with national and 
regional goals. It is understood that the procurement process as it progresses will 
include effective stakeholder identification and consultation as a prerequisite. 
 
The PDB is up and running and held its first meeting on the 24th January. The Assistant 
Chief Executive (ACE) will raise the matter of publication of minutes including the 
important matters around protection of commercially sensitive procurement 
information at the next meeting of the PDB this month. It is appropriate that the PDB 
is given the opportunity to make decisions on such matters.  The ACE can then brief 
the Elected Members. 
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 30th 
January 2025 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (381.4m² approximately) 
situated at Ballyvolane Commercial Park, Ballyvolane, Cork, to Focus 
Developments Ltd, c/o David Cowhey Solicitors LLP, Plunkett Chambers 
Business Centre, 21/23 Oliver Plunkett Street, Cork. for the sum of €2,000.00, 
together with costs of €1,500.00 plus VAT.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 

2. Disposal of the freehold interest in property situated at Dunkettle Road, Glanmire, 
Cork to Phillip Scott & Elizabeth Long, c/o O’Dowd Solicitors, 6, Crestfield 
Centre, Glanmire, Cork for the sum of €320,000.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal of the freehold interest in the property situated at 15 & 16, Kyle Street, 
Cork to Jim Vaughan, c/o RDJ LLP, 85, South Mall, Cork, for the sum of 
€185,000.00. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
4. Disposal by way of exchange of property known as 59, Saint Colmcille’s Road, 
Gurranabraher, Cork to Cornelius & Eileen Collins, c/o Finbarr Murphy 
Solicitors, Lee White House, 8, Washington Street, Cork, in exchange for the 
property owned by the said Cornelius & Eileen Collins at 14, Killala Gardens, 
Knocknaheeny, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
5. Disposal by way of exchange of property known as 40, Knockfree Avenue, Cork 
to Elizabeth Higgins, c/o Murphy & Condon Solicitors, 69, Shandon Street, North 
Gate Bridge, Cork in exchange for the property owned by the said Elizabeth 
Higgins at 37, Killala Gardens, Knocknaheeny, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: DEERPARK, DE PAUL HOSTEL, 
FRIARS WALK, CORK - SOCIETY OF SAINT VINCENT DE PAUL (SVP) 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 22nd of January 2025 in relation to a loan facility for the Society of 
Saint Vincent de Paul in respect of the provision of 8 semi-detached one bed 
bungalows of accommodation at Deerpark, De Paul Hostel, Friars Walk, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir H. 
Kamegni, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €2,150,893 be granted to the 
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul (SVP), subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance 
Scheme for the provision of 8 one bed units of accommodation at Deerpark Mews, De 
Paul Hostel, Deerpark, Friars Walk, Cork.” 
 
 

7.3 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 92 BALLYHOOLEY ROAD, ST. 
LUKE’S, CORK - ÓGLAIGH NÁISIÚNTA NA HÉIREANN (ONE) 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 22nd of January 2025 in relation to a loan facility for Óglaigh Náisiúnta 
na hÉireann in respect of the provision of 6 one bed units of accommodation at 92 
Ballyhooley Road, St. Luke’s, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €1,161,800 (previously 
€1,079,775) be granted to Óglaigh Náisiúnta na hÉireann (ONE), subject to the terms 
of the Capital Assistance Scheme for the provision of 6, one bed units of 
accommodation at 92 Ballyhooley Road, St. Lukes, Cork.” 
 
7.4 
TAKING IN CHARGE OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT CLUAIN 
ARD, CASTLEOWEN, KNOCKACORBALLY & MONACNAPA, BLARNEY, 
CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations Directorate, dated 15th January 2025, in relation to 
the proposed taking in charge of roads serving the development at Cluain Ard, 
Castleowen, Knockacorbally & Monacnapa, Blarney, Cork. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boylan, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Having considered the Report of the Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations Directorate, dated 15th January 2025, and the provisions of Section 11 
(1) of the Roads Act 1993, it is now hereby declared by this Order that the said roads 
serving Cluain Ard, Castleowen, Knockacorbally & Monacnapa, Blarney, Cork, are 
public roads.” 
 
7.5 
TRAFFIC CALMING SCHEMES 2025 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Director of Services, 
Local Area Development and Operations, dated 27th January 2025, following public 
consultation, on the proposed Traffic Calming Schemes 2025, pursuant to Section 38 
of the Road Traffic Act 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport 
Regulation Act 2009. 
 
7.6 
PROPOSED 
ADDITIONS 
TO 
THE 
RECORD 
OF 
PROTECTED 
STRUCTURES 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 

Planning & Integrated Development, dated 6th February 2025, on proposed additions 
to the Record of Protected Structures. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 4th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 4th February 2025. 
 
8.1 
AUDIT COMMITTEE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following reports from the Audit Committee in 
pursuance of the provisions of the Local Government Audit Committee Regulations, 
2014: 
 
1. An Chomhairle considered and noted Section 121 Report. 
2. An Chomhairle considered and noted the Audited Annual Financial Statement. 
3. An Chomhairle considered and noted the LGA Audit Report.  
4. On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle considered and approved the Audit Committee Charter 
2025. 
5. On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle considered and approved the Audit Committee Work 
Programme 2025. 
8.2 
MOTIONS 
 
8.2.1 
INDEPENDENT 
REVIEW 
BODY 
OF 
CORK 
CITY 
COUNCIL’S 
EXPENDITURE 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs Directorate, dated 30th January 2025 on the 
following motion:- 
 
‘The most recent independent review of the City Council’s staffing complement was 
conducted in 2013. This motion calls on the Chief Executive to establish an updated 
independent review body. Additionally, should the Chief Executive deem it necessary, 
the remit of this body to be extended to review the non-pay elements of the City 
Council’s expenditure. 
 
The purpose of the review is to ensure that the City Council’s financial capacity to 
deliver public services will not be compromised in the event of an economic 
downturn. The services identified as Members’ Priorities in the Finance and Estimates 
Committee Report 2024 are: 
 
• 
Housing Maintenance 
• 
Homeless Services 
• 
Footpath Repairs 
• 
Tree Pruning 
• 
Line Painting 
• 
Local Area Committee (LAC) Funding 

• 
Sports Grants 
• 
Ward Funds’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/028) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage requires Local Authorities to carry out a workforce plan 
process. This process commenced in Cork City Council in during 2024 and is 
continuing in line with the Strategic Framework for Workforce Planning adopted by 
the local government sector. The plan will reflect the priorities that the Chief 
Executive has highlighted to Members. This process equates effectively to the 
independent “review” contained in the motion as it will be subject to approval by the 
Department once considered. A review of staffing should not only focus on numbers 
of staff, but also on types required to deliver programmes, policy, strategy and services 
– all of which are subject to change as the economic and political landscape changes. 
However, the core business of local government should be resourced constantly from 
a staffing perspective. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 27th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 27th January 2025. 
 
10. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - CAIDREAMH 
IDIRNÁISIÚNTA & TURASÓIREACHT – 20th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 20th January 2025. 
 
10.1 
REPORT ON RECENT ACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT THE TOURISM 
SECTOR 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Strategic Planning & Economic Development, dated 10th January 2025 on recent 
activities to support the tourism sector. 
 
10.2 
MOTIONS 
 
10.2.1 
TWINNING MECHANISM WITH A CITY IN PALESTINE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
& Community Affairs, dated 10th January 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek the establishment of a twinning mechanism with a city in 
Palestine and Cork City.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/560) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that pursuant to previous motions 
concerning Cork twinning with a city in Palestine, a Council official met with the 
Ambassador of the State of Palestine, H.E. Jilan Wahba Abdalmajid, at the Embassy 
in Dublin in April 2023. This was followed up in May 2023 by a programme in Cork 
for the Ambassador including a meeting with then-Lord Mayor Deirdre Forde and 
officials. The Ambassador noted her interest at the time in exploring a project between 
Cork and the city of Nablus in Palestine. Her rationale for the selection of Nablus as 
a candidate for a project was its status as the centre of commerce in Palestine and it 
being a university town (hosting the fifth best university in the Arab world, with a 
particularly strong reputation in medicine). 
 
Further Council engagement in the months ahead added the possibility of a heritage 
and conservation link between the two historic cities, and the Ambassador was keen 
to develop other projects including the visit of a Palestinian youth orchestra to Cork. 
The outbreak of hostilities on 7 October 2023 put a pause to these initiatives. However, 
pursuant to motions brought to Council, opportunities for continued engagement have 
been secured. The Ambassador has twice visited Cork since to brief elected members 
on the situation in Palestine, the first visit coinciding with the initial ruling of the 
International Court of Justice on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories in 
February 2024. The second taking place in September 2024. The emphasis in these 
briefings has been on the role which elected members could play as advocates for 
Palestine. The Lord Mayor, Cllr. Dan Boyle, has also had a phone call with the 
Ambassador since.  
 
The current approach of Council with respect to twinning is to develop timebound 
programmes of mutual benefit with prospective partners before entering into formal 
twinning arrangements. Both the Embassy of the State of Palestine and Cork City 
Council have emphasised the need for a project to be both practical and meaningful. 
Council will continue to engage positively with the Palestinian Embassy and engage 
with the Palestinian community locally, on how best to advance a project, and will 
continue to secure periodic opportunities for the Ambassador to brief elected members 
 
11. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - COMHSHAOL, 
UISCE & ÁISEANNA – 21st JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 21st January 2025. 
 
11.1 
FLOODING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentation by Mr. Noel Murtagh on 
Flooding and Flood Relief Schemes. 
 
11.2 
MOTIONS 
 
 
 
 
 

11.2.1 
PUBLIC TOILETS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council agrees that the city needs more public toilets. 
  
The Council, therefore, agrees that three new public toilets should be added to the city 
each year for the next five years. This will be funded from a new budget line in the 
upcoming Cork City Council budget.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/468) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there is no funding provision in the 
budget for the provision and operation of additional public toilets in Cork City Centre.  
If funding is provided in future years then additional facilities can be delivered. 
 
11.2.2 
FLOODING 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council acknowledges the significant impact flooding has on residents, 
businesses and public spaces. The City Council also acknowledges that the risk of 
flooding will increase as our climate changes. 
 
Therefore, the Council will prioritise flood preparedness. This will include clearing 
drains and gullies, depaving, advancing early warning systems, rapid clean-ups, 
business adaptation advice, and other support. 
 
The Council also supports upstream nature-based solutions such as allowing rivers to 
bend to slow the flow, compensating farmers whose land is allowed to flood, and 
planting more trees for water absorption. The Council will also give serious 
consideration to the creation of a tidal barrier downstream.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/532) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Office of Public Works (OPW) 
is the lead organization for flood risk management in Ireland and has the national 
authority for the implementation of the EU Directive on the Assessment and 
Management of Flood Risks 2007/60/EC. 
 
Cork City Council continues to work closely with the OPW in the design, planning 
and delivery of several flood defence schemes in Cork city. OPW funded flood 
defence schemes have recently been completed in Douglas and Togher, and 
construction is currently underway on schemes at Morrison’s Island and 
Riverstown/Glanmire. 
 

The OPW is also currently advancing the design of the Blackpool Flood Relief 
Scheme and the Lower Lee Flood Relief Scheme (LLFRS). Tidal barriers were 
assessed as part of the Lee Catchment Flood Risk Management Plan (CFRMP) at 
several locations in Cork Harbour. That assessment was reviewed as part of the 
OPW’s LLFRS Options Report and tidal barriers were found not to be viable at this 
stage. The LLFRS will offer flood protection to around 900 homes and 1200 
businesses in Cork city when constructed. The OPW is overseeing the completion of 
the detailed design, and it is anticipated that the scheme will be submitted to DPER 
for confirmation in early 2026. 
 
LLFRS will incorporate a flood forecasting system and the use of washlands 
downstream of the Inniscarra and Carrigadrohid Dams. Extensive areas of biodiverse 
planting, including riparian vegetation, woodland and hedgerows are proposed as part 
of the scheme. 
 
Spot flooding, especially when caused by pluvial events, can occur anywhere in the 
city.  For example, the cloudburst event which took place on the 16th of October 2022 
resulted in flooding in areas which, according to local residents who had lived there 
all of their life, had not flooded in the previous 50 years. 
 
Cork City Council is aware of the locations of infrastructure e.g. trash screens, culverts 
and key gullies, which can cause problems during rainfall events if they are blocked 
and prioritises inspection of these locations in advance of any weather warnings.  
 
Cork City Council has dedicated crews who periodically clean out the 40,000 gullies 
across the City. However, if a resident identifies a gully which is blocked (i.e. the 
gully pot is full to the top) same should be reported to the City Councils Customer 
Service Unit on 021-4924000 and a crew will attend to this location and address the 
matter. 
 
Cork City Council is presently a partner in an EU project entitled GreenDense which 
is looking at piloting the regreening of a limited number of paved locations across the 
City. Depending on the outcome of this project and the availability of future funding, 
it would be hoped to expand on this initiative in future years. 
 
11.2.3 
PROGRAMME OF WORKS TO KEEP STORM GULLIES IN GOOD ORDER 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th January 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘I ask that the Operations Directorate would initiate plans to ensure that our storm 
gullies are kept in good order so as to prevent flash flooding due to torrential 
downpours which are becoming more commonplace due to the increase in Atlantic 
Storms. 
 
Recent torrential downpours lasting many hours saw low lying areas being affected 
by surface flooding even though the river itself was at low tide. 
 

I understand and accept that the task in hand would be an immense amount of work 
so therefore it would be acceptable that a programme of works on an annual basis be 
commenced so as to clear gullies in an organised way area by area street by street.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Dineen 24/542) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has a dedicated 
gully cleaning crew of 8 men, led by the Junior Foreperson. There are approximately 
25,000 gullies in Cork City. Gullies are cleared in a planned and scheduled way. Over 
46,000 gully cleaning operations were undertaken in 2024. In addition, 5,900m of 
linear drain are cleaned in the City Centre and surrounds. Gullies in flood prone areas 
are cleaned on a more frequent basis and calls to CRM are responded to. However, it 
should be noted that during the leaf fall season (late September to November), the 
gullies can become covered very easily by leaves and this can lead to temporary 
flooding of roads until the leaves are removed. As evidenced in recent events leaves 
can block gullies within 1 hour of an area being completely cleaned of leaves by a 
gully crew. Thus, no amount of additional resources will resolve the issue of leaves 
blocking gullies during flash flood situations. 
 
11.2.4 
STORMWATER HOLDERS AT THE END OF HILLS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th January 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘To seek an audit of capacity for stormwater holders at the end of hills in the City, 
especially in areas where flooding has occurred in heavy rainfall like on Douglas 
Street.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/561) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s Drainage 
Section is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the city’s stormwater 
network. It should however be noted that the majority of the drainage network within 
the city is a combined network (both foul and storm drainage) and is effectively an 
Uisce Éireann asset. Uisce Éireann is currently preparing plans for the separation of 
the combined network into separate foul and storm sewer systems. This is a long term 
project with the first package of works in the city not likely to commence before 2030.  
 
City Council resources for maintenance and operation of the stormwater network are 
limited and would not facilitate the carrying out of an audit as sought by the motion. 
In any event, any plans for water attenuation would need to be considered in the 
planning for the long-term Uisce Eireann investment project and any attenuation 
installations appraised in the context of the considerable maintenance and operational 
costs involved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11.2.5 
TREE PLANTING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th January 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘Cork City Council believes that Cork needs more trees. Trees help reduce flooding 
and provide shade in extreme heat. They also add to the biodiversity of the city. Cork 
City Council, therefore, agrees to increase tree planting by 20% year on year for the 
next 5 years.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/579) 
The report of the Director of Services stated that since 2020, Cork City Council has 
successfully planted over 15,000 trees, making a significant contribution to enhancing 
the city's urban environment. Currently, the Council is planting between 4,000 to 
5,000 trees annually, reflecting its commitment to fostering a greener, more 
sustainable city. 
 
However, the limited availability of suitable publicly owned planting spaces presents 
challenges to increasing this annual target. Without additional land and resources, 
expanding beyond the current planting rate is not feasible.  
 
Policy 14 of the Tree Strategy underscores the importance of prioritizing quality in 
tree planting to ensure long-lasting benefits for the city and its residents. 
 
Cork City Council remains committed to sustainable and impactful tree planting. 
Should additional suitable lands and resources become available for tree planting, the 
Council would explore opportunities to incrementally increase the annual planting 
target, further strengthening Cork’s green infrastructure and environmental resilience. 
 
4000 trees including community planting, are scheduled to be planted in 2025. 
 
11.2.6 
NEW PUBLIC TOILETS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th January 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council begin a programme of installing new public toilets in the 
parks or on new active greenways. A survey of city needs to be done including City 
Centre and costings be prepared for Councillors to make informed decisions at budget 
meetings.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/321) 
The report of the Director of Services stated that it is the intention of Parks & 
Recreation to have public toilet units in all major public parks, these parks attracting 
the highest footfall and time spent enjoying the amenity. There is an automatic self-
cleaning toilet unit at the Regional Park in Ballincollig, two new units will shortly be 

installed at Fitzgerald’s Park ( an increase of one), as well as public toilets located at 
Tramore Valley Park and Marina Park Phase 1.  
 
Parks & Recreation are currently reviewing the feasibility of the provision of a self-
cleaning automatic toilet in Tramore Valley Park and Marina Park Phase 2.  
 
Each automatic self-cleaning unit costs in the region of €35,000 annually on rental 
and maintenance costs, and funding for each additional unit installed will need to be 
secured. 
 
There is no budgetary provision to extend provision to smaller parks, nor is there 
considered to be an acute need for same as most of these park users live locally. 
 
11.2.7 
ADDITIONAL GULLIES IN ESTATES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th January 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘To initiate a review and plan for additional gullies in estates where flooding and water 
planing occur after heavy rain, especially where more vulnerable residents reside.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/595) 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has a crew 
dedicated to clearing gullies. This is carried out on a planned basis. The crew also 
check on areas where flooding has occurred to ensure the gullies at those locations are 
clear.  The Drainage section carries out jetting of sewer lines where blockages are 
apparent. 
  
During the leaf fall season (late September to November), the gullies are covered very 
easily by leaves and this can lead to temporary flooding of roads, until the leaves are 
removed. As evidenced in recent events leaves can block gullies within 1 hour of an 
area being completely cleaned of leaves by a gully crew. 
 
The majority of the city is served by a combined sewer network (both foul and surface 
water). The capacity in the combined sewer is limited. Adding new gullies to a 
combined system would increase the rate of storm water to the system and could lead 
to unintended consequences and flooding elsewhere. Ideally therefore, the solution to 
localised issue would not be the installation of new gullies but rather increased 
capacity in the network.  The combined sewer networks are Uisce Éireann assets and 
new gullies cannot be added without UÉ permission. UÉ have carried out a Drainage 
Area Plan (DAP) for Cork City which will separate the combined system into foul and 
storm sewers, with the storm sewers being handed over to Cork City Council. These 
works will be undertaken in stages throughout the city, but at this stage are likely to 
be a number of years off (post 2030).  
 
For localised areas served by separate storm systems, the City Council can investigate 
actions that could potentially alleviate flooding. A full scale review and plan for 
additional gullies would require resources and funding which are currently not 
available. 

 
12. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - POBAL, CULTÚR & 
COMHFHORBAIRT ÁITE – 23rd JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 23rd January 2025. 
 
12.1 
REPORT ON THE LCDC ANNUAL REPORT 2023 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report on the LCDC Annual Report 
2023. 
 
12.2 
MINUTES OF THE ARTS COMMITTEE OCTOBER 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Minutes of the Arts Committee October 
2024. 
 
12.3 
MOTIONS  
 
12.3.1 
LGBTQ+ GROUPS IN CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘Cork City Council is proud of the work that LGBTQ+ groups in Cork continue to do 
in our city. This Council stands opposed to all forms of homophobia, transphobia and 
discrimination against LGBTQ+ people.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/390) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council have been to the 
fore in terms of innovation, leadership and initiatives related to social inclusion, 
advocacy and leading the way on equality for all. Some key milestones include: 
 
• 2002: The Cork City LGBTI+ Interagency was established. Since then, we have 
been delivering the annual LGBTI+ Awareness Week in collaboration with a 
range of NGOs and semi-state members of the LGBTI+ Inter-Agency. We are the 
only Local Authority in Ireland to run an annual LGBTI+ Awareness Week. 
• 2006: Cork City’s first Pride parade was held. It has grown year on year to what 
is now a week-long festival of events. Cork City Council is one of the funders of 
this event. 
• 2012 Cork City Council became the first Local Authority in the State to officially 
support marriage equality, after it unanimously passed a motion to support same. 
• 2014: Cork City Hall was the first Civic building in Ireland to fly the Rainbow 
Flag. 
• 2020: Cork City is the first and only city on the island of Ireland to have become 
a member of the International Rainbow Cities Network (RCN), who pledge to 
protect and enhance LGBTI+ rights and inclusion across municipalities.  

• 2022: Cork City Council was the first local authority in Ireland to install a 
Rainbow Balustrade at the entrance to Cork City Hall. In the same year, we worked 
with the LGBTI+ Interagency and Cork Pride to install two Rainbow Crossings 
on Patrick Street.  
• Cork City Council has ongoing work with our sister San Francisco in relation to 
Rainbow City initiatives and supports. 
• 2023: Cork City hosted the RCN EU for Citizens Policy Conference. This led to 
the publication of the RCN LGBTIQ Good Practice Guidelines for cities. Cork 
was one of 20 European Cities participating in this policy working group over two 
years of development.  
• In July 2023, Cork City delegates were invited by our sister city Cologne to 
participate in their annual Pride Festival.  
 
This work will continue to grow and re-enforce equality and rights as laid out broadly 
in the new Local Economic & Community Plan actions across a range of communities.  
Specific to the LGBTI+ Community is action 2.3.3 outlined below to deliver on the 
progressive approach to creating a safe, warm and welcoming city for all but in this 
instance our LGBTI+ Community.   
 
Action 2.3.3: Support the LGBTI+ community in Cork city through its strong and 
robust community and voluntary organisations and encourage policy development 
from a rights-based perspective across agencies. To lead on and encourage an all-
island approach to Irish cities membership of the Rainbow Cities Network. 
 
12.3.2 
AUTISM FRIENDLY CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 23rd January 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will meet with and partner with AsIAm to initiate a plan for 
Cork to become an autism friendly city.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/622) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team will meet with AsIAm to look at the feasibility of Cork becoming 
an autism friendly city and report back at the February SPC. 
 
12.3.3 
CORKMAS EVENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 23rd January 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council report on the Corkmas events including the successful 
Christmas parade and markets, Council to look at options now for a New Years event.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/039) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a report on the annual Christmas 
festival will be prepared and presented to the Arts Committee. 

 
Corkmas 2025 was a success and helped to create a very positive atmosphere in the 
city centre in the lead up to Christmas. The inaugural parade to celebrate the switching 
on of the Christmas lights in the city took place on Friday, 15th November. The parade 
attracted approximately 40,000 attendees. 
 
Other Corkmas Events included the Festive Market and Corkmas Santa Experience at 
Emmet Place, which ran Thursday to Friday from 22nd November to 22nd December 
and the Ferris Wheel and SOLAS festive light installation on Grand Parade. The 
Corkmas marketing campaign promoted all of the events taking place across the city 
from Pantos to ice-skating to community-led events. 
 
The success of Christmas 2024 in Cork was the result of huge effort and collaboration 
between staff across the organisation led by the Events team with Communications, 
Lighting and the Fire Service, Roads, Tourism etc. with the support and contribution 
of Elected Members, city stakeholders and suppliers. 
 
The full report will include recommendations for replicating and sustaining the 
success of 2024 in 2025. 
 
12.3.4 
CORK COMMUNITY TV 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 23rd January 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will partner with Cork Community TV to promote and 
engage people on the work and activities of the Council, including exploring ideas to 
work together on the promotion of the business of Council.’ 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/601) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council collaborates and 
works with Cork Community TV to promote and engage people on the work and 
activities of the Council. Cork Community TV has livestreamed local elections. The 
Community Team have engaged Cork Community TV on a number of items including 
the annual Lord Mayor’s Community and Heritage Concert, a podcast on the Cork 
City PPN and the Irish Language programme. In addition, they have been funded 
under the LCDC Grants, Irish language Grants and Arts Grants. 
 
13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 14th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 14th January 2025. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 4th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 4th February 2025. 
 
 

15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th January 2025. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th January 2025. 
 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th January 2025. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th January 2025. 
 
19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th January 2025. 
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher at the AILG Autumn Training Seminar, held at Co. 
Monaghan, 11th - 12th September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher at the LAMA Autumn Seminar, held at Newgrange 
Hotel, Navan, Co. Meath, 17th - 18th October 2024. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir J. Lynch – Crawford Art Gallery – December 2024. 
• Comhairleoir J. Lynch – Cork International Film Festival – August to 
December 2024. 
• Comhairleoir J. Lynch – National Sculpture Factory – July to December 2024. 
• Comhairleoir L. Harmon – ETB – September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir L. Harmon – Cork Film Festival – August 2024. 
 
 

23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
None received. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
24.1 
ASSOCIATION OF IRISH REGIONS’ ANNUAL TRAINING SEMINAR 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of Comhairleoirí 
S. Martin and J. Kavanagh to Athlone on 5th and 6th February 2025 for the Association 
of Irish Regions’ Annual Training Seminar 2025. 
  
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
reports for November and December 2024. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 44, 
Cessation of Funding from Uisce Éireann, be referred to the Finance & Estimates 
Committee. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS 
 
27.1 
CORK CITY SPECIFIC ISSUES 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek to invite the Ministers for Transport Darragh O’Brien,  
Justice Jim O’Callaghan and Housing James Browne for engagement on Cork City 
specific issues in the areas of public transport, infrastructural investment, Gardaí 
support and housing provision amongst other areas as a matter of urgency.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/055) 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to refer the motion to the Corporate Policy Group for 
consideration. 
 
27.2 
ONCE OFF GRANT FOR MAINTAINING TREES  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to the new Minister with responsibility for forestry and 
trees to seek consideration of a once off grant that will help private property owners 

to maintain, not cut down, trees on their land that may pose a risk to neighbours, to 
infrastructure or their own property.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/061) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the motion 
revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to the new Minister with responsibility for forestry and 
trees to seek consideration of a once off grant that will help private property owners 
to assess, not cut down, trees on their land that may pose a risk to neighbours, to 
infrastructure or their own property.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/061) 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir M.R. 
Desmond, An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting 
30 minutes past 8pm. 
 
27.3 
HOUSING IN CORK CITY 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council invite the new Minister for Housing and Local Government 
to meet with the Council at the earliest opportunity to discuss the shortage of housing 
in Cork City, the unaffordability of new homes being built within the Council's 
administrative area, the city's homelessness crisis and other issues of concern to 
members.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/063) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a vote was called for to refer the 
motion to the Corporate Policy Group for consideration, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, T. Coleman. 
(11) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, B. McCarthy, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, N. O’Connor, C. 
Kelleher, J. Lynch. (13) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting against the amendment were greater than those voting for, An 
tArdmhéara declared the amendment to the motion defeated.  
 

An Chomhairle approved the motion without amendment. 
 
27.4 
SOCIAL HOUSING SUPPORT FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Housing and Local Government 
urging the development and implementation of an action plan - in conjunction with 
local authorities - to remove barriers to accessing social housing support by victims 
of domestic violence.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/064) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting 15 minutes 
past 8:30pm. 
 
27.5 
CONTROL OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES (OCCUPIED TERRITORIES) 
BILL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council registers its concern at recent indications from the Government that 
they will not follow up on their election commitment to enact the Control of Economic 
Activities (Occupied Territories) Bill 2018 and opposes any attempts to row back on 
enacting the bill in full. 
 
This important bill was introduced in the context of the International Court of Justice 
(ICJ) Advisory Opinion from July 2024 which deemed Israeli settlements on occupied 
Palestinian land illegal and stated that all countries were obliged not to trade with 
them.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/067)  
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
A vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to continue the meeting, 
where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, B. McCarthy, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch. 
(12) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, M.R. Desmond, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman. (8) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 

As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
Items 27.5, 27.6, 27.7 and 27.8 were deferred to the next Ordinary Meeting of An 
Chomhairle to be held, 10th March 2025. 
 
27.6 
UPGRADE OF THE R624 ROAD 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Government to emphasise the strategic 
priority and urgent upgrade of the R624 road to unlock the brownfield urban 
regeneration of the Cork docklands through the development of 1,325 homes with 
planning permission.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/079) 
 
27.7 
TFI 90-MINUTE LEAP CARD FARE 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Government and the National Transport 
Authority to ask them to make the new bus network for Cork a national priority and 
bring the TFI 90-Minute Leap Card Fare to Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/081) 
 
27.8 
ONGOING ISSUES WITH WATER QUALITY 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Chief Executive of the EPA, Uisce Éireann 
and the HSE to request their urgent attendance at a special meeting of Cork City 
Council to discuss ongoing issues with water quality in Cork City and the potential 
public health risk of same.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. K. Collins, Cllr. M. Gould, Cllr. F. Kerins 25/090) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
