MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 12th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir K. McCarthy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, T. Tynan, J. Kavanagh, O. 
Moran, G. Keohane.  
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, M. Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, 
B. McCarthy, D. Boylan. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí D. Cahill, L. Bogue, M.R. Desmond, T. Shannon, D. 
Forde. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí M. Finn, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, P. 
Dineen, F. Kerins. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, G. Kelleher, 
T. Moloney, Orla O’Leary. 
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. A. Doherty, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Roads & Environment  
Operations. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Mr. F. Reidy, Director of Services, Strategic Planning & 
Economic Development. 
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. P. McGuirk, Administrative Officer, Strategic Planning & 
Economic Development. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations. 
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Burton family on the death of Ann Burton. 
• The Clarke family on the death of Teresa Clarke. 
• The Healy family on the death of Colm Healy. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Agnes O’Sullivan. 
• The Keane family on the death of John Keane. 
• The Spillane family on the death of Phyllis Spillane. 
• The Crowley family on the death of Mary Crowley. 
• The Daly family on the death of Eileen Daly. 

• The Leneghan family on the death of Peter Leneghan. 
• The Downey family on the death of May Downey. 
• The Keane family on the death of Phil (Philomena) Keane. 
• The Crowley family on the death of Finbarr Crowley. 
• The Cox family on the death of Lillian Cox. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Mary O’Leary. 
• The O’Flynn family on the death of Vincent O’Flynn. 
• The O’Connor family on the death of Mary O’Connor. 
• The Brennan family on the death of Frederick (Freddie) Brennan. 
• The Lynch family on the death of Jeremiah (Jerry) Lynch. 
• The Hughes family on the death of David Hughes. 
• The McSweeney family on the death of John McSweeney.  
• The Walsh family on the death of Joy Walsh. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES   
 
• Jen Bowler, owner of Vibe Cork, on the opening of new LGBTQ+ venue in 
Cork City. 
• Lisa Walsh, Ballyphehane Ladies GAA, on being awarded County/Provincial 
Official of the Year at Croke Park.  
• Michelle O’Neill MLA and Emma Little-Pengelly MLA on their election as 
Northern Ireland First Minister and Deputy First Minister respectively.  
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
DEATH OF JOHN BRUTON 
 
An tArdmhéara expressed sympathy to the family of John Bruton, RIP, who passed 
away last week. 
 
3.2 
CIVIC RECEPTION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Bishop 
Colton, on his silver jubilee as bishop. 
 
3.3 
LORD MAYOR’S DELEGATION TO YPRES, BELGIUM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara Comhairleoir 
K. McCarthy to Ypres, Belgium, on 16-18 April 2024, as part of a Lord Mayor led 
delegation to mark the centenary of the unveiling of the Munster Cross. 
 
3.4 
SHIFT HAPPENS WOMEN’S POLICY SUMMIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An Leas Ardmhéara 
Comhairleoir C. Finn to San Francisco for the SHIFT Happens Women’s Policy 
Summit, on 18th April. 
 
3.5 
LADY MAYORESS’ COFFEE MORNING  
 

 
An tArdmhéara extended an invitation to An Chomhairle to attend the Lady 
Mayoress’ Coffee Morning in aid of Marymount, which will take place on Wednesday 
14th February from 10am – 12.30pm in the Millenium Hall. 
 
3.6 
ST. PATRICK’S DAY PARADE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara issued a call out for groups to take part in the St. Patrick’s Day Parade. 
 
3.7 
LORD MAYOR’S BALL 
 
 
An tArdmhéara informed An Chomhairle of the upcoming Lord Mayor’s Ball which 
will take place in the Rochestown Park Hotel on Friday 12th April 2024, and advised 
that tickets would be available in due course. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
CORK ST. PATRICK’S DAY PARADE 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive on the 
proposed holding of an event by Cork City Council under the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000 and Planning and Development Regulations 2001. The event 
is the Cork St. Patrick’s Day Parade, Sunday 17th March 2024. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Tynan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 8th January 2024. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
ARDFIELD ESTATE, GRANGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what progress has been made by the City Council in recent 
months to take Ardfield Estate in Grange in charge and to outline when it is anticipated 
that the process of taking Ardfield Estate in charge will be fully completed. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council have accepted in principle the full and final settlement offer from 
the Bond Holder for the bonds held for the Ardfield Estate in Grange. A letter of 
settlement acceptance and associated documentation is being finalised. The timeline 
for receipt of settlement sum is unknown as it relies on the 3rd party. Subject to receipt 
of settlement, it is the intention of the City Council’s  Estates Team to proportionately 
allocate the bond to the various internal and external Infrastructure Sections to enable 
the processing of the taking in charge of the Ardfield Estate. 

 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
 
6.2 
FIREMAN’S HUT 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE provide clarification on the restoration cost associated with the Fireman’s 
Hut. Could you please confirm the price and provide a detailed breakdown of the 
expenses incurred during the restoration process? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The project to restore the Fireman’s Hut is not yet complete and therefore a final 
clarification of costs is not possible at this stage. 
 
Phase one of the project is complete, which has resulted in a reconstruction and 
refurbishment that has secured a closed-in building.  
 
Phase 2 will include the installation of the decorative elements of Fascia Gutters, 
Lettering and finials etc. as well as drainage and further landscape/groundworks.  
 
To date in excess of €200,000 has been spent on the project with further payments due 
to be made. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations Directorate. 
 
6.3 
LITTER FINES 2023 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise on how many fines have been issued through 2023 for 
Littering? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Litter Warden Service issued a total of 705 Litter Fines during 2023. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate. 

 
6.4 
CREATE STABILITY FOR SME’S 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
In view of the many recent closures of Small to Medium enterprises in Cork City 
Centre and with many more to come in the weeks ahead and taking into consideration 
that Bus Eireann has to date failed to provide an adequate and reliable public transport 
service to/from Cork City Centre I ask the CEO to reverse or set in motion the pathway 
to reverse the Councils previous decision to provide a Bus Corridor and close St. 
Patrick's Street to regular traffic from 3pm to 6.30pm each day. It is imperative that 
we as a Council do everything we can to prevent any further closures and save as 
many jobs as we can in our City Centre therefore it is also imperative that we act in a 
positive way to increase footfall create stability for SME's and encourage the general 
public back into the City Centre. If and when Bus Eireann can live up to it's 
expectation/obligations to provide a robust & reliable public transport service we can 
if needs be then as a Council review this decision.   
 
 
REPLY 
 
There has been a mix of businesses closing and investing in the city centre city centre 
over the last year.  Importantly, the city centre has seen considerable private sector 
investment in the recent past, with new housing, student accommodation, hotels, 
retailers and hospitality businesses opening / being completed in 2022 and 2023. That 
stated, the city centre, similar to other city centres globally, is facing challenges 
particularly with the continued evolution of online retail, hybrid working, and 
increasing costs.   
 
Cork City Council is implementing a City Centre Economic and Revitalisation 
Strategy aimed at improving the appeal of the city centre by enhancing the experience 
of those visiting, living and working in the centre.  Over the last number of years, the 
city centre has seen investment in arts trails, outdoor dining, placemaking and public 
realm and this is set to continue in the short to medium term.  The Revitalisation 
Strategy is based on extensive consultation and international good practice. The 
consultation on this, and on other plans and strategies for Cork City, have found there 
is a demand for further pedestrianisation in the city centre.  
 
Cork City Council is supporting the implementation of the Cork Metropolitan Area 
Transport Strategy.  This includes a suite of measures to enhance transport services in 
the city, and the city centre in particular.  The transport modelling prepared to inform 
CMATS found that the implementation of the strategy could yield a 250% increase in 
footfall on St Patrick’s Street.   
 

Cork City Council is extremely conscious of the challenges facing businesses.  
Supports are provided though the Rates Schemes, and direct mentoring and training 
support is provided though the Local Enterprise Office for all businesses.   
 
Cork City Council is satisfied that the continued implementation of the City Centre 
Revitalisation and Economic Strategy and the Cork Metropolitan Area Transport 
Strategy, both of which are informed by international good practice, consultation and 
evidence, is the correct course of action for the City Centre.  With all strategies, this 
will be kept under review.  
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
6.5 
TREE REMOVAL IN LANDSCAPE PRESERVATION ZONE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the reason for tree removals in a Landscape Preservation 
Zone north of the North Ring Road and in the vicinity south of Barnavara Crescent; 
and what remedial works will be taken to restore the tree canopy and landscape that 
is lost? 
 
REPLY 
 
To facilitate the residential development at Newton Heights, Boherboy Road – Uisce 
Eireann conditioned that an upgrade of the existing sewer be carried out from Old 
Youghal Road for a distance of c. 0.5km to an area north of the North Ring Road. 
 
The sewer upgrade works are being carried out by Clancy Construction under the 
terms of the self-lay surety agreement between Clancy Construction and Úisce 
Eireann. The works are for the benefit of a mixed tenure scheme of social and 
affordable homes being delivered through a development agreement with Cork City 
Council at Newton Heights. 
 
These works necessitated the removal of a number of trees.  Cork City Council’s Tree 
Officer and an Engineer from Parks & Recreation in the Operations Directorate, met 
with the contractor on site to minimise the loss of trees & vegetation before any works 
were undertaken. Remedial tree planting will be carried out on completion of the 
works. 
 
A site compound was installed for the duration of the sewer upgrade works on the 
amenity space north of Tinkers Cross, Mayfield, Cork. Full reinstatement of the 
entrance and area of the compound will be undertaken on completion of works. 
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration.  

 
6.6 
NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number and locations of housing units developed or 
acquired, or expected to be completed for the period June 1st 2019 to May 31st 2024; 
developed directly, through AHBs, bringing long term voids back to use or acquired 
through purchase, specifying each category? 
 
REPLY 
 
Social and affordable housing delivery for this period, to include projected delivery 
into 2024, can be summarised as follows: 
 
Social and Affordable Housing Delivery 1st June 2019 – 31st December 2022  
 
A total of 2,313 homes were developed or acquired in this period, as summarised in 
the following table: 
 
Category 
Total no. of 
homes 
Social Housing - Build 
1,358 
Social Housing – Acquisition 
339 
Social Housing - Leasing 
376 
Affordable Housing - Sale 
135 
Affordable Housing – Cost Rental 
105 
Overall Total Delivery for the Period 
2,313 
 
Social and Affordable Housing Delivery 1st January 2023 – 31st May 2024  
 
Delivery statistics for 2023 are currently being finalised and validated for this 
particular period.  Projections into 2024 are current estimates.   
 
The projected additional delivery for the 17-month period from 01/01/2023 through 
to 31/05/24 can be projected and/or estimated as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Total no. of 
homes 
Social Housing - Build 
785 
Social Housing - Acquisition 
182 
Social Housing - Leasing 
155 
Affordable Housing - Sale 
85 
Overall Total Delivery for the Period 
1,207 

The overall total for social and affordable schemes delivered and projected for the 
period 1st June 2019 to 31st May 2024, is therefore currently totalling 3,520 homes. 
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration  
 
 
Vacant Properties Returned Citywide 
 
2019: 151 
2020: 159  
2021: 124 
2022: 150 
2023: 202 
2024 to May 31st estimated: 125 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Operations.  
 
6.7 
NUMBER OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins was deferred to the 
next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 11th March 2024:- 
 
 
To ask the CE to report, by company, the current number of construction contracts 
open and the cumulative value of same over the last five years in tabular form by 
company. 
 
6.8 
CITY OF WELCOMES/COMMUNITY RECOGNITION FUNDING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Nugent, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE update on the City of Welcomes/Community Recognition Funding 
 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The City of Welcomes/Community Recognition Fund 2023  
 
The Department of Rural and Community Development (DRCD) launched this fund 
in 2023. The Community Recognition Fund 2023 (local known as the ‘City of 
Welcomes’ Fund) supports the development of community infrastructure and 
facilities in recognition of the contribution being made by communities across the 
country in welcoming and hosting significant numbers of arrivals from Ukraine and 
other countries.  
 
The total allocated to Cork City Council was €1,163,515.00. 

 
To date, Cork City Council have distributed €340,969.81 to community groups across 
the city.  
 
Recoupment to the DRCD, for these projects, is also up to date. The money paid out 
to date equates to 30.3% of the overall project fund of €1,125,400.00. €38,115.00 is 
allocated for administration of the fund. The final funding drawdown will close in 
November 2024. 
 
There was a total of 39 projects identified and engaged with, who subsequently and 
successfully, applied for this funding.  
 
10 of those projects are now fully completed. The remainder are at various stages of 
progression.  
 
The projects are varied and extensive. An example of the funding resourcing which 
hugely 
benefit 
the 
communities 
across 
the 
city 
are 
as 
follows; 
 
• Community Transport (Togher & Ballyphehane) 
• Community Centre/Hubs Refurbishments (Blackpool, the Glen and Ballincollig) 
• Provision of Sports Facilities (Blarney, to be completed) 
• Sensory Play Zone (Gurranabraher) 
• Childcare Facilities (Mayfield)  
• Local Tidy Town Signage (Mahon) 
• Development of Community Hub (Knocknaheeny)  
 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
 
6.9 
REGENERATION OF CLASHDUV ROAD, SYCAMORE PLACE, TOGHER 
ROAD FLATS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. O’Leary, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE if she will report on the progress of regeneration of the Clashduv Road, 
Sycamore Place, Togher Road flat complexes to include: 
 
- work that has been undertaken, since October 2021 to secure the balconies 
- ⁠the number of reports undertaken into flats at this location since October 2021 and 
the date of these 
- ⁠the estimated commencement date of any permanent works to repair internal and 
external damage 
- ⁠the timeline for completion of same 
- ⁠when residents will be informed of same and whether the proposal is to relocate 
residents temporarily or permanently 
 
REPLY 
 

Following on from reports prepared in regard to Clashduv Road, Sycamore Place and 
Togher Road Flats, work is expected to commence on internal repairs (within 
apartments) before the end of February.  Work will commence at Clashduv Road 
before moving on to Sycamore Place and Togher Road.  
 
It is envisaged that the works will take 4-6 weeks per complex. 
 
Residents will be informed once a start date is finalised and each individual tenant 
will be contacted by the appointed contractor before they come to their apartment to 
do works. For this type of repair work, it is not necessary to relocate residents. 
 
Procurement documentation is presently being prepared to progress the necessary 
external works at Clashduv Road and Council will be kept informed of progress in 
this regard. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Operations.  
 
6.10 
NUMBER OF BUILDINGS SUITABLE FOR RESIDENTIAL USE SOLD ON 
OPEN MARKET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Since 2018, how many buildings suitable for residential use but in bad repair, either 
from existing stock or acquired by the City Council by CPO, were subsequently sold 
on the open market? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
There are 6 no. properties which have been sold on the open market since 2018 which 
could be classed as buildings suitable for residential use, but in bad repair. 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations Directorate. 
 
6.11 
SECTION 38/PART 8 CYCLE ROUTE SCHEMES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. Finn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE outline the stage in the process of implementation of Section 38/Part 8 
cycle route schemes already approved for the South West ward. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
There are a number of active travel and road improvement projects proposed for the 
area in question which have been approved under the Part 8 Planning process or 

Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act. These schemes are being progressed through the 
various development phases with funding support, mainly, provided by the National 
Transport Authority 
Details of current year grant funding and enabled work activity are as follows – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Funding has also been provided by NTA to enable the development of preliminary 
design proposals for section 38/part 8 planning in respect of the following schemes - 
Sarsfield Road to MTU Pedestrian and Cycle Scheme, Maglin Greenway Phase 1, 
Sarsfield Rd to Clashduv Rd Cycle link, Kinsale Rd to Tramore Valley Park - 
Pedestrian and Cycle Connection. 
In addition a total of €692,000 has also been allocated by NTA to enable active travel 
improvements at Bishopstown Community School and Scoil Naomh Caitríona under 
the safe routes to school programme. It is anticipated that Section 38 for works at both 
of these schools will be published in the coming weeks.  
 
Progress updates on the various schemes in the area and on any further funding 
secured will be advised to Members throughout the year. 
 
G O Beirne  
 
 
                
D Joyce 
Director of Services  
 
 
            Director of Services 
Infrastructure Development 
 
Roads & Environment Operations  
 
6.12 
ACTIVE 
TRAVEL 
FUNDING 
FOR 
FOOTPATHS, 
CYCLING 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE what, if any active travel funding or any other government funding 
was applied for, to improve footpaths, cycling infrastructure & public lighting, from 
Scheme 
2024 Grant 
Allocation 
Enabled Work Activity 
Innishmore Active Travel Scheme 
 €        1,000,000  
Progress and complete the current 
works at construction  
Lehenaghmore Road - Active 
Travel Improvement Scheme 
 €            950,000  Complete land acquisition and 
finalise tender documents 
Viaduct to City Cycle Route Phase 
1 (Viaduct to Kinsale Road) 
 €            200,000  Progress detailed design for the 
scheme 
Curaheen Road Pedestrian and 
Cycle scheme 
 €            100,000  
Finalise of tender documents 
Leo Murphy Road - Cycle Scheme 
 €              50,000  
Progress detailed design and 
preparation of tender documents 

Whites Cross, along Ballyhooly Road to Ballyvolane & from Whites Cross to 
Dublin Pike to improve public realm and make the area safer? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council is currently seeking to advance a major road improvement scheme 
for Ballyhooley Rd/R614 under the Ballyvolane Strategic Transport Corridor Scheme. 
The area covered by the scheme extends from the North Ring Rd Junction to Mervue 
Lawn and ties in with further onward road improvements to be progressed under the 
planning consents associated with adjoining permitted residential developments 
(Longview Developments etc). Funding of €800,000 has recently been allocated by 
the National Transport Authority in support of the Ballyvolane Strategic Transport 
Corridor Scheme and this will support necessary land acquisition and the preparation 
of detailed design and tender documents. Proposals regarding further improvement 
works on the R614 or on the adjoining road network can be assessed following 
progress on the delivery of the aforementioned schemes. As with other parts of the 
City, the related requests can be considered, in conjunction with others received 
having regard to Council policy, transport demands and future funding streams/work 
programmes. 
 
In the meantime, Members will be kept appraised of ongoing progress in the delivery 
of the Ballyvolane Strategic Transport Corridor Scheme. 
 
G O Beirne 
Director of Services 
Infrastructure Development 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS  
 
7.1 
CORK UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL BUS TERMINUS - SECTION 38 
APPROVAL 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
Director of Services, Infrastructure Development, following public consultation, on 
the proposed Cork University Hospital Bus Terminus Scheme pursuant to Section 38 
of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport 
Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
7.2 
CLONTARF STREET BUS STOPS - SECTION 38 APPROVAL   
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the Director 
of Services, Infrastructure Development, following public consultation, on the 
proposed Clontarf Street Bus Stops Scheme pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic 
Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
7.3 
MARDYKE BUS TERMINUS - SECTION 38 APPROVAL   
 

An Chomhairle considered the report and recommendation of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, following public consultation, on the proposed Mardyke 
Bus Terminus Scheme pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as 
amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed scheme, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, G. Keohane, M. 
Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, D. Boylan, D. Cahill, L. Bogue, M.R. 
Desmond, K. McCarthy, T. Shannon, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, 
F. Dennehy, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, G. Kelleher, O. O’Leary. (25) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, P. Dineen. (2) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí D. Forde, M. Finn, T. Moloney. (3) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried, and the proposed scheme approved. 
 
7.4 
RIVERSTOWN BUS TERMINUS - SECTION 38 APPROVAL 
   
On the proposal of Comhairleoir G. Keohane, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
Director of Services, Infrastructure Development, following public consultation, on 
the proposed Riverstown Bus Terminus Scheme pursuant to Section 38 of the Road 
Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 
2009. 
 
7.5 
PARNELL PLACE BUS TERMINUS - SECTION 38 APPROVAL   
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the Director 
of Services, Infrastructure Development, following public consultation, on the 
proposed Parnell Place Bus Terminus Scheme pursuant to Section 38 of the Road 
Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 
2009. 
 
7.6 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 1st 
February 2024 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal by way of extension to lease of “The Lodge” (known as “The Lord 
Mayor’s Pavilion”), Fitzgerald Park, Mardyke Walk, Cork to Sample Studio CLG, 
c/o David Ryan CKT Solicitors, 2, Georges Quay, Cork, up to 31st December 
2026, at a rent of €100.00 per annum.  
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Sheehan, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of the leasehold and freehold interest in an area of land (32.9m² 
approximately) situated to the rear of No. 11, East View Terrace, Quaker Road, 
Cork to Althea O’Sullivan c/o Noonan Linehan Carroll Coffey Solicitors, 54, 
North Main Street, Cork for the sum of €500.00 plus costs of €1,500.00 plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Finn, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (33.6m² approximately), 
situated to the rear of No. 26, Gould Street, Cork to Mark Stryker and Lori Iaboni 
c/o Halpin & Co. Solicitors, 7, South Mall, Cork for the sum of €500.00 plus costs 
of €1,500.00 plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Moloney, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.7 
PROPOSED 
RESIDENTIAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
AT 
HOLLYVILLE, 
HOLLYHILL CORK 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed residential development at 101 and 
102 Hollyville, Hollyhill, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive 
thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(as amended) dated 6th February 2024. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Nugent, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at  Hollyville, Hollyhill, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Hollyville, Hollyhill, in the City of Cork be carried out as 
recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was 
put before Council on the 12th February 2024.” 
 
7.8 
ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT CORK CITY COUNCIL CLIMATE ACTION 
PLAN 2024–2029 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, in 
accordance with Section 16 of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development 
(Amendment) Act 2021, An Chomhairle considered and approved the Draft Cork City 
Council Climate Action Plan 2024–2029. 
 
7.9 
VACANCIES ON BOARDS/COMMITTEES  
 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Kerins, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle approved the nomination of Comhairleoir K. Collins to fill the 
vacancy on the Board of Leisureworld, arising from the resignation of Comhairleoir 
J. Kavanagh. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, 
An Chomhairle approved the nomination of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher to fill the 
vacancy on the Regional Health Forum, arising from the resignation of Comhairleoir 
J. Kavanagh. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 6th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 6th February 2024. 
 
8.1 
MOTIONS 
 
8.1.1 
UPLOAD NON-PERSONAL FOI DISCLOSURES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 2nd February 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises the importance of free and accessible information 
in increasing transparency in public bodies and thus agrees to upload all non-personal 
FOI disclosures.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/030) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the FOI Central Policy Unit has 
produced guidance in relation to the display of FOI requests on websites in the format 
of a disclosure log. The Code of Practice states that a log of FOI requests received 
should be available on the websites of FOI bodies.  The log should provide 
information on the date of the request, the category of the requester, a description of 
the request (categories of records sought), the decision made and the date of release 
(if a request is granted).  These details will assist others who may be seeking the same 
information. Cork City Council has prepared and published a disclosure log in 
accordance with this code of practice. Since the introduction of the FOI Act in 2014 
the number of requests has increased from 110 in 2014 to 343 in 2023. 
 
If any individual requires a copy of any decision on the log this is available from the 
FOI section on request. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 22nd JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 22nd January 2024. 
 
10. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 15th JANUARY 2024 
 

An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 15th January 2024. 
 
10.1 
RECENT ACTIVITIES IN TOURISM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report from the Director of Services, 
Strategic and Economic Development, dated 4th January 2024 on recent activities in 
tourism. 
 
10.2  
RECENT ACTIVITIES IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report from the Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs and International Relations, dated 8th January on recent activities in 
International Relations. 
 
10.3 
MOTIONS  
 
10.3.1 
INVITATION TO THE PALESTINIAN AMBASSADOR, DR JILAN WAHBA 
ABDALMAJID 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs and International Relations, dated 8th January 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council invite the Palestinian Ambassador, Dr Jilan Wahba 
Abdalmajid, to address a public meeting of Cork City Council, with an opportunity 
afterwards to network with elected members and Council staff with an agenda of 
further developing links between Cork City and the State of Palestine and to receive 
an update from the Ambassador on the situation in Palestine.’  
 
(Proposers: Cllr. M. Nugent, Cllr. K. Collins, Cllr. O. O’Leary, Cllr. F. Kerins 24/027) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that “the Palestinian Mission advised the 
International Relations Office on 29th November 2023 (UN International Day of 
Solidarity with the Palestinian People) that the Ambassador is considering programme 
options for another visit to Cork in the New Year. On 26th December 2023, the Mission 
noted the Ambassador would be interested in briefing Councillors on the situation in 
Palestine, and this invitation was relayed to the Lord Mayor in the New Year for 
consideration. 
 
The Lord Mayor has agreed to convene a briefing for interested Councillors, and 
arrangements will be confirmed once finalised. 
 
Cork City Council remains committed to meeting the aspirations of Council in terms 
of developing practical and meaningful links with Palestinian partners.” 
 
11. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 16th JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 16th January 2024. 

 
11.1  
MOTIONS 
 
11.1.1 
RE-MUNICIPALISATION OF THE BIN SERVICES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 15th January 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes the huge increases in the cost of living for ordinary 
people currently and agrees to begin the process of re-municipalisation of the bin 
services to ensure fair pricing for waste collection.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 23/347) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that as advised to Council previously, 
Dublin City Council (DCC) commissioned the Institute of Public Administration 
(IPA) to undertake research in respect of the re-municipalisation of waste services in 
Dublin City Council.  The results of this research were published in February of this 
year.  The key finding of this report was that the re-municipalisation of waste services 
in Ireland (and thus the exclusion of private collectors) would require changes to the 
primary legislation i.e. to the Waste Management Act, 1996.  The report was very 
clear that without said changes to the national legislation and re-municipalisation 
would be deemed anti-competitive by the Irish and European Courts. The report went 
further and stated that even if a Local Authority were to re-enter the market in 
competition with private operators, it is likely that the Courts could view its dual roles 
as both regulator and market operator as a conflict of interests and therefore also anti-
competitive, unless legislative changes were introduced.  It is thus clear from the 
above report that unless changes to national legislation are implemented, the re-
municipalisation of waste collection services by Local Authorities is not permissible. 
 
11.1.2 
OWNERSHIP OF ROADSIDE TREES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 15th January 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will revise the standard letter issued to property owners 
advising them of their responsibilities with regards to ownership of roadside trees in 
a way that reflects the tone and content of the Landowners Guide for Managing 
Roadside Trees published by the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine in 
2021.’ 
               
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 23/508)            
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the standard Violation Notice issued 
to property owners has been revised to refer them to “A Guide for Landowners for 
Managing Roadside Trees”  published by the Department of Agriculture, Food and 
the 
Marine, 
and 
the 
Tree 
Council 
of 
Ireland, 
available 
on 
https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/8fb45-a-guide-for-landowners-to-managing-
roadside-trees/.  
 

11.1.3 
PILOT THE USE OF HYDROTREATED VEGETABLE OIL (HVO) 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 15th January 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will pilot the use of Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO) with 
diesel-fuel vehicles and plant machinery in its fleet as a climate-mitigation measure; 
and prepare a report for consideration on the outcomes and issues associated.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 23/509) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has been to the 
forefront in the whole area of a clean council fleets.  We have the largest Local 
Authority Electric Fleet in the country and are constantly looking at other 
opportunities to reduce the carbon footprint of our fleet vehicles. 
 
The use of HVO, especially in larger HGV type vehicles, is one such option that we 
are considering at present.  We are working with our vehicle suppliers to identify 
options to pilot the use of HVO as a diesel fuel alternative.  Unfortunately, not all 
diesel engines are capable of running of pure HVO at this point in time and so the 
selection of appropriate equipment for any pilot is vital. 
 
Key outcomes of this pilot will include engine efficiency, engine performance and a 
lessons learnt with regards to an operating environment which includes HVO. 
 
One of the key operating constraints that we hope to evaluate is the availability of 
HVO which is deemed sustainable under the criteria set out in the recast EU 
Renewable Energy Directive 2018/2001/EU (referred to as RED II).  At present the 
distribution network of HVO in Ireland is very limited and compliance procedures 
with regards to Red II remain under development. 
 
Based on the outcome of the above pilot, Cork City Council would hope to include 
HVO as an option in any future fleet services procurement process. 
 
11.1.4 
PORTAL FOR REPORTING ISSUES WITH STORM DRAINS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 15th January 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will develop a portal for the reporting of issues with storm 
drains by members of the public; and provide traders groups and residents associations 
with advice on maintaining and clearing storm drains in the public realm.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 23/510) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council already has in 
place an existing system for capturing service requests associated with storm drains. 
 
Members of the public can ring the Customer Services Unit Monday to Friday from 
9:00am to 5:00pm on 021 4924000 to log a service request.  Out of hours (evenings 

and weekends) the out of hours phone number operates (021 4966512) for urgent 
situations. 
 
In addition there is also an email address and website portal which allows issues to be 
logged 24 hours a day. 
1) Email address:  servicecentre@corkcity.ie  
2) Website: 
www.corkcity.ie/corkcityco/en/council-services/public-
info/customer-service-requests/  (also accessible from the homepage of the 
website using the Customer Service Requests button) 
 
Cork City Council will review options in relation to providing traders groups and 
residents associations with advice on clearing leaves and other debris from the top of 
storm gully grates/drains in the public realm. 
 
11.1.5 
DEVELOPING 
PLANTING 
AREAS 
WHEN 
CREATING 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Directors of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, Housing Capital & Regeneration and Infrastructure 
Development dated 15th January 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That given the success of the inclusion of a planting area when creating a raised zebra 
crossing at Grattan Street, it become the ongoing policy of this Council to develop 
such planting areas when creating any similar scale infrastructure.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 23/582) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that Cork City is an EU Climate Mission 
City and is thus actively striving towards delivering projects which both increase the 
quantum of green space within the City and well as introducing new opportunities to 
improved biodiversity. 
 
Projects delivered across the City Council Directorates, including the Operations, 
Infrastructure and Housing Delivery, always strive to maximize opportunities to 
deliver planted areas within such projects and developments. 
 
The above notwithstanding, it is not always possible to include green infrastructure in 
every project and every setting. 
 
The Parks Section are available to advise Directorates regarding the appropriate plant 
species to use in such schemes so as to ensure that they are appropriate for the setting 
into which they are being introduced. 
 
Also, going forward provisions need to be made as part of the annual budgeting 
process for the maintenance and upkeep of all of these new installations. 
 
12. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 18th JANUARY 2024 
 

An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 18th January 2024. 
 
12.1.1 
PUBLIC GATHERING FOR SWITCHING ON THE CHRISTMAS LIGHTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council allow discussion on the events being organised by Cork City 
Council to mark the Christmas festivities. This year again does not include a public 
gathering for the switching on of the Christmas lights. Cork City Council should 
examine proposals to allow for such a public event to take place in 2024 and every 
year thereafter.’  
 
(Proposers: Cllr. K. Collins, Cllr. M. Nugent, Cllr. J. Maher 23/541) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated Traffic Operations advises that discussion 
on the events organised by Cork City Council to mark the Christmas festivities was 
conducted via the Arts Committee in 2023, including at a special meeting convened 
in August at which the proposal for SOLAS on Emmet Place was presented.  
 
The Events team in the Community, Culture & Placemaking Directorate will facilitate 
a workshop for Councillors for discussion of a Public Gathering for the switching on 
of the Christmas Lights in the first quarter of 2024. 
 
12.1.2 
BENEFIT CONCERT FOR PALESTINIAN SOLIDARITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will host a benefit concert for Palestinian solidarity in the 
Concert Hall in Cork City Hall with proceeds going to the Palestinian Red Crescent 
Society, the UN's Occupied Palestinian Territory Humanitarian Fund and the 
UNRWA for Palestinian refugees in the Near-East.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 23/555) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated Cork City Council remains committed to 
meeting the aspirations of Council in terms of developing practical and meaningful 
links with Palestinian partners and in this regard, the Ambassador is considering 
programme options for another visit to Cork in the coming weeks to explore this 
further.  
 
Cork City Council is amenable to considering and supporting an ask from external 
hosts which may arise in relation to making Cork City Hall available for a benefit 
concert for Palestinian solidarity should the request arise. 
 

12.1.3 
CCTV ON THE PEDESTRIAN AND CYCLE LANE FROM THE GRANGE 
ROAD TO TRAMORE VALLEY PARK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council, in consultation with the Joint Policing Committee, write to 
the Commissioner of An Garda Síochána, Drew Harris, requesting authorisation 
pursuant to Section 38 of the Garda Síochána Act 2005 in respect of the installation 
and operation of CCTV on the pedestrian and cycle lane from the Grange Road to 
Tramore Valley Park for the sole or primary purpose of securing public order and 
safety there by facilitating the deterrence, prevention, detection and prosecution of 
offences.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 23/556) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that S 38 of the Garda Síochána Act 2005 
regulates the installation and operation of fixed and permanent CCTV for “The sole 
or primary purpose of securing public order and safety in public places by 
facilitating the deterrence, prevention, detection and prosecution of offences.” 
 
The Garda Commissioner may authorise the installation and operation of CCTV for 
such purposes. Various conditions and requirements must be met including the 
approval of the Joint Policing Committee to such a scheme as part of the application 
process. 
 
To regularise usage of existing cameras in Parks and Cemeteries, last year the City 
Council (Parks & Recreation Department) commenced the process of formal 
approval, with report being approved at a meeting of the September Joint Policing 
Committee with site specific locations as part of a submission to the Garda 
Commissioner. (The new Grange Frankfield pedestrian/cycleway was not completed 
at the time and therefore not included). 
 
We will be undertaking a review (with An Garda Siochana) of any new requests for 
CCTV during 2024, and making necessary arrangements to have all included in a 
further report to the Joint Policing Committee at that stage if deemed appropriate. 
 
12.1.4 
STREET OR PLACE NAME FOR FREDRICK DOUGLAS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘Given that the 175th anniversary of the visit of Frederick Douglass to Cork is on 
October 11th, that Cork City Council will investigate marking the occasion by naming 
a street or place for Frederick Douglass.’ 
 

(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 20/253) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the list of unnamed streets (copy 
attached) was circulated to the City Archaeologist, the Heritage Officer, the 
Conservation Officer, and the City Library Studies. Having duly considered the 
locations, it was agreed that there was no historical or meaningful connection between 
Frederick Douglass and any of the unnamed street. 
 
A number of alternative suggestions were made to commemorate individuals such as 
an art installation, social housing development, park bench, tree planting, sports 
bursary etc depending on the interests of the individual being commemorated. 
 
A creative outreach project or some form of conference or series of talks, exploring 
the topic of slavery, both historic and current, was suggested as an appropriate and 
fitting way to commemorate Frederick Douglass. 
 
It was noted that the City Library had an exhibition on Frederick Douglass which has 
toured 
most 
of 
the 
libraries 
and 
is 
accessible 
on 
our 
website 
on 
https://www.corkcitylibraries.ie/en/online/exhibitions-online/.  
 
The Fredrick Douglass Trail map produced on the anniversary of the visit to Cork 
notes significant locations where he lectured and stayed. It is noteworthy that there is 
a plaque in the Imperial Hotel commemorating his visit also. 
 
In addition, the Imperial Hotel Cork unveiled a new guest lounge named in honour of 
Frederick Douglass with a historic talk and walking tour of the Cork Abolitionists 
Trail to celebrate their famous past guest on October 12th, 2023. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer this motion to the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s International 
Relations Office in the Corporate Affairs and International Relations Directorate, in 
collaboration with the Unitarian Church in Cork, US partners in the Globe Lane 
(Frederic Douglas) Initiative, Cork City Libraries, Cork City Council’s Arts Office 
and Parks Department, has released a commission for a mural commemorating the 
anti-racist legacy of Frederick Douglass’ visit to Cork in 1845 to be installed in the 
courtyard of the Unitarian Church on Princes Street in the City Centre. The project is 
funded under a Creative Ireland scheme managed by the Arts Office. The site of the 
mural was decided upon by partners following an investigation of suitable prominent 
sites in the City Centre. The central location of the Church, coupled with Douglass’ 
association with it informed the decision to install it there.  
 
The mural will be installed on the gable end of the right-hand side of the courtyard of 
the Unitarian Church on Princes Street, and the commission invites artists to develop 
a proposal which reflects and promotes the positive anti-racist legacy of Frederick 

Douglass’s visit in 1845, and the welcome he received from community leaders 
including Mayor Richard Dowden. 
 
The project is part of Cork City Council’s ongoing collaboration with the Globe Lane 
Initiative and its #DouglassWeek project, an annual, transatlantic, creative event series 
that started in Cork in 2021 and continues to celebrate and advance the legacy and the 
continuing impact of Frederick Douglass around the world each year. It builds on Cork 
City Council’s engagement on the importance of the history of Frederick Douglass 
and his family on Lord Mayor-led delegations to the United States, and extensive 
engagement from Cork Cities Libraries.  
 
Cork City Council’s Parks Department will refresh the space as part of the project 
with new surfacing, planters and picnic benches, and the Unitarian Church will 
facilitate access to the courtyard at lunchtime so people can use the space for eating 
their lunch, or taking time out of their day to enjoy the space, and its positive civic 
and social messaging. It is envisaged that the mural will be formally unveiled by the 
Lord Mayor in April 2024 to coincide with #DouglassWeek 2024. Applications for 
submissions from interested artists are open until 19th January 2024, and the 
application form is available on the Arts Office section of the City Council website.  
 
12.1.5 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE 2024 CORK MARATHON 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council requires a briefing from the Council Executive on the present 
contractual situation with the Davis Event Agency and the arrangements for the 2024 
Cork Marathon following the termination of said contract.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 24/037) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that on the 18th of December 2023, Davis 
Events Limited (DEL) exercised its right to terminate the contract with Cork City 
Council without liability on either side as was their right to do under the contract 
between themselves and Cork City Council. Having thanked DEL for their efforts in 
the past couple of years with the marathon and wishing them well for the future, Cork 
City Council wishes to confirm it is organising and will deliver the Annual Marathon 
event. Arrangements are well advanced and participants and the public can look 
forward to a seamless transition and a safe and enjoyable Cork City Marathon for 
2024.    
 
12.1.6 
LGBTQ+ SAFE SPACE IN THE CITY CENTRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 

 
‘That Council work in conjunction with the LGBTQ+ community and representative 
groups like the Gay Project, LINC and others to identify a suitable publicly owned 
building in the City Centre to provide an LGBTQ+ safe space, both during the day 
and for nightlife, as a matter of urgency. Our LGBTQ+ community is under increasing 
threat and the massive public support for the recent protest outside Chambers showed 
the lack of safe spaces in the City is of huge concern to everyone.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 23/424) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated Cork City Council, through the 
Community, Culture and Placemaking Directorate work closely with the Cork 
LGBTI+ Inter-Agency Committee to address many of the presenting issues the 
LGBTI + Community face, including safe spaces.  Cork City Council is a board 
member of the Rainbow Cities Network (RCN) and as part of this, has played a 
significant and progressive part in the formulation of international and localised policy 
guidelines to create a more inclusive and safe city for the community by looking at 
international best practice.  These policy guidelines were recently published in 8 
languages.  One of the topics covered within these guidelines is best practice in the 
provision of LGBTI+ community spaces.  Cork City Council is committed to seeking 
out sustainable long-term community spaces, where it is possible to find such 
premises, which would offer community spaces for LGBTI + social and community 
development.  
  
Cork City Council, through its leasing of community spaces, for instance, the South 
Parish Community Centre, has enabled access to office spaces to the Gay Project, 
from which it can provide services to the LGBTI+ Community.  Cork LGBT+ Pride 
Festival is also availing of a similar office space in Civic Trust House, Pope’s 
Quay.  These premises are operated under management or leasing agreements with 
Cork City Council.   
 
Applications to Cork City Council and LCDC grants are regularly invited from the 
LGBTI+ community groups to apply for capital and running costs.  Our community 
section recently made recommendations to the DRCD for community groups to access 
the LGBTI+ Dormant Accounts Grants for 2023 and we are awaiting the 
response.  This fund, if successful, will further enhance the delivery of community 
services through or from these centres/spaces.     
 
12.1.7 
ST. LUKE’S CHURCH 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will facilitate use of St. Luke's Church as a community 
meeting place, especially for issues relating to culture and placemaking.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 23/441) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated since it was acquired by Cork City 
Council and renovated, St. Lukes has been in use as a venue for arts and cultural 
activity under the management of the Cork City Council Arts Office. Currently the 
church is used as a live music venue and the basement, otherwise known as The Crypt, 
is used as a flexible space for a variety of public facing and production uses by the 
not-for-profit arts and cultural sector. This includes exhibitions; theatre, dance and 
circus rehearsals and residencies; small concerts, plays etc. While a portion of the 
activity in the Crypt is open to the public, much of it is in the development and creation 
of new work with the space being used as a rehearsal studio. The principal criteria for 
booking the space is that it is for arts and cultural uses.  
 
Space for Art is a strategic priority for Cork City Council as per the Arts and Culture 
Strategy. The Arts Office regularly receives requests for space by artists and 
organisations for whom space is very difficult to access. Currently St. Lukes is an 
important resource for the sector. 
 
12.1.8 
ALLOCATION OF €20,000 TO DOUGLAS COMHALTAS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council allocate the sum of €20,000 to the Douglas Branch of 
Comhaltas Ceoltóirí Éireann so as to enable Douglas Comhaltas to successfully host 
the Cork County Fleadh Cheoil in Douglas in May 2024. A once-off payment of 
€20,000 would provide vital funding to Douglas Comhaltas and would virtually 
guarantee the success of the Cork County Fleadh Cheoil in Douglas in May 2024.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 23/504) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated applications for arts funding for 2024 are 
invited through the Arts Grants Scheme which closes on Thursday 16th November. 
Douglas Comhaltas is a regular recipient of funding through the scheme, and they 
have been advised to detail their plans to host the Cork County Fleadh Cheoil in their 
application.  
 
12.1.9 
TAKING IN CHARGE ISSUE WITH HOUSING ESTATES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘To call on Cork City Council to take immediate and necessary action to address the 
taking in charge issue with housing estates in the City that are not taken in charge due 
to outstanding works to be carried out and that are not covered by existing planning 
bond arrangements. I would ask that an assessment be made of the number of estates 
involved, their location and the scope of works required to bring them to a standard 
that is acceptable and the costs associated with such. The funding for this should be 
sought from central government in order that this issue is dealt with once and for all.’  

 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 23/495) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated the Council Executive is in agreement 
that an assessment can commence on the number of estates involved where a scope 
of works is required to bring them up to a taking in charge acceptable standard. The 
Council can then make a submission to central Government where applicable to 
source the funding required to carry out the necessary works. 
 
A further report will issue to Members in due course when the process is completed. 
 
12.1.10 IMPROVE ACCESSIBILITY AND INCLUSIVITY FOR THOSE WITH 
DISABILITIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises that:  
• 
Significant change is needed to improve accessibility and inclusivity for those 
with disabilities in Cork City  
• 
The City is not currently compliant with the UNCRPD and specific work by 
Council could improve compliance with Articles 9, 19, 20, 28, 29 and 30  
• 
The current ‘Access Group’ are not empowered as a decision-making body within 
the Executive  
• 
The existing role of ‘access officer’, while important, is not fully meeting the 
needs of those with disabilities  
• 
The partnership of Wicklow County Council and the Disability Federation of 
Ireland, and particularly the establishment of a Disability and Inclusion Steering 
Committee, employment of a Disability and Inclusion Officer and publishing of 
a Disability and Inclusion Strategy, should be replicated in Cork City  
 
And agrees to:  
• 
Write to Wicklow County Council and the Disability Federation of Ireland 
commending them on their achievements and seeking a meeting before the end 
of Q1 2024 to explore the process behind this and how this could be replicated in 
Cork City 
• 
Report back to Council at the first full Council session after the meeting with a 
plan to implement a similar partnership and strategy.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 23/515) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated the Cork Access Group is comprised of 
volunteers representing a number of disability groups e.g. Irish Wheelchair 
Association, National Council for the Blind, Spinal Injuries Association, etc.  They 
are an independent group who meet regularly autonomously of Cork City Council.  A 
number of times per year the Cork Access Group engages with the Operations 
Directorate (Roads Operations Division & Traffic Division) and the Infrastructure 
Directorate to discuss issues that they have identified relating to Roads and associated 
infrastructure across the City.  The Cork Access Group facilitates a consultative 

function enabling communication and engagement between the City Council and the 
organisations representing the disability community. 
 
Cork City Council hosted a specific consultation for people with disability under new 
Local Economic & Community Plan (LECP). This consultation was extremely 
successful with over 50 people in attendance. It was run in collaboration with the Cork 
Access Group, Disability Federation Ireland, The Cork City PPN, Cork City Council 
and Cork Age Friendly City Programme. The results of this consultation will feed 
directly into the new LECP currently being prepared for Cork City. 
 
Community Culture and Placemaking are actively working with all directorates in 
CCC to populate an internal scoping document on work and service levels currently 
provided that support people with disability. It seeks to draw together a cross 
directorate group to draft a Disability Strategy for the City which will include a 
benchmark of best practice nationally. Cork City Council have a very successful 
partnership with The Disability Federation Ireland, securing funding under Disability 
Participation and Awareness fund; (1/1/2022 to 31/03/2023), which enabled us to 
deliver Disability Awareness training to 344 staff and UNCRPD awareness training 
for 42 senior managers, and Part M Design training to 45 technical staff. Cork City 
Council, through the cross-directorate subgroup will link with DFI to explore the work 
done with other City and County Councils nationally. 
 
12.1.11 COMMUNITY GROUPS’ ASSISTANCE IN REPAINTING STREET SIGNS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That the CE will advise how community groups can assist to repaint street signs that 
have become faded and unsightly.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. Finn 23/272) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated Traffic Operations advises that the 
cleaning of road signs and public signage throughout the City is in the roads 
programme and is carried out on an ongoing basis, subject to suitable weather 
conditions and funding being available. Members of public can report issues via the 
Customer Services Unit or online portal, these will be assessed and if appropriate will 
be added to the list. 
 
If there are particular community groups that have a particular location in mind, they 
can engage with Traffic Operations with regard to any proposal which can be 
considered, taking into account the scale of the proposal, Health and Safety, traffic 
management, industrial relations issues etc. 
 
12.1.12 INTRODUCING A DEDICATE A TREE PROGRAMME – A GIFT THAT 
LIVES YEAR AFTER YEAR 
 

 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council introduce a Dedicate a Tree Programme in our city. The 
programme would allow citizens to honour their loved ones, relatives, or special 
friends by dedicating a tree in their name, which would then be planted in a designated 
area in the city. 
 
Trees are essential for maintaining a healthy environment, and the Dedicate a Tree 
Programme would provide people with an opportunity to contribute to the city's 
greenery while also honouring their loved ones. It would also create a unique and 
lasting legacy for the individuals commemorated through the programme. 
 
The dedication would be recognized through a personalized plaque or marker near the 
tree, which could include the name of the honouree, the donor’s name, and a brief 
inscription. Additionally, the programme could be used to acknowledge special events 
such as weddings, anniversaries, or graduations. 
 
Other cities around the world have successfully implemented similar Dedicate a Tree 
Programmes, and I believe that Cork City could benefit from this initiative as well. It 
would promote a sense of community involvement and environmental responsibility 
while creating a beautiful and long-lasting tribute to loved ones.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. O’Flynn 23/292) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated the proposal to offer A Dedicate a Tree 
Programme for residents of the city will be an action item in the Cork City Tree 
Strategy currently at draft stage. Specific details for this programme are under 
consideration and, when finalised will be incorporated into the final draft for 
consideration by Council. 
 
12.1.13 CITY PRIDE AWARDS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council introduce City Pride Awards. 
 
The City Pride Awards are an initiative aimed at rewarding local businesses for their 
contribution in maintaining, enhancing, and preserving the public realm outside of 
their establishments. 
 
The goal of these awards is to encourage a sense of responsibility and pride among 
business owners towards the environment and public property. 
 
The awards will be given out quarterly to businesses that maintain clean and tidy 
storefronts with well-painted facades and structures, such as awnings or shutters, that 
complement the City's overall aesthetics. 

 
Businesses that go above and beyond in terms of enhancing the public realm, such as 
adding planters, benches, or lighting, will also be considered for the award. 
 
Privileges for the businesses receiving the City Pride Awards will include recognition 
on the City's website and social media platforms, a certificate of recognition, and 
signage they can display in their windows to showcase their achievement. 
 
The City Pride Awards will not only incentivise businesses to take care of their 
surroundings, but also instil a sense of civic pride and responsibility among business 
owners towards the environment and public spaces. 
 
Additionally, these awards will help improve the overall appearance of the city, 
making it more attractive to current and potential residents, as well as tourists. 
 
We envision the City Pride Awards as a collaborative effort between the CCC business 
associations, and the general public, where we can all work together to create a 
cleaner, more vibrant, and welcoming place to live, work, and visit.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. O’Flynn 23/295) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that City Council believes that there is 
merit to this proposal and will consider an award scheme, in the context of the existing 
award programmes. 
 
12.1.14 SUSTAINABLE EVENT PRACTICES IN CORK CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th January 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That all applications for festivals or public events be subject to the submission of a 
sustainability report, which must be made available upon application. 
 
As the vibrant hub of cultural and social activities, Cork City host various festivals 
and public events that contribute significantly to the overall vibrancy and appeal of 
our community. However, it is crucial that we address the environmental impact of 
these events and strive towards a more sustainable future. 
 
In order to ensure that events in Cork City align with sustainable practices, I propose 
that event organizers be required to submit a comprehensive sustainability report 
along with their application. This report would outline the measures and strategies that 
will be employed to minimize environmental impact, reduce waste, conserve 
resources, and promote eco-friendly practices throughout the event planning and 
execution process. 
 
By implementing this requirement, we can provide a framework that encourages event 
organizers to incorporate sustainable practices into their planning and operations. It 
will also enable the City Council to assess the environmental impact of proposed 

festivals or public events, allowing for informed decision-making and prioritization 
of sustainability. 
 
The sustainability report should encompass elements such as waste management 
plans, 
energy 
consumption 
strategies, 
transportation 
arrangements, 
water 
conservation measures, and any other relevant initiatives that aim to minimize the 
event's ecological footprint. It should also outline the steps being taken to engage 
attendees in sustainable behaviours and promote environmental awareness during the 
event.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. O’Flynn 23/305) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Development Management licence 
outdoor events with audiences over 5,000.  Through consultation in the event 
licencing process, DM engage with colleagues in the Environment Department who 
request conditions to be attached to the event licence concerning the provision of a 
Waste Management Plan as part of the Final Event Management Plan.  The Waste 
Management Plan should include details pertaining to the litter clean up, along with 
measures taken to ensure the management and segregation of waste arising on site into 
the relevant waste categories, ie, residual, mixed dry recyclables, glass, 
compostable/food waste).  Additionally, details should be provided pertaining to the 
provision of an adequate number of segregated waste bins on site for the duration of 
the event and by requiring all stall holders to carry out waste segregation at their 
individual stalls. 
 
Separately, and with regards to the sustainability of arts festivals and events applying 
for funding support to Cork City Council, from 2024 applicants for arts grants funding 
will be required to outline their policies and practices in respect of environmental 
sustainability as applicable. 
 
13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 9th JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 9th January 2024. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 6th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 6th February 2024. 
 
14.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
14.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF NOVEMBER 2023 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
November 2023. 
 
14.2 
MOTIONS 
 

14.2.1 
RATE 
DISCOUNT 
FOR 
BUSINESSES 
THAT 
BRING 
HISTORIC 
BUILDINGS INTO PUBLIC USE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer on 
the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council considers an extra rate discount for businesses that bring 
historic buildings into greater public use via investment in restoration, erecting of info 
plaques, creation of displays etc that in turn contributes significantly more to the 
heritage value and attractiveness of the City for locals and tourists alike (Frederick 
Douglass work at the Imperial Hotel being a recent prime example).’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 23/485) 
 
The response of the Chief Financial Officer stated that Cork City Council operates a 
two-tier rates incentive scheme whereby compliant rate payers receive a rebate on 
their previous years rate collection performance. This is contained in the 2024 budget. 
There is no provision in the 2024 budget for an extra rate discount for businesses that 
bring historic buildings into greater public use. It is an incentive that we can consider 
for the 2025 budget. 
 
15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd January 2024. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd January 2024. 
 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd January 2024. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd January 2024. 
 
19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd JANUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd January 2024. 
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 

21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn as part of the Cork City Council Delegation visit to 
the EU Commission and European Parliament, Brussels, 6th - 8th December 
2023. 
• Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn at the Cork Association Annual Dinner, held at 
London, UK, 2nd - 3rd December 2023. 
• Comhairleoir D. Forde at the Celtic Conferences Modular Housing 
Conference, held at Carlingford, Co. Louth, 24th - 26th November 2023. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved attendance at conferences/seminars tabled 
on the night. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
reports for November and December 2023. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES  
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1, that have been referred to the 
relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS 
 
27.1 
RECENT COMMENTS ABOUT AN GARDA SÍOCHÁNA 
 
 
The following motion was withdrawn:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council condemns recent comments made by a Cork City Councillor 
that An Garda Síochána’s priority is to provide protection for private businesses and 
to act as security for capitalist interests rather than to protect and defend public safety 
and the public good. That Cork City Council also condemns the recent post on social 
media by a Cork City Councillor, which included a photograph showing a clearly 
identifiable member of An Garda Síochána standing outside a McDonald’s restaurant 
and which included untrue and derogatory comments implying that the member of An 

Garda Síochána’s reason for being there was to provide private security for a multi-
national company.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/053) 
 
An Chomhairle noted Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan’s confirmation that Comhairleoir 
L. Bogue was the Cork City Councillor referred to in the motion. 
 
27.2 
FULL CONFIDENCE IN AN GARDA SÍOCHÁNA 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council expresses full confidence in An Garda Síochána and 
commends An Garda Síochána for its many years of exemplary service to the State 
and its citizens in a variety of areas including crime detection and prevention, road 
traffic enforcement, witness protection and community policing. That Cork City 
Council also commends An Garda Síochána for the fair and impartial manner in which 
it acts in furtherance of its primary goal, which is to protect and defend public safety 
and the public good.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/054) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
Martin, a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as 
follows:-  
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, G. Keohane, T. 
Fitzgerald, M. Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, D. Boylan, D. Cahill, M.R. Desmond, 
K. McCarthy, T. Shannon, D. Forde, M. Finn, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, 
P. Dineen, F. Kerins, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, G. Kelleher, T. Moloney, O. 
O’Leary. (27) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, B. McCarthy, L. Bogue. (3) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Finn, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
27.3 
FINAL ALLOCATION OF BASELINE FUNDING TO CORK CITY 
COUNCIL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 

‘That Cork City Council call on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, Darragh O’Brien, to provide Cork City Council with a detailed report 
outlining how and upon what basis he reached the conclusion that consideration of the 
annual €15 million payment by Cork City Council to Cork County Council would not 
have increased the final allocation of baseline funding to Cork City Council in 
circumstances where every Local Authority (not just Cork City Council) benefited 
from the application of the model on a no-reduction basis and benefited from the 
application of a minimum increase.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/061) 
 
27.4 
€15 MILLION ANNUAL PAYMENT TO CORK COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘Given that the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Darragh 
O’Brien’s response to the written submission made by the City Council Executive in 
November 2023 recommended that Cork City Council refer its concerns regarding the 
€15 million annual payment to Cork County Council to the Oversight Committee in 
accordance with section 24 of the Local Government Act 2019, I would ask that Cork 
City Council write to Minister O’Brien asking him to advise Cork City Council of: 
  
- 
the identities of the current chairperson and other two members of the Oversight 
Committee; 
  
- 
the date on which the current chairperson and other two members of the Oversight 
Committee were appointed to their positions; 
 
- 
the date on which the Oversight Committee last held a formal meeting; 
  
- 
the process by which the Minister proposes that Cork City Council should refer its 
concerns to the Oversight Committee, to include the address or email address to 
which the City Council should send any written submission and who said written 
submission should be addressed to.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/062) 
 
27.5 
CURRENT STATUS OF THE GLANMIRE GARDA STATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Garda Chief Superintendent, the Minister and 
the Department of Justice requesting an update on the current status of the Glanmire 
Garda Station, its current opening hours and future plans, if any, to improve this local 
Garda service for the people of Glanmire and surrounding areas. 
 
Glanmire urgently needs a full time Garda Station.  
 

In recent years, this fantastic modern building was refurbished and transformed to a 
Garda Station in the Sallybrook area of Glanmire. Since its opening, it has been 
opened on a somewhat restricted basis from a timing perspective.  
 
With the ever increasing population of Glanmire and surrounding areas, this relatively 
recently opened Garda station urgently needs to be opened on a full time basis and 
adequately resourced in order to provide a much needed Garda service to this rapidly 
growing community in our City. Residents of Glanmire and surrounding areas 
currently have to call Mayfield or Anglesea Street if they need a Garda. I know we 
have the 999 service, but this should be used for emergencies. There is an urgent need 
for this Garda Station to be opened on a full time basis in the Glanmire area as this 
has been acknowledged as one of the fastest growing areas in our City and a well 
functioning full time Garda Station is now an absolute necessity in our Community.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 24/067) 
 
27.6 
BUS CONNECTS PLAN FOR DOUGLAS VILLAGE  
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council writes to the NTA reiterating its call for a third round of 
submissions for the Bus Connects plan for Cork.  
 
Specifically the Douglas village plan needs more consideration and further 
engagement with the residents/business owners. 
 
The option of using the Douglas relief road for a designated bus lane rather than the 
proposed bus gate on East Douglas Street needs urgent consideration. This will 
provide designated bus lanes at minimal cost while affording the opportunity to 
enhance the East Douglas Street area to improve the village feel for Douglas.  
 
A holistic view of Douglas village needs to be at the forefront of the plan as for too 
long various “improvements” have had a detrimental effect on the village.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Cahill 24/071) 
 
27.7 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL CAMERA-BASED ENFORCEMENT 
STRATEGY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees the urgency of camera-based enforcement of junctions 
and bus/cycle lanes and utilising bus-mounted cameras to detect and enforce illegal 
parking in bus lanes (actions 67 and 122 of the Phase 1 Action Plan 2021–2024 of the 
Road Safety Strategy 2021–2030); and will forward this motion to the Road Safety 
Transformation Partnership Board seeking an update on the development of the 
National Camera-Based Enforcement Strategy that is being led by Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland; and requests the implementation of camera-based enforcement 
of junctions, bus/cycle lanes and utilising bus-mounted cameras in Cork as soon as 

possible to protect transport investments and to assist the City in reaching its climate 
action ambitions.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/079) 
 
27.8 
MAINTENANCE OF CYCLE ROUTES  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That the CE will write to the Minister for Transport to ascertain if the need for the 
maintenance of the increased number of cycle routes has been factored into exchequer 
funding to local authorities.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. Finn 24/083) 
 
27.9 
INVESTIGATION OF UISCE ÉIREANN  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council writes to the European Commission’s Directorate General 
for Environment to request that Uisce Éireann be investigated under the terms of the 
Drinking Water Directive 2020 (2020/2184) with regard to quality monitoring, 
contamination and risk management strategy, and other relevant aspects in respect of 
unacceptable provision of drinking water in Cork City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 24/099) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir L. Bogue, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a vote 
was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:-  
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, G. Keohane, M. 
Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, L. Bogue, D. Boyle, F. Kerins, C. Finn, 
O. O’Leary. (14) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, M.R. Desmond, K. McCarthy, 
T. Shannon, C. Kelleher. (6) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, S. O’Callaghan, D. Canty. (3) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
27.10 
TEST DRINKING WATER FOR RESIDENTS OF BOREENMANNA ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Local Government, Darragh 
O’Brien, to demand that Uisce Éireann be instructed to urgently implement testing for 
manganese and other harmful substances in drinking water for residents of the 

Boreenmanna Road in Cork City following a recent Council briefing on water 
quality.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 24/100) 
 
27.11 
BUSCONNECTS SCHEME AROUND BALLINTEMPLE GRAVEYARD/ 
BEAUMONT COTTAGES/CHURCHYARD LANE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to BusConnects Cork in relation to the mapping of the 
scheme around Ballintemple Graveyard/Beaumont Cottages/Churchyard Lane to 
request complete and accurate mapping of this area as mapping provided to date has 
been inadequate.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 24/102) 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
  
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
 
