 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 26th July 2018 
Room G12, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Ann Doherty 
Paul Moynihan 
Cllr. Chris O’Leary 
Cllr PJ Hourican 
Dan Boyle 
Joe Curtin 
Eddie Mullins 
Fiona Finn 
Ger Canning 
Bernie Connolly 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
 
Apologies: 
Aaron O’Connell, Lawrence Owens, David Ronayne, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, 
Mick O’Connell, Nora O’Donovan, Priscilla Lynch, Adrienne Rodgers 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted. R. Loughry introduced 
Mr. Stephen Murphy who recently took up the development worker grade 6 post. A round 
of introductions was made. 
 
2. Minutes 
 
The minutes of 21st June, 2018 to be amended to reflect the following: 
 
 
Agenda Item 3. Funding Streams Update: a) Healthy Ireland Fund Application 2018 
 
“The Department will grant 10% of funding initially and an official decision on the application 
will issued in August/September 2018.”  
 
To be amended to: 
 
The Department will grant 15% of funding initially and an official decision on the application 
will issued in August/September 2018. 
 
On proposal of PJ Hourican, seconded by Dan Boyle, subject to above amendment being 
made, the minutes of 21st June, 2018 were approved. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
3. Funding Streams Update: 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund Application 2018 
T. Power noted that there were no new developments under the Healthy Ireland Fund 
application. T. Power confirmed that the advance payment of 15% of funding was received 
last week. 
b) Community Enhancement Programme 2018 
It was noted that the closing date for the Community Enhancement Programme is the 30th 
July. Following the closing date, the SICAP Sub Group and the RAPID ABC will meet to assess 
the applications and make final recommendation to the LCDC at its September meeting. 
 
4. RAPID ABC Presentation 
Denis Barrett, Chairperson gave a presentation on the RAPID ABC. The RAPID ABC looks at 
the needs of all 4 RAPID areas within the City. Priority actions were agreed in 2017 to ensure 
best use of funding across areas (list of priorities that are ready to go when funding becomes 
available). This list is updated every 18 months approximately and is due to be revisited this 
autumn. Membership of RAPID ABC consists of members from all 4 RAPID areas. 
Membership will be reviewed in the autumn, 2018. 
 
5. SICAP Mid-Year Review 2018 
T Power reported the SICAP Sub Group met with the programme implementer prior to the 
LCDC meeting to assess the SICAP mid-year review. The SICAP Mid-Term Performance 
Checklist was circulated to the LCDC. T Power gave an update on each section of the 
checklist and noted that everything was in order. T Power confirmed that the SICAP Sub 
Group was recommending approval of the SICAP mid-year review and on the proposal of G 
Canning, seconded by PJ Hourican the LCDC formally approved the mid-year review.  
 
T Power reported on a communication from Cork City Partnership to Chief Officer outlining 
an under-spend in the 2018 SICAP salary budget of €10,249. This under-spend will be re-
allocated to the development of an existing action around Mental Health in partnership with 
UCC, developing a course in ‘Mental Health in the Community’. As the transfer was within 
programme parameters, no formal LCDC approval required. 
 
Following notification from DRCD, the case studies element of the End of Year Narrative 
Report will be submitted separately by 5th October, 2018. The LCDC may select a theme from 
the following; 
1. Engagement Strategies with SICAP Target Groups/Communities 
2. Collaboration 
3. Goal One or Two Projects 
The SICAP Sub Group discussed with the programme implementer and recommended 
‘Engagement Strategies with SICAP Target Groups/ Communities’ to the LCDC as the Case 
Study theme for 2018. The LCDC approved this theme. 
 
T Power reported that Cork City Partnership is having difficulty sourcing a base in the south 
side of the city with affordability being the main issue. The base needs to within designated 
disadvantaged areas – Togher, Ballyphehane or Greenmount.  
 
T Power noted that the ESRI had released a report on ‘The Goals and Governance of the 
Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme (SICAP) 2015-2017: A Mixed Methods 
Study’. T Power to circulate link to document. It was noted that a second report is due out 
on ‘Profiling Barriers to Social Inclusion in Ireland: The Relative Roles of Individual 
Characteristics and Location’. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
6. SICAP Sub Group Membership 
Current membership of the SICAP sub group includes Fergal Dennehy, Paul Moynihan, Dan 
Boyle and Fiona Finn. T Power noted that there is a vacancy on the sub group and invited 
new LCDC members to join. Members are to email T Power if interested. 
 
7. Public Participation Network Report 
D Boyle gave an update on the PPN and noted that the PPN will have its plenary meeting 
shortly. D Boyle noted that the PPN is contributing to the Atlantic Social Lab project and that 
PPN members are taking part in the City of Sanctuary movement.  
 
The PPN is actively recruiting members.   
 
It was noted that Cork City Council is currently redeveloping its website and that the LCDC  
will have a more prominent presence on the new site. Minutes of LCDC meetings will be 
made available on the new site and can be circulated to PPN members for information.   
 
 
8. Boundary Extension  
P Moynihan noted that the City will be expanding in 2019 and that the implementation 
process is ongoing. Structures will have to be redesigned and we will need to plan for the 
transfer of functions. Cork City Council will formally engage with Cork County Council. Local 
elections will be held in 2019.  
 
A Doherty noted that the Boundary Extension will be a 3 year plus process. The priority is to 
put arrangements in place for a safe transfer and to ensure that business continuity is 
maintained. A Doherty noted that we are currently waiting on legislation.  
 
9. A.O.B. 
It was agreed by the LCDC that the LECP would become a permanent item on the agenda. 
 
T Power circulated the attendance record of LCDC meetings 2018 to members. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting and the next meeting scheduled Thursday, 13th 
September, 2018 at 4pm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, 
Chairperson 
 
 
 
 
 
