MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 13th MAY 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir K. McCarthy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, T. Tynan, J. Kavanagh, O. 
Moran, G. Keohane. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, M. Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, 
B. McCarthy, D. Boylan. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí D. Cahill, L. Bogue, M. R. Desmond, T. Shannon, D. 
Forde. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí M. Finn, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, P. 
Dineen, F. Kerins. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, G. Kelleher, T 
Moloney, O. O’Leary. 
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. A. Doherty, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Housing 
Operations.  
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing Delivery & 
Regeneration. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Roads & Environment  
Operations. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Mr. F. Reidy, Director of Services, Strategic Planning & 
Economic Development. 
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Senior Executive Officer, Community, Culture 
& Placemaking. 
Ms. A. Murnane, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations. 
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Leahy family on the death of Marie Leahy. 
• The Kelleher family on the death of Sr. Ambrose Kelleher. 
• The Walsh family on the death of Tommy Walsh. 
• The Heaphy family on the death of William Heaphy. 
• The Foley family on the death of Tony Foley. 

• The Bolster family on the death of Tom Bolster. 
• The Haugh family on the death of Meg Haugh. 
• The Kinsella family on the death of Bobbie Kinsella. 
• The Tierney family on the death of Pat Tierney. 
• The O’Flaherty family on the death of Frank O’Flaherty. 
• The Foley family on the death of Marc Foley. 
• The Delaney family on the death of Edwin Delaney. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Damian O’Sullivan. 
• The Tingle family on the death of James Tingle. 
• The Drennan family on the death of Joe Drennan. 
• The Malone family on the death of Eleanor Malone. 
• The Foley family on the death of Deirdre Foley. 
• The Murphy family on the death of William Murphy. 
• The Walsh family on the death of Marie Walsh. 
• The Owens family on the death of Biddy Owens. 
• The Cronin family on the death of Kathleen (Kay) Cronin. 
• The Mohally family on the death of Michael Mohally. 
• The White family on the death of John White. 
• The O’Riordan family on the death of Pat O’Riordan. 
• The O’Hanlon family on the death of Michael O’Hanlon. 
• The Bridgeman family on the death of Michael Bridgeman. 
• The Doyle family on the death of Pat Doyle. 
• The Conroy family on the death of Chris Conroy. 
• The Budden family on the death of Marian Budden. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES   
 
• Patrick Murdock in recognition of his community spirit in installing solar-
powered lights to assist elderly residents of the area navigate the public steps 
outside his home. 
• Cork Constitution RFC on winning the Energia All-Ireland League Cup. 
• Councillor Derry Canty on 34 years of service. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
ORDINARY MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE – 4th JUNE 2024 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised that the next Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle would take 
place online on 4th June to deal with statutory business only. An Chomhairle agreed 
that the meeting would take place at 4pm. 
  
3.2 
EUROPEAN MARITIME DAY CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara Comhairleoir 
K. McCarthy to Svendborg for the European Maritime Day Conference from 29th May 
– 1st June 2024. 
 
 

3.3 
CIVIC RECEPTION 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that a Civic Reception for Bishop Colton 
would take place on 16th May 2024 at 6pm in the Council Chamber. 
 
3.4 
INTERNATIONAL 
FORUM 
ON 
LEADERS 
OF 
REVOLUTIONS 
WORLDWIDE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara acknowledged the success of the recent trip to Korea to partake in an 
International Forum on Leaders of Revolutions Worldwide. 
 
3.5 
CERTIFICATES  
 
 
An tArdmhéara presented certificates to Comhairleoirí in recognition of service to 
Cork City Council from 2019-2024. 
 
3.6 
RETIRING COUNCILLORS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara expressed his best wishes and thanks to the four retiring Cork City 
Councillors: Comhairleoirí D. Canty, M. Finn, T. Moloney and G. Keohane. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
PROPOSED HOLDING OF AN EVENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the report of the Chief Executive, dated 9th May 2024 on 
the proposed holding of Cork Carnival of Science on 8th and 9th June 2024 in 
Fitzgerald Park. 
 
 
A vote was called for on the approval of the proposed holding of Cork Carnival of 
Science, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, G. Keohane, T. 
Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, D. Boylan, D. Cahill, M.R. Desmond, K. McCarthy, T. 
Shannon, D. Forde, M. Finn, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, P. Dineen, F. 
Dennehy, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, G. Kelleher. (23) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, M. Nugent, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, L. Bogue, 
F. Kerins, O. O’Leary. (7) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir T. Moloney. (1) 
 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the holding of the event approved, subject to clarification 
on sponsorship. 
 
5. 
ANNUAL REPORT 2023 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Moloney, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Annual Report 2023. 

 
6. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Canty, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Finn, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 8th April 2024. 
 
7. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
7.1 
NUMBER OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE to report, by company, the current number of construction contracts 
open and the cumulative value of same over the last five years in tabular form by 
company. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The City Council’s open housing construction, via public works contracts in the 
Housing Delivery and Regeneration Directorate comprises the following: 
 
 
 
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration 
 
7.2 
CEOL TRADITIONAL MUSIC & CULTURE EXHIBITION 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Please update the Council on the prestigious Ceol traditional music and culture 
exhibition that was purchased by the Council under the 2006/2007. 
 
Could you please provide information on the current whereabouts of this collection 
and how it is being stored? Additionally,  the state of preservation of this collection 
COMPANY 
CURRENT NUMBER OF 
HOUSING 
CONSTRUCTION 
CONTRACTS 
CUMULATIVE VALUE OF THE 
HOUSING CONSTRUCTION 
CONTRACTS (EXCL. VAT) 
BPH Construction Limited 
2 
€3,145,392.84 
Brendan Woods Construction Ltd. 
1 
€1,330,439.25 
Deermount Construction Ltd. 
1 
€797,291.82 
HG Construction Limited 
1 
€926,347.00 
MMD Construction Cork Ltd. 
2 
€23,639,562.00 
Murnane & O’Shea Ltd. 
2 
€25,777,723.82 

and what measures have been taken to ensure its pristine condition since the day of 
purchase. 
 
Furthermore, provide details on the total cost of acquiring this exhibition and the 
estimated storage costs incurred by the city. 
 
Finally, could you please outline any future plans regarding the exhibition's return to 
the public domain? 
 
REPLY 
 
The CEOL exhibition was acquired by Cork City Council in 2007.  The exhibition 
had initially opened in Dublin in 1999 where it operated for a number of years.  The 
exhibition told the story of Irish traditional music, using technology to showcase the 
audiovisual content.   
 
The exhibition was archived until a suitable location, permissions and the resources 
needed to stage it could be identified.   
 
Following a review in 2019 it was determined that elements of the exhibition 
(electrical equipment, computers etc) were obsolete and/or unsalvageable.  These 
were subsequently decommissioned and those physical elements capable of reuse 
(largely visual staging elements) were archived in Council property, with no further 
storage costs to be incurred.  The audio visual files on which the exhibition was based 
are retained by Cork City Council. 
 
The agreed cost of acquiring the exhibition was €75,000.  Archive costs are c. €61,568.  
No additional costs have been incurred since January 2020.  The contents of the 
storage unit were in good condition when last inspected. 
 
When acquired by Cork City Council, the contents were 8 years old.  Any installation 
based around the use of technology quickly becomes obsolete.  CEOL is now 25 years 
old and significant investment would be required to restage the exhibition.  Cork City 
Council is open to consideration of proposals for suitable uses for CEOL subject to 
permission of the intellectual property and copyright owners, and suitable funding 
sources for same. 
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
7.3 
SPECIAL EDUCATION SCHOOL, BROOKLODGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir G. Keohane, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Could I ask the CEO please on an update or progress report on the proposed Special 
Education School earmarked for the site formerly owned by the NTA which was 
purchased by Cork County Council and inherited by Cork City Council in Brooklodge, 
Glanmire. 

 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Council passed a motion to dispose of the Brooklodge site to the Department of 
Education in June 2022. Conveyancing commenced with the closure of the transaction 
being subject to Planning to allow the Department to secure the necessary permission. 
The Department of Education have not made a planning application to date for the 
site. The City Council’s Property section remains engaged with the Department of 
Education and understand that it is still the Department’s intention to develop a 
Special Education School on this site. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations. 
 
7.4 
FUNDING FOR NORTH EAST WARD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
In 2021/22 €46 million in funding was secured for the North East ward with some of 
this being ring fenced for paths and traffic calming measures for the Kilcully area. 
However, the residents have since been informed that this funding is no longer 
available and the promised measures will be delayed. This is urgently needed as there 
have been several accidents in the last few weeks alone so could the CE please explain 
what has happened to the funding that was supposed to be ring fenced for this project? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
As Members will be aware, the Council’s Active Travel capital works programme is 
funded by grants from the National Transport Authority (NTA). Funding allocations 
are made by the NTA on a scheme by scheme basis and not on the basis of electoral 
wards. The allocations are made each year and cover expenditure over the period to 
the year end.  
 
In 2021 the Council secured initial grant funding of €100,000 to enable the 
appointment of a design team to assess and prepare proposals for road improvements 
in the Kilcully and Upper Glanmire area. The team assessed the need for 
improvements and recommended that works be progressed in two phases. In this 
regard it is to be noted that (Phase 1) Upper Glanmire has a more concentrated urban 
form and the related improvements could be delivered relatively quickly and without 
the need for land acquisition. 
 
Preliminary road improvement designs were prepared for Phase 1 Upper Glanmire 
and in 2022 these proposals were approved by Council following public consultation 
under Section 38 of Road Traffic Act 1994, as amended. In 2022 the Council also 
progressed preliminary design proposals for the Phase 2 Kilcully and this included 
engagement with landowners as well as environmental surveys and engineering 
assessments. The proposed improvement works for Kilcully were published in late 
2022 in accordance with the Part 8 Planning process and Section 179 of the Planning 

and Development Act, 2000 (as amended). The proposals were subsequently approved 
by Council in early 2023. The design and planning of both phases were funded by way 
of further grants from NTA in 2022 and 2023. In late 2023 a contractor was appointed 
for Phase 1 Upper Glanmire and the related works are now well advanced. The 
Council secured grant funding of €1.2m for 2024, primarily to support the 
construction of Phase 1 (which is expected to be complete in the coming months) but 
also to further advance Phase 2. Engagement with local property owners in relation to 
the acquisition of lands necessary for Phase 2 Kilcully will be progressed over the 
coming months and further funding sought for next year to complete the necessary 
land acquisition and to finalise the detailed design and tender documents. Subject to 
continued funding the project will proceed to tender following completion of land 
acquisition and the estimated construction period is 8 - 10 months. 
 
G O Beirne 
Director of Services 
Infrastructure Development 
 
7.5 
PLANNING APPLICATIONS QUERY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To inquire about the number of planning applications that have been submitted for 
derelict sites within Cork City over the past two decades.  Could you provide the Cork 
City Council with information on the total number of planning applications made for 
such sites during this time period.   Additionally, it would be beneficial to understand 
how many of these applications have been granted approval by the Council. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
It is difficult to quantify the number of planning applications submitted on derelict 
sites over the past 20 years, mainly due to the way information was captured at that 
time and over the intervening years. However, the following metrics provide a 
snapshot of planning activity on current derelict sites and activity on the Derelict Sites 
Register (DSR) over the past 5 years: 
Of a current DSR list of 157 sites: 
- 
34 sites on the DSR with “active” planning permission 
- 
8 sites currently in the planning process 
- 
11 sites refused planning permission 
- 
36 sites with expired planning permissions 
- 
2 sites with withdrawn planning applications  
- 
66 sites with no planning activity 
 
It is not always necessary to obtain planning permission to remove dereliction.  Over 
the last 5 years (01/01/2019 - 31/12/2023): 
- 
56 sites removed from DSR 
 
- 
85 Derelict Sites files closed (without being added to DSR) 
 
 
 

Cork City Council will continue to proactively engage with owners of properties on 
the Derelict Sites Register to address the dereliction issues affecting their sites and to 
encourage those with development proposals to submit planning applications with a 
view to redeveloping and regenerating those properties.  A series of clinics are 
organised at local libraries and a public event is scheduled to take place on 24th May, 
2024.  In addition, Cork City Council is working with 250 vacant and derelict 
properties under the Croi Connaithe grants scheme. 
 
Fearghal Reidy 
Director of Services 
Strategic and Economic Development 
 
7.6 
INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS AT ST. LUKES CROSS JUNCTION 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please provide an update on the current status and progress in terms of 
delivery timeline on the installation of Traffic Lights at the St Lukes Cross junction 
which is supposed to be happening as part of the Bus Connects project in this area.  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
As Members will be aware, Bus Connects is the National Transport Authority (NTA) 
led programme for the improvement and expansion of bus services across Cork City. 
It comprises of a range of proposed improvements including – a network review, 
corridor improvements, zero emission fleet, fare review, payment system 
improvements, ticketing, additional park and rides, new livery and improved bus stop 
facilities. 
 
As part of the corridor improvement element NTA have prepared proposals for 11 key 
transport corridors across the City. These include the Mayfield to City Sustainable 
Transport Corridor B (STC B - Mayfield to City). The proposals for this corridor 
include provision for a complete upgrade to the junction at St Lukes Cross including 
signals and crossings. The related proposals have been developed across three rounds 
of public consultation and are expected to be finalised shortly following which the 
relevant documentation will be prepared for submission to An Bord Pleanala in early 
2025.  It is anticipated that the that works will proceed to detailed design, tender and 
construction following An Bord Pleanala approval. The Cork Bus Connects 
programme represents a €600m investment in sustainable transport improvement 
across the City and it is supported by the National Development Plan. 
 
G O Beirne 
Director of Services 
Infrastructure Development 
 
 
 
 
 

7.7 
BANDSTAND IN TORY TOP PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding the restoration of the Bandstand 
in Tory Top Park, including the approximate date upon which it is hoped that the 
restoration works will be completed, and the Bandstand will be ready for use by the 
public. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Extensive works to the Bandstand are nearly complete with a delay experienced with 
supply of a roof piece fitting. It is expected that the facility will be open to the public 
by the end of the month. 
 
David Joyce,  
Director of Services, 
Environment & Roads Operations. 
 
7.8 
TAKING IN CHARGE - MOUNT EDEN RISE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask Council when will Mount Eden Rise be taken in charge following the 
submission of a plebiscite signed by the majority of residents in 2022? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
A plebiscite was received from the residents on the 31/05/2022. The Estates Team 
carried out an inspection of the estate on the 19/06/2023. Extensive works, in the order 
of €300,000, were identified which are required to bring the estate up to a taking in 
charge standard. No bond is in place and there is no alternative funding stream 
available. 
 
Members have previously been advised that an assessment is currently underway to 
identify the scope of works required on the estates to be taken in charge. The Council 
can then make a submission to central Government where applicable to source the 
funding required to carry out the necessary works. 
 
David O’Brien 
Interim Director of Services 
Community Culture and Placemaking 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7.9 
GRANTS ALLOCATED 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the total grants facilitated and allocated in the 
lifetime of this Council, during its current term (2019-2024) in the following areas, 
 
a/ Community Development; 
b/ Arts and Culture; 
c/ Sporting Organisations and 
d/ Environmental and Heritage work? 
 
REPLY 
 
The following grant totals are overall amounts facilitated and allocated across a range 
of areas and interests over the life of this Council 2019-2024 
 
Community Development and Community Grants - €6,986,800 
Arts and Culture grant allocations to arts organisations, groups and individuals across 
the professional, voluntary and community arts sectors - €6,310,323  
Sporting and Sports Capital Grants to clubs and groups €2,440,000  
Environment and Heritage including Biodiversity, €3,569,497  
 
David O’Brien 
Interim Director of Services 
Community Culture and Placemaking 
 
7.10 
AVERAGE LENGTH TO PROCESS APPLICATION FOR SOCIAL 
HOUSING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the average length to process an application for social housing 
currently, in 2022 and in 2019 respectively in tabular form. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The conducting of a social housing assessment is carried out under the criteria detailed 
in the Social Housing Assessment Regulation 2011, in particular Section 12 refers; 
 
12. (1) Subject to proper completion of the application form by the household and to 
paragraph (2), the housing authority of application shall deal with the application 
within a period of 12 weeks of receipt or, where the authority has requested additional 
information for the purpose of verifying information relating to the application, within 
6 weeks of the receipt of such additional information. 
 
As the time frame for assessing an application is dependent on the Assessment Officer 
having all the required information, it is not possible to give an average length of time 

to process an application. However, the table below gives an indication of the volume 
of application being received in recent years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once an application is received in the Allocations Section it is reviewed to ensure it 
includes all the necessary documentation. This would include personal information 
for all household members, income details for the proceeding 12 months for all 
household members, documentation in relation to separation/divorce and property 
ownership. If any of this documentation is missing the application form may be 
returned to the applicant with a letter advising what information is required. This 
initial review is done to reduce the likelihood of delays at assessment stage. 
 
Once a completed application has been received it is forwarded to an Assessment 
Officer for full assessment. The Assessment Officer may require additional 
information or clarification in relation to the application. In most cases this relates to 
information regarding income, previous tenancies with a Local Authority/Approved 
Housing Body, access & maintenance arrangements, documentation regarding 
Mortgage Arrears Process (MARP) (if relevant) or proof of citizenship/permission to 
remain in the country. If the information is not received within the appropriate time 
frame an application will remain closed until the applicant re-engages.  
 
It should be noted that the change in the income bands introduced in January 2023 
means that an Assessment Officer is now required to review documentary evidence of 
income for the preceding 12 months. This can involve a number of interactions with 
an applicant. Also, the removal of the Central Broker function on the iHouse system 
means that we can no longer determine if an applicant has an open application with 
another local authority.  This means that we may need an applicant to provide a letter 
from a local authority in whose area they previously lived confirming they do not have 
a tenancy or open application with them. Alternatively, we may have to contact the 
local authority to investigate this. This additional work, which was not required in 
previous years, can result in delays in processing an application. 
 
In all cases we endeavour to process an application as quickly as possible. While 
applications are processed in the order they are received, we do prioritise applicants 
identified to us as being particularly vulnerable. This would include those in 
emergency accommodation or at risk of imminent homelessness, care leavers, those 
accommodated in a domestic violence refuge or persons unable to leave hospital due 
to lack of suitable accommodation.   
 
Period  
Number of  
Applications 
Received 
Q.1/2019 
294 
Q.1/2020 
251 
Q.1/2021 
274 
Q.1/2022 
298 
Q.1/2023 
391 
Q.1/2024 
468 

In all assessments where the application is approved, the applicant’s credit time on 
our social housing list is back dated to the date the application was received. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Housing Operations Directorate. 
 
7.11 
IS THERE ANY PROHIBITION ON DISPLAY OF COMMERCIAL 
ADVERTISING ON PROPERTIES LISTED ON DERELICT SITES 
REGISTER 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. Finn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Is there any prohibition on the display of commercial advertising on a property that is 
listed on the Cork City Council derelicts sites register? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
There are no specific statutory restrictions on placing advertising on a property which 
is listed on the Derelict Sites Register.  However, all advertising on buildings requires 
the benefit of planning permission, unless deemed exempt under the Planning & 
Development Regulations 2001, Schedule 2, Part 2: Exempted Development - 
Advertisements. 
 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community Culture and Placemaking. 
 
There is no specific regulation relating to the display of commercial advertising on 
property that listed on the Derelict Sites Register, except for the standard regulations 
that pertain to outdoor advertising under the Litter Pollutions Act 1997 and 2003 and 
the Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
7.12 
MOSS WALLS/CITY TREES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. O’Leary, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE report on the next steps concerning the Moss Walls/CityTrees? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council continues to engage with a number of third parties with a view to 
identifying opportunities to evaluate the performance of the Moss Walls in alternative 

indoor locations, as proposed in the review of the Moss Walls undertaken in 2023.  
The next steps to be taken will depend on the outcomes of these engagements. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate 
 
7.13 
NORTHERN DISTRIBUTOR ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for the current status of identifying a route for the Northern 
Distributor Road; when she expects public consultation on the emerging preferred 
route to be held; and if a route involving Silversprings and Mayfield is still being 
considered or if another route is emerging as preferred? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (2020) sets out the transport 
investment required to support the development of Cork over the period to 2040. The 
strategy identifies the need for a new Northern Distributor Road as a critical enabler 
to the established transport and planning objectives for Cork. The proposed new road 
will create opportunities for sustainable residential and commercial development, 
facilitate the roll out of planned transport improvements (incl new bus, cycle and 
pedestrian facilities) and establish much needed connectivity for both local movement 
and broader HGV and other routing.  
 
With funding support from the National Transport Authority, the City Council 
appointed a project design team in 2021 and the proposal is now progressing through 
the early stage processes in accordance with the Public Spending Code. The Strategic 
Appraisal Phase for the project (phase 1) was completed in 2023 and the related 
gateway 1 approval was received in December 2023. The strategic appraisal phase 
addresses the rationale for the project to ensure its strategic fit with government 
policy, in particular the National Planning Framework and National Development 
Plan.  
 
The design team is currently closing out on the Concept Development and Options 
Phase (phase 2) for the scheme. This involves examination of the alternatives and 
identification of the emerging preferred route based on a standard set of criteria. The 
options appraisal phase is expected to be complete in the third quarter of this year at 
which point the emerging preferred route will be identified and published. Following 
confirmation of the preferred route, the project can progress onto the preliminary 
design and formal planning consent phases subject to continued funding. Ongoing 
updates on the development of the new road will be issued to Members as the scheme 
progresses. 
 
G. O’ Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development Directorate. 

 
7.14 
PHASE 2 CITY NORTH WEST REGENERATION SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Nugent, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE report on the next phase of finishing out Phase 2C of the City North West 
Regeneration Scheme? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council has concluded its contractual arrangements with the initial building 
contractor on the twenty-four-unit housing development referred to as Phase 2C, Cork 
City Northwest Quarter Regeneration on its site at Kilmore Road, Knocknaheeny, 
Cork City. 
 
Cork City Council’s Housing Delivery and Regeneration Directorate will immediately 
re-set the project to deliver quality homes on the site for the community in a timely 
manner.  
 
The Council is therefore making immediate arrangements to take over and secure the 
site and to undertake any urgent or necessary works. Safety and enabling works will 
be prioritised and ongoing. 
 
It has always been the aim of Cork City Council to provide a sustainable and high-
quality place for the community to live and prosper in, and a further update will issue 
in the coming weeks by the Council on the timeline for procurement of a new 
contractor and the programme for delivery of these homes for our Regeneration 
residents.   
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration 
 
7.15 
CITY FIREFIGHTER CALLOUTS SINCE 2019 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir L. Bogue, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to present data in tabular form for cork city firefighter 
callouts since 2019, as well as information on the methodology of the reportage and 
gathering of these statistics and whose role it is to record these statistics? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Please see below Operational Statistics for Cork City Fire Brigade from 2019 to 2023. 
The Munster Regional Control Centre provides mobilisation data to Cork City Fire 
Brigade when they receive a callout. Upon completion of the incident, personnel from 
Cork City Fire Brigade input the details of the call on the Cork City incident recording 
system. All reports are checked and signed off by the Third Officer at the end of the 

shift. The Second Officer will also check these reports for accuracy. Reports are ran 
from the Incident Recording system to provide local and national statistics. 
 
Note in 2023 there was industrial action with effect from 20/04/2023-21/08/2023. This 
resulted in no detailed reports being entered into the Incident recording system. For 
this period we relied on the data from the Munster Regional Control Centre to record 
the number of calls. They cannot provide detailed at incident data. This can only be 
done by the crews in attendance at an incident. 
 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community Culture and Placemaking. 
 
 
 
 
7.16 
EVENTS CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Finn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
With Q1 gone, and the anticipation of construction unrealised yet again, can the CE 
confirm if the request for extra funding - to build Cork's Event Centre has gone to 
cabinet and if a decision is likely to be made on what could now be a €150m 
project before another five-year council term expires in June? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council has made a recommendation to the DHLGH in respect of the Cork 
Event Centre. The Department have been in discussions with cabinet members in 
recent weeks to agree next steps so that the funding decision can be made. At present 
we do not have a timeline for this process to take place.    
 
 
Cork City Fire Brigade Operational Statistics 2019 – 2023 
 
 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
Fire 
1176 
1063 
1097 
1247 
571 
False Alarms 
571 
526 
578 
778 
485 
Special Services 
1069 
1138 
1216 
1308 
1132 
detailed reports 
not available due 
to industrial 
relations issues 
 
 
 
 
904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
2816 
2727 
2891 
3333 
3092 

Ann Doherty, 
Chief Executive. 
 
7.17 
TRAVELLER HOMELESS TASK FORCE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Moloney, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE, in relation to my motion below at the housing SPC on 19th December 
2023 & accepted at full council on the 8th January 2024, Can I ask when in 2024 
“review of the partnership will be conducted in 2024 to determine its effectiveness 
and consideration can be made at that point in relation to the establishment of a local 
Traveller Homeless Task Force”. 
 
6.8 Traveller Homeless Task Force 
Members considered the report of the Director of Services, Housing Operations dated 
14th December, 2023 on the following motion referred to the Committee by An 
Chomhairle: 
  
TRAVELLER HOMELESS TASK FORCE 
‘Calls on Cork City Council to establish a local Traveller Homeless Task Force, 
which will be action and outcome focused to overcome the ever-increasing, 
disproportionate and intergenerational degree of traveller homelessness.’ 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Moloney 23/466) 
  
Response: 
The report of the Director of Services, Housing Operations advised that following a 
presentation by Cena to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee 
on the 16th May, 2023, the Traveller Accommodation Unit and the Accommodation 
Placement Service have engaged with Cena to address the number of representatives 
of the Traveller Community currently availing of homeless services. Cena (the word 
means ‘home’ in the Traveller language) is an Approved Housing Body that is 
working for and with Travellers to address critical accommodation needs. This 
collaboration with Cena will be focused on and targeted at traveller homelessness. A 
review of the partnership will be conducted in 2024 to determine its effectiveness and 
consideration can be made at that point in relation to the establishment of a local 
Traveller Homeless Task Force. 
 
REPLY  
 
The collaboration between Cork City Council and Cena has and will continue 
throughout 2024.   While Cork City Council and Cena are involved in a number of 
initiatives, this collaboration with Cena will be focused on and targeted at traveller 
homelessness. The review of the partnership will be conducted in Q4, 2024.   
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Operations Directorate. 
 
 

8. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
8.1 
CORK CITY ROAD TRAFFIC (SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS) BYE-LAWS 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th May 2024 in relation to the proposed Cork City 
Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Bye Laws 2024 and approved the Cork City Road 
Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Bye Laws 2024, in accordance with Section 9 of the 
Road Traffic Act 2004 as amended by Section 22 of the Road Traffic Act.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“In the matter of the proposed Cork City Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Bye-
Laws 2024 Cork City Council having given notice to the elected Members of Cork 
City Council and the Garda Commissioner and having complied with the provisions 
of Section 9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004 as amended by Section 22 of the Road 
Traffic Act 2016 and having considered the proposed Bye-Laws, representations 
received following publication of notices and the Director of Services Report dated 
the 9th day of May 2024 and having considered the written submission with respect 
thereto, it is hereby resolved to make the proposed Cork City Road Traffic (Special 
Speed Limits) Bye-Laws 2024 in accordance with the draft attached hereto.” 
 
8.2 
KERRY PIKE PEDESTRIAN IMPROVEMENT SCHEME - SECTION 38 
APPROVAL  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Nugent, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
Director of Services, Infrastructure Development, following public consultation, on 
the proposed Kerry Pike Pedestrian Improvement Scheme pursuant to Section 38 of 
the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport 
Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
8.3 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT SPRING LANE HALTING 
SITE AND ELLIS YARD, CORK 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, An 
Chomhairle considered the proposed redevelopment of Spring Lane Halting Site, 
along with the construction of a new purpose-built group housing scheme on the land 
adjacent to Spring Lane, known as Ellis Yard, Ballyvolane, in the City of Cork and 
the report of the Deputy Chief Executive thereon as required under Section 179(3) of 
the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) dated 9th May 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the proposed residential development at Spring 
Lane Halting Site and Ellis Yard where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, G. Keohane, T. Fitzgerald, M. 
Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, D. Boylan, L. Bogue, M.R. Desmond, 

K. McCarthy, M. Finn, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, P. Dineen, F. Kerins, F. 
Dennehy, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, T. Moloney, O. O’Leary. (25) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Kavanagh, D. Cahill. (3) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed residential development at Spring Lane 
Halting Site and Ellis Yard approved. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Moloney, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
redevelopment of Spring Lane Halting Site, along with the construction of a new 
purpose-built group housing scheme on the land adjacent to Spring Lane, known as 
Ellis Yard, Ballyvolane, in the City of Cork and the report of the Deputy Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Spring Lane Halting Site, in the City of Cork be carried out as 
recommended in the said report of the Deputy Chief Executive, Cork City Council, 
which was put before Council on the 13th May 2024.” 
 
8.4 
CAPITAL 
ASSISTANCE 
SCHEME: 
129 
CONNOLLY 
ROAD, 
BALLYPHEHANE, CORK - FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration dated 17th April, 2024 in relation to a loan facility 
for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 129 Connolly Road, Ballyphehane, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Finn, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €382,950 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 three bed unit of accommodation at 129 Connolly Road, 
Ballyphehane, Cork.”. 
 
8.5 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 2 BOTANIC ROAD, BALLYPHEHANE, 
CORK - FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration dated 17th April, 2024 in relation to a loan facility 
for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 2 Botanic Road, Ballyphehane, Cork.  
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €372,600 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 three bed unit of accommodation at 2 Botanic Road, Ballyphehane, 
Cork”. 
 
8.6 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 9 SEMINARY WALK, FARRANREE, 
CORK - FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration dated 17th April, 2024 in relation to a loan facility 
for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 9 Seminary Walk, Farranree, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €331,200 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 three bed unit of accommodation at 9 Seminary Walk, Farranree, 
Cork”. 
 
8.7 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 22 E, F, H, J, LOWER JOHN STREET, 
CORK - FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration dated 17th April, 2024 in relation to a loan facility 
for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of four units of 
accommodation at 22 E, F, H, J, Lower John Street, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €1,079,436 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 2 one bed units and 2 two bed units of accommodation at 22 E, F, H, 
J, Lower John Street, Cork”. 
 
8.8 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 201B OLD YOUGHAL ROAD, CORK - 
FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration dated 17th April, 2024 in relation to a loan facility 
for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 201B Old Youghal Road, Cork.  

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €362,250 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 three bed unit of accommodation at 201B Old Youghal Road, Cork”. 
 
9.  
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 7th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 7th May 2024. 
 
9.1 
AUDIT 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Audit Committee Charter and the Audit 
Committee Work Programme 2024.  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Audit Committee Annual Report 2023 and 
Section 121 Report (dated 14.03.24). 
 
9.2 
REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUDITOR 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Report of the Local Government Auditor 
2022. 
 
9.3 
ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
 
9.3.1 
AUDITED ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT 2022 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the (audited) Annual Financial Statement 2022. 
 
9.3.2 
(UNAUDITED) ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT 2023 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the (unaudited) Annual Financial Statement 
2023. 
 
9.4 
RESOLUTION 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir M.R. 
Desmond, An Chomhairle agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“The Council Resolves that “the Annual Financial Statement for 2023 and, pursuant 
to Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001, the over / under expenditure as 
outlined in note 16 are hereby approved”. 
 
 
 

9.5 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/03/2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement of Cork City Council to 
31/03/2024. 
 
9.6 
INTEREST-FREE LOAN APPROVAL 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Finn, seconded by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 3rd May 
2024, in relation to the proposal for an Interest-Free Loan to Leisureworld. 
 
 
An Chomhairle further noted declarations of conflict of interest from Comhairleoirí 
F. Dennehy, C. Finn, D. Canty and K. Collins in relation to Leisureworld. 
 
9.7 
MOTIONS 
 
9.7.1 
APARTHEID FREE ZONE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 3rd May 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘In 2021 this Council voted to declare Cork City an apartheid free zone. However, this 
is meaningless unless we back up our words with action. There are numerous 
companies with links to the Israeli State, the occupation and the genocide that have 
operations and premises here in Cork. None of these companies should receive any 
public contracts and the City Council should not conduct any business with them. Any 
companies we do have business with should sign a declaration stating that they have 
no links or dealings with the Israeli State, the occupation or the genocide.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/183) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that any public contracts being awarded 
by Cork City Council are subject to procurement rules and regulations both at National 
and European levels. Accordingly, public contract awards are necessarily highly 
regulated in this country so as to effectively ensure compliance with National Public 
Procurement Policy Framework and to deal with the complex legal issues involved. 
Cork City Council complies with this framework and our compliance is subject to 
audit, both internally and externally. 
 
Any material change initiated or any form of prohibition being imposed as is being 
sought in the motion would need to be actioned at a national level and supported by 
national policy measures. It would be inappropriate for Cork City Council to itself 
impose such changes at a local level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9.7.2 
FLY THE TRICOLOUR 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 3rd May 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would ensure that the Tricolour fly from all public buildings 
and at public parks/cemeteries where possible.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Nugent 24/187) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that for the past number of years the Irish 
National Flag has been flown at Cork City Hall. The Flag is also flown at a number of 
other locations where facilities exist for same. 
 
Should it be the wish of Council to fly the National Flag from all public buildings and 
at public parks/cemeteries a detailed audit would be required as to locations. Options 
for safe placement of flagpoles would then need to be assessed and costed and 
appropriate funding would require to be approved as part of the Budget process. 
 
9.7.3 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPORT 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 3rd May 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises: 
• 
The importance of accountability and transparency  
• 
That making information available is empowering for individuals and 
communities  
• 
There are significant delays in uploading the Chief Executive’s report monthly 
with current uploads finishing in 2023 
 
And agrees to: 
• 
Upload the Chief Executive’s report within one week of the full monthly Council 
meeting 
• 
Update contracts awarded and other information on the website monthly 
• 
Provide the number of bids on each individual property on CBL monthly in the 
Chief Executive’s report or in another uploaded report.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/193) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Chief Executive’s Monthly 
Management Report is coordinated by CAIR Directorate as required under Section 51 
of the Local Government Reform Act 2014. Its importance as a governance 
mechanism and as a tool to provide information is well appreciated. Issues resulting 
in delays in uploading of the Report to the website have now been dealt with and the 
Report is now promptly uploaded, and the intention is to have it uploaded within the 
week following Council approval. I will arrange for a review in relation to the process 
regarding information on contract awards. 
 

As part of the Report, Housing provide statistics on the choice-based letting scheme. 
Any request for additional information will need to be fully assessed by Housing in 
relation to the related resource requirements and implications. 
 
9.8 
LOCAL ECONOMIC & COMMUNITY PLAN 2024-2029 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Local Economic and Community Plan.  
 
Members further acknowledged Mr. Tony Power (RIP), Cork City Council, for his 
contribution in this area. 
 
10. 
PARTY WHIPS – 22nd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 22nd April 2024. 
 
10.1 
LORD MAYOR ITEMS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Part A schedule/consolidation of the 
changes to Standing Orders. 
 
11. 
ROADS & TRANSPORTATION STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 15th 
APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Roads & Transportation 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 15th April 2024. 
 
11.1 
MOTIONS  
 
11.1.1  MOBILE SPEED-ACTIVATED RADAR SIGNS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 5th April 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will periodically locate mobile speed-activated radar signs 
within special 30km/h zones (such as housing estates) to emphasise the speed limit in 
these areas and communicate to motorists their speed.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/076) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the selection of appropriate locations 
for Driver Feedback Signs is subject to minimum criteria including locations where 
the Average Annual Daily Traffic is >1500 vehicles per day minimum and where the 
road is a Local Primary, Regional or National Road. In addition, there must be a 
verifiable history of speeding where the V85 is greater than the posted speed limit in 
the area. 30 km/hr slow zones are located in housing estates which in general do not 
meet the above criteria. In addition, prior to the implementation of a 30 km/hr slow 
zone in a housing estate, a pre implementation speed survey is carried out to verify 
the speed at the location prior to the recommendation for a reduction in speed limit. 

All such slow zones are signed with the slow sign specified in the Guidelines for 
Setting and Managing of Speed Limits in Ireland. 
 
11.1.2 
BIKE SHARE STATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 5th April 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That new locations be found for bike share stations that had been on Washington 
Street and Sullivan’s Quay, as well as requesting that the National Transport Authority 
provide for more bike share stations across a wider area in the City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/090) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Public Bike Scheme is operated 
and managed by the National Transport Authority. Committee queries and 
recommendations regarding current services and future proposals have been 
submitted as requested and the related response dated 25th March 2024 is now being 
circulated to Members. 
 
12. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 15th APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 15th April 2024. 
 
12.1 
NOTICE OF HERITAGE GRANTS ADVERTISMENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Notice of Heritage Grants Advertisement. 
 
12.2 
NATIONAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK REVIEW 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the National Planning Framework Review. 
 
12.3 
FINAL SED SPC APPROVAL OF DRAFT LOCAL ECONOMIC & 
COMMUNITY PLAN 2024-2029 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Draft Local Economic and Community 
Plan (LECP) 2024 – 2029. 
 
12.4 
MOTIONS 
 
12.4.1 
SHOP FRONTS POLICY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 15th April 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council adopts a Shop Fronts policy protecting and encouraging the use of 
materials in signage that enhance the character of the City.’ 

 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/174) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s existing policy 
on shop fronts and commercial façades is set out in the City Development Plan.   This 
policy refers to traditional and contemporary pub fronts and shop fronts, visual clutter, 
security screens, and references the need for particular care and regard for shop fronts 
in Architectural Conservation Areas (ACAs).  
 
Cork City Council’s Strategic Planning and Heritage section intends to commission 
conservation specialists in Q2 2024 to prepare a guidance document on the 
management and care of ACAs in the city and providing technical guidance for 
development in ACAs. It is intended that this guidance document would be made 
available to public and private sector planning professionals, architects, developers 
and the general public. 
 
Consideration of shop fronts will be included in the brief for the ACA guidance 
document, to supplement the policy contained the City Development Plan. 
 
13. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 17th APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 17th April 2024. 
 
13.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Housing Progress report for February 
2024.   
 
13.2 
MOTIONS  
 
13.2.1 
CHILDREN IN EMERGENCY ACCOMMODATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Operations, dated 12th April 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
• Recognises the particular harm caused to children in emergency 
accommodation who struggle to maintain links with their school/education 
facility 
 
And agrees to: 
• Compile an anonymised report on all families currently in emergency 
accommodation and the distance they travel to school, the number currently 
engaged with a child support worker and the number offered such a service 
• Seek funding from Government to provide Leap Cards to all families of 
school-going children in emergency accommodation similar to the scheme 
operated in Dublin 
• Review all available accommodation and offer any available spaces closer to 
children’s schools to relevant families at their discretion.’ 

 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/142) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Good Shepherd Cork is currently 
operating a B&B Outreach Service, that is Section 10 funded, which has a support 
avenue to provide leap cards to families who require assistance to travel to school. 
Cork City Council does not have access to any data relating to a child support worker, 
Tusla are the governing body that would provide such information. The B&B 
Outreach workers would engage and communicate with families in Emergency 
Accommodation and assess and support a family’s needs accordingly.  
 
Cork City Council has engaged with Good Shepherd Cork in relation to a leap card 
project.   Good Shepherd Cork had a pilot project for 2022/2023 and presented the 
findings to the Homeless Consultative Forum in September 2023. They have, through 
the homeless office, also engaged with Cork City Council’s Community, Culture and 
Placemaking Directorate for additional funding. Good Shepherd Cork have funding 
received for this current school term and plan to apply for additional funding via Cork 
City Council for 2024/2025 school year. Cork City Council will support this 
application.  
 
The majority of emergency accommodation providers are city centre based (the 
Family Hub, Edel House etc.) and this may impact some families given the transport 
needs from these settings. All families would be referred to Good Shepherd Cork and 
if the issue of transport is raised, Good Shepherd Cork would support the family 
through that process.   
 
13.2.2 
HOUSING TARGETS FOR 2023 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 15th April 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes that social and affordable housing targets for 2023 were 
too low to meet the real need of those in the City, that Council failed to meet these 
targets and calls for an urgent meeting with Minister Darragh O’Brien to develop a 
plan to realistically meet the City’s real housing need.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/194) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s overall delivery 
programme is outlined in its Housing Delivery Action Plan (HDAP) (2022).  The 
Action Plan is prepared to be in line with targets set under Housing for All (2022-
2026) by the Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH), the 
relevant adopted Development Plan, together with the Cork Joint Housing Strategy, 
and the Housing Need Demand Assessment. 
 
Cork City Council’s target for social housing provision under Housing for All is 3,023 
homes, and reflective of this target and the HNDA, a more ambitious target was set 
for social housing provision in the Council’s HDAP of 3,934 homes.  A parallel target 
for overall affordable housing provision is set at 1,737 homes, with 378 homes to be 

delivered directly by Cork Council and the balance of 1,359 homes to be delivered by 
the AHB and LDA Sector.   
 
It should be noted that since adoption of the HDAP, significant change has occurred 
to programme, affected by a number of events and challenges including international 
economic headwinds such as: the introduction of the Tenant in Situ scheme, 
construction cost hyperinflation, phasing out of Leasing provision, and global supply 
chain disruption.  The projected pipeline and constituent delivery elements has 
therefore been adapted on a regular basis as a result, e.g. build delivery was projected 
to peak in the period 2023-2024, however delivery is now more evenly distributed 
between each of the 5 years of the plan.   
 
Cork City Council’s delivery target for affordable purchase homes set by the DHLGH 
and as set out in the HDAP is 378 homes.  Already, Cork City Council has delivered 
179 affordable homes, which is 47% of target.  A total of 105 cost rental homes have 
been delivered to date, with a current projected pipeline out to 2026 of over 1,300 
homes to be delivered. 
 
Cork City Council’s delivery target for social homes under Housing for All has been 
met and exceeded for 2022 and 2023.  Indeed, Cork City Council did not fail to meet 
its housing delivery targets, in fact the opposite is the case. The 2022 target of 596 
homes was exceeded by Cork City Council with the delivery of 731 homes, and the 
2023 target of 624 homes was exceeded by Cork City Council with the delivery of 
804 homes.  I can therefore confirm that Cork City Council has met and exceeded its 
Housing for All targets for the period 2022-2023 with the provision of 1,535 homes 
across the build, leasing and acquisition delivery streams.  The HDAP target for the 
equivalent period was 1,538 homes.  Cork City Council is confident of delivery of its 
full DHLGH and HDAP targets out to 2026.  
 
14. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – SPECIAL MEETING 2nd MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its special meeting held, 2nd May 2024. 
 
14.1 
DRAFT LOCAL ECONOMIC & COMMUNITY PLAN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Draft Local Economic & Community 
Plan. 
 
15.  
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 9th APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 9th April 2024 
 
16. 
SPORTS COMMITTEE – 18th APRIL 2024  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Sports Committee from its 
meeting held, 18th April 2024. 
 

16.1 
SPORTS CAPITAL GRANTS ALLOCATION FOR 2024 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Sports Capital Allocation Grant Scheme 
2024. 
 
17. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd April 2024. 
 
17.1 
MOTIONS  
 
17.1.1 
PATHWAY/CYCLEWAY ALONGSIDE THE UCC MARDYKE SPORTS 
TRACK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Roads & 
Environment Operations, dated 18th April 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That for reasons of better permeability the section of pathway/cycleway alongside 
the UCC Mardyke Sports Track, no longer be gated or be subjected to closure times.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/175) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that this section of walkway is opened 
and closed in line with Fitzgerald’s Park. It was the request of local residents to have 
it gated to help deal with anti social activity at night time and no change is 
recommended. 
 
17.1.2 
CONTROLLED GATE AT ST. PETER'S AVENUE, GRATTAN STREET 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Roads & 
Environment Operations, dated 18th April 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That to enhance residents' safety, after several break-ins and public order issues, a 
controlled gate be considered for St. Peter's Avenue, Grattan Street.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 23/473) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the issue of anti social behaviour has 
been discussed a number of times at Council with varied views being expressed by 
Members with regards to same.  However, the outcome of said discussions was that 
anti social behaviour should be tackled through means other than removing public 
infrastructure or access to same.  Having a City comprised of nothing but private 
streets would not be a good thing.  In addition, the City Development plan’s Objective 
6.16 identifies the “the need to preserve all public rights of way in Cork City”.  It is 
also Government policy to maintain permeability and not to remove public access 
unnecessarily.  Thus the issue of anti social behaviour identified should be resolved 
by other means rather than excluding members of the public from accessing this 
roadway. 

 
18. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd April 2024. 
 
19. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd April 2024. 
 
20. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 22nd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd April 2024. 
 
21. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – SPECIAL MEETING 8th MAY 
2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its special meeting held, 8th May 2024 
 
22. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd April 2024. 
 
23. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – SPECIAL MEETING 2nd 
APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its special meeting held, 2nd April 2024. 
 
24. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
25.  
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES  
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir C. Kelleher as part of the Cork City Council Delegation visit to 
San Francisco, USA, 1st - 8th March 2024. 
• Ardmhéara Comhairleoir K. McCarthy as part of the Cork City Council 
Delegation visit to New York and San Francisco, USA, 29th February - 8th 
March 2024. 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher at the AILG Annual Training Conference, held at 
Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow, 14th - 15th February 2024. 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher at the New Ireland Commission Event, held at 
Seamus Heaney Centre, Bellaghy, Co. Derry, 29th February 2024. 

• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Module 2 Training, Local Election 
Preparation, held at Kilkenny, 21st March 2024. 
• Ardmhéara Comhairleoir K. McCarthy as part of the Cork City Council 
Delegation trip to Shanghai, China, 30th October - 8th November 2023. 
 
26.  
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
27. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
27.1 
IRISH PUBLIC BODIES MUTUAL INSURANCES LIMITED CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the attendance of 
Comhairleoir S. Martin at the Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Limited 
conference, held at the Gibson Hotel, Dublin, 3rd May 2024. 
 
28.  
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
29. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORT  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for March 2024. 
 
30.  
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES  
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1, that have been referred to the 
relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 34, 
No HGV Access On Dublin Hill, be referred to the North West Local Area Committee 
as well as the North East Local Area Committee for consideration. 
 
31.  
MOTIONS 
 
31.1 
COMPREHENSIVE REPLACEMENT OF ALL PIPES WITHIN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls upon Irish Water and the Government of Ireland to 
allocate a substantial fund of at least €500 million for the comprehensive replacement 
of all pipes within the city limits. 
 
This significant investment is crucial to safeguarding the health and well-being of our 
community members, as well as preserving our valuable water resources for future 
generations. By addressing the issue proactively, we can mitigate potential risks 

associated with aging infrastructure and ensure a reliable water supply system that 
meets modern standards. 
 
I urge all Council Members to support this motion in the best interest of our City and 
its residents.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. O’Flynn 24/116) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Finn, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Moloney, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
31.2 
BUS SHELTER IN ASHMOUNT ESTATE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would write to Bus Éireann and request that the following 
works be implemented around the recently installed Bus Shelter at the bottom of 
Ashmount Estate:- 
 
• 
That the three missing Perspex back panels along the bottom of the Bus Shelter 
be installed. They haven't yet been installed. 
• 
That a digital monitor illustrating the relevant bus times be put in place adjacent 
to the Shelter. 
• 
That a side panel be put in place where there currently isn't one, as this Shelter is 
in a quite exposed location in terms of wind and rain, etc. 
 
Also, can Cork City Council Parks Department look at grassing the area at the rear of 
this Bus Shelter and remove the rocks and stones that are currently there.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 24/218) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Finn, An 
Chomhairle approved the motion revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would write to the NTA and request that the following works 
be implemented around the recently installed Bus Shelter at the bottom of Ashmount 
Estate:- 
 
• 
That the three missing Perspex back panels along the bottom of the Bus Shelter 
be installed. They haven't yet been installed. 
• 
That a digital monitor illustrating the relevant bus times be put in place adjacent 
to the Shelter. 
• 
That a side panel be put in place where there currently isn't one, as this Shelter is 
in a quite exposed location in terms of wind and rain, etc. 
 
Also, can Cork City Council Parks Department look at grassing the area at the rear of 
this Bus Shelter and remove the rocks and stones that are currently there.’ 
 

(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 24/218) 
 
31.3 
PERSISTENT 
PROBLEMS 
OF 
WATER 
DISCOLOURATION 
AND 
OUTAGES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council call upon the Chief Executive Officer of Uisce Éireann/Irish 
Water, Niall Gleeson, to come before the meeting of Cork City Council on 4th June 
2024 to account for the consistent failure by the management of Uisce Éireann/Irish 
Water to tackle the persistent problems of water discolouration and water outages 
without sufficient notice in large areas of Cork. At the meeting, Chief Executive 
Officer Gleeson should be in a position to answer questions from City Councillors on 
the issues concerned and to provide a detailed report regarding what efforts have been 
made to tackle these issues to date and what further steps the management of Uisce 
Éireann/Irish Water propose to take to resolve these problems.’   
  
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/254) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded by Comhairleoir D. 
Boylan, An Chomhairle approved the motion revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council call upon the Chief Executive Officer of Uisce Éireann/Irish 
Water, Niall Gleeson, to come before the meeting of Cork City Council in early July 
2024 to account for the consistent failure by the management of Uisce Éireann/Irish 
Water to tackle the persistent problems of water discolouration and water outages 
without sufficient notice in large areas of Cork. At the meeting, Chief Executive 
Officer Gleeson should be in a position to answer questions from City Councillors on 
the issues concerned and to provide a detailed report regarding what efforts have been 
made to tackle these issues to date and what further steps the management of Uisce 
Éireann/Irish Water propose to take to resolve these problems.’   
  
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/254) 
 
31.4 
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council requests the Minister for Rural and Community Development 
to extend the Local Improvement Scheme to Cork City Council given the five-fold 
increase in the size of Cork City post the city expansion in 2019. 
 
A Local Improvement Scheme is a scheme for carrying out improvement works on 
private/non-public roads. The scheme currently operates in Cork County Council and 
every other local authority with the exception of Cork City and Dublin City Council.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. F. Dennehy 24/257) 

 
31.5 
ST. KILLIAN’S SPECIAL SCHOOL, MAYFIELD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘I want to bring to the attention of the Council, the urgent situation regarding the lack 
of provision of vital health services to the children of St. Killian’s Special School, 
Mayfield. 
 
St. Killian's is a primary school that caters for pupils with Dyslexia/Dyspraxia/Speech 
and Language Disorder and pupils with a diagnosis of Autism and complex needs. 
 
It provides vital interventions to children who can't be easily diagnosed and is a place 
for children who don't fit in anywhere else. All of the children attending St. Killian’s 
are in receipt of a psychological assessment that recommends they attend a special 
school on the basis that they have very complex and specific needs and demand 
support beyond the abilities of mainstream education. 
 
Since 2020 however, St. Killian’s has not received any hours of therapy in the vital 
areas of Speech and Language Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Social Work, Play 
Therapy and Physiotherapy. For context, in 2020 St. Killian’s was receiving 3.5 days 
of therapy every week. Since that ended, the school has received zero hours. 
 
I have heard of the repeated attempts from St. Killian's Parent's Unite to demand a 
response from the relevant bodies to provide vital assistance to the children of the 
school, yet no adequate provision has been made. 
 
I urge members of this Council to use their powers as elected representatives, so that 
the children of St. Killian's receive the educational supports that they deserve. In 
addition, I request that this motion be forwarded to the offices of Taoiseach Simon 
Harris and Minister Anne Rabbitte, with the full support of the Council.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 24/264) 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to forward this motion to Bishop Fintan Gavin. 
 
31.6 
BUS SHELTER AT PARKLANDS DRIVE, FAIRHILL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the NTA to install a bus shelter at Parklands Drive, 
Fairhill.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/274) 
 
 
 

31.7 
DIRECTLY ELECTED MAYOR OF CORK CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Local Government, in light of 
legislation having been enacted in relation to the position of directly elected mayors, 
to ask that a second plebiscite for a directly elected mayor of Cork City be held during 
the next Council term.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 24/291) 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
