MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 9th DECEMBER 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. Harmon, 
A. Deasy, T. Coleman.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development.  
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate & Community 
Affairs. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate & Community Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Callaghan family on the death of Vanessa O’Callaghan. 
• The O’Brien family on the death of Michael O’Brien. 
• The Cronin family on the death of Michael Cronin. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Pat O’Sullivan. 
• The Goodwillie family on the death of John Goodwillie. 
• The Doherty family on the death of Thomas Doherty. 
• The Reynolds family on the death of Paul Reynolds. 
• The Crowley family on the death of Theresa Crowley. 
• The Newman family on the death of Frances Newman.  
• The O’Flynn family on the death of Helen O’Flynn. 
• The McLoughlin family on the death of Mary McLoughlin. 
• The Breen family on the death of Ned Breen. 
• The Crowley family on the death of John Crowley. 
• The Dorney family on the death of Catherine Dorney. 

• The Mulcahy family on the death of Peggy Mulcahy. 
• The Meehan family on the death of Anna Meehan. 
• The O’Callaghan family on the death of Augustine (Gussy) O’Callaghan. 
• The Kelly family on the death of Tom Kelly. 
• The Burke family on the death of Edward Burke. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Sarsfields GAA on becoming Munster Senior Hurling Champions. 
• Russell Rovers on becoming Munster Junior Hurling Champions. 
• Kilmurry GAA on becoming Munster Junior Football Champions. 
• Watergrasshill GAA on becoming Munster Intermediate Hurling 
Champions. 
• St. Michael’s LGFC on becoming Minor County Champions. 
• Visit Cork on the holding of the Cork Ambassador Awards. 
• Eoghan Kenny T.D. on his election as a T.D. for Cork North-Central.  
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
OUTGOING COUNCILLORS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara congratulated Deputies Pádraig Rice and Kenneth O’Flynn on their 
election to Dáil Éireann and invited them to enter the Council Chamber and speak 
from their former seats. 
 
3.2 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR MARTIN HARVEY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Martin 
Harvey to mark his retirement as Returning Officer for Cork City after 35 years. 
 
3.3 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CORK COUNTY BOARD PITCH AND PUTT 
CLUB 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that a Civic Reception would take place for 
Cork County Board Pitch and Putt Club on Wednesday 11th December 2024 at 6pm. 
 
3.4 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR BALLINCOLLIG TIDY TOWNS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that a Civic Reception would take place for 
Ballincollig Tidy Towns on Tuesday 17th December 2024 at 6pm. 
 
3.5 
SPECIAL MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that a Special Meeting of An Chomhairle 
would take place on Tuesday 17th December 2024 at 4pm to co-opt two new members 
to Council. 
 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  

 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that notification had been received from 
Comhairleoir M. Gould of her intention to suspend standing orders, and called on 
Comhairleoir M. Gould to read her motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
 
 
- 
holds the family and friends of Vanessa O’Callaghan in our thoughts this evening 
- 
requests the Chief Executive utilise all powers available to her to open a temporary 
facility for those sleeping rough to access basic needs - somewhere to eat, charge 
phones and shower over the Christmas period 
- 
agrees to name this facility in honour of Vanessa as requested by her family 
- 
begins long-term planning for improved homeless services recognising the 
complexity of rough sleeping 
- 
calls for a more visible Garda presence to prevent attacks on the most vulnerable.’ 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to take the motion at the 
meeting, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. 
McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, J. Lynch, L. 
Harmon, A. Deasy. (14) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, G. 
Kelleher, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman. (13) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the  
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the  
proposal defeated. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
None received. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 11th November 2024. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
SOUTH PARISH 
 

 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I ask that you would provide clarity on the following. 
 
1, Clarify the boundary of the South Parish. 
2, Clarify how many parking spaces have been removed from within the South Parish 
in the past 10 years  
3, With regard to the loss of many parking spaces and with a future plan to remove 
more much needed parking spaces in the South Parish may I ask as to what has 
happened to, and where are the locations of the parking spaces that were paid for by 
way of contributions via the planning process. In particular once again to the 3 
planning applications that were granted and are mentioned below. 
 
1, Planning permission ref. T.P. 00/24158 Schedule of conditions Part 9F 
Contribution: £11,502.00 for the provision of car parking spaces. 
[Reason for condition] "Adequate and sufficient car parking cannot be provided 
within the site curtilage. This contribution is to a fund for the provision by Cork City 
Council of car parking facilities adjacent to the City Centre. The proposed car parking 
areas will facilitate the proposed development" 
 
2, Planning permission ref. T.P. 02/26527 Schedule of conditions Part 11 G 
Contribution: €19,778.00 for the provision of car parking spaces. 
[Reason for condition] "Adequate and sufficient car parking cannot be provided 
within the site curtilage. This contribution is to a fund for the provision by Cork City 
Council of car parking facilities adjacent to the City Centre. The proposed car parking 
areas will facilitate the proposed development" 
 
3, Planning permission ref. T.P. 9519625 Schedule of conditions Part 8 Contribution: 
£2304.00 for the provision of 2 car parking spaces. “Prior to commencement of 
development the developer must make a contribution to Cork Corporation towards the 
cost of works viz provision of 2 No carparking space facilitating the proposed 
development. The present value of the contribution is £2304. The amount payable will 
be determined by the Consumer Price Index prevailing at the date of payment” 
[Reason for condition] "Adequate and efficient car parking cannot be provided within 
the site curtilage. This contribution is to a fund for the provision by the corporation of 
car parking facilities adjacent to the City Centre. The proposed car parking areas will 
facilitate the proposed development" 
 
REPLY 
 
The Operations Directorate manages parking on a street basis and does not use parish 
boundaries. As such, the Directorate does not have data on the changes to parking 
spaces in the area referenced in the question.     
 
 
I can confirm that Development Contributions were levied and paid on planning 
permission ref nos. TP 00/24158, TP 02/26527 & TP 95/19625. As Cork City Council 
is not required to keep financial records for more than 7 years (less in some cases), it 
is not possible to state definitively where funds were allocated 24  - 29 years ago. At 
the time in question the forementioned contributions would have been used to provide 

and/ or maintain a variety of parking options e.g., in the immediate vicinity of the area 
referred to Cork City Council operated a surface car park, White Street car park, and 
that facility would have received funding for facility enhancements – resurfacing, 
relining & resigning, upgrade to facility payment by park by phone etc; development 
of Black Ash Park & Ride to facilitate visitors and shoppers coming into the city centre 
and removing the potential for such vehicles parking in areas adjacent to the city 
centre, creation of disabled parking bays, relining parking spaces, etc.     
 
It is national policy, supported by Cork City Council City Development Plan, to 
encourage active travel and sustainable transport and many projects to support same, 
costing millions of Euro, have been funded nationally and delivered by Cork City 
Council over the last number of years. The impact of such policy and schemes is 
deliberately and actively to reduce road space for cars and provide more road space 
for sustainable transport modes. This national policy, supported by local 
implementation, does and will continue to impact on parking spaces as sustainable 
transport is prioritised.  
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.2 
GARAGES AT PATRICK O’DONOGHUE PLACE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
What is holding up the rental of these units to the residents as agreed? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council issued Licence Agreements in relation to the garages to the legal 
representatives of 5 residents of Patrick O’Donoghue Place earlier this year.  The 
rental process can conclude on the return of the completed Licence Agreements to 
Cork City Council. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.3 
REPAIR AND LEASE SCHEME – BUY AND RENEW SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of applications received, approved and 
disallowed by Cork City Council for the year 2023, 2024 year to date under the repair 
and lease scheme, the buy and renew scheme; the types of properties involved 
(apartment, detached, bungalow etc) the amount paid under each scheme to date, and 
the length of turnaround time on average, in tabular form. 
 

 
REPLY 
 
 
The Repair & Lease and Buy & Renew Schemes are two mechanisms utilised by the 
Housing Directorate as part of its delivery programme. 
 
Repair and Lease Scheme 
 
The Repair and Lease projects provide for a mix of unit types from traditional houses 
to apartments.  The approved projects under construction, formerly derelict properties, 
will provide 18 apartments in 2025. Refurbishment costs in respect of Repair and 
Lease units is capped at €80,000 per unit, with total expenditure to date in respect of 
projects referenced below at €640,000. 
   
Cork City Council’s target for the delivery of Repair and Lease properties under 
Housing for All, is a total of 48 homes, with 14 completed to date, and a further 27 
currently within various stages of our programme.  
 
The following table briefly outlines detail on the number of applications received, 
approved for Repair & Lease projects for the programme years of 2023 & 2024, as 
requested. 
 
RLS 
Programme 
Year 
Proposals Approvals 
Projects 
Proceeding 
Nr. of 
Homes 
Alternative 
Delivery (AHB 
Deliver) 
2023 
3 
2 
2 
4 
1 
2024 
9 
9 
1 
16 
8 
 
Cork City Council partners closely with the AHB Sector for the delivery of Repair 
and Lease properties, which has been successful to date, hence the above additional 
column to demonstrate partnership projects with the sector. 
 
Buy & Renew Scheme 
 
A total of five properties, 1 nr. 3 bedroom terraced & 4 nr. 3 bedroom semi-detached, 
were acquired utilising the Buy & Renew Scheme and incorporated into the housing 
delivery programme at a cost of €938,875. Refurbishment of one of those properties 
is complete with a turn-around time of 23 weeks and a cost of €45,051. The balance 
of properties which required more substantial refurbishment works are under 
construction and scheduled for delivery in Q1, 2025.  
 
The Housing Directorate considers both the Repair and Lease, and Buy and Renew 
Schemes, to be successful to date, both in terms of expanding the delivery programme, 
but also as a successful intervention around dereliction and vacancy, and this 
programme is expected to expand further in 2025 and 2026. 
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
Director of Services,  
Housing Directorate. 
 

6.4 
HOUSING STOCK RETROFITTED 2003 & 2024 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir L. Harmon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Council the number of Council Housing stock retrofitted in 2023 and 2024 
year to date, the amount spent on such retrofitting and the energy savings made in that 
time and the timeline for full housing stock retrofit? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council’s social housing retrofit program aims to ensure that all included 
housing stock has an energy rating of B2 or better. If a B2 energy rating cannot be 
achieved, then the cost optimal equivalent as defined by the building regulations must 
be achieved.  
 
In 2023, Cork City Council retrofitted 53 homes at a cost of €2,056,120. The rated 
energy savings are 30,869,269 kilowatt hours/year. 
 
In 2024, Cork City Council retrofitted 123 homes at a cost of €5,248,656, which is in 
excess of the target set for Cork City Council for 2024 of 116 homes by the 
Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage. The rated energy savings 
achieved are 180,802,791 kilowatt hours per year. 
 
Looking forward to 2025, the social housing retrofit programme has a projected 
pipeline of 290 properties which will be progressed in line with available funding. 
 
Cork City Council therefore continues to expand its social housing retrofit programme 
on an annual basis.    
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.5 
AGE FRIENDLY “TAKE A SEAT” INITIATIVE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for progress on the Age Friendly “Take a Seat” initiative 
and its incorporate of the “Leeside Leithreas Scheme?” 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
Cork City Council in cooperation with the Age Friendly Alliance & Forum will be 
publishing an Action Plan for the Cork City Age Friendly Programme in the first 
quarter of 2025. Both the ‘Take a Seat’ and ‘Leeside Leithreas’ Schemes will be 
incorporated into the Cork Age Friendly implementation plans for 2025 as part of the 
Age Friendly Business Training offering.  
 

Age Friendly Business Training has been rolled out to businesses in association with 
the Cork City Local Enterprise Office. The new draft Action Plan proposes an 
increased offering of business training in 2025. This training will be free of charge to 
the Cork business communities in conjunction with our Age Friendly Alliance 
partners, Cork City Local Enterprise Office, Cork Business Association and Cork 
Chamber.  
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 28th 
November 2024 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of land (737.5m² approximately) located at The Marina, Cork to the 
Trustees of Lee Rowing Club, c/o John O’Lee & Co. Solicitors, 30/31 South Mall, 
Cork by way of a supplementary sporting lease, to run concurrent with the existing 
principal lease. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (86.85m² approximately) 
located at Hollyhill Lane, Hollyhill, Knocknaheeny, Cork to Margaret & Thomas 
Egan, c/o Martin A. Harvey & Co. Solicitors, Parliament House, 9, Georges Quay, 
Cork for a nominal fee of €1.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
Collins, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal of Unit No. 12 and Units Nos. 13-19, Princes Street Market, Cork, to 
Starlow Limited (trading as Farmgate Café) c/o J. W. O’Donovan LLP Solicitors, 
No. 53, South Mall, Cork, by way of lease for a term of 21 years from the 1st 
January 2024 at an annual rent of €15.80 per square foot plus rates and service 
charges. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir M.R. 
Desmond, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
CAPITAL 
ASSISTANCE 
SCHEME: 
O’CONNELL 
COURT, 
DOUGHCLOYNE, LEHENAGHMORE, TOGHER, CORK - OAKDENE 
HOUSE CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 18th November, 2024 in relation to a loan 
facility for Oakdene House CLG in respect of the provision of 90 one bed units of 

accommodation and additional communal facilities at O’Connell Court, 
Doughcloyne, Lehenaghmore, Togher, Cork. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €28,607,000 be granted to 
Oakdene House CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for the 
provision of 90 one bed units of accommodation at O’Connell Court, Doughcloyne, 
Lehenaghmore, Togher, Cork.” 
 
7.3 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT FARRANLEA ROAD 
  
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed residential development at 
Farranlea Road, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive thereon as 
required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, dated 10th November 2024. 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed residential development, where 
there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. 
Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. 
Dineen, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. Harmon, T. 
Coleman. (26) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried, and the proposed residential development approved. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Farranlea Road, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Farranlea Road, in the City of Cork be carried out as recommended in 
the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was put before 
Council on the 9th December 2024.” 
 
7.4 
EXTERNAL NOMINATIONS TO STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEES 
 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Public Participation Network’s and Cork 
Business Association’s nominations to Cork City Council’s Strategic Policy 
Committees.  
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 2nd DECEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 2nd December 2024. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/10/2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/10/2024. 
 
8.2 
CORPORATE PLAN 2024-2029 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report, dated 28th November 2024, in 
relation to the preparation of a draft Corporate Plan for the period 2024-2029. 
 
8.3 
MOTIONS 
 
8.3.1 
TWO-TIER PAY FOR SCHOOL WARDENS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 28th November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That this Council expresses its total opposition to two-tier pay for school wardens. 
 
Council believes that school wardens working in areas that used to be part of the Cork 
County Council jurisdiction should receive the same rate of pay as that currently paid 
to school wardens employed in areas that were part of the Cork City Council 
jurisdiction before the 2019 merger.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/567) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the matters referred to have been the 
subject of ongoing discussions and negotiations between the Council and SIPTU 
which is the trade union that represents the School Warden grade. This is the 
appropriate forum for these matters to be resolved and the Council is confident that 
these discussions will yield a satisfactory outcome in the near future. 
 
8.3.2 
DIRECTLY-ELECTED LORD MAYOR OF CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 29th August 2024 on the following motion:- 
 

 
‘That the Corporate Policy Group will recommend to Cork City Council to provide 
by law for a directly-elected Lord Mayor of Cork in accordance with Section 47 of the 
Local Government (Mayor of Limerick) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2024.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/379) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the legal provisions relating to the 
holding of plebiscites on the direct election of mayors are set out in Part 6 of the Local 
Government (Mayor of Limerick) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2024 
(https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/act/7/enacted/en/print#part6). Pursuant to 
the provisions of Section 47(1)(a)(i) of the Act, the Corporate Policy Group may 
submit a report to An Comhairle recommending a proposal to provide by law for a 
directly elected Lord Mayor for Cork City. While there is no prescriptive template for 
such report, it would require to set out the cost of holding the plebiscite and the 
revenue costs of running the Office of a Directly Elected Lord Mayor. These costs 
would need to be borne by Cork City Council. The cost of holding a plebiscite as a 
“stand-alone” electoral event would be substantial and would need to be provided for 
through the Council’s budgetary process. For the information of Members, I attach 
herewith correspondence received from the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage in relation to the role, functions and responsibilities of the 
Directly Elected Mayor for Limerick as well as the structural changes brought about 
by the creation of the Office. These matters would be relevant in the drafting of a 
proposal under the Act. Finally, Members are advised that the following motion was 
approved by An Comhairle at its meeting held on 13th May, 2024: ‘That Cork City 
Council write to the Minister for Local Government, in light of legislation having been 
enacted in relation to the position of directly elected mayors, to ask that a second 
plebiscite for a directly elected mayor of Cork City be held during the next Council 
term.’ The Meetings Administrator subsequently wrote to Minister Darragh O’Brien 
advising him of the Council’s approval of the motion and an acknowledgement of 
same has been received from the Minister’s Office. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 25th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 25th November 2024. 
 
9.1 
MEETING SCHEDULE 2025 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed Meeting Schedule for 2025. 
 
10. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - CAIDREAMH 
IDIRNÁISIÚNTA & TURASÓIREACHT – 18th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 18th November 2024. 
 
10.1 
REPORT ON RECENT ACTIVITIES IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
 

 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs and International Relations, dated 12th November 2024 on recent activities in 
International Relations. 
 
10.2 
REPORT ON RECENT ACTIVITES IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN 
TWINNED CITIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs and International Relations, dated 12th November 2024 on recent activities in 
International Relations in twinned cities. 
 
10.3 
REPORT ON RECENT VISIT TO SHANGHAI AND SHENZHEN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs and International Relations, dated 12th November 2024 on the recent visit to 
Shanghai and Shenzhen. 
 
11. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - COMHSHAOL, 
UISCE & ÁISEANNA – 19th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 19th November 2024. 
 
11.1 
DEDICATED DOG PARKS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentation on Dedicated Dog Parks. 
 
11.2 
MOTIONS 
 
11.2.1 
DEDICATED DOG PARKS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council consider introducing dedicated dog parks across various 
locations in our city. Dog parks have proven to be beneficial not only for our furry 
companions but also for the city and its residents. Here are some key advantages of 
having dog parks in Cork City: 
 
1. **Promoting Responsible Dog Ownership:** Dog parks provide a safe and 
controlled environment for dogs to play and socialize. This encourages responsible 
pet ownership and helps in fostering better-behaved canine companions in our 
community. 
 
2. **Enhancing Community Engagement:** Dog parks serve as gathering spots for 
dog owners, creating a sense of community and fostering social connections among 
residents. This can lead to a stronger and more tightly-knit local community. 

 
3. **Improving Health and Well-being:** Regular visits to dog parks offer both dogs 
and their owners opportunities for exercise and physical activity. This can contribute 
to improved health outcomes, including reduced stress levels, lower blood pressure, 
and increased overall well-being. 
 
4. **Boosting Local Economy:** The presence of dog parks can attract more visitors, 
both local and tourists, to certain areas of the city. This increased foot traffic can 
benefit local businesses, such as pet stores, groomers, and cafes located near the parks. 
 
5. **Preserving Green Spaces:** By designating specific areas as dog parks, we can 
help protect other public spaces, such as playgrounds and recreational areas, from 
potential damage caused by off-leash dogs. This contributes to the conservation of our 
city’s green spaces for everyone to enjoy. 
 
In light of these benefits, I strongly believe that the introduction of dog parks in Cork 
City would be a valuable addition to our community. I respectfully urge the Council 
to consider this proposal and work towards creating more inclusive and pet-friendly 
spaces for all residents to enjoy.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. O'Flynn 24/163) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Council is currently 
constructing a pilot Dog Park in the Regional Park, Ballincollig, which will be 
operational in the next week. The Park will be monitored as regards usage / any issues 
that may arise and its effectiveness reviewed over the next year prior to any decision 
to provide an additional Park. 
11.2.2 
LOCATION FOR A TRAINING TRACK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 18th November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council work with the various athletic clubs in the city to help identify 
a location for a training track (running) that would accommodate the needs of track 
and field athletes. They could obtain a lease and then source funding from National 
Government.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/215) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Cork City Council has met with 
representatives of the athletics clubs in the city with a view to identifying location and 
potential delivery and operational models for a running track in the city.  Cork City 
Council will continue to work with this group to support the delivery of such facilities 
in a viable and sustainable manner, to the benefit of sports and health in the city.   
 
11.2.3 
NOTIFICATION OF BROKEN OR DAMAGED UTILITY COVER APRONS 

 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will create a one stop shop email for the public, separate to the 
service centre system, for the notification of broken or damaged utility cover aprons 
that can then be directly sent to the utility provider in question.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/373) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a one stop shop already exists for the 
submission of all service requests to Cork City Council.  Service request can be 
submitted via any of the following channels: 
1) By ringing the Customer Service Unit (CSU) on 021 492 4000 
2) By emailing the CSU – servicecentre@corkcity.ie 
3) Via our website – Service Requests tab on the homepage 
 
All submissions received are logged on our Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) ICT System.  All received requests are assigned to the relevant staff member, 
who will investigate and take action as appropriate, including contacting the relevant 
service provider. 
 
The creation of duplicated separate and individual systems for different types of 
service requests, which would require both human and financial resources to support, 
manage and operate on an ongoing basis, cannot be justified and could be significant.  
There is no evidence that the existing systems are not providing a high level of service 
or that a new separate system would in any way improve service levels.  
 
Thus, the best level of service to the public is provided via a unified single service 
request ICT system. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee for further discussion. 
 
11.2.4 
PLAYGROUND SHADES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will examine and trial the use of playground shades to allow play 
in playgrounds shielded from sun and rain and that trials will be carried out for this 
autumn to allow further use of playgrounds year round.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/374) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that the provision of playground shades 
will need to be thoroughly researched and reviewed before any commitment is given 
to trial sunshades in Cork City Council’s playgrounds.  
 
This review will need to include associated costings, possibility of retrofitting in 
existing playgrounds – structural integrity of these units, construction materials, are 
they currently being used in other local authorities in Ireland and have they been a 
success or failure, and how vandal resistant they may be e.g. fires and wanton 
destruction etc.  
 
Also of concern also would be the risk of such structures providing sheltered areas at 
nighttime for unsocial gatherings that would impact negatively on nearby residents 
and on the safety of the play equipment. 
 
It should be noted that playgrounds in Cork City Council Parks are available for use 
all year round and at presently are actively used every month of the year. 
 
Should specific funding be provided in the 2025 budget to fund the above review, 
same can be undertaken with a view to having the report completed by the end of 
2025. 
 
11.2.5 
NEW SYSTEM OF DEEP CLEANING CORK CITY CENTRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council introduce a new system whereby Cork City Centre is deep 
cleaned much more often and at regular intervals.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/383) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council currently operates 
a cleaning service in the city centre utilising a street scrubber and power washer unit, 
both units operate daily in the City Centre area. Cork City Council also carries out a 
deep cleaning programme each spring which involves contractors working through 
the night cleaning pavements in the City Centre area. In addition to the above, we have 
recently been granted approval for the purchase of a new specialised power washing 
unit with 2 new staff which we expect to be operational in February 2025. 
 
The Cleansing Section is constantly exploring new systems and new ways of 
optimising their staff and equipment to carry out more deep cleaning within available 
resources and cleansing staff have been in contact with other local authorities looking 
at alternative options. 
 
11.2.6 
CORK LIDO 
 

 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 18th November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That this Council supports the work underway to bring a Cork Lido to fruition, which 
would bring many benefits to Cork City in relation to health, tourism, community and 
local businesses. This Council will work to identify suitable funding from all avenues 
for this open air swimming facility including necessary state funds to create it.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/389) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has provided 
support for a voluntary group to conduct a location analysis for a LIDO in Cork City.  
In addition, Cork City Council has worked with Swim Ireland to model the need for 
swimming facilities (indoor and outdoor) in the city as a pilot for the country.  Sites 
are being appraised for the provision of swimming facilities, after which business 
plans etc will be prepared.   
 
This process will take time, and the members of Cork City Council will be kept 
informed.  Cork City Council would be glad to meet with the LIDO group to review 
this proposition further. 
 
11.2.7 
DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDOOR RUNNING TRACK 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 18th November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘In light of the remarkable achievements of Irish athletes on the global stage, 
particularly at the recent Olympics, and acknowledging the ongoing need to nurture 
and develop new and emerging talent within our city and beyond, I propose that Cork 
City Council formally supports the development of an indoor running track to serve 
the athletics community in the Cork area. 
 
Rationale: 
 
1. National and Local Athletic Success: The success of Irish athletes, including 
those hailing from Cork and Munster, has shone a spotlight on the importance 
of providing world-class training facilities. To build on this success and ensure 
future generations have the opportunity to excel, we must invest in the 
necessary infrastructure. 
 
2. Current Facility Deficit: Despite the strong tradition of athletics in Cork, 
there is a glaring lack of sufficient indoor facilities to support athletes, 
particularly during the winter months. This deficit puts our local talent at a 
disadvantage compared to athletes in other regions who have access to indoor 
tracks. 
 

3. Fostering New Talent: An indoor running track would not only benefit elite 
athletes but also provide a vital resource for schools, clubs, and community 
groups across Cork. It would enable year-round training, foster grassroots 
participation, and help identify and develop the next generation of Irish sports 
stars. 
 
4. Health and Wellbeing: Beyond the competitive aspect, such a facility would 
contribute to the overall health and wellbeing of our citizens by promoting 
physical activity in a safe and accessible environment. 
 
Conclusion: 
 
Given the clear benefits to our community and the potential to enhance Cork’s 
reputation as a hub for sporting excellence, I ask that Cork City Council: 
 
1. Endorse the proposal for the development of an indoor running track. 
 
2. Seek out potential partnerships and funding opportunities at the local, 
national, and EU levels to bring this project to fruition. 
 
3. Initiate a feasibility study to identify the most suitable location and scope for 
this facility within Cork City. 
 
By supporting this motion, we can take a significant step towards ensuring that Cork 
continues to produce top-tier athletes and remains a leader in sports development. 
 
I respectfully request that this motion be considered and supported by the members of 
Cork City Council, with a view to taking actionable steps towards the development of 
this much-needed facility.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 24/410) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a meeting took place between the 
Athletic Association of Ireland Cork County Board and officials from Cork City 
Council (Economic Development, Operations and CCP) to discuss the potential 
development of an athletics track in Cork City. It was agreed, following this meeting, 
that Cork City Council would fund the Athletics Board to hire consultants to undertake 
a feasibility study on this project. It is envisaged that this study will take 16 weeks to 
complete. 
 
11.2.8 
WATER STATION POLICY FOR PARKS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would progress the implementation of their water station 
policy for parks and expedite the roll out of water stations in parks and locations 
throughout the city. With Cork's healthy city status and more citizens using our parks 
it is imperative that we provide water stations.’ 
 

(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 24/431) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that in the past few years, the City Council 
has installed 7 drinking water fountains across the following Parks: 
 
1) The Regional Park in Ballincollig 
2) The Community Park in Douglas 
3) Tramore Valley Park 
4) Meelick Park 
5) Fitzgerald’s Park x 2 
6) Bishopstown Park ( Murphys Farm).  
 
We intend expanding the roll out further next year, subject to resources, installations 
varying from €4,500 to €7,000 depending on the civil works necessary to get a 
connection. Each new connection requires Uisce Eireann consent which could take a 
few months. 
 
However, it is not possible to have fountains in each park, the costs associated with 
making a connection to a water supply being prohibitively expensive. This has proved 
to be the case in Gerry O Sullivan Park, Pophams Park, Clashduv Park and the Glen 
River Park following site assessments. 
 
11.2.9 
PUBLIC TOILET SIGNAGE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will provide additional street signage to highlight the location 
of the public toilets on Grand Parade and other locations.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/446) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s Drainage Dept. 
is currently progressing the provision of additional signage to highlight the location 
of the public toilets on Grand Parade and other locations. 
 
11.2.10 TENNIS COURTS IN PUBLIC PARKS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council develop a plan to have tennis courts installed in all its public 
parks. The success of the upgraded tennis courts in Kempton Park in Ballyvolane 
needs to be replicated across the city.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/470) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Council has been very 
supportive of the sport of tennis, leasing lands to Douglas Tennis Club, Bishopstown 
Tennis Club and Ballinlough Tennis Clubs which allowed clubs to establish in these 
locations. All clubs are operating successfully.  
 
It also developed a suite of 5 outdoor tennis courts in Clashduv Park which are in good 
condition but underused, and 2 outdoor tennis courts in Meelick Park. The courts at 
Meelick Park have recently being resurfaced at a cost of €60,000, with the associated 
car park area costing €4,000k to resurface. 
 
The approximate cost of providing two new tennis courts is €100,000. Most of our 
parks such as Gerry O Sullivan Park, Pophams Park, the Fairfield, Lough Mahon Park, 
Tory Top Park, Beaumont Park, Glenamoy Lawn Park etc are not suitable due to lack 
of space or topography.  
 
Neither is there evidence that provision of additional courts could be justified in terms 
of usage and cost. 
 
11.2.11 DOLPHIN SWIMMING CLUB 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council work with Dolphin Swimming Club and help to secure a 
home for their 50m swimming pool in Cork City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/471) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a meeting was held with Club 
officials and it is understood that very substantial capital costs would have to be 
incurred to bring this project to fruition with no indication of how this could be funded 
nor the ongoing substantial operating costs met. 
  
As part of a National Swimming Pool Planning Model, the City Council is working 
with Swim Ireland and its consultants on an assessment of swimming pool provision 
in the Cork area. This study will guide the Council in any decision in relation to pools 
within the City in the medium term. 
 
As such, the City Council is not in a position at present to make any commitment in 
relation to the project. 
 
11.2.12 ILLEGAL BONFIRES ON NON FIRE NIGHT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council presents a report on the number of green spaces destroyed by 
illegal bonfires on non fire night for the last four years and the costs involved over the 

last four years and to look at preventative measures to protect these green spaces for 
2025 availing of existing resources and community involvement.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Fitzgerald 24/485) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that generally there are approximately 37 
illegal bonfires across the City around June 23rd of varying scale, most very modest, 
19 in the North West, 10 in the North East, 5 in the South East and 4 in the South 
West. It should be noted that this is a considerable reduction on the amount of fires 10 
years ago, where over 80 large fires would have been lit.  
 
The Family Fun Night Project where the City Council and local community groups 
organise family fun activities in parks across the City on June 23rd has had a big impact 
on reducing the amount of fires and local children nowadays generally attend fun 
events in their local parks rather than attend unauthorised bonfires. Additional 
measures such as the Council arranging skips for clean ups in particular areas prior to 
the night has also helped, together with interventions where local community groups 
request assistance in arranging alternative activities on green areas on the night in 
question. 
 
The Council is willing to support where possible, any request by a local resident’s 
group to work with them to help reduce the number of bonfires further. 
 
Annual clean up costs are € 7500 approximately. 
 
11.2.13 SPOT FLOODING DURING SEVERE RAIN EVENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will record and publish data of areas affected by spot flooding 
during severe rain events; that this data will be used to verify that storm drains in these 
areas are clear ahead of Orange Alerts for rainfall; and that documentation will be 
provided to residents in all areas on how to clear gullies.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/510) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that spot flooding, especially when caused 
by pluvial events, can occur anywhere in the City. For example, the cloudburst event 
which took place on the 16th of October 2022 resulted in flooding in areas which, 
according to local residents who had lived there all of their life, had not flooded in the 
previous 50 years. 
 
Cork City Council is aware of the locations of infrastructure e.g. trash screens, culverts 
and key gullies, which can cause problems during rainfall events if they are blocked 
and prioritises inspection of these locations in advance of any weather warnings.  
 
The OPW provides information on past flood events on their website floodinfo.ie 
which is available for any member of the public who wishes to view same. 
 

During extreme rainfall events there will be multiple locations where spot flooding 
can occur.  Cork City Council prioritises our emergency response to these based on 
the prevailing weather conditions and the risk. Each weather event will require a 
different response depending on whether the main cause of flooding is tidal, pluvial 
or fluvial.  
 
Cleaning of gullies is the responsibility of Cork City Council. While Cork City 
Council would welcome residents brushing leaves off the top of a gully, it would not 
be appropriate for us to instruct any further intervention due to potential health and 
safety risks.  If a residents identifies a gully which is blocked (i.e. the gully pot is full 
to the top) same should be reported to the City Councils Customer Service Unit on 
021-4924000 and a crew will attend to this location and address the matter. 
 
11.2.14 SLOW AND REDUCE RAINWATER FLOWS DURING SEVERE RAIN        
EVENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 18th November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will assess areas for opportunities to re-green hard surfaces 
as a means to slow and reduce rainwater flows during severe rain events; that the Cork 
City Council Development Plan will require driveways to be constructed using 
rainwater permeable surfaces; and that standards for surface water attenuation, and 
capacity of storm drains, will be reviewed in light of increased severe rain events.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/511) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that City Council is presently a partner 
in an EU project entitled GreenDense which is looking at piloting the regreening of a 
limited number of paved locations across the City. Depending on the outcome of this 
project and the availability of future funding, it would be hoped to expand on this 
initiative in future years. 
 
Paragraph 11.145 of the Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 sets out the 
requirements for residential entrances and parking in front gardens and requires hard 
surfaces for driveways to be permeable.  
 
Cork City Council manages over 130 km of storm drains and an increasing number of 
Storm Water Attenuation tanks across the City area. There is also additional surface 
water infrastructure in the suburban areas around the City.  Uisce Eireann also manage 
an extensive Combined Sewer Network which plays a key role in the management of 
surface water during weather events.  Over the next number of years a review of the 
management of surface water will have to be undertaken with a view to identifying 
capital projects which could be implemented to address surface water flooding issues.  
While some interventions will be engineering in nature, there is also a key role which 
can be played by Sustainable Urban Drainage (SUDS) and Natural Surface Water 
Management Infrastructure. 
 

12. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - POBAL, CULTÚR & 
COMHFHORBAIRT ÁITE – 21st NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 21st November 2024. 
 
12.1 
MOTIONS 
 
12.1.1 
COMMUNITY HALL IN CORK CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘My motion seeks to encourage the City Council to initiate plans and allocate 
resources for the construction of a community hall in Cork City. This facility will 
serve as a versatile space for community gatherings, social events, public meetings 
and other activities that enhance community engagement, inclusion and cohesion. 
Many residents, community groups, and organisations have expressed a need for a 
centralized space to host a variety of community-focused activities.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/460) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that availability of suitable spaces for 
community groups of all kinds to gather, hold events, train, provide services and avail 
of office space is very much a live issue for Cork City Council. The Community team 
recognises, in particular, the dearth of availability of space for new communities as 
well as community groups who operate in the city centre. 
 
‘Let’s Plan Together’, Cork City’s Local Economic and Community Plan has 
identified ‘A City of Safe Accessible & Resilient Neighbourhoods’ as a High-Level 
Goal within the plan, which constitutes the key policy document for our community 
and social inclusion work across the city. 
 
The actions underneath this goal speak to the recognised need to understand the space, 
groups and needs across our city’s communities. 
 
Action 5.3.2 states:  
‘Cork City Council will lead on a city-wide assessment of community infrastructure, 
assets, spaces and needs to inform planning and resource allocation in the sector.’  
 
In line with the broader implementation of the LECP, it is anticipated that an initial 
assessment will come in 2025. This component goes hand in hand with ongoing 
collaboration between Community and Planning Policy when assessing the potential 
for community spaces to be incorporated into proposed developments. 
 
12.1.2 
LGBTQ+ GROUPS IN CORK 
 

 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council is proud of the work that LGBTQ+ groups in Cork continue to do 
in our city. This Council stands opposed to all forms of homophobia, transphobia and 
discrimination against LGBTQ+ people.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/390) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council have been to the 
fore in terms of innovation, leadership and initiatives related to social inclusion, 
advocacy and leading the way on equality for all. Some key milestones include: 
 
• 
2002: The Cork City LGBTI+ Interagency was established. Since then, we have 
been delivering the annual LGBTI+ Awareness Week in collaboration with a 
range of NGOs and semi-state members of the LGBTI+ Inter-Agency. We are the 
only Local Authority in Ireland to run an annual LGBTI+ Awareness Week. 
• 
2006: Cork City’s first Pride parade was held. It has grown year on year to what 
is now a week-long festival of events. Cork City Council is one of the funders of 
this event. 
• 
2012 Cork City Council became the first Local Authority in the State to officially 
support marriage equality, after it unanimously passed a motion to support same. 
• 
2014: Cork City Hall was the first Civic building in Ireland to fly the Rainbow 
Flag. 
• 
2020: Cork City is the first and only city on the island of Ireland to have become 
a member of the International Rainbow Cities Network (RCN), who pledge to 
protect and enhance LGBTI+ rights and inclusion across municipalities.  
• 
2022: Cork City Council was the first local authority in Ireland to install a 
Rainbow Balustrade at the entrance to Cork City Hall. In the same year, we 
worked with the LGBTI+ Interagency and Cork Pride to install two Rainbow 
Crossings on Patrick Street.  
• 
Cork City Council has ongoing work with our sister San Francisco in relation to 
Rainbow City initiatives and supports. 
• 
2023: Cork City hosted the RCN EU for Citizens Policy Conference. This led to 
the publication of the RCN LGBTIQ Good Practice Guidelines for cities. Cork 
was one of 20 European Cities participating in this policy working group over 
two years of development.  
• 
In July 2023, Cork City delegates were invited by our sister city Cologne to 
participate in their annual Pride Festival.  
 
This work will continue to grow and re-enforce equality and rights as laid out broadly 
in the new Local Economic & Community Plan actions across a range of communities.  
Specific to the LGBTI+ Community is action 2.3.3 outlined below to deliver on the 
progressive approach to creating a safe, warm and welcoming city for all but in this 
instance our LGBTI+ Community.   
 
Action 2.3.3: Support the LGBTI+ community in Cork city through its strong and 
robust community and voluntary organisations and encourage policy development 

from a rights-based perspective across agencies. To lead on and encourage an all-
island approach to Irish cities membership of the Rainbow Cities Network.  
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
12.1.3 
SPACES AND PROGRAMMES FOR OLDER CITIZENS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘To request that Cork City Council take the lead in looking after our older residents 
by setting up a proper support system that encourages socialisation, prevents 
loneliness and isolation, and provides the help needed where it's lacking. Cork City 
has a growing number of older residents who often face challenges like feeling 
isolated, not having enough to do, and not getting the support they need. As a Council 
that cares about all its people, it's time we did something about it by creating spaces 
and programmes that make life better for our older citizens.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 24/411) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork has been a designated a WHO 
Age Friendly City since 2019.  
 
The Cork City Age Friendly structures ensure that we the support, connect and 
promote older people in our city. 
 
Cork City is part of Age Friendly Ireland which is a National Shared Service which 
supports communities to prepare for the rapid ageing of our population by addressing 
environmental, economic and social factors that influence the health and well-being 
of our older adults. 
 
The Age Friendly approach ensures that we broaden the view of ageing beyond health 
valuing older people as contributors to our city.  
 
Our existing structures in Cork city are: 
 
• 
Age Friendly Alliance a high-level cross-sector strategic group, chaired by the 
Chief Executive, whose member agencies include an Garda Siochana, the HSE, Irish 
Rail, Bus Eireann, Education partners, Libraries and the business sector.  
 
• 
Age Friendly Forum is the older persons council currently consisting of four 
elected representatives providing a voice to older people at alliance level, co-
designing solutions and initiatives to serve our older communities.  
 

• 
Age Friendly Programme Coordinator works with the Alliance, Forum and 
additional strategic partners to develop and implement an Age Friendly Strategy and 
Action Plans, supporting initiatives that respond to priorities raised at local level.  
 
• 
Healthy Age Friendly Homes Coordinator undertakes individual home visits 
to older people living in the Cork city and assesses their needs to assist ageing in place. 
Over 80 home visits have been completed in Cork city since the introduction of this 
service.  
 
• 
Age Friendly Interdepartmental Group is a cross-directorate group who 
works collaboratively to ensure that the age friendly agenda is considered and 
incorporated into all aspects of local government service delivery. 
 
• 
Age Friendly Housing Technical Advisor provides specialist housing advice 
to the authority itself, to private sector organisations interested in providing age 
friendly housing and to the general public 
 
Current Activities 
 
Age Friendly Seating delivered in conjunction with City Architects, Roads & 
Engineering has been installed in 5 areas across Cork City.  
 
Age Friendly Business Training has been rolled out to businesses in association with 
the Cork City Local Enterprise Office. (2 sessions in 2023) 
 
Walkability Studies take place annually in association with the Access Group, ‘Make 
Way Day’ and Cork City Council.  
 
Age Friendly Stadium: Progress is underway on securing Age Friendly designation 
for Pairc Ui Chaoimh. 
 
Supporting and signposting to all services supporting older people including Friendly 
Call, Library Link and Befriending Services.  
 
Delivery of Cultural Companions / Age Friendly event targeting older men funded 
by Healthy Ireland and Age Friendly ‘Meet Jimmy Barry Murphy’  
 
Signposting towards ‘meals on wheels’ services though the community work dept, 
HSE. 
 
Working on the development of an Age Friendly Strategy which will be open for 
public consultation shortly, this follows a series of consultations with older people 
facilitated by UCC to inform the themes. 
 
All of our Cork City Libraries have Age Friendly designation, and each has an Age 
Friendly Champion who works with older people to co-design and continuously 
improve their services hosting activities, groups and initiatives across all sites daily.  
 

Community Newsletter: The Cork City Age Friendly Programme City Database is 
used to reach out weekly to 500+ subscribers with both electronic and printed updates 
on practical initiatives, local and national as appropriate.  
 
This month Cork City Council has been shortlisted for two National Awards related 
to Age Friendly:  
(a) Cork Age Friendly Conversations project has been shortlisted in the annual 
Chambers Ireland Excellence in Local Government Awards.  
(b) Mahon Point Irelands First Dementia Inclusive Shopping Centre in the 
Business Innovation Category in the National Age Friendly Achievement Awards. 
 
12.1.4 
TOY LIBRARIES 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That in order to promote learning through play this Council roll out a toy library in 
all public libraries across the city. Toy libraries provide greater accessibility to play 
while also reducing waste and encouraging a culture of sustainability.’ 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. F. Kerins 24/482) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Libraries was the first Irish 
public library authority to provide universal access to a toys and games collection. 
Our libraries stock a range of toys, jigsaws and games which can be borrowed by 
members of the library. The collection aligns with the Sustainable Development Goal 
of Responsible Consumption – to borrow rather than buy or try before you buy to 
avoid unnecessary purchasing of toy and play equipment that does not get used.  
 
The Toys and Games in the collection are suitable for all and aligns with the Playful 
Paradigm approach of making play accessible for all ages - adults as well as children. 
The collection supports individuals and families in short-term or space limited 
accommodation, it supports all forms of play- indoor and outdoor, active, and restful, 
group and individual. The collection supports adults living with dementia (piecing 
together a series of jigsaws that are designed specifically for adults with dementia for 
example). Items in the collection are carefully curated for their robustness and 
suitability for shared use. The collection is added to annually and selections grow and 
widen.  
 
The coming of a New City Library, when its developed, will see a dedicated space for 
a Toy Library enhancing the current availability and building with the spirit of the 
Playful Paradigm Project in mind.  
 
Toy Libraries are in line with initiatives in this area and complement a wider and 
integrated approach. Cork City Council Libraries have been key project partners in 
the Let’s Play Cork Initiative since its inception under the URBACT Playful Paradigm 
Project. As a component of this urban best practise transfer project, Cork City Council 
considered how to incorporate learnings from Toy Libraries in partner cities across 
Europe. Through collaboration with the Let’s Play Steering group Cork City Libraries 

offers the following programme under the Let’s Play Cork initiative. Community 
Play Bags are housed in each local library and can be booked and checked out by 
registered community groups across the city. These bags contain the equipment and 
prompts to support a community play event at neighbourhood celebrations, estate 
parties, sports days etc. The bags are regularly checked and updated to ensure high-
quality outdoor equipment is available to residents’ associations, community, and 
sports groups. 
 
Community Play Leader Training is provided to compliment the above Play 
resources. Let’s Play Cork and Cork Local Sports Partnership frequently hold play 
leader sessions locally and for a city-wide audience. The sessions provide participants 
with ideas, skills, and the capacity to hold dynamic and engaging play sessions for all. 
Participants are also covered by CLSP’s public liability insurance. 
 
12.1.5 
HOST EURO 2028 GAMES IN PÁIRC UÍ CHAOIMH 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Assistant Chief Executive, 
dated 21st November 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council supports any efforts to secure the ability to host games in Euro 2028 
in Páirc Uí Chaoimh and that such a hosting opportunity outside of Dublin would be 
a massive boost to Cork City and surrounding regions.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/375) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that while the lead responsibility in 
relation to this matter will rest with the FAI and the GAA, Cork City Council would 
be supportive of any efforts in this regard and available to advise as required in relation 
to the logistical and planning supports that the Council could provide. 
 
12.1.6 
BREASTFEEDING-FRIENDLY INITIATIVE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will develop an initiative similar to Breastfeeding Friendly 
Limerick to help improve the health and wellbeing of breastfeeding mothers, babies 
and their families through the development and promotion of breastfeeding-friendly 
businesses, organisations and communities.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/512) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Community Culture and Placemaking 
Directorate through the Healthy Ireland coordinator is currently reviewing what has 
been done in other local authorities, including Limerick Local Authority and will 
report back on the best pathway to collaboration on the creation of a similar 
programme to Breastfeeding Friendly Limerick. It would be envisaged that such a 
programme would have to be done in collaboration with all of the relevant 
stakeholders of which Cork City Council would be one. 

 
12.1.7 
SUPERVISED AND CONTROLLED INJECTION CENTRES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘My motion seeks City Council approval to explore the establishment of supervised 
and controlled injection centres in the city to address the growing and worrying public 
health and safety concerns.   By putting in place these centres, the city will take a 
proactive step and approach to improving public health, supporting individuals with 
substance use disorders or addiction, and enhancing the overall community well-
being. Supervised injection centres offer a compassionate, evidence-based solution to 
the challenges of public drug use, overdose, and community safety (some critical 
areas).’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/515) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is one of the 
number of partners that has been supporting the HSE in the development of a 
supervised injection facility for Cork city. In 2023 Cork City Council participated in 
a site visit to a number of facilities in Lisbon. The development of a supervised 
injection facility is also a key action in the Cork City LECP. Current legislation allows 
for the development of one pilot facility in Dublin and legislative change is required 
for the development of a similar facility in Cork city. The HSE and Cork City Council 
have jointly commissioned a piece of research from UCC to scope the scale of the 
type of service needed. Joint work is underway between the HSE and Cork City 
Council to examine a number of options in relation to supporting this very vulnerable 
cohort. 
 
12.1.8 
PERMANENT BASE FOR CORK CITY FIRST RESPONDERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Cork City First Responders is a voluntary organization that has been serving the Cork 
City area since 2012, with 52 highly trained volunteers who work in conjunction with 
the National Ambulance Service, providing 24/7, year-round service within a 7.5km 
radius of the Marina Market. In 2023 alone, they responded to over 1,800 emergency 
callouts on a voluntary basis. The team supports the community in cases of cardiac 
arrest, chest pain, respiratory emergencies, choking, and strokes. They also work 
closely with local community groups, promoting vital life-saving skills such as CPR 
and defibrillation. Over the past year, they have trained more than 1,500 people in 
these crucial potentially lifesaving techniques. 
 
Cork City First Responders need a permanent base of operations, ideally circa 2000sq. 
ft., with 2 training rooms and 2 offices spaces, along with storage and welfare 
facilities.  

 
This motion calls on the Chief Executive to review existing premises to ascertain if 
City Council can offer Cork City First Responders a permanent base anywhere within 
the City Boundary.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 24/539) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that our community staff have engaged 
with the Cork City Council Property Section and currently, there is no such suitable 
property or space available to Cork City Council at this time that would meet the needs 
of the Cork First Responders. We periodically receive such requests from the 
community and voluntary sector and we are conscious of the demands placed on such 
organisations in terms of additional rental cost, etc. Some of the Community Grants 
address running costs and we endeavour to direct the community organisations to 
apply for same where applicable as a support to them.  When property becomes 
available to the community section we address this opportunity with community 
groups by opening expressions of interest as a fair, transparent and equitable way of 
distributing such properties and maximising their use for the community. Should such 
property become available into the future through the community section we will 
endeavour to follow that process again and publicly invite applications. 
 
12.1.9 
COMMUNITY FACILITIES FOR THE MUNSTER CRICKET TEAM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will advance the selection and development of a site for 
community facilities for the Munster Cricket team.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/574) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Council has received a 
number of requests for land to accommodate sport development across the City, 
including needs identified through the Cork City Active Recreation Infrastructure 
Needs Study, such as from Munster Cricket. Whilst available lands are scarce and it 
is not possible to meet all these needs, it is hoped to make recommendations shortly 
that would accommodate some of these requests. 
 
12.1.10 NEW PUBLIC CHILDCARE FACILITIES IN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 21st November 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council agrees that Ireland needs a new public model of childcare where 
fees are capped at affordable rates, and workers are better paid. To that end, the 

Council will work with the central Government to support the expansion of new public 
childcare facilities in the city.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/576) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council continues to 
collaborate and work with a variety of Government Departments including the 
Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth who take a lead 
on childcare provision in Ireland. The Community Culture and Placemaking 
Directorate will continue to be a collaborative partner with other relevant stakeholders 
in the expansion of any new public childcare facilities undertaken by the Department. 
 
13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 12th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 12th November 2024. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 2nd DECEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 2nd December 2024. 
 
14.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
14.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
October 2024. 
 
14.2 
MOTIONS 
 
14.2.1 
COUNCIL RELATED PAYMENTS AT A LOCAL POST OFFICE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer, 
dated 2nd December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will examine a pilot project to allow for Council related payments 
at a local post office in the administrative confines of Cork City Council.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/416) 
 
The report of the Chief Financial Officer stated that An Post currently process two 
different types of rent payment for Cork City Council, HB (Household Budget) and 
BP (Bill Pay). 
 
Household Budget (HB) 
The Household Budget payment is deducted directly from a tenant’s social welfare if 
they collect their social welfare payment from the Post Office. Tenants can complete 
an application form which is scanned by us and forwarded to the Household Budget 
department of An Post to get set up. Once set up, rent will be deducted at source. The 

account data is forwarded to us by An Post and typically takes 4-5 days for payment 
to be reflected onto our rent accounts. 
 
Bill Pay (BP) 
This is where Tenants have a physical card which the Post Office Teller either scans 
or manually enters and they physically make a payment of any amount they choose. 
We used to issue these cards up to about 10 years ago but no longer do so. It was 
intended to discontinue this method of payment. However, tenants who still have this 
card can continue to use it. If they lose it or it stops working, it is not replaced. They 
are advised to switch their method of payment to HB, set up a standing order in the 
bank or avail of any of our numerous alternative payment methods. 
  
Costs Associated with Rent payments 
Cork City Council pay An Post a flat fee for every transaction of €1.11. The total 
payment to An Post in 2023 for both of these services combined was €137,612.75. 
That breaks down into €102,320.35 for BP and €35,292.40 for Household Budget. 
 
Why did Cork City Council stop issuing Bill Pay cards? 
1. Costs – Cork City Council as outlined above are charged a flat rate of €1.11 per 
transaction.  BP customers can pay whatever amount they wish, as often as they 
like i.e. if a customer’s rent is €30 per week, they can pay €10 Monday, €10 
Wednesday and €10 Friday. In this scenario Cork City Council would be charged 
€3.33 for An Post processing this one customers rent for the week.  
2. The issues involved with losing/replacing cards, people forgetting cards and 
giving wrong card numbers – When everything goes right, the delay on a 
customer’s An Post payment being reflected in their account is 4-5 days. This is 
typically at least doubled when things go wrong – ie when An Post manually enter 
a rent account number incorrectly, requiring manual correction in Cork City 
Council resulting in very significant inefficiencies. These instances are not 
irregular. 
3. Streamlining payment as best as possible through Cork City Council – Cork 
City Council has numerous existing ways to pay rent directly through us. In 
person, over the phone, by standing order/direct debit, and now online through 
Mycoco.  
 
Feasibility of using An Post for other Cork City Council payments 
Other than Rents, the largest of volume of public payments taken by the Council are 
fines which include parking fines. The feasibility of using An Post for fines has been 
examined previously concluding that it would not be feasible for the following 
reasons: 
1. Fines are complex to manage i.e. they increase in amount after 28 days, and fine 
payments cannot be accepted after certain days (56 days in the case of parking 
fines). An Post staff would not be in a position to discuss or even debate this with 
customers presenting to pay the lower amount, which is a regular scenario in the 
cash office. If somebody tries to pay a fine in An Post but it is now gone to court, 
it cannot be accepted.  An Post could mistakenly take their money in error but they 
have a court date.  
2. Fines are often disputed/appealed – and the appeal has to happen before payment. 
If somebody pays the fine through An Post, then attempts to appeal, they will not 
be able to appeal. 

3. If the ownness is on the customer to present to An Post with the fine number, what 
if they get a digit wrong for example? Rents already have this issue with Bill Pay 
and it is a difficulty for them. The relevant department in Cork City Council won’t 
be able to process the payment, and fines are on a ticking clock with the threat of 
raised prices and court summons. Cork City Council will have great difficulty in 
tracking down the correct fine/person.  
4. The cash office must ring the relevant departments for clarification on fine 
payments. This facility would obviously not be available to An Post. 
5. There is a 4-5 day delay in processing rent payments from the moment of payment 
to them being recognised on Cork City Council accounts. If somebody pays An 
Post a parking fine on the 56th day (given they have 56 days to pay from date of 
issue) – the delay in processing means that the file could go to court but the person 
have paid. This scenario would be worsened again if the person provides an 
incorrect fine number to the An Post cashier. 
6. It would not be feasible to circulate information of all fines to An Post. Fines arise 
daily to different people, for different amounts, for different things, from different 
departments 
 
People can pay for parking fines through the online payment portal, in person at City 
Hall, and over the phone.  
 
15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th November 2024. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th November 2024. 
 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th November 2024. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th November 2024. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer item 6.6 on the North East Local Area 
Committee minutes, One-Way Traffic Flow System On York Hill, back to the 
committee for further discussion 
 
19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th November 2024. 
 

20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoirí S. Martin and J. Kavanagh at the AILG Government Legislation 
Policy Programme 2024, a briefing for Elected Members, held at Tower Hotel, 
Co. Waterford, 16th November 2024. 
• Comhairleoir K. McCarthy as part of the China Delegation Visit to Shanghai 
and Shenzhen, 1st - 9th November 2024. 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon at the La Touche Legacy Weekend Conference, held 
at Greystones, Co. Wicklow, 20th - 21st September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon at the MacGill Summer School 2024, held at 
Glenties, Co. Donegal, 18th - 20th July 2024. 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon at the AILG Autumn Training Seminar, held at Co. 
Monaghan, 11th - 12th September 2024. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – CORE – August to November 2024. 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – Cork ETB – August to November 2024. 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – Cork Local Drugs and Alcohol Taskforce – August 
to November 2024. 
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
None received. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None received.  
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORT 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for October 2024. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 29, 
Knocknaheeny Regeneration, be referred to the Housing Strategic Policy Committee. 

 
27. 
MOTIONS 
 
27.1 
PAY PARITY FOR WORKERS IN SECTION 38/39 ORGANISATIONS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council supports pay parity for workers in section 38/39 organisations with 
their counterparts in the HSE and will write to the new Taoiseach and Minister for 
Health to seek their action on same.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/592) 
 
27.2 
CORK COMMUTER RAILWAY ORDER FOR PHASE 2 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to the incoming Minister for Transport to reinforce the 
importance of ensuring the Cork Commuter Railway Order for Phase 2 is approved as 
soon as it is received from Irish Rail and the importance of removing as many 
obstacles as possible for all transport capital projects in Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/594) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
