MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 10th NOVEMBER 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, 
D. Boyle. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. 
O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. N. Murtagh, A/Director of Services, Local Area 
Development & Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Mr. N. Carroll, A/Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Mr. P. McGuirk, Senior Executive Officer, Emergency 
Management and Climate Action. 
Mr. J. Stapleton, Senior Engineer, Infrastructure Development. 
Mr. M. Roman, ICT Specialist. 
Mr. B. Hurley, ICT Programme Officer. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer.  
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Horgan family on the death of Clare Horgan. 
• The McKnight family on the death of Berenice McKnight. 
• The O’Mahony family on the death of Antoinette O’Mahony. 
• The Noone family on the death of Triona Noone. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Michael O’Sullivan. 

• The Forde family on the death of Marie Forde. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Ken Murphy. 
• The Drennan family on the death of Jimmy Drennan. 
• The Wallace family on the death of George Wallace. 
• The McCue family on the death of Ken McCue. 
• The Ryan family on the death of Vivienne Ryan. 
• The O’Mahony family on the death of Pat O’Mahony. 
• The O’Byrne family on the death of Lorcan O’Byrne. 
• The Cleary family on the death of Noel Cleary. 
• The Drummond family on the death of Kathleen Ann Drummond. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Frank McCarthy. 
• The Spillane family on the death of Michael Spillane. 
• The Deasy family on the death of Seodhna Deasy. 
• The Doyle family on the death of Norah Philomena Doyle. 
• The Lawlor family on the death of Betty Lawlor. 
• The McGann family on the death of Barry McGann. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Beaumont Girls National School on their Sciath na Scol win. 
• Zohran Mamdani on his election as Mayor of New York. 
• Cork Harbour Alliance for a Safe Environment (CHASE) on continuing their 
fight against the unwanted incinerator in Ringaskiddy.  
• Douglas Tidy Towns on being awarded a silver medal at the National Tidy 
Towns Awards. 
• Mahon Tidy Towns on their positive report from the National Tidy Towns 
adjudicator. 
• The Rainbow Club on their Pride of Cork win. 
• Blackrock National Hurling Club on being crowned Seandún Junior B 
Hurling Champions. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
NEW ELECTRONIC MEETINGS INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that the new meeting software was being trialled 
which will be reviewed on an ongoing basis by Party Whips. An Chomhairle approved 
the use of e-voting and to livestream the meeting. 
 
3.2 
LADY MAYORESS’ COFFEE MORNING 
 
 
An tArdmhéara noted the very successful Lady Mayoress’ Coffee Morning and 
thanked all those who supported the event. 
 
3.3 
LORD MAYOR’S GALA CHRISTMAS CONCERT 
 
 
An tArdmhéara informed members that tickets were on sale for the Lord Mayor’s Gala 
Christmas Concert and that this year’s Concert is in aid of Shine A Light, Cork 
Samaritans, and Alzheimer Society of Ireland. 

 
3.4 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR PATRICK HORGAN 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that a Civic Reception for Patrick Horgan would 
be held on 10th December 2025. 
 
3.5 
BUDGET MEETING 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that the Budget Meeting would take place on 
Wednesday 12th November 2025 at 5.00pm. 
 
3.6 
CORKMAS PARADE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that the Corkmas Parade would take place on 
Friday 14th November 2025 at 7-8pm, going through North Main Street, Washington 
Street, St. Patrick’s Street, Bridge Street and ending on MacCurtain Street, and 
encouraged members to attend. 
 
3.7 
CITY CENTRE COMMITTEE TECHNICAL VISIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of the following City Centre 
Committee Members to London and Brighton from Tuesday 25th to Thursday 27th 
November 2025 for a technical visit: Comhairleoirí John Maher, Paudie Dineen, 
Niamh O’Connor, Fiona Kerins. 
 
3.8 
CONGRATULATIONS TO CATHERINE CONNOLLY 
 
 
An tArdmhéara extended congratulations to President Elect Catherine Connolly. 
 
3.9 
FAI CUP FINAL 
 
 
An tArdmhéara praised Cork City FC on their performance in the FAI Cup Final on 
9th November 2025. 
 
3.10 
UCC GOVERNMENT AND POLITICAL SCIENCE FIRST YEAR CLASS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara welcomed the BSC Government and Political Science first year class 
in the public gallery. 
 
3.11 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that notification had been received from 
Comhairleoir O. Moran of his intention to suspend standing orders, and called on 
Comhairleoir O. Moran to read his motion:- 
 
 
‘That there will be an extraordinary meeting of the Transport and Mobility Strategic 
Policy Committee to consider the proposal for an interchange at the Dunkettle 
roundabout being put forward by the Port of Cork, prior to an application being lodged 
in relation to the proposal; that the Port of Cork shall be invited to present to the 

meeting; and that the Chief Executive will advise Cork City Council on the legal 
processes involved vis-à-vis the statutory functions of Cork City Council.’ 
 
 
An tArdmhéara confirmed that the proposal did not require a suspension of standing 
orders and that a special meeting of the Transport and Mobility Strategic Policy 
Committee would be held. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
None received. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
An Chomhairle considered the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 13th October 2025. 
 
An Chomhairle noted a correction to Item 7.9. Resolution (as per the approved report) 
to read:  
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding  €406,949 be granted to Belmont 
Park Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme 
for the provision of 1 unit of accommodation at 1 three bed house at 12 Grange Vale 
Court, Grange, Cork.” 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle approved the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 
13th October 2025, including the corrected Resolution. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
OUTLINE WHAT MEASURES CORK CITY COUNCIL HAS IN PLACE TO 
ENSURE 
THAT 
PERSONS 
WITH 
INTELLECTUAL 
OR 
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES ARE SUPPORTED 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline in detail what measures Cork City Council has 
in place to ensure that persons with intellectual or developmental disabilities are 
supported when applying for social housing; to confirm whether the Council provides 
an Easy-Read or simplified version of the standard application form, or offers any 
form of assisted-completion appointment for applicants who require help; to indicate 
whether the Council recognises an advocate or family representative acting on behalf 
of such applicants; to state the average processing time for housing applications 
submitted by or on behalf of persons with intellectual disabilities in 2023 and 2024; 
to specify the number of allocations made to applicants with intellectual disabilities 
and the number of disability-appropriate or Supported Independent Living (SIL) units 
currently in the pipeline; to clarify whether the Council’s Housing Allocation Policy 

allows for the co-allocation of adult siblings with disabilities and whether this policy 
will be reviewed; to confirm if there is a designated liaison officer within the Housing 
Directorate for applicants and families in this category; to outline what formal 
coordination exists between Cork City Council and HSE Disability Services (CHO4) 
to plan housing transitions before family-care breakdown or bereavement; and to 
indicate whether the Chief Executive will conduct and publish a full review of the 
housing application process for people with intellectual disabilities and outline 
reforms to make that process fully accessible and supportive. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council operate in accordance with the legislation and guidance provided 
by the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage. The current Guidelines 
for housing people with a disability came into effect from October 17th, 2017. These 
guidelines assist us with the management of the housing assessment and allocation 
process for people with disabilities, including those living in the community and those 
transitioning to the community from residential care. 
 
A full Social Housing Support Application form must be submitted by all applicants 
for assessment purposes. This is a national document used by all local authorities and 
was revised a number of times under Statutory Instruments. Any amendments to this 
form would have to be issued by the Department of Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage (DHLGH). This form can be completed by an applicant with their advocate 
or recognised service provider. There is an easy-to-read guide in relation to 
completing a social housing application available on our website (easy-to-read-guide-
to-filling-in-the-social-housing-support-application-form.pdf).  In the event that a 
person with a disability has agreed/requested in a written, verbal or other appropriate 
method (depending on their disability), that an individual or service provider act in 
the capacity as advocate for the applicant, we engage as appropriate with this 
individual or service provider. We have a number of applicants who for various 
reasons have requested that a nominated person be permitted to discuss their housing 
file with us. For applicants with an intellectual disability this is often a support worker 
or a family member. This consent is recorded on the applicant’s housing file.  
  
Staff are available at the Public Housing Counter daily from 10am to 4pm to provide 
assistance with all aspects of the application process. If following the review of a 
HMD1 Form, there are circumstances that require further investigation the Housing 
Welfare Officer may carry out a more detailed assessment. 
 
We are also required to operate in accordance with the Assisted Decision-Making 
(Capacity) Act 2015. As you would be aware, having capacity is not a one-size fits all 
approach, but is something that is specific to the particular decision that is to be made 
at a given time. For example, a relevant person might need minimal assistance to apply 
for Social Housing Support but may need an increased level of support to understand 
the terms of a Tenancy Agreement so that they can sign the Tenancy Agreement. 
 
The 2021 amendment to the Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011 allowed 
for the replacement of the need for a Consultants Letter if seeking support on disability 
or medical ground with the new Medical/Disability Information Form (HMD Form 
1). The form was designed in consultation with local authority and HSE 

representatives. The purpose of the form is to ensure that we are given the appropriate 
information in a more structured, uniform way to allow us to assess an applicant. It 
assists us to ensure that the individuals or families most in need of housing on 
Disability Grounds will be given the appropriate priority. This is the form that is used 
for all applicants if applying for social housing support due to a disability or on 
medical grounds or if seeking prioritisation on that basis. The form is used for all types 
of disability whether physical, intellectual, sensory, or mental health. The decision 
made in relation to the information provided on the form is based on the applicant’s 
current housing situation and their future accommodation needs. It is not a reflection 
of the seriousness of their medical condition rather how their current accommodation 
is affecting their health. If the form is submitted as part of an initial housing 
application, it is reviewed as part of the assessment. If it is submitted by an existing 
applicant, it is logged, and they are assessed in date order. Applicants receive the 
decision on prioritisation in writing and are also advised on how to submit an appeal 
if they are unhappy with the outcome.  
 
Applications for social housing support are assessed in the order that they are received. 
The conduct of a social housing assessment is carried out under the criteria detailed 
in the Social Housing Assessment Regulation 2011, in particular Section 12 refers; 
 
12. (1) Subject to proper completion of the application form by the household 
and to paragraph (2), the housing authority of application shall deal with 
the application within a period of 12 weeks of receipt or, where the authority 
has requested additional information for the purpose of verifying information 
relating to the application, within 6 weeks of the receipt of such additional 
information. 
 
As the time frame for assessing an application is dependent on the Assessment Officer 
having all the required information, it is not possible to give an average length of time 
to process an application. We do not specifically identify applications as being 
submitted by an applicant with an intellectual disability, however if we are made 
aware of circumstances that indicate the applicant is at particular risk e.g. due to 
become homeless, we can prioritise the application for processing. 
 
Data in relation to applicants on the social housing list is published annually by the 
DHLGH (SSHA_2024_Report.pdf). Other data in relation to allocations is returned 
to the Housing Agency on an annual basis.  
 
The Capital Assistance Scheme is available to Approved Housing Bodies (AHBs) 
through the Housing Delivery Section to provide funding for specific categories of 
applicants which includes those with a disability and congregated settings. AHBs such 
as Horizon (Cope Foundation) have availed of this funding in recent years to deliver 
units. Belmont Park Housing Association have also recently received approval for 
CAS funding for a number of projects for applicants with an intellectual disability. 
 
We consider joint application by referring to national guidance. Under Part 1 of the 
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 a household is defined as a person who 
lives alone or two or more persons who live together. Furthermore, Section 20(1) and 
84(1) states that ‘A reference in this section to a household shall be read as including 
a reference to two or more persons who, in the opinion of the housing authority 

concerned, have a reasonable requirement to live together’. We accept applications 
from households consisting of two or more individuals, who are known to each other 
but who are not related or in a relationship, where: -  
 
- 
At least one individual has a verified disability,  
- 
And/or where the application will allow individuals to live in a household of 
their choosing, and/or  
- 
Where one or both applicants provide informal support to the other reducing 
the reliance on more formal supports.  
 
It should be noted that the individuals are not required to be living together at the time 
of application. Furthermore, it should be noted that joint applicants are considered as 
a household, and their eligibility must be viewed as a household. Therefore, assuming 
that the household meets the criteria for social housing support in our administrative 
area they can be housed together.  
 
It should be noted that if an applicant is engaged with the HSE or Service Provider, 
they will have a key role to play in ensuring that the individual is prepared for 
independent living and has the necessary personal and practical supports in place. This 
role shall include practical issues around living in the property and the training and 
support to be given shall form part of the person-centred plan prepared for the 
individual. It is of extreme importance that the supports are put in place to ensure that 
the person can sustain the tenancy and the resulting independence. We engage an on 
regular basis with Enable Ireland, Horizons (Cope Foundation) and Cheshire Homes 
in particular in relation to applicants that they are supporting.   
 
Within the Allocations Section, priority cases of applicants with disability/medical 
needs identified through the HMD1 Form review can be referred to the Housing 
Welfare Officer for further review and engagement. This would involve liaising with 
social workers and services supporting the individuals to identify their housing needs. 
 
Housing and Disability Steering Groups (HDSGs) were established in each local 
authority area under the National Housing Strategy for People with a Disability 2011 
to 2016 (extended to 2021). The National Housing Strategy for People with a 
Disability 2022-2027 follows on from the previous National Strategy with an aim to 
support people with disabilities in community-based living with maximum 
independence and choice.  The steering group provides a forum for Cork City Council, 
Cork County Council, HSE Disability Services, HSE Mental Health Services, 
Approved Housing Bodies, Disability Groups and the Housing Agency to meet 
quarterly.  
 
The setting up of the Regional Interagency Group is currently in progress. The role of 
this Group will be to bring together the local authority disability representatives and 
the HSE dedicated housing representatives for both Disability Services and Mental 
Health Services to allow for co-operation and collaboration at an operational level. 
The Groups will be facilitated by The Housing Agency, who will chair and provide 
administrative support to the Groups and will meet at least each quarter.  
 
As stated above the process for assessing social housing applications is determined by 
guidelines set out in legislation by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 

Heritage. Any changes to this process would have to be implemented at a national 
level.   
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.2 
MAHON YOUTH CLUB 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE give an update to Council regarding the status of the new Youth Club 
which is to be co-located with the long awaited Mahon Library. Recent reports would 
indicate that the Council are not proceeding with the much needed Youth Club and 
are embarking on a temporary stand alone Library which would be against best 
practice. The location of the new facility was to be on the extensive grounds of Nagle 
Community School and indeed has been with them and the relevant departments for 
more than 6 years. The City Council executive has not applied for government funding 
for the new facility, likely as a result of Nagle Community School not allowing their 
lands to be used. The youth of Mahon are being left behind. Why can't the Council 
lead a project to rebuild the Youth Club on their existing grounds?  For a decade they 
have been told that they would be housed in this new purpose built facility which 
would include the community library and Mahon Youth Club. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council and Nagle Community School/Cork Education and Training Board 
have agreed a Memorandum of Understanding relating to the use of the grounds to the 
west of the school campus for the purposes of a multi-use Library facility. It is 
intended that this would be home to the library, as well as youth and community 
spaces.  
 
National funding for Library development requires a 4-stage approval process. The 
first stage of this process has been successfully completed by Cork City Libraries. As 
this could be a lengthy process consideration is being given to the potential to develop 
an interim library space in the area.  
 
The potential interim library space would have a footprint roughly equivalent to that 
of other libraries in the network. The intention is that it would be a fully staffed facility 
and that it would be designed to allow for its evolution to a long-term community 
facility once the bespoke Library facility is realised.  
 
Councillors have been briefed by the City Librarian on the procedure and process 
required to secure this interim solution at the last South East LAC, with follow up 
detail expected at the next LAC for the area.  
 
From a community and youth perspective, the modular units on Mahon Drive are 
managed by Mahon Community Development Project and house Mahon Youth 
Project as well as Meals on Wheels and the Mahon Blackrock School Completion 

Project. In recent years, significant funding through the Cork City Council 
Community department, amongst others, has been directed to the upkeep of these 
units, with external cladding, replacement plumbing and additional glazing. These 
works aim to extend the lifespan of the units, while a long-term solution is secured.  
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.3 
BISHOP LUCEY PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the amount spent per sq. m on Bishop Lucey Park, the portion of this 
funding provided by central government and the amount spent on park maintenance 
and refurbishment in the last 5 years by park in the North West and North East wards 
and the amount spent on specific recreational infrastructure projects in the NWQR in 
the last 5 years. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Bishop Lucey Park is a compact City Centre park measuring 3,900M2.  
 
Its comprehensive restoration—encompassing soft and hard landscaping, upgraded 
lighting, installation of feature structures, conservation of sculptures, repairs to 
boundary walls and historic railings, archaeological surveys, and associated works—
is projected to cost approximately €7 million (excluding VAT). 
 
Construction is currently underway; hence the final cost can only be confirmed upon 
completion of works and conclusion of the final account in 2026. 
 
This transformative project is being delivered through a 75% grant from the 
Government’s Urban Regeneration and Development Fund which forms part of 
Project Ireland 2040. The remaining funding is provided by Cork City Council. 
 
Over the past 5 years the Council has spent €4.291M on a range of walking and 
cycling projects in the Northwest Local Electoral Area  
 
In addition, the  Rapid Deployment Pedestrian Scheme Northwest (funded by NTA), 
is nearing completion at a cost of €1.9m.  
 
The contracted works include: 
• 
1.5km of new/upgraded footpaths between St Vincent’s GAA Club and 
Castleview AFC via Dunmore Gardens, Churchfield Road and John F 
Connolly Road with a new path linking to Mount Agnes Road. 
• 
Removal and recycling of 395 large concrete bollards. 
• 
Installation of new public lighting on the path around the Fairfield. 
• 
100m of new footpath at Monacnappa, Waterloo Road, Blarney with new 
junction build out and uncontrolled crossing. 

• 
In total, the project includes 80 new LED luminaires on new/upgraded public 
lighting columns across John F Connolly, Monacnappa and The Fairfield. 
 
A further €361,789 has been spent in 2024/2025 on the development of proposals for 
the proposed Northwest Regional Park. 
 
A total of €10,048,641 has been spend in the North East and West Wards on Parks 
maintenance and refurbishment over the last 5 years. 
 
Park Refurbishment 
 
 
Area 
2021 to 2025 
  
North East 
  
  
Meelick Park 
€206,085.52 
  
The Glen 
€15,000.00 
  
Tank Field 
€35,000.00 
  
Tinkers Cross Park 
€176,000.00 
  
Cork Foyer Playground, Blackpool 
€19,500.00 
  
John O'Callaghan Park, Glanmire 
€105,000.00 
  
Glenamoy Park, Mayfield 
€22,015.00 
  
North West 
  
Bridvalley Park 
€5,000.00 
  
Pophams Park  
€16,813.52 
  
Gerry O'Sullivans Park 
€76,837.52 
  
Kerry Pike / Ballycannon Park Playground 
€300,000.00 
  
Boherboy Playground by end 2025 
€150,000.00 
  
Blarney Childrens Playground Park 
€55,389.73 
  
Fairfield Park 
€25,000.00 
  
North West Sports Hub, Churchfield ( €1million 
Gov. grant)  
€1,250,000.00 
  
River Martin Walkway Works 
€240,000.00 
 € 100k grant  
Fenn Works  
€520,000 
  
  
Total 
 €   3,217,641.29   
Parks 
Maintenance – 
Pay & Non Pay 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
North West 
€590,100 
€622,100 
€683,400 
€687,800 
€781,300 
North East 
 €620,000 
 660,800 
 626,000 
 €753,100 
 €806,400  
Total 
€1,210,100 
€1,282,900 
€1,309,400 
€1,440,900 
€1,587,700 
Total 
€6,831,000.00 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 

Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development Directorate.  
 
6.4 
UISCE ÉIREANN 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to identify the issues discussed and the date she or her 
senior officials last met with Uisce Éireann CEO and management on and what 
progress, if any, has been achieved on those issues; and if she will advise on when the 
next meeting is scheduled for senior management to meet and a meeting with elected 
members and Uisce Éireann will be scheduled.  
 
REPLY 
 
A meeting was held between Cork City Council and Uisce Éireann senior 
management on 19th March 2025 which was attended by Cork City Council’s Chief 
Executive and Uisce Éireann’s CEO. The purpose of the meeting was for CCC to raise 
and outline their concerns to Uisce Éireann across a number of areas including: key 
strategic issues impacting growth in Cork City under Planning & Development 
Management, and Housing; Uisce Éireann’s operational issues; the end of the Service 
Level Agreement (SLA); and reassignment of staff. Currently there are no further 
meetings scheduled between the senior management teams, it is however planned to 
review the issues raised from the perspective of CCC and progress from UE at the end 
of this year. I can also confirm, from an Operations Directorate perspective, that 
progress has been made on the SLA and the reassignment of staff throughout the year.  
 
Noel Murtagh, 
Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.5 
WATER QUALITY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Council if it is aware of chlorine dosing in water lines that impact on taste 
of the water and the impact on appliances and water quality across the city water 
network; to identify those lines and the number of homes impacted on each line with 
such dosing. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council no longer have any involvement in the delivery of water services. 
Cork City Council are aware that chlorine is used to disinfect drinking water. The 
dosing regime and potential residue in the distribution pipes (which are Uisce Éireann 
assets) are a matter for UÉ. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 

Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.6 
BUS STOPS AND WORKS IN ADVANCE OF EXPANDED CITY BUS 
NETWORK 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the legal powers being used by the National Transport 
Authority to install bus stops and associated works in advance of the expanded city 
bus network; if Cork City Council has been provided with drawings and other 
materials illustrating the works planned; and if these can be provided to members of 
Cork City Council? 
 
REPLY 
 
For information, the Traffic Regulation and Safety section of Cork City Council 
receives an allocation of funding annually from the NTA as part of the Bus Stop 
Enhancement Program grant. This funding is used to upgrade existing stops to 
improve road safety and accessibility for customers. In 2025 four bus stops were 
upgraded. Further bus stop upgrade works will be considered in 2026 subject to 
availability of NTA funding. 
 
The City Council currently approves the designation of bus stops under Section 85 of 
the Road Traffic Act, 1961, as amended by Section 16 of the Road Traffic Act, 2002, 
which transfers this responsibility from the Garda Commissioner to the local 
authority. This includes the hundreds of new/upgraded bus stops being installed for 
the new bus network, these bus stops are considered to be exempted development. If 
Members have any queries in relation to the location of a bus stop the traffic section 
can follow up with the NTA with regard to same.  
 
For bus facilities requiring more extensive civil works, these are subject to separate 
consent processes (usually under Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act or Part 8 of the 
Planning and Development Act) with the related details being presented to Members 
for consideration as part of the process.  
 
Noel Murtagh, 
Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.7 
CIRCULAR ECONOMY INITIATIVES 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline circular economy initiatives this Council is 
supporting and encouraging, stating what measures are being taken to develop Council 
strategy in this area? 
 

REPLY 
 
Cork City Council is actively supporting circular economy initiatives through grant 
schemes, community partnerships, and strategic planning efforts aimed at reducing 
waste and promoting reuse, repair, and recycling. Several initiatives and measures are 
currently being supported and developed: 
 
Community-Focused Grant Schemes 
 
Circular Economy Grants 2025  
This annual scheme provides up to €1,500 per project to schools, community groups, 
and social enterprises to implement waste prevention, reuse, and repair activities. The 
scheme encourages collaboration between local schools, charities, and voluntary 
groups, fostering innovation and knowledge-sharing around sustainable practices. The 
grant application process open in March/April of each year. 
 
Cork City Community Climate Action Fund 
The Community Climate Action Fund, supported by the Department of Climate, 
Energy and Environment, supports the circular economy by financing local projects 
that reduce waste, promote reuse, and encourage sustainable consumption. The 2026 
round has recently opened for applications with a total of €860,000 again available 
across five themes.  
 
Community Partnerships 
 
Re-love Paint 
Three social enterprises in Cork city and county take leftover water-based paint and 
filter, remix, recolour and repackage it to sell at reduced rates in the local community. 
This unique collaboration between Cork City and County Councils provides 
affordable, high-quality paint in a great range of colours for reuse in the local 
community.  Community groups and clubs can apply for this grant directly to Re-Love 
Paint. €2500 is contributed to Re-Love Paint to allow the community groups to receive 
free paint.  
 
Cloth Nappy Scheme Incentive 
Following success in 2024, the scheme was funded once again in 2025 allowing 50 
families in Cork City to receive a pack of reuseable Cloth Nappies free of charge. This 
is in collaboration with Cork University Maternity Hospital. 
 
Toy Library  
The Toy Library is a social enterprise to divert plastic waste from toys going to 
landfill. They host Swap and Play events where toys are re-circulated and to date in 
2025, 2 tons of plastic waste has been diverted from landfill. Cork City Council 
provided financial support for two events this year with the second event taking place 
in Millenium Hall on Sunday, November 23rd – a Circular Christmas.  This initiative 
also received financial support through the SEFIT programme, run by Rethink Ireland 
and Local Enterprise Office Cork. 
 
Rubbish Film Festival 

The Rubbish Film Festival is a creative project which empowers secondary school 
students to create one-minute films highlighting issues around climate change.  
 
Strategy and Policy Integration 
Circular economy principles are being embedded into environmental awareness 
campaigns, public procurement policies, festivals and events.  The Council’s 
Environmental Awareness Office plays a key role in promoting circularity through 
education, outreach, and support for grassroots initiatives. 
 
National Waste Management Plan for a Circular Economy 2024-2030   
Ireland consists of three Regional Waste Management Offices, Connaught – Ulster, 
Eastern – Midlands and Southern Region. The South Region Waste Management 
Office (SRWMO) consists of 10 local authorities including Cork City Council. Two 
circular economy projects which will be launched in November 2025 by the SRWMO 
in conjunction with it’s constituent Local Authorities: 
 
- 
Reuseable Party Packs  
Each local authority of the SRWMO will receive 10 packs consisting of 
reuseable cutlery, plates, bowls, cups and water/juice jugs to share among 
community groups at their events. The pack also contains bunting which was 
created from textile waste material 
 
- 
Circular Cups for Community Events 
Circular Cups for Community Events consists of coffee cups, pint glasses and 
½ pint glasses for use at community events throughout the South Region. The 
social enterprise IRD Duhallow will house the washer and dryer system and the 
cups which will be available through a booking system for community events. 
 
In 2024, the three Regional Waste Management Offices collaborated and produced 
the National Waste Management Plan for a Circular Economy 2024-2030.  Cork City 
Council were a contributor to the production of this Plan.  The delivery on our Circular 
Economy commitments is based on the implementation of the provisions of this Waste 
Management Plan for a Circular Economy 2024-2030 in Cork City.  Cork City 
Council is committed to delivering the actions identified in this strategic plan locally 
through our communities and businesses. 
 
In summary, Cork City Council is actively encouraging circular economy practices 
through targeted funding, strategic partnerships, and integration into long-term 
planning. These efforts reflect a growing commitment to sustainability, community 
empowerment, and innovation in waste reduction. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Emergency Management & Climate Action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.8 
TRAVELLER HOMELESS TASKFORCE 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the establishment of the local Traveller 
Homeless Taskforce. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council currently has no plans to establish a local Traveller Homeless 
Taskforce.  The Traveller Accommodation Unit (TAU) and the Accommodation 
Placement Services (APS) currently provide supports to homeless traveller families 
who require homeless support within Cork City.  The TAU also has proposals within 
the current Traveller Accommodation Programme to establish a transitional housing 
initiative for families.  
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.9 
BISHOP LUCEY PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on the works at Bishop Lucey and on the financial 
investment details?  
 
 
REPLY 
 
Work on Bishop Lucey Park is expected to be completed within the next two weeks. 
The park is scheduled to reopen to the public on the 14th of November. Project finances 
remain in line with expectations at circa €7m, however, the final outturn costs cannot 
be confirmed until the conclusion of the final account process in 2026. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne,  
Director of Services,  
Infrastructure Development.  
 
6.10 
MAYFIELD SPORTS COMPLEX 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what is Cork City Councils responsibilities and obligations 
to Mayfield Sports Complex?  
 
*The complex was built in 1975 with Cork City Council providing 50% of the cost of 
building the complex. 

 
REPLY 
 
The first five community schools built and owned by the Department of Education in 
the country of ninety schools, had sport complexes attached to them. This includes 
Mayfield Community School, who manage the Mayfield Sports Complex (owned by 
the Department of Education). Because of the public swimming pool element, despite 
not having formal responsibilities, the City Council has always been supportive of the 
leisure centre, being represented by Councillors and officials on the Management 
Advisory Committee which reports to the Board of Management of the School. For a 
long period of years, the Council has given an annual grant from its Revenue Budget 
towards the maintenance/upkeep of the premises, grant provision in 2025 being 
€41,200 which was approved by Members of Council. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.11 
STATUS OF PLANNING APPLICATION 19/04667 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE to set out the status of planning application 19/04667 re the provision 
of a crèche facility, a local shop, doctors surgery and pharmacy, alongside the 
development of overhead apartments, in Manor Farm, Lehenaghmore; to set out what 
contact there has been between Cork City Council and the developer to ensure these 
vital community facilities are delivered as soon as possible; and to set out if the 
Council has been advised of a completion date for the development. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Permission was granted by Cork County Council for the construction of (1) a creche 
facility, (2) a local shop with overhead apartment, (3) a local doctor’s surgery and 
retail unit with 4 no. overhead apartments. The application was a part alteration and 
completion of the larger housing development permitted under 04/7674 and 07/10893 
which had been granted extension of durations under Refs 10/5240, 13/4884 and 
13/5025.  
 
A final grant of permission issued from Cork County Council on 02.01.2020. No 
extension of duration application was received by Cork City Council. The permission 
expired in April 2025.  
 
A site inspection carried out by the Development Management team confirmed that 
the development is substantially complete with all three structures constructed to roof 
level with 2 of the buildings appearing almost ready for occupation. The entrance and 
access roads within remain unsurfaced and the site is fenced off. 
 

The City Council will make contact with the developer to establish an up to date 
position with respect to the completion of the development and likely commencement 
of uses.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.12 
DERELICT SITES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the amount spent on the purchasing of derelict sites in each of the last 
5 years, the amount spent on securing sites on the derelict sites register and the number 
of sites that have been returned to use from city council ownership. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The following table is reflective of the number of properties acquired by Cork City 
Council Property Section from calendar year 2020 to 8th October 2025 utilising the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990. 
 
No. of 
Acquisitions 
Properties 
Sold via the 
Open Market 
Properties in 
process of 
redevelopment 
Expenditure 
21 
5 
20 
€1,607,321 
 
 
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate spent €10,240 on securing sites on 
the Derelict Sites Register since 2020.   
 
Of the 21 properties acquired referenced above, the following is the status of same: 
 
Nr. of 
Properties 
Address of Property acquired via 
Derelict Sites Act 1990 January 2020 – 
October 2025 
Current Status of Property 
2 
118 Barrack St & 119 Barrack Street, 
Cork 
Property sold privately for redevelopment. 
4 
62, 63, 64 & 65 North Main Street, Cork 
City Centre Directorate advancing development. 
1 
1 Elizabeth Terrace, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
4 Gerald Griffin Avenue, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
‘Greystone Cottage’, Cois Coilte, Mahon, 
Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
5, Prosperous Place, Blackpool, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 

1 
20, Muskerry Terrace, Blarney, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
2 
23, Lower John St & 24 Lower John St, 
Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing development. 
1 
49/50, Old Market Place, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing development. 
1 
14, The Grove, Shanakiel, Cork 
Private sale agreed. Conveyance advancing. 
2 
15/16, Kyle Street, Cork 
Private sale agreed. Conveyance advancing. 
1 
‘Strawhall’, St. Mary’s Road, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing redevelopment.  
3 
21, 22 & 23 Thomas Davis Street, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing a development. 
 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1  
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 30th 
October 2025 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of leasehold interest (110.4 m2 approximately), on land located at 27, 
Long Range, Ballincollig, Cork to Alan Buckley c/o O’Sullivan Whelan 
Solicitors, 16 & 17A South Terrace, Cork, for the sum of €750.00 together with 
costs in the sum of €1,500.00 plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir G. 
O’Brien, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of Stall 4C Grand Parade Market, Cork to Bubble Brothers Ltd. c/o 
Martin A. Harvey & Co. Solicitors, Parliament House, George’s Quay, Cork, by 
way of lease for a term of 21 years from 1st January 2024 subject to an annual rent 
of €8,888.16 plus rates and service charges. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal by way of exchange of property known as 26, Primrose Hill, Tower, 
Cork to Alfred Board c/o Niall Daly, BDM Solicitors, Clarkes Bridge House, 
Hanover St, Cork in exchange for the property owned by the said Alfred Board at 
38, Killala Gardens, Knocknaheeny, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
 

7.2 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: APARTMENT 2, 14 TRAVERS STREET, 
CORK - CORK SIMON COMMUNITY CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 23rd October 2025 in relation to a loan facility for Cork Simon 
Community CLG in respect of the provision of 1 one bed apartment at Apartment 2, 
14 Travers Street, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €253,717.88 be granted to Cork 
Simon Community CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 one bed apartment at Apartment 2, 14 Travers Street, Cork.” 
 
7.3 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 120 CLONLEA, MOUNT OVAL 
VILLAGE, ROCHESTOWN, CORK - CORK SIMON COMMUNITY CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 23rd October 2025 in relation to a loan facility for Cork Simon 
Community CLG in respect of the provision of 1 one bed apartment at 120 Clonlea, 
Mount Oval Village, Rochestown, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €260,394.45 be granted to Cork 
Simon Community CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 one bed apartment at 120 Clonlea, Mount Oval Village, 
Rochestown, Cork.” 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 3rd NOVEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 3rd November 2025. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 30/09/2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 30/09/2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8.2 
MOTIONS  
 
8.2.1 
CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUEST NUMBERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 30th October 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council service centre will provide customer service request numbers 
in response to email and telephone queries; and allow the public to track the progress 
of requests online using these.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/515) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Cork City Council, Customer 
Care Team can provide case reference numbers to the public in response to email and 
telephone queries. The online tracking of the progress of the request by the public 
cannot be facilitated currently in the existing system. 
 
8.2.2 
INCREASE THE MEMBERSHIP OF COUNCIL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 30th October 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council seek from the Government legislative change that would 
increase the membership of this Council to better reflect increased population, added 
land area and greater responsibilities brought about by the 2019 city boundary 
extension.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/526) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the responsibility for determining the 
number of councillors per Local Authority area rests with the Minister for Local 
Government. The Programme for Government 2025 provided for the establishment of 
the Local Democracy Taskforce for the reform and strengthening of local government 
in Ireland.  The Local Democracy Taskforce was indeed established in June 2024, and 
it is currently progressing with its work schedule with the aim of delivering 
recommendations to Government in the first half of 2026. In relation to councillor 
numbers, the Taskforce has been asked to:- 
 
“examine how the current number of councillors is determined and explore proposals 
for a framework for amendments including taking into consideration population 
growth since the 2014 reforms and the consequent need for an increase in the numbers 
of councillors to ensure appropriate representation of citizens.” 
 
Taking an evidence informed approach, the Taskforce will finalise a programme of 
recommendations for the reform and strengthening of local government in Ireland, 
which will include recommendations in relation to the framework for determining 
councillor numbers; these will be considered by Government following reporting by 

the Taskforce. Elected members are represented on the task force through the AILG 
and Cork City Council agreed to include the Taskforce as a standing item at CPG 
whilst the taskforce is continuing its work. It is recommended that CPG consider the 
recommendations of the taskforce and any proposal to increase the number of 
Councillors is predicated on those recommendations. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Corporate Policy Group 
for further consideration. 
 
8.2.3 
INDEPENDENT 
REVIEW 
BODY 
OF 
CORK 
CITY 
COUNCIL'S 
EXPENDITURE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following which the Corporate Policy 
Group has held in committee:- 
 
‘That the Chief Executive provides a report on the findings of the processes that were 
initiated in February 2025 in response to my subject motion.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/463) 
 
and accompanying report of the Director of Services, HR, dated 2nd October 2025. 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the development of the Council’s 
Strategic Workforce Plan is a central element of the proactive management of our 
workforce and will ensure the most effective and efficient deployment of people, 
skills, and experience. Following the adoption by Members of the Council’s Corporate 
Plan on 14 July 2025, a further round of detailed workshops have been conducted to 
identify the staff resources required to deliver on the strategic priorities set out in the 
Plan. A draft Strategic Workforce Plan will be considered by Senior Management in 
the coming weeks following engagement with staff representative groups. The Plan 
will then be submitted to the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
for consideration. 
 
The Chief Executive also provided a verbal update to the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Corporate Policy Group 
for further consideration. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 28th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 28th October 2025. 
 
10. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - CAIDREAMH 
IDIRNÁISIÚNTA & TURASÓIREACHT – 15th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 15th October 2025. 
 

10.1 
MOTIONS 
 
10.1.1 
REPORT ON HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS IN CHINA 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs, dated 13th October 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘In the context of Cork City Council's Sister City Agreement with the City of Shanghai 
in the People’s Republic of China, this Motion calls on Cork City Council to 
consistently raise concerns over human rights violations in China in all meetings and 
discussions with Chinese Government officials, specifically with regard to the 
treatment of the Uyghur, Tibetan and Christian Minorities, as well as lawyers, activists 
and journalists.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/269) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that May 2025 marked the twentieth 
anniversary of Cork City’s twinning with Shanghai, which was a product of the Irish 
Government’s original Asia Strategy in 1999. The request from Government to 
consider a twinning initiative at the time was informed by a desire at national level to 
promote more Irish engagement with China, and support the expansion of Ireland’s 
diplomatic footprint. Over the past twenty years, the partnership has provided 
numerous opportunities for projects of mutual benefit in education, healthcare, culture 
and business.  
 
The partnership has also proved a successful bridge for the city’s key institutions in 
supporting their own aspirations in terms of Chinese engagement. Cork City Council 
is regularly in contact with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in terms of 
ensuring our international engagement remains in line with national foreign policy, 
and is consistent with our status as an Irish local authority.  
 
The raising of human rights concerns in other countries is a competence of the 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The protection and promotion of human 
rights is a core pillar of Ireland's approach to foreign policy, and the Department of 
Foreign and Trade has supplied the following information on their raising of human 
rights concerns with China:  
 
“The protection and promotion of human rights is a core pillar of Ireland's foreign 
policy. Human rights and the protection of the global multilateral human rights 
framework are also among Ireland’s priorities in our relationship with China. 
There are several serious issues of concern regarding human rights in China, 
particularly the situations in Xinjiang, Hong Kong, and Tibet. Ireland regularly 
discusses these human rights concerns with the Chinese authorities in bilateral 
meetings and in the appropriate multilateral fora. Both the Tánaiste and Taoiseach 
raised Ireland’s concerns in relation to human rights in China with Chinese 
Foreign Minister Wang Yi during his visit to Ireland in February 2025. Ireland 
also ensures these issues are raised in relevant UN and EU fora.  
 

At the most recent session of the UN Human Rights Council in March 2025, 
Ireland’s National Statement set out our concerns on restrictions on civic space 
in China; on the treatment of ethnic and religious groups in China, including 
Tibetans and Uyghurs; and stressed the need for China to implement 
recommendations from the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR) on Xinjiang. We also reiterated our continued concern at the 
erosion of fundamental freedoms in Hong Kong. The EU statement on China at 
the same session of the UN Human Rights Council also urged China to abide by 
its obligations, under national and international law, to respect, protect and fulfil 
the rule of law and human rights for all, including Uyghurs, Tibetans and other 
persons belonging to national or ethnic, linguistic, religious or other groups and 
minorities. The EU pressed for the restoration of full respect for the rule of law, 
fundamental freedoms, and democratic principles, and to preserve Hong Kong’s 
high degree of autonomy under the ‘one country, two systems’ principle. The EU 
statement also referred to the ill treatment and unlawful detention of human rights 
defenders. At the most recent EU-China Human Rights Dialogue in June 2025, 
the EU reiterated its serious concerns regarding the ongoing deterioration of 
fundamental freedoms in China. These include the persistent restrictions on 
freedom of expression, religion or belief, peaceful assembly, and the right to 
equality and non-discrimination. The EU again called attention to the erosion of 
the rule of law, due process rights violations and the lack of judicial 
independence. It also raised concerns over labour rights, the use of forced labour 
and labour transfer programmes. The EU upheld the importance of transparency 
and accountability, urging China to end practices such as arbitrary detention, 
enforced disappearance, torture and ill-treatment. The EU reiterated its firm 
opposition to the death penalty in all circumstances and urged China to establish 
a moratorium and provide transparent data on its application. The EU expressed 
its concerns for the particularly vulnerable situation of persons belonging to 
religious, ethnic and linguistic minorities in China. The EU underlined that the 
selection of religious leaders should happen without government interference and 
in accordance with religious norms, including for the succession of the Dalai 
Lama.  
 
Ireland will continue to address human rights concerns with China, both 
bilaterally and as a member of the EU, through our contacts in Dublin and Beijing, 
and through the relevant multilateral channels.” 
 
It is proposed that Council explores the organisation of a workshop on the promotion 
of human rights locally as it pertains to the competence of Irish local authorities for 
interested Members. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is the national 
government authority responsible for raising human rights concerns with other states, 
and Cork City Council can bring our concerns directly to the Department.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.1.2 
REPORT ON NEW TWINNINGS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs, dated 13th October 2025 on the following 
motions:- 
 
TWINNING WITH THE CITY OF BANGALORE 
 
‘That Cork City Council explore the possibility of twinning Cork with the city of 
Bangalore (Bengaluru), the capital of the southern Indian State of Karnataka in 
recognition of and to build upon the existing and historical links between Cork and 
Bangalore in a variety of areas including technology, culture, research and education.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/356) 
 
FRIENDLY CITY RELATIONSHIP WITH ABERDEEN 
 
‘That this Council investigate the possibility of establishing a friendly city relationship 
with Aberdeen, Scotland.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/388) 
 
DEVELOP CITY-TO-CITY RELATIONSHIPS WITH GDYNIA 
 
‘That Cork City Council will extend congratulations to Gdynia, a port city in Poland 
of similar size to Cork and whose name has the same meaning as ‘Corcaigh’, on the 
occasion of the centenary of it being awarded city rights in 1926; and shall report on 
previous proposals to develop city-to-city relationships with Gdynia.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/385) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that it is a responsibility of the 
International Relations and Tourism Strategic Policy Committee to review requests 
for new twinning relationships with Cork City. Cork City is currently twinned with 
Cologne, Coventry, Rennes, San Francisco, Shanghai and Swansea. Formally lower 
levels of city partnership exist, and there are opportunities to consider city-to-city 
agreements, e.g. Partner or Friendship City Agreements. Cork currently has such a 
partner agreement with Shenzhen, Wuxi and Hangzhou. 
 
The current approach of Council is to develop timebound programmes of mutual 
benefit with prospective city partners before entering into formal twinning 
arrangements, and subject to the views of the SPC, it is considered that more 
information on what co-operation is known to exist, what thematic areas of co-
operation are proposed and how a formal partnership would serve to strengthen this 
co-operation is established.  
 
The Corporate, Community & Cultural Directorate would be happy to work with 
Members on this in view of bringing a detailed business case on a prospective 

partnership to the SPC for consideration. SPC members are asked to consider which, 
if any, of the cities should be considered for developing a business case(s). 
 
With specific regard to Motion 25/385 concerning Gdynia, it is proposed that the SPC 
consider whether they wish to send a letter of congratulations to the city at this time. 
In terms of the request for information on previous proposals, Gdynia was one of the 
six cities working with Cork on the recently concluded European REACHOUT 
(Horizon 2020) project, which engaged with making scientific decision-making tools 
in terms of climate adaptation, more accessible to public governance. Furthermore, a 
private citizen contacted the Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs Directorate, 
most recently in June 2025, noting a letter was forthcoming from Gdynia City Council. 
This letter has not been received by Council to date.  
 
11. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – 20th 
OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 20th October 2025. 
 
11.1 
MOTIONS 
 
11.1.1 
ADD CYCLE SYMBOL TO RESERVOIR OF ADVANCE STOP LINES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, and A/Director of Services, Local Area Development & 
Operations, dated 20th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That, as part of road lining maintenance contracts, Cork City Council will include the 
addition of a cycle symbol to the reservoir of existing Advance Stop Lines, ensure the 
depth of the reservoir is a minimum of 4m, and that the surface is red; consideration 
also to add an early start in the signal stage and cycle detection to existing junctions 
where an Advance Stop Line is present.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/318) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that current planned road lining 
replacement is completed as a replace like for like scenario as part of routine 
maintenance and road resurfacing as part of normal operations. 
 
All new road and street layout design proposals—including signage and road 
markings—are governed by national design standards and relevant guidance 
documents. Cork City Council is committed to complying with these standards in the 
planning, design, and construction of all new infrastructure works. 
 
 
 
 
 

11.1.2 
REPAIRS TO PRIVATE FOOTPATHS AND ROADS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 20th October 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek powers from the Minister responsible to ensure that 
mechanisms and orders can be directed so that repairs can be ensured on footpaths and 
roads where they are private but operate effectively as public realm; or in instances 
where no repairs are taken that the Council will undertake the repairs and bill the 
landowners directly.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/351) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has no powers to 
undertake works on lands which are not in charge and in private ownership. Also, 
public funds cannot be used for this purpose. There are significant public liability 
issues/aspects to this proposal which would require legal advice. However, if there is 
a specific location of interest, Roads Operations could review on a case-by-case basis.  
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration. 
 
11.1.3 
CHILDREN’S TRAFFIC PLAYGROUND 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 20th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘To ask the Council to examine the feasibility and cost of creating a Children’s Traffic 
Playground as is done in Copenhagen in an area of the city that will allow children to 
practice cycling and scooting and walking in a safe protected manner.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/352) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there is an existing park managed by 
the Council’s Parks Department at Railway Park, just off the Lower Glanmire road 
that has recently developed a Children’s Traffic Playground with the support of the 
Council’s Community Climate Action Fund.  Images of the park are available on their 
Instagram page @railwayparkcork. 
 
The Council are currently looking at other projects where similar facilities can be 
provided. 
 
11.1.4 
BRIEFING ON CAPITAL TRANSPORT PLANS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 20th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That in view of the multiple different capital transport plans which will have a major 
impact on how our city develops over the next number of decades that Cork City 

Council would arrange a briefing of members to consider the timelines, progress and 
implications of the various projects for the city.  This project briefing should include, 
but not limited to; 
 
1. 
Cork Commuter Rail network 
2. 
Cork-Limerick N/M20 Upgrade 
3. 
Northern Distributor Road  
4. 
Bus Connects 
5. 
Luas for Cork 
6. 
M28 Cork to Ringaskiddy Road 
 
The purpose of the briefing is to give an overall view of how the various projects will 
integrate’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 25/377) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Members will be provided with 
regular briefings on relevant capital projects as requested. 
 
Recent presentations/updates to the Strategic Policy committee have included: 
 
• N28 Scheme by Cork County Council RDO 
• Irish Rail, including site visit to Kent Station. 
• Bus Eireann on bus services 
• Cork City Council regarding the public Consultation on Northern Distributor 
Road 
 
In addition, presentations both statutory and non-statutory have been made to Council 
regarding Light Rail Transport, N/M20 Cork – Limerick Upgrade and Cork 
Commuter Rail Project.  
 
The National Transport Authority have also engaged extensively on the Bus Connects 
Project over recent years and it is envisaged that this will continue in the period ahead. 
 
The Infrastructure Development Directorate also provides monthly updates on all 
capital projects through the Chief Executive Monthly Report and provides regular 
updates on individual projects at Local Area Committee meetings. 
 
The Directorate has also recently commenced overview presentations to ward 
members on the full suite of capital projects currently being progressed in each ward 
and this will continue in the period ahead. 
 
The Directorate will be happy to provide further updates and reports as requested by 
the Members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11.1.5 
INCLUDE LUAS CORK IN THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 20th October 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises the necessity of Luas Cork to the sustainable 
development of Cork and Ireland, including the development of housing, the 
docklands and the city centre and the transition to sustainable mobility and climate 
neutrality, and specifically requests the Government that it be included as an absolute 
top priority commitment in the National Development Plan 2026-2035, including with 
a timeline for delivery in the 2030s’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/397) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the development of an east-west rapid 
mass transit corridor has long been an objective for Cork City, first articulated in the 
Cork Area Strategic Plan (CASP) in the 2000s. The idea of this corridor being a light 
rail system was fully embraced in the Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy 
(CMATS) published in 2020. Dubbed “Luas Cork”, this light rail system is a central 
part of CMATS which sets a framework to deliver a series of public transport services 
across metropolitan Cork, also including BusConnects Cork, heavy rail 
improvements, safe cycling and walking infrastructure. The Cork City Development 
Plan 2022-2028 and the Southern Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy fully 
support CMATS and the proposed light rail system. 
  
The National Development Plan 2021-2030 referred to this light rail system and 
committed to funding its continued development and design. In April 2025 the 
Revised National Planning Framework was published, and in May 2025 the 
Government issued a call for submissions on the review of the National Development 
Plan. Cork City Council issued a robust submission recommending that the Cork Light 
Rail / Luas Cork be included in the National Development Plan Review as a key 
strategic public transport project for Cork City, highlighting its importance to Cork 
City in realising its potential for sustainable growth as envisaged in the National 
Planning Framework. 
 
When the National Development Plan Review 2025 was published in July 2025 it 
departed somewhat from the format of its predecessor. It does not include a detailed 
list of projects. Instead, it sets out Departmental capital allocations, including €24.3 
billion set aside for the transport sector, including low carbon transport projects 
(which would include Luas Cork). Individual Departments will progress sectoral 
investment plans, identifying priority programmes and projects within their capital 
allocations, which are expected to be published later this year. 
 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) in collaboration with the National Transport 
Authority (NTA) continue to progress the Luas Cork project, with the consultation 
period for the Emerging Preferred Route having closed on 9th June 2025. A summary 
of the key findings and proposed next steps was recently published and it is expected 
the preferred route will be published early in the New Year. Cork City Council will 
continue to support this critical project as a key stakeholder. 

 
11.1.6 
SAFER ROUTES TO SCHOOLS SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 20th October 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council produce a report listing all schools who have applied for and 
have been granted funding under the Safer Routes to Schools scheme and the amount 
of funding granted to each.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/404) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Safe Routes to School (SRTS) 
Programme was developed by An Taisce in partnership with the NTA, on request of 
the Department of Transport, as a response to the need to improve safety at the ‘front 
of school’ environment and enhance access to school grounds, and accelerate the 
delivery of walking, scooting and cycling infrastructure on key access routes to 
schools.  
 
In 2021 all schools in the country were invited to apply to the Safe Routes to School 
programme. In Cork City 24 schools applied out of the 120 schools invited. All of 
these schools which are listed in the table below, have been accepted on the 
programme. However, due to the overwhelming response, it is not possible to progress 
all schools simultaneously and a phased approach was developed by An Taisce. 6 
schools in Cork City are included in Round 1 of the SRTS Programme and 4 of these 
are due to start construction with the remaining 2 in design stages. 3 schools are 
included in Round 2 of the programme and 2 further schools are included in Round 3 
of the programme. 
 
Schools that have applied and have not been included in the first 3 Rounds of funding 
will not be required to reapply, as they will come into the programme on a rolling 
basis. Only schools that have been selected for a Round have an associated funding 
allocation from the NTA.  
 
An Taisce’s selection criteria for schools to be included in active Rounds of the 
programme are as follows: 
 
• 
Mix of school type (primary, secondary), 
• 
Mix of location [urban (village, town, city), suburban, rural],  
• 
Socio-economic mix (non-DEIS, DEIS schools),  
• 
School’s commitment to sustainable travel [the school has already 
demonstrated a commitment to promote walking or cycling and other active 
modes (e.g. Walk on Wednesday, Cycle on Wednesday, Cycle Bus, 
Park in Stride, audits etc.)],  
• 
Cluster of schools (if schools are located on the same campus or 
street/section of road).   
• 
Liaison with local authorities to capture local knowledge and ensure 
complementarity with other active travel schemes being implemented or 
planned by local authorities. 

 
 
School Name 
Round Selection 
Current 
Allocation 
LEA 
Bishopstown Community School 
Selected Round 1 
€344,449 
SW 
Gaelscoil na Dúglaise  
Selected Round 1 
€60,000 
SC 
Glanmire Community College 
Selected Round 1 
€364,449 
NE 
Scoil Naomh Caitríona, 
Bishopstown 
Selected Round 1 
€342,308 
SW 
Scoil Naomh Iosaf, Riverstown. 
Selected Round 1 
€399,511 
NE 
St. Luke's NS, Mahony's Avenue 
Selected Round 1 
€341,965 
NE 
Coláiste Daibhéid, Sawmill St. 
 Not yet selected 
 
SC 
Coláiste Éamann Rís, St. 
Patrick's Rd 
 Not yet selected 
 
SC 
Cork Educate Together N.S, 
Grattan St.  
Selected Round 2 
€60,000 
SC 
Gaelscoil an Teaghlaigh Naofa, 
Tory Top Rd 
Selected Round 3 
€20,000 
SC 
GS Ui Riada, Wilton 
 Not yet selected 
 
SW 
North Monastery Primary, Scoil 
Mhuire Fatima  
Selected Round 3 
€20,000 
NW 
Scoil an Athar Maitiu Togher 
Girls 
 Not yet selected 
 
SW 
Scoil Barra Naofa Buachaillí, 
Beaumont 
Selected Round 2 
€60,000 
SE 
Scoil Barra Naofa Cailini, 
Beaumont, Cork  
Selected Round 2 
€60,000 
SE 
Scoil Bernadette, Montenotte 
 Not yet selected 
 
NE 
Scoil Íosaf Naofa, Ballintemple 
 Not yet selected 
 
SE 
Scoil Mhuire, Ballincollig 
 Not yet selected 
  
SW 
Scoil Realt na Maidine, 
Ballyphehane 
 Not yet selected 
  
SC 
South Lee Educate Together, 
Tramore Rd 
 Not yet selected 
  
SC 

School Name 
Round Selection 
Current 
Allocation 
LEA 
St Michael's CoI NS, Church Rd 
Blackrock 
 Not yet selected 
  
SE 
St. Luke's School, Douglas 
 Not yet selected 
  
SE 
Sunday’s Well GNS, Strawberry 
Hill 
 Not yet selected 
  
NW 
Upper Glanmire National School 
 Not yet selected 
  
NE 
 
11.1.7 
LOCAL LINK LIKE BUS SERVICES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 20th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council investigate along with the National Transport Authority the 
possibility of introducing a local link like bus services, where smaller buses could 
carry people living on the periphery of the city to and from the main city bus routes.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/471) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the operation and management of 
bus services fall within the remit of the National Transport Authority and public and 
private bus companies and with the Committee’s approval the motion can be referred 
to National Transport Authority for a response. 
 
11.1.8 
STEEL OR CONCRETE MARKERS TO DELINEATE CYCLE LANES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘In an effort to reach sustainability goals, improve the aesthetic of our streetscapes and 
save money in the long term (existing plastic markers need to be replaced regularly) 
the Council will endeavour to use steel or concrete to delineate cycle lanes instead of 
plastic going forward.’ 
   
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/096) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that cycle lane bollards are unfortunately 
frequently impacted by vehicles.  The bollards used by Cork City Council are flexible 
in accordance with Section 4.2.5.4 of the Department of Transport’s Cycle Design 
Manual which means that they are designed to return to a vertical position after 
impact. Impacts on steel or concrete bollards commonly result in broken or bent 
bollards which then become a hazard for both cyclists, pedestrians and vehicular 
traffic. Experience has shown that flexible bollards need replacement far less 
frequently that steel of concrete bollards for the previously mentioned reasons and this 
makes flexible bollards more cost effective in the long run. 

 
12. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH 
- 
STRAITÉISEACHT, 
FORBAIRT 
EACNAMAÍOCH, 
FIONTAR 
& 
PLEANÁIL – 20th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 20th October 2025. 
 
12.1 
MOTIONS 
 
12.1.1 
ONE-OFF HOUSING 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 20th October 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
 
1. Recognises that the current approach to one-off housing has made it 
unreasonably difficult for families and individuals with land and means to 
provide their own homes, effectively shutting down an important housing 
option during a crisis. 
 
2. Acknowledges that in times of sufficient housing supply, restrictions on 
one-off housing may have merit; however, given the current shortage, 
policies designed for another era are no longer fit for the circumstances we 
face today. 
 
3. Further acknowledges that Councilors are on the front lines of this crisis, 
dealing daily with individuals and families in need of housing, and that their 
role and experience should be respected and given appropriate weight in the 
shaping of housing policy. 
 
4. Agrees to initiate a review of the current Development Plan with a view to 
facilitating a controlled release of one-off housing permissions, subject to 
clear conditions, including: 
o Homes must meet modern building and energy efficiency standards; 
o Homes must respect design quality and the character of local areas; 
o Homes should connect to existing infrastructure and services where 
feasible; 
o Priority consideration should be given to applicants with a genuine 
local connection or family need. 
 
5. Commits to ensuring that planning policy balances sustainability and 
community protection with the urgent and immediate need for housing, and 
to bring forward draft amendments or supplementary guidance to this effect 
for Council consideration within six months. 
 

(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/427) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that this response addresses Motion 
25/427 by Councillor Damian Boylan and Motion 25/464 by Councillor Albert Deasy. 
 
As confirmed to members the Planning and Integrated Development Directorate is 
carrying out a review of the rural one-off housing policy as it is outlined in the current 
Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028. This review will be undertaken in the 
context of new and updated available data, including Census 2022 data, and the 
executive will revert to Council with proposals in the coming months with the 
expectation that this review will culminate in an appropriate variation of the City 
Development Plan in respect of this matter. Members will be kept informed at key 
stages of this process. 
 
12.1.2 
ONE-OFF RURAL HOUSING GUIDELINES ON FAMILY FARMS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council reviews its guidelines for one-off rural housing on family 
farms, as set out in the Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028, to align more closely 
with the policies of the Cork County Development Plan 2022-2028, and to present the 
review’s findings and recommendations to a full Council meeting for consideration 
and adoption, with a view to supporting viable family farms and rural communities in 
the expanded city boundary.  This motion is prompted by the 2019 boundary 
extension, which incorporated additional rural areas and family farms, including parts 
of Ballincollig, Blarney, Glanmire, and Tower, into the City Council’s remit. 
 
The current City Development Plan imposes stringent criteria, such as a minimum 30-
hectare landholding for farm viability and a prohibition on urban-generated housing, 
which may unduly restrict genuine rural housing needs on family farms. In contrast, 
Cork County Council’s Development Plan adopts a more flexible approach, 
supporting one-off housing for family farm successors and those with demonstrable 
economic or social need, without a fixed farm size threshold, to sustain rural 
communities.’ 
          
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/464) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that this response addresses Motion 
25/427 by Councillor Damian Boylan and Motion 25/464 by Councillor Albert Deasy. 
 
As confirmed to members the Planning and Integrated Development Directorate is 
carrying out a review of the rural one-off housing policy as it is outlined in the current 
Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028. This review will be undertaken in the 
context of new and updated available data, including Census 2022 data, and the 
executive will revert to Council with proposals in the coming months with the 
expectation that this review will culminate in an appropriate variation of the City 
Development Plan in respect of this matter. Members will be kept informed at key 
stages of this process. 
 

12.1.3 
30 HECTARES RULE IN THE CITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council remove the 30 hectares rule from the City Development Plan 
as expeditiously as possible. The removal will not solve the housing problem but 
would be seen as an important step in improving the situation.’ 
             
(Proposers: Cllr. S. Martin, Cllr. J. Sheehan 25/501) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that, as confirmed to members, the 
Planning and Integrated Development Directorate is carrying out a review of the rural 
one-off housing policy as it is outlined in the current Cork City Development Plan 
2022-2028. This review will be undertaken in the context of new and updated 
available data, including Census 2022 data, and the executive will revert to Council 
with proposals in the coming months with the expectation that this review will 
culminate in an appropriate variation of the City Development Plan in respect of this 
matter. Members will be kept informed at key stages of this process. 
 
12.1.4 
FUNDING AND CAPACITY TO BUILD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council, prior to any sale of a development property would ensure 
that the prospective buyer had funding and capacity to build on said Council property 
before engagement to sell.’ 
           
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/524) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that where Cork City Council propose 
the disposal of development land and/or assets in its ownership to a private entity, it 
will continue to, as part of the disposal process, to seek evidence of funds available to 
a preferred purchaser to realise any development proposal 
 
12.1.5 
REDEVELOPMENT OF VACANT AND DERELICT PROPERTIES FOR 
KEY-WORKER COST-RENTAL HOUSING 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council commits to developing a pilot programme to convert vacant 
and derelict buildings in the city centre into cost-rental homes for key workers, 
including nurses, teachers, gardaí, emergency responders, and other essential public 
and community sector staff. 
 
This programme will: 

• 
Prioritise the reuse of existing vacant and derelict properties to deliver 
affordable, long-term rental homes close to employment and public 
transport; 
• 
Seek funding and partnership support from the Department of Housing, the 
Land Development Agency, and Approved Housing Bodies; and 
• 
Ensure that all developments are provided at cost-rental levels to maintain 
long-term affordability for key workers.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/532) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council Housing Delivery 
Section will examine looking at the use of vacant and derelict properties if deemed 
appropriate as options for Cost Rental Housing.  A number of Cost Rental Schemes 
are either onsite or due to commence onsite with the Land Development Agency and 
a number of Approved Housing Bodies in conjunction with Cork City Council and the 
Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage, including sites in Cork City 
Centre and immediate suburbs. This will assist in making it easier for key workers to 
rent properties at an affordable rate in close proximity to their places of employment. 
The Cost Rental scheme will also offer security of tenure and high quality 
accommodation over the lifetime of the tenancy. There have already been 161 Cost 
Rental homes delivered in Cork City with over 400 units onsite under construction 
with both the LDA and the AHB Sector. 
 
12.1.6 
CORK CITY WALKS SIGNS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That the info on the old Cork City Walks signs be incorporated into the Cork City 
Walks section of the Council’s website.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/346) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is currently 
reviewing the information contained within the “Cork Walks” signage/brochures, and 
this will be updated on the website in due course. 
 
13. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS 
STRAITÉISIGH - TITHÍOCHT – 21st OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 21st October 2025. 
 
13.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Housing Progress report for August 2025. 
 
 
 
 

13.2 
MOTIONS 
 
13.2.1 
NUMBERS IN EMERGENCY ACCOMMODATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council report on the number of families and individuals in 
emergency accommodation and the length of time spent in such accommodation, 
report in tabular format  1, 2 or 3 + plus years.  Council to outline strategy to address 
homelessness including if a certain percentage of new housing allocations are being 
considered for those in long term emergency accommodation.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/233) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services set out the number of families and 
children placed in Emergency Accommodation in the last 5 years in the following 
table:  
 
Year 
Families 
Children 
2021 
110 
224 
2022 
127 
235 
2023 
147 
275 
2024 
179 
332 
2025 
149 
292 
 
The report advised that given the amount of data corresponding to each record held 
by each family, it is not possible to run a specific report in relation to each placement.  
The report noted that the following is a record for each year as at 31st December of 
that given year.  
 
 31/12/2021 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
29 
69 
6-12 months 
6 
6 
12-18 months 
0 
0 
18-24 months 
0 
0 
24+ months 
0 
0 
 
 
 
  
  
31/12/2022 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
34 
59 
6-12 months 
5 
13 
12-18 months 
3 
8 
18-24 months 
1 
1 
24+ months 
0 
0 
 
 
31/12/2023 
Families 
Children 

0-6 months 
33 
56 
6-12 months 
17 
43 
12-18 months 
6 
10 
18-24 months 
1 
3 
24+ months 
2 
3 
  
  
  
  
31/12/2024 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
38 
84 
6-12 months 
26 
46 
12-18 months 
10 
15 
18-24 months 
6 
15 
24+ months 
3 
7 
  
  
  
30/06/2025 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
44 
89 
6-12 months 
19 
49 
12-18 months 
15 
27 
18-24 months 
4 
5 
24+ months 
5 
14 
 
13.2.2 
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
  
‘That Cork City Council will report on the concept of community land trusts and their 
potential for housing delivery in Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/249) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Community Land Trusts 
(CLTs) are organisations set up to develop and manage homes and protect assets of 
community value, including affordable homes, workspace and green space. CLTs use 
legal structures such as covenants or planning agreements to provide long-term 
affordable housing, often by linking prices to local income or setting prices at a 
proportion of market rate.  In Ireland, Ó Cualann Housing is a co-operative with a 
mixed tenure and mixed income policy mainly focusing on affordable housing 
options. Ó Cualann are the key organisation delivering the Community Land Trust 
Model that Cork City Council is aware of. Ó Cualann partner with local authorities to 
identify sites for development and acquire the sites from the local authority at a 
discounted price in order to assist with making units affordable. The model is mixed 
tenure with affordable, private rented and social units provided.  All of their completed 
schemes are currently in Dublin.  Ó Cualann previously engaged with Cork City 
Council some years ago around a scheme in the North West of the City but 
unfortunately it did not come to fruition. Cork City Council, however, remains open 
to further engagement with Ó Cualann or any other organisation or trust implementing 
a similar model for future delivery of housing schemes should an appropriate 
opportunity arise. 

 
13.2.3 
TENANT PURCHASE SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council undertake to review the property types currently excluded 
from the Tenant Purchase Scheme, and that this review shall be completed within 
three months.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/259) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council undertakes 
to carry out a review of the current Tenant Purchase Scheme which will examine, 
amongst other things, the property types currently excluded from the Tenant Purchase 
Scheme.   
 
13.2.4 
RENT CALCULATIONS AND SOCIAL HOUSING ASSESSMENTS  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would disregard child maintenance payments when 
calculating income for the purposes of rent calculations and social housing 
assessments.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/265) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is in the 
process of reviewing the current Differential Rent Scheme and, once finalised, a report 
will issue to Members.  The current Departmental Guidelines issued to all Local 
Authorities requires them to include child maintenance payments in household income 
calculations. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further consideration. 
 
13.2.5 
NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS TO BE DELIVERED 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council set out the number of housing units to be delivered via Part 
V of the Planning and Development Acts in 2025 within the Council's administrative 
area; that the number be set out on a ward-by-ward basis; and that the mix of social, 
affordable and cost-rental use be identified.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/308) 
 

The report of the Acting Director of Services provided the table below setting out the 
number of units scheduled to be delivered via Part V within the City Council’s 
administrative area including the ward and tenure type of each. 
 
No. of  
Part V  
Units 
Tenure 
Cork 
City 
Council 
Ward 
Current 
Scheduled 
Completion Dates* 
18 
Social Housing  
Cork City South East 
Q4 2025 
9 
Social Housing  
Cork City North East 
3 Delivered, 6 in Q4 
2025 
9 
Social Housing  
Cork City North West  Q4 2025 
1 
Social Housing  
Cork City North West 
Q4 2025 
14 
Social Housing  
Cork City North East 
10 Delivered, 4 in 
Q4 2025  
6 
Social Housing  
Cork City South West  Delivered 
5 
Social Housing  
Cork City South West 
Delivered 
13 
Social Housing  
Cork City South West 
Delivered 
14 
Social Housing  
Cork City South West 
Q4 2025 
17 
Social Housing 
Cork City North East 
Delivered 
5 
Social Housing 
Cork City North West 
Q4 2025 
 
*Completion schedules can be subject to change. 
 
13.2.6 
TRAUMA INFORMED CARE AND PRACTICE TRAINING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will provide comprehensive training in Trauma-Informed 
Care and Practice for all staff within the Housing Department, including frontline and 
customer-facing personnel. 
 
This training will aim to foster a deeper understanding among staff of the complex 
emotional and psychological challenges faced by individuals and families 
experiencing housing insecurity, homelessness, or related stressors.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/323) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the Housing Directorate will 
facilitate training in Trauma-Informed Care and Practice for all staff within the 
Housing Directorate, including frontline and customer-facing personnel. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
 
 
 

13.2.7 
TENANT-IN-SITU/SECOND HAND ACQUISITIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would seek a meeting with the Minister for Housing with a 
view to reaching an agreement whereby Government fulfil their obligations to allow 
full recoupment of all 173 second hand home acquisitions sanctioned under the terms 
set out in circular entitled Guidance for 2024 Social Housing Acquisitions June 2024, 
setting aside the stipulation in Circular 11/2025 that unrecouped funds and incomplete 
conveyances from the calendar year 1/1/2024 to 31/12/2024 would be deducted from 
the 2025 allocation of €20,000,000, thereby freeing those funds for use in preventing 
homelessness in the calendar year 1/1/2025 to 31/12/2025, noting that no budget was 
stipulated for the calendar year 2024, and a precedent was set whereby the financial 
years 2023 and 2024 were treated separately for recoupment purposes.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/333) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that, to continue to support local 
authorities in responding to acute local situations, the Government approved an 
increase in the funding available for second-hand social housing for 2025 from the 
€60m initially available under Housing for All to €325m through the allocation of an 
additional €265m. Details were contained within Circular 11/2025 but this increased 
funding was to allow for a significant programme of acquisitions in 2025 for the 
specific priority categories of need set out below: 
  
1. Tenant in Situ. 
2. Exits from homeless services. 
3. People with a disability and older persons requiring urgent housing responses. 
4. Buy and Renew (B&R) acquisitions which tackle vacancy. 
  
The report advised that Cork City Council had a significant commitment under Tenant 
in Situ acquisition with some units carried over from 2024 and the allocated budget 
of €20m for 2025 had already been committed to these and the categories outlined 
previously.  Subsequently, the City Council was informed under the agreed NDP 
capital funding to 2030 now provides the Department with greater capital funding 
certainty for 2026 and beyond so Cork City Council has already committed elements 
of the housing delivery budget to further acquisitions for 2026 delivery under the 
categories above including the Tenant in Situ scheme. 
 
In September 2025, an additional €50 million was secured by the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage, James Browne T.D., to expand the 
programme and bring the total funding available this year to €375 million.    
 
The report noted that additional funding will be ring-fenced for acquisitions that 
support households, and particularly larger families with children and Housing First 
clients, to exit from long-term emergency homeless accommodation into housing. To 
this end, and, having regard to the large number of families with children in 
emergency homeless accommodation for longer than 12 months in Cork City, 
Minister Browne has allocated an additional €2 million to Cork City Council to 

progress acquisitions that will help exit as many of these households as possible from 
emergency accommodation. Acknowledging there is limited time to effectively 
complete such acquisitions before the end of the year, any unspent monies from the 
allocation will be carried forward into 2026 so as to maximise the impact of the 
funding for households. Funding carried forward will be ring-fenced and separate 
from any allocation provided under the second-hand acquisitions programme in 2026. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further consideration. 
 
13.2.8 
SPEED UP ALLOCATIONS FOR TURN KEY UNITS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will examine a policy where potential tenants would sign an 
insurance waiver on pre-installed fixtures in a home to take a social tenancy as is in 
order to speed up allocations for those on the list who wish to avail of turn key units.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/349) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has a legal 
requirement to ensure all properties made available for allocation meet the Housing 
(Standards for Rental Housing) Regulations 2019. The Housing Directorate will liaise 
with the Office of Legal Affairs to establish if it is possible for potential tenants to 
sign a waiver in regard to aspects of the Regulations. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further consideration. 
 
13.2.9 
SOCIAL HOUSING ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes the low level of allowance afforded by the Social 
Housing Assessment Regulations (2011) to the Council with respect to the inclusion 
of additional household members in setting income limits for applications for social 
housing support; calls for the Regulations to be amended to provide for a 5% increase 
in respect of additional household members aged less than 18 years and for the 10% 
cap to be removed with respect to same; and that the Council will communicate this 
call to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/364) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the current assessment criteria 
provides for a 2.5% increase in the income threshold for each child under 18 years. 
The 10% cap was removed under S.I. No. 116/2021 Social Housing Assessment 
(Amendment) Regulation 2021. This came into effect on 19th April 2021. 
 

13.2.10 AFFORDABLE HOUSING SCHEMES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would commit to delivering genuinely affordable homes, 
with pricing that reflects the real income levels of local residents. This should be in 
contrast to the current ‘affordable’ housing project on the Old Mallow Road, where 
homes are being marketed at prices approaching €400,000 — a figure far beyond the 
reach of many working individuals and families. The Council must ensure that future 
affordable housing schemes are genuinely accessible and aligned with the needs of 
those they are intended to serve.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/410) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the Local Authority 
Affordable Purchase Scheme (Affordable Housing) provides newly built homes for 
first-time and other eligible buyers who cannot afford to purchase a home at its open 
market value, using the maximum mortgage available to them, along with their 10% 
deposit.  Homes in Glenbride, Kilnap were advertised and sold with a minimum 
purchase price of €317,000 for a three-bed semi-detached unit and €322,500 for a 
three-bed semi-detached corner unit. The open market value of these homes was 
€392,500 and €397,500 but this is not the affordable housing purchase price.  
Applicants finance the purchase of their Affordable Housing Scheme homes with a 
10% deposit, a combination of Help to Buy, savings and a mortgage.  
 
• The average price paid in Phase 1, Glenbride across both unit types is 
€332,015.  
• 98% of purchasers in Glenbride are availing of the Help to Buy, with an 
average value of €19,608.  
• The average gross household income of the purchasers in Glenbride is 
€72,733.  None of the purchasers in Glenbride have purchased at the maximum 
purchase price.  
• 54% of purchasers have required 15% or more equity share assistance from 
Cork City Council to enable them to purchase their new family home.   
 
Cork City Council is always conscious of endeavouring to provide affordable homes 
at the most competitive prices and prices compare well when benchmarked against 
other affordable schemes in larger urban centres in other Local Authorities. 
 
13.2.11 HOUSING CRISIS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘To ask the CEO of Cork City Council, Valerie O’Sullivan, that she consider pursuing 
and implementing Workers’ Party policy in relation to the Housing Crisis, with the 
following solutions proposed by our Party: 
 

- 
The establishment of a State Construction Company under the direction of a 
National Building Agency, by extension of and incorporation into the 
competences of the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 
 
- 
The reinstatement of Cork City Council’s Direct Labour Unit to carry out small 
scale building projects and remedial works, throughout the city and within the 
newly extended boundaries accorded to the administrative remit of Council. 
 
- 
The reinstatement of the office and position of Clerk of Works by Cork City 
Council to oversee, supervise and account for each stage of a social housing 
(public building) project, ensuring the adherence to building regulations and 
standards, ensuring value for money, quality procurement and sourcing of 
materials, adherence to specified time schedules in the delivery of a project in 
order to ensure no repeat of the circumstances surrounding the derailment and 
partial demolition of the Kilmore Road ‘Homes For All’ social housing project.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 25/425) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council presently 
has a direct labour complement of 125 staff consisting of tradespersons, general 
operatives and supervisors. Just over 8,400 maintenance jobs were completed by 
direct labour in 2024.  
 
Cork City Council presently has a team of directly employed Engineers, Technicians 
and Clerks of Works that are fulfilling the role of overseeing the delivery of social 
housing construction projects. 
 
13.2.12 HOUSING FIRST 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises addiction as a debilitating disease with a high 
human, economic and reputational cost, recognises Housing First as a model policy 
to support the most vulnerable people from despair to recovery, will review its housing 
policy to reflect Housing First as a core priority and to prioritise housing for recovery 
patients accordingly, and will engage with the Government to ask for its full support.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/441) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the current Housing First 
National Implementation Plan 2022-2026 provides for the creation of 1,319 additional 
tenancies nationally over the period of 2022 - 2026. This represents an average of 264 
new tenancies per year with specific regional targets included. These targets are based 
on an analysis of need which involved all key stakeholders and was supported by The 
Housing Agency.  Cork City has a target of 45 properties over the lifetime of the plan 
which is funded jointly by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage and the National HSE Social Inclusion Office. 
 

The report further noted that Housing First has been in operation in Cork City since 
2019.  There are currently 48 active Housing First tenancies in Cork City and each 
year the targets set out by Government have been met. Housing First is operated and 
managed by Cork Simon and Focus Ireland in Cork City and supported by Cork City 
Council and the HSE Social Inclusion Cork/Kerry region. Cork City Council and its’ 
partners continue to focus on those who require Housing First supports to end the 
cycle of homelessness and support those individuals with complex issues such as 
addiction, mental and physical ill health. 
 
13.2.13 SECTION 3.7 OF THE HOUSING ALLOCATIONS SCHEME  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That the CE shall provide a report on the operational application of Section 3.7 of the 
Council's Housing Allocations Scheme; and shall outline whether it is the case that 
offers of housing are made in respect of areas to those who have not specified those 
areas of choice as part of their application for social housing support.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/454) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Section 3.7. of the Allocations 
Scheme approved in 2017 reflects national legislation and guidance such as the 
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 and the Social Housing Assessment 
Regulations 2011. The guidance states that one area of choice must always be 
specified in the functional area of the local authority of application. In addition, an 
applicant cannot change an area of interest within the period of 12 months following 
notification of that area of choice. 
 
While applicants for social housing with Cork City Council still select up to three 
areas of choice when they make an application for social housing support, they can 
view and bid on any property advertised on Cork City Council’s Choice Based Letting 
(CBL) system irrespective of the areas of choice they have selected. The basis for this 
has evolved from the initial introduction of the CBL system.  
 
When the Choice Based Letting (CBL) system was introduced in 2015 the areas of 
choice were merged into three areas – Northside, City Centre and Southside. 
Therefore, on the application for social housing support, applicants still selected up to 
three areas in which they would consider an offer of accommodation, and they were 
then given access to view properties on CBL in the appropriate area, e.g. selecting 
Farranree allowed you to view all Northside properties. Many applicants quickly 
realised that if they selected areas of choice across the city, they would be able to view 
all the available properties. The decision to have three areas was made prior to the 
launch of CBL and was communicated to elected representatives at that time. 
 
The report further noted that for properties that are reserved for older persons or units 
adapted for medical needs which are not advertised on the CBL system, Cork City 
Council does consider an applicant’s area of choice when making an offer. In addition 
to areas of choice, older applicants can select, on the application form, if they wish to 

be considered for specific developments and this information is used to select 
applicants for offers when properties become available. 
 
13.2.14 TRACKING SYSTEM FOR HOUSING RELATED DOCUMENTATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council introduce a centralised tracking system for all housing-
related documentation, integrated with the existing Choice Based Letting (CBL) 
system. This system would provide applicants with confirmation of receipt and a 
reference number upon submission of forms and documents. It would also allow 
Council staff to efficiently track incoming documentation, reducing the risk of forms 
being misplaced, mislabelled, or not logged. At present, many applicants experience 
delays that are attributed to forms being ‘not received’, resulting in backlogs, the loss 
of time on housing waiting lists, and in some cases, the unnecessary burden of having 
to re-submit documentation or obtain new affidavits.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/479) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the application form used for 
applying for social housing support is a national document and is a prescribed 
template. An application must be accompanied by a significant number of supporting 
documents including photographic I.D., birth certificates, marriage certificates, proof 
of current address, proof of citizenship/leave to remain, 12 months of income in the 
form of statement of liability and employment detailed summary available from 
Revenue and 2 years of accounts if self-employed. In addition, information may be 
required regarding divorce/separation and property ownership. Some applicants will 
also have disability/medical needs which require a completed HMD Form 1.  
 
An application is screened on receipt and if it is fully completed with the necessary 
documentation it is logged and given a reference number. If an application is missing 
a significant piece of documentation the full application is returned to the applicant 
by post at the address they have provided. Applications returned in this manner are 
also recorded. It is important to note that there is a checklist on the application form 
which provides details of all the documentation required to assess an application. It is 
the applicant’s responsibility to ensure they provide everything required at the time of 
application. Once the assessment process has been completed, the applicant will be 
advised of the outcome in writing and provided with their unique housing reference 
number. 
 
Currently applicants who submit an application in person at the Housing Counter 
receive a receipt confirming it has been submitted. All completed applications are 
inputted into the iHouse system. iHouse is the national system in use in all local 
authorities (except the Dublin LAs). Each application, whether approved or rejected, 
is recorded in detail on this system.  If after the initial application is processed, an 
applicant contacts the Allocations Section, or submits further information, it is noted 
on this system. The Allocations Section holds a hardcopy file for each applicant which 
contains all documentation submitted by the applicant relating to their application. All 

correspondence received by post is recorded each day noting the sender, nature of the 
correspondence and the date received. An acknowledgement letter is also sent. 
 
In relation to the Choice Based Letting (CBL) system, this is a system designed to 
facilitate applicants expressing an interest in a property available for letting. The 
system is designed, for GDPR purposes, to hold minimal personal information:- 
applicant(s) name(s), address, contact number and household composition to ensure 
maximum security.  The integration between iHouse and CBL is also kept to a 
minimum for data security reasons. 
 
The report noted that as the Housing Directorate recognises that there is often a large 
volume of documentation relating to each housing file, a process already underway, 
in conjunction with the I.C.T. and Business Services Directorate, to set up a new 
digital storage system for the Allocations Section. Once this system is in place, all 
documentation relating to an applicant’s file will be stored in an easily accessible and 
safe manner. The system called iDocs is a document repository for internal document 
storage. It ensures that sensitive information (e.g. housing supporting 
documentation/medical information) is only available to authorised personnel. It is an 
on-premises solution here in Cork City Council, so documents will be stored on a 
server within the City Council and support will be provided by the Local Government 
Management Agency (LGMA), if needed. 
 
13.2.15 ENSURING OPERATIONAL CHILDCARE FACILITIES IN PART 8 
HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council resolves that in all Part 8 housing developments where a 
crèche or childcare facility is proposed, it shall be a condition of planning that the 
developer must ensure the facility is fully operational and a qualified operator is 
secured prior to the occupation of residential units. This requirement shall be 
incorporated into the planning conditions and enforced through phased development 
or occupancy restrictions, to ensure that childcare infrastructure is delivered in tandem 
with housing and not deferred or omitted post-construction.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/531) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council will ensure 
that where a crèche or childcare facility is proposed, in accordance with the 
requirements of the Cork City Development Plan and forms part of a Part 8 Planning 
Approval, that a planning condition will be included to cover delivery of same by the 
Developer.  Cork City Council will also ensure that the Developer has the 
responsibility to secure a qualified operator for the facility and that they proactively 
progress with same during the construction stage. 
 
14. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 14th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 14th October 2025. 

 
15. 
CITY CENTRE COMMITTEE – 22nd OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the City Centre Committee from 
its meeting held, 22nd October 2025. 
 
16. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 3rd NOVEMBER 2025  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 3rd November 2025. 
 
16.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
16.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF SEPTEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
September 2025. 
 
17. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th October 2025. 
 
18. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th October 2025. 
 
19. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th October 2025. 
 
20. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th October 2025. 
 
21. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 29th OCTOBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 29th October 2025. 
 
22. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
 
 
 

23. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoirí S. Martin and J. Kavanagh at the LAMA Autumn Seminar, held 
at Amber Springs Hotel, Knockmullen, Gorey, Co. Wexford, 16th - 17th 
October 2025. 
• Comhairleoirí S. Martin and D. Boyle at the AILG Training Module 5, Local 
Authority Finance and Budget Process, held at Horse & Jockey, Co. Tipperary, 
11th October 2025. 
 
24. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir D. Boyle – Southern Regional Assembly – Q3 2024 to Q3 2025. 
• Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald – Cork Healthy Cities and National Healthy Cities 
– Q1 to Q3 2025. 
• Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald – WHO EU Healthy Cities – Q2 to Q3 2025. 
 
25. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
None received. 
 
26. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
27. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for September 2025. 
 
28. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 21, 
SEEP Funding for the NWQR, be referred to the Minister for Housing. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 23, 
Upgrade of MacCurtain Street, be referred to Party Whips. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29. 
MOTION REFERRED FROM PARTY WHIPS 
 
29.1 
NATIONAL COMMEMORATION FOR THE 150th ANNIVERSARY OF THE 
CATALPA EXPEDITION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Culture, Communications and Sport, 
Patrick O’Donovan and the Minister for Justice, Jim O’Callaghan calling on them and 
the Irish Government to hold a formal national commemoration on 17th April 2026 to 
mark the 150th anniversary of the Catalpa expedition organised by John Devoy and 
John Boyle O’Reilly, which resulted in the famous rescue of six Fenian prisoners from 
a British penal colony in Fremantle, Western Australia and asking the Irish 
Government to recommend that the six Fenian prisoners concerned, namely James 
Wilson, Thomas Hassett, Michael Harrington, Thomas Darragh, Martin Hogan and 
Robert Cranston be granted a posthumous presidential pardon.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/518) 
 
30. 
MOTIONS 
 
30.1 
INCREASE THE LEVY ON INCINERATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council asks that the Government increase the levy on incineration in the 
forthcoming Finance Bill, as had been previously included and taken out of earlier 
waste management legislation; in order that the true economic, social and 
environmental costs on incineration technology be measured, and that the viability of 
proposed use of the technology be properly assessed. In Cork Harbour over a twenty 
five year period, this region has been tormented with the threat to impose this 
technology without properly measuring its cost.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. D. Boyle, Cllr. O. Moran, Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/560) 
 
30.2 
CONSTRUCTION OF PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS / ZEBRA CROSSINGS / 
TOUCAN CROSSINGS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will inform the Minister for Transport, the NTA and Bus Connects 
that any sustainable transport corridor applied for must frontload the construction of 
pedestrian crossings/zebra crossings/toucan crossings before any other work is started 
on the corridors where approval is granted from Coimisiún Pleanála.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/561) 
 
 
 
 

30.3 
MULTIANNUAL FINANCIAL FRAMEWORK (MFF) 2028–2034 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls on the Taoiseach, Minister  for Public Expenditure, 
Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and Digitalisation, and the Minister for Finance 
not to support the European Commission’s proposal to establish a single common fund 
under the new Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 2028–2034, which would 
merge key EU policy instruments such as the Cohesion Policy, Common Agricultural 
Policy (CAP), and the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund into one 
overarching funding mechanism.  
  
This Council expresses concern that:  
1. The proposed “common fund” risks undermining the integrity and transparency 
of long-standing EU policies that have delivered tangible benefits to Ireland’s 
regions, farmers, and coastal communities.  
 
2. The Commission’s justification—that this structure would “simplify” the MFF—
fails to recognise that simplification through centralisation can weaken the 
specific policy objectives and ring-fenced funding that underpin regional and 
rural development.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/567) 
 
30.4 
ISSUES WITH BUS SERVICE IN SALLYBROOK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘I propose that Cork City Council writes to the National Transport Authority (NTA) 
and Bus Éireann requesting the urgent extension and improvement of the 214 bus 
route to adequately serve the greater Sallybrook area of Glanmire.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. McDonnell 25/568) 
 
30.5 
INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION ACCOMMODATION CENTRES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council condemns the recent arson attack on an International 
Protection accommodation centre in Drogheda and will write to the Minister for 
Justice, Home Affairs and Migration, recognising that families with their teenage 
children are sharing the same bedroom space in International Protection 
accommodation centres in Cork, and to request support for alternatives for them.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/579) 
 
 
 
 
 

30.6 
OVERTURN IN RESPECT OF PLANNING REF. 24/42854 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
 
- 
Notes the recent decision of An Coimisiún Pleanála to overturn the refusal of 
the Council to grant planning permission in respect of planning ref. 24/42854. 
 
- 
Records the Council's extreme disappointment with this decision. 
 
- 
Acknowledges the recent community demonstration held in Ballincollig - at 
which approximately 500 local residents were in attendance - and further 
acknowledges the community petition against the proposal; which has been 
signed by almost 2,000 residents. 
 
- 
Agrees with the community's call for those behind this proposal not to proceed 
with the development. 
 
- 
Affirms the Council's decision of June 2024 that this development is 
inappropriate development for the area. 
 
- 
Shall write to Coalquay Leisure Limited to communicate the contents of this 
motion to them.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/589) 
 
In the absence of the proposer of the motion, the motion was considered withdrawn. 
 
30.7 
ASSURANCE FROM TUSLA IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN CARE 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would write to the Chief Executive Officer of Tusla and the 
Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth, seeking formal 
written assurances that no child in Tusla care in Cork City is in a placement that places 
them at risk of harm or neglect, and confirm that all such children have an allocated 
social worker and a current, reviewed care plan, and that any identified gaps in 
oversight, staffing, or placement suitability in Cork have been immediately 
addressed.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/596) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir G. O’Brien, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the amendment where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, K. McCarthy, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, A. Deasy, C. O’Connor. (11) 
 

AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, D. Boylan, G. O’Brien. (3) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, F. Dennehy, T. 
Coleman. (5) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
