MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 8th JULY 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. 
McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan.  
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, P. Rice, F. Kerins. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. Harmon, 
A. Deasy, T. Coleman.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. A. Doherty, Chief Executive. 
Mr. B. Geaney, Deputy Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Housing 
Operations.  
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing Delivery & 
Regeneration. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Community, Culture & 
Placemaking. 
Mr. F. Reidy, Director of Services, Strategic Planning & 
Economic Development. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Ms. E. O’Callaghan, A/Director of Services, Roads & 
Environment Operations. 
Ms. E. Roberts, A/Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Ms. A. Murnane, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations. 
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Dowling family on the death of Gail Dowling. 
• The Skillington family on the death of William Skillington. 
• The Varma family on the death of Manohar Varma. 
• The Blackburn family on the death of Liam Blackburn. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Christine Murphy. 
• The Sullivan family on the death of June Sullivan. 

• The McCarthy family on the death of Laurence McCarthy. 
• The Crowley family on the death of Michael Crowley. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Declan O’Sullivan. 
• The Morrissey family on the death of Con Morrissey. 
• The Dullea family on the death of Florence J. (Flor) Dullea. 
• The Aherne family on the death of Chris Aherne. 
• The Long family on the death of Ann Long. 
• The Brennan family on the death of Gertrude (Gert) Brennan. 
• The Behan family on the death of Eamon Behan. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Margaret O’Leary. 
• The Foley family on the death of Anne Foley. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Frank McCarthy. 
• The Bohane family on the death of Noreen Bohane. 
• The Casey family on the death of John Joseph Casey. 
• The Lynch family on the death of Martin Lynch. 
• The Varian family on the death of Monica Varian. 
• The Cahill family on the death of Teresa Cahill. 
• The O’Meara family on the death of Sarah-Kate O’Meara. 
• The Allen family on the death of Bernard Allen. 
• The Donovan family on the death of Canon Bernard Donovan.  
• The Walsh family on the death of John Walsh. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Sir Keir Starmer MP on his election as Prime Minister of the United 
Kingdom; the first Labour leader in fourteen years.  
• Morgan McSweeney of Macroom for his role in the recent UK Election win 
for the Labour Party. 
• First Minister of Northern Ireland Michelle O’Neill on recent electoral 
success and moving to reset relations with the Westminster Government. 
• The Cork Senior Hurling Team on reaching the All-Ireland Hurling Final. 
• The Kabin Crew on the production of ‘The Spark.’ 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
WHO POLITICAL COMMITTEE  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the appointment of Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald to the WHO Political Committee. 
 
3.2 
WELLBEING ECONOMY FORUM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald to Reykjavik from 10th – 13th June 2024 for the Wellbeing Economy Forum. 
 
3.3 
WHO EUROPEAN HEALTHY CITIES NETWORK 
 

 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald to 
WHO European Healthy Cities Network: Political Committee Meeting taking place 
in Brno, Czech Republic, from 5th – 6th September 2024. 
 
3.4 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CORK CITY SPORTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Cork 
City Sports to mark its 70th anniversary. 
 
3.5 
EXTENSION OF BEST WISHES TO ANN DOHERTY, CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that this would be Ann Doherty’s final 
Ordinary Meeting of Council as Chief Executive, and thanked her for her service and 
dedication over the last ten years. This was followed by contributions and best wishes 
from members and a presentation of flowers to the Chief Executive. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir L. Harmon, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to discuss motion 57 on 
Appendix 1, Combat Gender and Sexuality Based Violence, at the end of the meeting, 
where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, J. Lynch, L. 
Harmon. (13) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. 
Martin, F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (16) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
As those voting against the proposal to suspend standing orders were greater than 
those voting for, An tArdmhéara declared the proposal defeated. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to discuss motion 60 on 
Appendix 1, Host Euro 2028 Games in Páirc Uí Chaoimh, at the end of the meeting, 
where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. 
Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, J. 
Lynch, L. Harmon. (14) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. 
Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (15) 

 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
As those voting against the proposal to suspend standing orders were greater than 
those voting for, An tArdmhéara declared the proposal defeated. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir L. Harmon, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to discuss motion 72 on 
Appendix 1, LGBTQ+ Groups in Cork, at the end of the meeting, where there 
appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, J. Lynch, L. 
Harmon. (13) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. 
Martin, F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (16) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
As those voting against the proposal to suspend standing orders were greater than 
those voting for, An tArdmhéara declared the proposal defeated. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir M. Gould to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would organise the installation of a family friendly fan zone 
viewing area in Cork city center for the All Ireland Hurling Final on July 21st and also 
to respectfully ask the Ardmhéara to engage with the Cork GAA County Board with 
a view to use Páirc Uí Chaoimh.’ 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to discuss the motion at the 
end of the meeting, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. 
Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, J. 
Lynch, L. Harmon, A. Deasy. (15) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. 
Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman. (14) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
 

As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 13th May 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 4th June 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Annual Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 21st June 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 24th June 2024. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
BUS CONNECTS CORRIDORS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE advise on as close as possible a timeline for the commencement of work 
to deliver the various Bus Connects Corridors as planned after the three Public 
Consultations over the past couple of years.  
 
As part of this Bus Connects plan, it has been proposed to implement certain work at 
St. Lukes Cross, and in particular, the installation of Traffic Lights at this very busy 
junction. When will work start on this project, as especially the installation of the 
Traffic Lights at this junction? 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Bus Connects is the National Transport Authority (NTA) led programme for the 
improvement and expansion of bus services across Cork City. It comprises of a range 
of improvements including – a network review, corridor improvements, zero emission 

fleet, fare review, payment system improvements, ticketing, additional park and rides, 
new livery and improved bus stop facilities. 
 
As part of the corridor improvement element NTA have prepared proposals for 11 key 
transport corridors across the City. These include the Mayfield to City Sustainable 
Transport Corridor B (STC B - Mayfield to City). The proposals for this corridor 
include a complete upgrade to the junction at St Lukes Cross including traffic signals, 
crossings etc. The related proposals have been developed across three rounds of public 
consultation. The NTA have confirmed that they will be finalised shortly and that the 
necessary application documentation will then be prepared for submission to An Bord 
Pleanala in early 2025.  The NTA have advised that the corridor improvement works 
will proceed to detailed design, tender and construction following An Bord Pleanala 
approval. Further details on works timelines and programmes will be circulated to 
Members as they become available. The Cork Bus Connects programme represents a 
€600m investment in sustainable transport improvement across the City and it is 
supported by the National Development Plan 2021-2030.  
 
Edith Roberts, 
A/Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.2 
REQUEST FOR UISCE ÉIREANN CEO TO ATTEND COUNCIL MEETING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive: 
 
To confirm that Cork City Council, on foot of my motion, wrote to the Chief Executive 
Officer of Uisce Éireann/Irish Water, Niall Gleeson calling upon him to come before 
a full meeting of Cork City Council in July 2024 to account for the consistent failure 
by the management of Uisce Eireann/Irish Water to tackle the persistent problems of 
water discolouration and water outages without sufficient notice in large areas of 
Cork; and 
 
Whether a response has been received from Uisce Éireann/Irish Water confirming that 
CEO Niall Gleeson will attend the July 2024 meeting, as requested. 
 
REPLY  
 
A response has been received from Uisce Eireann following the request for the Chief 
Executive Officer of Uisce Éireann/Irish Water, Niall Gleeson to come before a full 
meeting of Cork City Council in July 2024. A full copy of the response can be found 
within the Correspondence section of the agenda.  
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations. 
 
6.3 
CORK EVENT CENTRE 

 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the current amount of public funding pledged to the Cork 
Event Centre, timelines established of construction if cabinet approve such a funding 
commitment and if a public seat on the Board of the Event Centre will be involved. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The current amount of public funding pledged to the Cork Event Centre is €57m. A 
recommendation in relation to additional funding is with the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage who are liaising with the Government in terms of a 
decision. It is expected that construction will take two years to complete.  
 
A Review Committee will be set up to ensure that the minimum requirements of the 
Event Centre’s programme are met. It will comprise of 2 representatives from Cork 
City Council, one person nominated by the Event Centre company and a further 
person nominated by the JV with the agreement of Cork City Council. Minimum 
requirements means that in each Operating Year: 
 
(i) at least 15 large events with a minimum capacity of 4,500 people; 
(ii) at least 50 small events with a minimum capacity of 2,000 people and 
comprising at least 10 family, culture and arts focussed events such as 
musicals;  
(iii) overall footfall 220,000; 
 
Ann Doherty, 
Chief Executive. 
 
6.4 
ILLEGALLY DUMPED WASTE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the cost to Cork City Council of the collection of illegally 
dumped waste, on a yearly basis, including the staff costs associated; and if she will 
comment on the matter? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The annual cost to Cork City Councils Street Cleaning Section for the collection of 
Illegally dumped waste is estimated at €630,000 this figure includes wages, disposal 
of waste and Plant & Machinery. 
 
This figure does not include the costs of street sweeping, mechanical street cleaning 
nor the emptying of public litter bins. 
 

In a City, where some people took more personal responsibility for their actions much 
of the above expenditure would not be necessary and this money could be spent on 
higher order value add services. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate. 
 
6.5 
DOG WARDENS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the hours/days on which dog wardens are on patrol across Cork City 
(in tabular form); if, in light, of recent incidents across the country these hours are 
deemed to be sufficient; and if she will make a statement on the matter. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The City Council engages an Agent, the Cork Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (CSPCA) on our behalf to carry out two main functions under the Control of 
Dogs Acts: 
1) The provision of a Dog Shelter and  
2) The provision of a Dog Warden service 
 
The CSPCA have a purpose built Shelter at Mahon, which houses stray, surrendered 
and seized dogs. They also employ Dog Wardens, with the City Council funding three 
Dog Wardens for the past five years, up from one previously. The Wardens are mobile, 
operating from vans and respond to calls from the public in relation to dog control 
issues, house call inspections for dog licences and also patrol our parks and 
cemeteries. Their work hours are as follows 
 
Day 
Hours 
Monday 
9am to 5pm 
Tuesday 
9am to 5pm 
Wednesday 
9am to 5pm 
Thursday 
9am to 5pm 
Friday 
9am to 5pm 
 
In addition they also patrol our public parks on Saturdays.  These hours are considered 
sufficient at present but are kept under review. 
 
David Joyce 
Director of Services 
Roads & Environment Operations. 
 
6.6 
DERELICT SITES LEVY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir L. Harmon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 

 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how much Cork City Council collected from the Derelict 
Sites Levy in the past 12 months, segmented by electoral ward, in tabular form and 
what plans are in place to increase collection of this levy and to tackle the issue of 
derelict properties and sites in Cork City? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
In the last 12 months from June 2023, Cork City Council has collected €427,993 in 
Derelict Sites Levies. 
 
The table below shows the collected levies filtered by local electoral area for that 
period.  
 
LEA 
DS Levies collected since June 2023 
Cork City North East 
€26,600 
Cork City North West 
€64,893 
Cork City South Central 
€319,705 
Cork City South East 
€9,295 
Cork City South West 
€7,500 
 
 
TOTAL COLLECTED: 
€427,993 
 
 
Plans in place to increase levy collection. 
Cork City Council extensively reviewed its Derelict Sites processes in 2023 and 
increased the size of its Derelict Sites team. Cork City Council applies a robust 
approach to the collection of levies including timely notification of placement on the 
register, a determined approach to owner identification, timely issuing of relevant 
statements and the enforcement of final demand letters when payment is not received. 
 
Cork City Council is placing a legal charge on properties who fail to pay their levies, 
which means the property cannot be sold without the settlement of any outstanding 
levies.  
 
The circumstances of all properties are regularly reviewed and progressed to ensure 
the timely removal of dereliction and recoupment of levies.  
 
Plans to tackle the issue of derelict properties and sites in Cork City. 
In 2023, Cork City Council increased its staff resource and carried out a survey of 
over 13,000 city properties, with an end result of a 45% increase in the number of sites 
on the Derelict Site Register. The team is now working on a portfolio of over 700 
vacant and derelict properties.  Cork City Council is using all tools at its disposal to 
facilitate a timely removal of dereliction and a return to use.  
 
This includes the administering of available grants, with over 250 properties having 
applied for the Croi Conaithe/Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant, which brings 
long term vacant and derelict properties back into use. Several other grants/schemes 
administered by the Council contribute towards the same objective. These include the 

Living City Initiative, the Repair & Lease and Buy & Renew schemes, and the 
Architectural Conservation Grant. 
 
In the community, events are being held in all Cork City electoral wards in 2024 
including a recent conference in the city centre, where property owners and developers 
met council staff to understand the options available to them to bring vacant and 
derelict properties back into use. 
 
Cork City Council is using its powers of compulsory purchase, levy application and 
sale by agreement with increased frequency to facilitate a swift return to use.  
 
Cork City Council has increased the size of its technical team to identify deterioration 
in properties and pre-empt, where possible, their descent into dereliction. 
Improvement notices are issued with the aim of improving the fabric of the city. 
 
Detailed briefings have been provided to members on the work programme to address 
dereliction and this will continue through the SPC structure. 
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
6.7 
COLMCILLE ROAD PEDESTRIAN CROSSING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE give an update on when the Pedestrian Crossing works is due to commence 
on St Colmcille Road Gurranabraher. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Works to the pedestrian crossing on St. Colmcille Road, Gurranabraher are due to start 
in July/ August.  
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate. 
 
6.8 
MONEYGOURNEY ROAD TRAFFIC CALMING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is any plan in place to deal with the traffic calming 
on the Moneygourney Road. What is the plan, and how long will it take to complete, 
as children and residents are exposed to daily excessive speeding? 
 
REPLY 
 
 

The Moneygourney road is mainly a rural local road with extensive residential ribbon 
development to the northern and southern ends of the road. The road is approximately 
4.5 to 5 m in width and is approximately 2.5 km in length running from the L2470 in 
the south to the L2472 in the north. The road generally has no footpaths or public 
lighting with intermittent footpaths at certain locations. The speed limit on the road is 
80 km/hr from the L2470 in the south to a point approximately 725 m from the 
junction with the L2472 where it reduces to 60 km/hr for approximately 550 m and 
then reduces to 50 km/hr for the remainder. There are no current planned projects on 
the Moneygourney Road, however, as part of the national Speed Limit Review being 
currently progressed it is likely that the speed limit on the Moneygourney road will be 
reduced from 80 km/hr to 60 km/hr. In addition, the Moneygourney Road will be 
added to the list of requests for traffic calming. Annually Roads Operations bring 
forward to the Members of the Area Committees all requests for traffic calming and 
locations are selected by the Members subject to funds being available. The quantum 
of Traffic Calming Infrastructure that is installed annually is directly proportional to 
the amount of funding provided to the Operations Directorate for such purposes.  As 
such, should Members wish to increase the pace of delivery of Traffic Calming 
Infrastructure then options to achieve same are a) increase the revenue budget 
allocation in 2025 or b) assign some of the 2024 LAC Budget towards such works.    
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate. 
 
6.9 
NUMBER OF VACANT COUNCIL-OWNED SOCIAL HOUSING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Rice, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how many Council-owned social housing units are 
currently vacant, what is the average turnaround time and what steps are being taken 
to reduce the length of time people are waiting for social housing? 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
VACANT DWELLINGS BY LOCAL AREA 
 
 
Description 
SC 
NE 
NW 
SE 
SW 
Grand 
Total 
Under Repair  
22  
90  
122 
16  
10  
260  
Allocations/Area 
Management 
 22 
 9 
21  
16  
 20 
 88 

Grand Total 
44  
 99 
143  
32  
 30 
348  
 
Cork City Council is taking appropriate steps to expedite the turnaround time of vacant 
properties.  At present 348 dwellings out of approximately 11,000 are vacant in Cork 
City.  This represents a vacancy of 3.16 %.   
 
It is important to note that the reletting time includes the time taken to both repair and 
upgrade vacated properties to an acceptable letting standard and to relet those 
properties in line with the City Council's scheme of lettings. 
   
As such, the time taken to relet a property is dependent on the condition of a property 
at the time of return and how long it takes to relet a particular property depending on 
uptake and acceptance by applicants on the social housing list.   A comprehensive 
effort to improve the turnaround time based on process and system improvements is 
ongoing.  
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Operations. 
 
6.10 
RELAUNCH OF SHANDON STREET FESTIVAL 2025 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Will Cork City Council commit to support both financially and in an organisational 
capacity, the relaunch of the Shandon Street Festival for 2025? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Shandon Street Festival was organised by a local steering group which was a 
subgroup to the Shandon Area Renewal Association (SARA). The Cork City Council 
RAPID Coordinator for the area spoke to a representative of the group and they 
advised that due to other workloads and challenges in relation to volunteer 
recruitment, it was decided not to run the festival in 2022 or 2023. Our understanding 
is that there are no further plans for the festival. However, Cork City Council would 
be supportive of working as part of a local stakeholder’s group to establish if the 
festival would be a possibility for 2025. Ideally this group should be community led 
and made up of community & voluntary groups, public sector organisations and 
should include SARA. The proposed Festival would be eligible to apply for the 
Community Development Small Programme Grant funding and capital funding under 
the Community Enhancement Programme funding once they get a community 
organisation to agree to undertake the application and the draw down if successful.  
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Community, Culture, and Placemaking. 
 

6.11 
VARIOUS BUDGETS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the CE what was the entire budget for 2024 for: - 
- 
tree cutting 
- 
line painting (how many crews do we employ) 
- 
city wide allocation for footpath renewal  
- 
city wide allocation for traffic calming  
 
Further can the CE confirm what additional financing we received from central 
government in relation to footpath restoration new or old and whether we at 
management level requested a relaxation of the rules governing the Active Travel 
Programme ie a cycle lane or nothing. 
 
REPLY 
 
1) Tree Maintenance 
The budget for Arboricultural Contract Works undertaken by the Parks & 
Recreation Division of the Operations Directorate is €147,000 for 2024. This 
covers all contract work in the Public Realm (including street trees, housing estates, 
public parks & open spaces within the ‘old’ city boundary etc.).  Non contract work 
is carried out by Parks & Recreation’s Tree Crew which has an annual budget of 
€397,700 which covers wages, contract plant, purchase & maintenance of 
equipment, operating costs and general tools & materials. 
There are contract Frameworks for Arboricultural Services, and Arboricultural 
Consultancy Services which are in place and  are available to all Directorates across 
the City Council to utilise if they require such services. 
The Roads Operations Division of the Operations Directorate is responsible for tree 
cutting in the expanded city area and this is generally carried out by contract using 
a framework.  There is no specific budget allocated to tree cutting in the Roads 
Operations 2024 Budget.  However, when tree cutting is required, the Local 
General Roads Budget for each Engineering Area is used to cover these costs. The 
amount of tree cutting varies depending on weather, storms, trees damaged and 
Councillor representations/customer service requests for the general public, Bus 
Eireann etc.. 
2) Line painting (how many crews do we employ) 
The Traffic Crew are responsible for the following services in accordance with 
priority below: 
1. Emergency Call Outs  
2. Road Closures   
3. Delivery of lining & signing programme.  
 
Lining & Signing is delivered: 
• Former Transition Area: Delivered by Area Engineer by contract 
• Former City Area: Delivered by the Traffic Crew.   

 
Once Emergency Call Outs & Road Closures are attended to, the Traffic Crew then 
turn their attention to the lining and signing programme subject to suitable weather 
conditions. The programme is delivered having regard to the following priorities: 
a) Safety related issues 
b) Mobility related issues 
c) Traffic issues 
d) Others e.g. emergency flooding response,  
 
The Traffic Crew currently is a team of 10 (including 2 painters) and the 2024 
budget for their operation is €1.2m and includes wages, plant & machinery, 
materials, etc. 
In the expanded city area, the budget for line marking is €150,000 and this work is 
carried out by contract, as necessary.   
3) City wide allocation for footpath renewal  
There are three types of interventions with regard to footpaths undertaken by Cork 
City Council: 
1) Maintenance – these works are carried out by direct labour and are focused on 
small scale repair works e.g. replacing broken paving slabs, fixing a crack in a 
footpath, fixing small surface defects etc. Unlike renewal works, maintenance does 
not involve the replacement of footpath infrastructure but rather the repair of 
localised defects in existing infrastructure.  Annually €1.2m is spend on direct 
labour payroll costs providing this service along with €488,700 supporting the 
works of the direct labour crews (e.g. materials, plant/machines, support services 
etc.). 
2) Renewal – this involved the breaking out of the old footpath and the full 
replacement of a section of footpath with new footpath to modern specifications.  
The budget for footpath renewal in 2024 is €420,000 which is spread across the 
entire City and suburbs areas and is used to pay for footpath renewal contracts 
which address identified footpaths which are in need of renewal due to their present 
condition. The Local Area Committees may also assign a portion of their LAC 
budgets towards footpath renewal should they wish to do so, and in 2024 a number 
of LAC’s did so and such works will be added to the annual footpath renewal 
contract. 
3) Improvement Works – These works involve the upgrade of public footpaths as 
part of large public realm projects (see list of examples below).  As part of such 
projects significant monies are spend improving, expanding and enhancing the 
public footpaths usually with high quality surfaces e.g. granite paving and is done 
as part of Active Travel projects which are externally funded. The amount of 
funding for such works annually fluctuates depending on what projects are under 
way at the time. 
List of Streets where footpath upgrades were carried out under contracts by 
Infrastructure that are completed or still at construction in 2023 & 2024. 

MacCurtain Street Public Transport Improvement scheme 
• Oliver Plunkett Street Lower 
• Andersons Street 
• Andersons Quay 
• Clontarf Street 
• St Patrick’s Quay 
• Camden Place 
• Camden Quay 
• Mulgrave Road 
• Popes Quay 
• Christy Ring Bridge 
• Lavitts Quay 
• Merchants Quay 
• Leitrim Street 
• Devonshire Street 
• Pine Street 
• Coburg Street 
• Bridge Street 
• St Patrick’s Hill 
• MacCurtain Street 
 
Knapps Square: 
• Knapps Square 
• Lower Johns Street  
• Upper Johns Street 
• Cathedral Walk 
• Currys Roack 
• Saint John Villas 
• Mary's Lane  
• Bob & Joan's Walk 
 
Grange to Tramore Valley Park inc Vernon Mount Bridge 
Donnybrook Hill pedestrian Scheme 
NTA Rapid Deployment Pedestrian Scheme project : 
• Muskerry Estate 
• Castle Road 
• Church View 
• Halldene to Waterfall Rd 
• The Rise, Eastern and Western entrance 
• Leesdale, North and South 
• Kenley Close 
• Westgate Road to Fremont Estate - Western Entrance 
• Donscourt to Woodbrook Grove 
• Elm Road  

• Hazel Road 
• Clashduv Estate 
• Hillside Avenue  
• Glendale Drive 
• Lee Fields 
 
Curragh Road: 
• Curragh Road 
• Kinsale Road 
• Pearse Road 
 
Ballybrack Valley Pedestrian and Cycle Track 
• Ballybrack Valley 
• Temple Grove 
• Carrigaline Road 
• Maryborough  woods 
• Calderwood  
 
Mahon Cycle Route : 
• Ringmahon Road 
• Ringmahon Road,  
• Skehard Road,  
• Avenue de Rennes,  
• Ballinure Avenue,  
• Lakeland Crescent,  
• Mahon Drive and  
• Castle Road 
 
Glanmire to city phase 1 Cycle Scheme : 
• Glanmire village to Glanmire Road roundabout 
 
Inishmore Ballincollig: 
• Inishmore Lawn 
• Inishmore Court 
 
Glashaboy Flood Relief Scheme Glanmire : 
• R639 – Various Locations in Glanmire area 
• Hazelwood Road 
• Meadowbrook Estate 
• Newline 
• Copper Valley View 
 
Morison’s Island; 
• Father Mathew Quay 

• Father Mathew Street 
• South Mall 
• Morrisons Quay 
• Morrisons Street 
 
Marina Prominade : 
• The Marina 
 
Beamish and Crawford Quarter: 
• South Main Street 
• Tuckey Street 
• Crosse’s Green 
• French’s Quay 
• Proby’s Quay 
• Clarkes Bridge 
• Hanover Place 
• Wandesford Quay 
• Bishop Lucey Park 
• Lambley's Lane 
 
Morrison’s Island; 
• Morrisons Quay 
• Morrison Street 
• Fr Matthew Quay 
• South Mall (Parnell place end) 
 
4) City wide allocation for traffic calming  
€100,000 from the revenue budget (20k per LEA) is allocated annually to deliver 
a city wide Traffic Calming Programme of Works. Each Local Electoral Area can 
use part/all of their €398,000 Local Area Committee budget to undertake additional 
works in their LEA if they so choose to do so. 
Cork City Council has engage with the National Transport Authority and Department 
on a number of occasions with regards to the use of Active Travel funding for the 
renewal of existing public footpaths.  The most recent engagement was on the 15th of 
April when a letter issued to the Minister for Transport on behalf of Council requesting 
that Active Travel Funding be permitted to be spent on the repair, maintenance, 
upgrading and resurfacing of public footpaths. A response from the minister was 
received on the 23rd of April which stated “in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 13 of the Roads Act 1993, each local authority has statutory responsibility for 
the improvement and maintenance of their regional and local road network. Works on 
those roads are funded from local authorities' own resources and are supplemented by 
State Road grants”.  The correspondence goes on to state “Funding for the 
maintenance of active travel infrastructure was not secured in Budget 2024 due to a 
high level of competing demands both within my Department and across Government; 

however my officials will continue to seek funding as part of the annual estimates 
process”. 
 
David Joyce  
 
 
 
 
Edith Roberts 
Director of Services  
 
 
 
A/Director of Services 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate 
Infrastructure Development 
Directorate  
 
6.12 
PILOT PROJECT 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if she will examine a pilot project on transparency 
overhaul to proactively publish data similar to the mechanism used in the city of South 
Bend Indiana, United States. 
 
REPLY 
 
The dashboards available on the South Bend, Indiana Transparency Hub are put 
together using datasets from their Open Data portal. Cork City Council has already 
begun this 
journey in 
the form 
of our own Open Data platform, 
https://data.corkcity.ie/. The datasets available here are limited at the moment but the 
portal is currently undergoing a technical overhaul and migration to a cloud hosting 
provider. This work will be completed later this year. At that stage a suitable platform 
will be available where useful datasets of varying types can be made available to the 
public. At this point, a corporate decision will be made with regards to next steps 
regarding the management and provision of data. 
 
On a monthly basis, the Chief Executive of Cork City Council publishes a report with 
the latest updates, statistics, and figures from around the organisation. The CE report 
contains up-to-date information collected from all service areas of Cork City Council 
and provides transparency as a key priority, fosters accountability and is published on 
Cork City Council’s website once noted by Council. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations. 
 
6.13 
NUMBER OF PLANNING APPLICATIONS SUBMITTED FOR DERELICT 
SITES 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn was deferred to 
the next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 9th September 2024:- 
 

I am seeking confirmation on the number of planning applications submitted for 
derelict sites from 2014 to 2024, along with the count of refusals on these same sites 
during this period. 
 
A. Do you believe it would be advisable for developers engaging with Cork City 
Council for planning applications on derelict sites to be exempt from derelict site fees? 
 
B. Could you furnish data regarding planning applications declined by Cork City 
Council but subsequently approved by An Bord Pleanála from 2014 to 2024, in 
general and in relation to derelict sites? Additionally, please provide the associated 
costs of these applications and the revenue accrued by Cork City Council before their 
denial and subsequent appeal to An Bord Pleanála. 
 
C. The number of site visits, specifically internal inspections carried out in relation to 
derelict buildings by the planning department and in relation to historical / protected 
structure by the conservation department. 
 
D. The number of applications that have been asked for further information only to be 
subsequently refused permission. 
 
It is noteworthy that applications rejected by Cork City Council and later overturned 
by An Bord Pleánala often result in considerable expenses for developers, which are 
then transferred to citizens. 
 
In most cases these derelict buildings are dilapidated, uninhabitable and only fit for a 
complete refurbishment, whereby unreasonable demands are placed on developers 
due to either refusal of planning permission or the request of prohibitively expensive 
reports / consultations before a decision is made. 
 
Do you concur that it is time for the planning department to be held responsible for 
local refusals that gain approval at the national level? Is there a necessity for a 
structured mechanism that allows developers to not only recoup the initial application 
expe but also reclaim additional costs incurred due to process-related delays?  
 
Also of note, is the requirement of some departments, specifically conservation when 
dealing with historical and often dilapidated buildings, to require the input of specific 
consultants, hence creating an artificial monopoly and undue cost to developers. This 
practice is outside their remit and not in accordance with planning legislation. 
 
6.14 
ELECTORAL REGISTER 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the processes used by Cork City Council to maintain the 
accuracy of the electoral register? 
 
 
REPLY  
 

 
Local Authorities across the country are engaged in register modernisation work and 
data cleansing in advance of a move to a shared national voter registration network in 
2026. Each Local Authority will still be responsible for processing applications in 
their area. 
 
To support this, national and local awareness campaigns (radio, tv, flyers, social 
media) have pushed the new online registration option (www.CheckTheRegister.ie) 
with a noticeable surge in applications and updates during these campaigns and before 
recent electoral events. The provision of voter PPSN, Eircode and DOB details will 
ultimately allow Registration Authorities across the country maintain a more accurate 
register. 
 
With the simplification of the update process each individual voter is ultimately 
responsible for making sure that their electoral details are up-to-date.  
 
Paper forms are still available for download or can be requested from the Franchise 
Section. Paper applications are still used for postal voter applicants and nationality 
change updates (ERF1).  
 
The Franchise Section continues to delete electors who are listed as deceased on the 
national death event website (https://deathevents.gov.ie/).  
 
Over the next few months, the Franchise Section will work through correspondence 
and polling card returns received after the most recent electoral events and update 
campaigns. Returned correspondence and polling cards marked ‘gone away’ or ‘no 
longer at address’ will be marked for deletion with at least two notice letters issuing.  
 
Periodically the Franchise Section runs reports to identify and address duplicates.   
 
A third-party request form to amend the register is also available for public reps and 
members of the public who wish to have electoral records other than their own 
potentially deleted or corrected (TPC1 form).   
 
Local Authorities across the country regularly meet to share best practice processes 
and the Electoral Commission now has an oversight role. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Servies, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations. 
 
6.15 
CORK CITY CENTRE DEEP CLEAN 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive:  
 
       
- the date on which Cork City centre last received a deep clean; 
- how many times over the last 10 years Cork City centre has been deep cleaned; and 
      
- the date on which Cork City centre is next going to be deep cleaned. 

 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Operations Directorate engages in the deep cleaning of the streets of Cork City 
on a continual basis, every single week of the year.  This cleaning takes many forms, 
including: 
 
• A City Council power washer unit that is used on a weekly basis to clean the 
streets and also street furniture e.g. litter bins. 
• The Cork City Council also have a dedicated street scrubber machine which 
maintains the city centre on a weekly basis. 
• Local contractors with specialist equipment have also been brought in at 
different periods to do sections of pavements when an issue arises e.g. gum 
removal. 
 
In addition to the very extensive ongoing street deep cleaning detailed above, Cork 
City Council also utilise specialist contractors periodically.  The last time this was 
done was at the end of May 2024.  Specialist contractors have been utilised on 5 
occasions in the past 10 years to supplement the deep cleaning services provided 
directly by the City Council crews.  It is anticipated that external specialist deep 
cleaning services may again be used in 2025, but same has yet to be determined. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate. 
 
6.16 
PARLIAMENT BRIDGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive about the repair of Parliament Bridge. 
 
REPLY 
 
Following recent vehicular impact, the damaged section of Parliament Bridge has 
been made safe. The historic stonework from the damaged parapet is currently being 
recovered from the riverbed.  The condition of the recovered material will be assessed 
and a programme for repair will be informed by the outcome of same. Structural 
engineers have also been engaged to assess the damage to the bridge and to assist in 
the design of the overall remedial works to be undertaken.  Details of the planned 
remedial work and related timeline for completion will be confirmed shortly. 
Parliament Bridge is included in the Record of Protected Structures and is listed on 
the National Inventory of Architectural Heritage. All recovered parapet elements will 
be incorporated to the greatest extent possible in the reinstatement works using 
conservation best practice methodologies.  
 
Edith Roberts, 
A/Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 

 
6.17 
VACANT PROPERTY TAX 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir L. Harmon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if she believes the Vacant Property Tax should be collected 
by the Revenue Commissioners instead of local authorities and if she has had any 
engagement with the Revenue Commissioners or with other Local Authority Chief 
Executives on this matter? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The collection of revenue sources is an important function of local government.  The 
Chief Executive has not engaged with the Revenue Commissioners or other local 
authority Chief Executives on this matter. 
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
6.18 
DERELICT SITES ACT 1990 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Rice, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the chief executive how many times in the last year has the Council used its 
powers under section 11 of the Derelict Sites Act 1990. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council is currently working on a portfolio of 653 vacant and derelict 
properties.  In addition to the Derelict Sites Act 1990, Cork City Council intervenes 
using the instruments of other legislation such as the Local Government (Sanitary 
Services) Act, 1964 
 
Since June 2023 Cork City Council issued  
 
• 4 “Section 11” notices (+ 2 more imminent) 
• 50 Building Control interventions 
• 59 Demand Letters issued to remove dereliction  
• 14 written requests for Improvement Works  
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 

7.1 
EXTINGUISHMENT OF A SECTION OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY ON 
ELBOW LANE, CORK 
 
An Chomhairle considered the report and recommendation of the Director of Services, 
Roads and Environment Operations Directorate, dated 4th July 2024, on the 
extinguishment of a section of the public right of way on Elbow Lane, Cork, following 
public consultation on the proposal pursuant to Section 73 (1)(a) of the Roads Act 
1993. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed extinguishment of a section of the 
public right of way on Elbow Lane where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, 
M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, 
F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. Harmon, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. 
(25) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, B. McCarthy. (2) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí O. Moran, H. Kamegni, P. Rice (3) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed extinguishment of a section of the public 
right of way on Elbow Lane approved. 
  
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVES THAT  
 
Two submissions having been received within the prescribed statutory period set out 
in section 73 (1) (a) of the Roads Act 1993, with one request for an oral hearing which 
is refused after due consideration, it is now hereby Ordered that the following Public 
Right of Way be extinguished with effect from the date of the making of this Order:- 
 
The Northern Section of Elbow Lane, which runs from Cook Street for approximately 
48.20 meters towards Oliver Plunkett Street, Cork, marked as Point AA to Point BB 
on said map.” 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 1st JULY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 1st July 2024. 
 
8.1  
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/05/2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement of Cork City Council to 
31/05/2024. 

 
8.2  
MOTIONS  
 
8.2.1  
PLAQUES AND MEMORIALS ACROSS THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 27th June 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council audit plaques and memorials across the City, renewing or 
repairing where necessary or appropriate starting with the plaque near Glen Boxing 
Club marking the rail tunnel explosion.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/369) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that identification of a dedicated budget 
for small scale works for the repair and restoration of historic fabric in the public 
realm, including plaques, monuments and heritage objects, is an action listed in the 
Cork City Heritage and Biodiversity Plan 2021-2026. Such a budget is currently being 
considered as part of the Council’s annual budgetary processes. Once a budget has 
been secured, this work can commence. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 27th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 27th May 2024. 
 
9.1  
MEETING SCHEDULE H2 – 2024 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the draft meeting schedule for H2 - 2024. 
 
10. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 20th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 20th May 2024.  
 
10.1  
REVIEW OF CORK CITY COUNCIL INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
ACTIVITIES 2019-2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations. 
 
10.2  
REVIEW OF CORK CITY COUNCIL TOURISM ACTIVITIES 2019-2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Director of Services, Strategic & Economic 
Development. 
 
11. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 21st MAY 2024 

 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 21st May 2024. 
 
11.1  
REPORT ON THE USE OF CCTV FOR LITTER MANAGEMENT AND 
WASTE ENFORCEMENT 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report on the current status of the 
introduction and use of CCTV for Litter Management and Waste Enforcement 
activities. 
 
11.2  
MOTIONS  
 
11.2.1  ‘FRIENDSHIP BENCH’ IN PARKS OR WALKWAYS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 16th May 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council ensure that the ‘Friendship Bench’ in Gerry O'Sullivan Park 
is replicated in other parks or walkways where possible.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Nugent 24/134) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Friendship Benches initiative 
came from Zimbabwe as a community based mental health intervention, where trained 
community health workers would sit on designated park benches delivering problem 
solving therapy sessions to people struggling with mental health challenges. It was 
subsequently supported by the World Health Organisation. The Parks Department 
installed one in Gerry O Sullivan Park in the recent past with a similar one now 
installed at the Fairfield. We will make contact with the relevant health organisations 
to explore the merit of providing additional seats in other parks and report back to the 
Committee at a later date. 
 
11.2.2  PUBLIC TOILET POLICY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 16th May 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Policy Action 8 of Cork City Council's public toilet policy is amended to include 
plans for public toilets on a more permanent basis in the Marina Park development 
and that groundworks for same are completed as soon as possible. This motion is due 
to privately operated toilet facilities being identified by a petition presented to the 
Lord Mayor prior to the April 2024 meeting as being inadequate.’  
 
(Proposers: Cllr. L. Bogue, Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/200) 
 
The report of the Director of Service stated that as part of the development of the 
Marina Park Phase 1, Cork City Council installed permanent female, male and disable 
access public toilets in the plaza area of the centre of the park.  These are managed on 
our behalf by the operator of adjacent Café. The opening hours of the public toilets 

mirror the opening hours of the Café.  As with many of the City’s recreational facilities 
the winter opening hours are less than those in the peak summer season. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to both the Environment, 
Water & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee and the South East Local Area 
Committee for further discussion. 
 
12. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 23rd MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 23rd May 2024. 
 
12.1  
MINUTES OF THE ARTS COMMITTEE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of the Arts Committee from its 
meeting held, 26th February 2024.  
 
12.2  
MOTIONS 
 
12.2.1  LARGE-SCALE CHRISTMAS EVENT IN 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 23rd May 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘Motion to propose a comprehensive plan for a large-scale Christmas event in 2024, 
culminating in a spectacular lighting ceremony.  
 
I suggest that this event be meticulously thought out, possibly incorporating a ticketing 
system to manage crowds effectively. This not only ensures crowd control but also 
adds an element of exclusivity and anticipation. Additionally, I propose a reimagining 
of Cork City's lighting events, transforming them into a weekly run-up to Christmas.  
 
To further enhance the experience, a lighting show and various events could be 
organized throughout the weeks leading up to Christmas. Offering free tickets can be 
a strategy to encourage people from all over Ireland, particularly the south, to visit and 
shop in Cork City Centre during this festive period.  
 
That this strategy be thoroughly planned and put together, with details available for 
Council agreement no later than August 2024.  
 
By doing so, we can ensure a well-coordinated, enjoyable, and economically 
beneficial Christmas celebration for both residents and visitors alike.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. O’Flynn 24/044) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that all Elected Members were invited to 
a facilitated workshop to discuss the Christmas Lights Switch On and Christmas 
Festival 2024 on 28th March. The 12 Councillors that attended had an opportunity to 
share their views and thoughts on the priorities for Christmas 2024, they also had the 

opportunity to hear directly from officials on the operational considerations and 
challenges inherent in the event. All input was gratefully received and heard, and the 
feedback generated from this workshop is informing planning for Christmas 2024. 
 
The Executive is committed to delivering a quality Christmas offering for the city in 
2024 within the available budget and resources and will continue to communicate with 
Elected Members via the Arts Committee and the CCP SPC as plans develop. 
 
13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 14th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 14th May 2024. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 2nd JULY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 2nd July 2024. 
 
14.1  
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
14.1.1  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF MAY 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of May 
2024. 
 
15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th May 2024. 
 
15.1  
MOTIONS 
 
15.1.1  PORTABLE COFFEE DOCK AT TRAMORE VALLEY PARK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Roads & 
Environment Operations, dated 23rd May 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council consider granting a licence to a portable coffee dock operator 
so as to enable him/her to operate a coffee dock at or near the Grange Road entrance 
to the new pedestrian and cycle lane from the Grange Road to Tramore Valley Park, 
with conditions of the licence to stipulate:- 
 
-  
that the coffee dock operator be responsible for all rubbish in two or three public 
bins along the route of the pedestrian and cycle lane; and 
 
-  
that the coffee dock operator ensure that the two or three public bins are changed, 
cleaned and maintained on a regular basis.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 23/549) 
 

The previous report of the Director of Services stated that it is not appropriate for 
coffee docks to spring up everywhere along public amenities. While the limited 
provision of such services is appropriate, it is important that they are strategically 
placed and appropriate to their surroundings. In the case of the Grange Road to 
Tramore Vally Park Pedestrian Cycle Link it has been determined that the location of 
such a facility at the Grange Road entrance to this facility would be improper and not 
a suitable location. A decision was made some time ago to provide Coffee Dock 
facilities within the Tramore Valley Park and it is proposed to progress this facility 
during 2024. This facility will also include the provision of public toilets and litter bin 
facilities. Thus, the provision of additional facilities at other adjacent locations could 
not be supported at this time. 
 
The updated report of the Director of Services stated that the new public walkway 
between Grange and Tramore Valley Park is already well service by litter bins. There 
is an existing litter bin immediately as you enter the Park from the new Grange Road 
Frankfield Pedestrian / Cycle Link which will accommodate any dog waste bags 
gathered by those using this access point to the amenity. There are also litter bins at 
the car parking area withing Tramore Valley Park for those who access the facility 
from that side and as you enter the Park from the Half Moon Lane entrance. It is thus 
not necessary or practical to provide bins along the length of the new walkway. The 
servicing and emptying of such bins would be difficult and time consuming and 
unnecessary given the existing infrastructure which is already in place at both ends of 
the walkway as detailed above. Therefore no change is proposed to the existing litter 
infrastructure which is in place and provides a more than adequate level of service. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th May 2024. 
 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th May 2024. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th May 2024. 
 
19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th MAY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th May 2024.  
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir C. Kelleher as part of the Cork City Council Delegation visit to 
San Francisco, USA, 1st - 8th March 2024. 
• Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, as part of the Cork City Council Delegation visit 
to New York and San Francisco, USA, 29th February - 8th March 2024. 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher at the AILG Annual Training Conference, held at 
Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow, 14th - 15th February 2024. 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher at the New Ireland Commission Event, held at 
Seamus Heaney Centre, Bellaghy, Co. Derry, 29th February 2024. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Module 2 Training, Local Election 
Preparation, held at Kilkenny, 21st March 2024. 
• Comhairleoir K. McCarthy as part of the Cork City Council Delegation trip to 
Shanghai, China, 30th October - 8th November 2023. 
• Comhairleoir F. Dennehy at the LAMA Spring Seminar, held at Abbey Hotel, 
Co. Donegal, 19th - 20th January 2024. 
• Comhairleoir F. Dennehy at the AILG Annual Training Conference, held at 
Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow, 14th - 15th February 2024. 
• Comhairleoir K. McCarthy at the European Maritime Day Conference, held at 
Svendborg, Sweden, 29th May - 1st June 2024.  
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the IPB (Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances 
Limited) AGM, held at Gibson Hotel, Dublin, 3rd May 2024. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None Received. 
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
23.1 
AILG AND LAMA CONFERENCES AND TRAINING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved attendance by Elected Members at all AILG 
and LAMA conferences and training. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None Received.  
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORT 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for April 2024. 
  

26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS 
 
27.1  
ONSLOW GARDENS, COMMONS ROAD  
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council request NTII to include Onslow Gardens, Commons Road as 
a new route in the Busconnect Project.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Fitzgerald 24/326) 
 
27.2  
M28 WORKS  
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will invite Transport Infrastructure Ireland and the relevant 
personnel from Cork County Council to meet with all interested Councillors on the 
works being done on the M28 to identify community benefit works in terms of traffic 
management, communications to residents of the route.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/348) 
 
27.3  
CHILDCARE PROVISION IN THE CITY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council invites the Cork City Childcare Committee to present to Full 
Council as to the current status of childcare provision in the City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/361) 
 
27.4  
JOINT CORK CITY COUNCIL/CORK COUNTY COUNCIL COMMITTEE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to Cork County Council requesting that a meeting of 
the Joint Cork City Council/Cork County Council Committee be convened in 
September to: 
  
-        discuss the fact that the City Council now has to pay an extra €3 million per 
annum to the County Council under the boundary extension agreement because 
of inflation in addition to the €13 million that the City Council is already 
obligated to pay the County Council every year under said agreement; 
  

-        enable the City Council members to make submissions to the County Council 
members outlining how the additional €3 million annual payment is 
unsustainable from the City Council’s point of view; 
  
-        discuss whether a recommendation should be made to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, Darragh O’Brien to re-establish the Oversight 
Committee in accordance with section 24 of the Local Government Act 2019; 
and 
  
-         discuss whether a recommendation should be made to Minister O’Brien that the 
most efficient and practical course of action to take to resolve the issue would 
be for Minister O’Brien to direct that the Department make an annual payment 
of €2 million to Cork City Council for the next 5 years so as to alleviate the 
crippling inflation associated with the annual payment to Cork County Council.’ 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/377) 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to refer this motion to the Corporate Policy Group in advance 
of issuing a letter requesting a meeting of the Joint Cork City Council/Cork County 
Council Committee. 
 
27.5 
RECRUITING BUS DRIVERS IN THE CITY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Minister for Transport, Eamon Ryan, 
outlining the severe difficulties in recruiting bus drivers in the City; the vital 
importance of recruiting bus drivers to meet the transport and climate action policies 
of the City, including as an EU Mission City; that Bus Éireann have informed elected 
members that a shortfall of 35 drivers exists to meet existing service levels, with 16 
drivers currently in driver training with the company; that these recruitments will meet 
only existing service-level demands; that a very significant additional number of 
drivers will be required to meet the service-level for BusConnects Cork planned for 
2025; and requests that his department consequently engages with the Department of 
Enterprise, Trade and Employment to remove barriers to the recruitment of drivers 
from overseas, including the addition of bus drivers to the Critical Skills Occupations 
List.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/378) 
 
27.6 
UPDATE ON PLANS FOR TRANSPORT IN CORK 
 
 An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council ask the CEO of the NTA to come to Cork and engage with 
Cork City Council on plans for Bus Connects Cork, the maintenance and expansion 
of the shared bike scheme, the management of current bus service and an update on 
plans for transport in Cork (currently bus stops/shelters popping up and nobody knows 
what for and when they’ll be in operation).’ 
 

(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/393) 
 
27.7 
LACK OF GARDAÍ IN THE CITY CENTRE 
 
 An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Chief Superintendent, Tom Myers and Garda 
Commissioner Drew Harris to ask for a meeting to discuss the lack of Gardaí in our 
City Centre. Our City is a beautiful place, but anti-social behaviour and no Gardaí on 
the beat has become the norm throughout the City Centre. Garda management locally 
and nationally must address this and help us to make our streets safer.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/394) 
 
27.8 
ADDITIONAL 
RESOURCES 
FOR 
THE 
IMMIGRATION 
SERVICE 
DELIVERY 
 
 An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘It is welcome news that, following on from the protest outside Angelsea Garda 
Station organised by the Cork Indian Nurses, and with support from the INMO, the 
system for Irish Resident Permit renewal for Cork is being moved online starting this 
month. This ends the cruel and unnecessary 5 month wait previously endured by these 
workers and their families. However, first time applicants still need to travel to Dublin 
for registration. This is another unnecessary obstacle that these vital workers are faced 
with so this Council calls for the allocation of whatever additional resources may be 
needed to the Registration Office of the Immigration Service Delivery (ISD) of the 
Department of Justice to allow for local registrations of first time applicants in Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/398) 
 
27.9 
RESOLVE THE DISCOLOURED WATER ISSUE PERMANENTLY  
 
 An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘After almost two years, Uisce Éireann have still not come forward with any serious 
plan to deal with the discoloured water issue. In areas where the pipes were 
extensively flushed several months ago problems are now reoccurring and replacing 
a few kms of pipes a year is nothing more than a desperate PR stunt when more than 
400 kms of pipes need to be replaced. This motion calls for this Council to demand, 
in the strongest possible terms, that Uisce Éireann come forward with serious 
proposals that will actually resolve the issue permanently and to establish a clear 
timeline for this work to be done.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/399) 
 
27.10 
NEWLY HIRE BUS DRIVERS’ CONTRACT 
 
 An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 

‘That Cork City Council will engage with Bus Éireann, TFI, NTA to find out whether 
a clause exists within the newly hire bus drivers’ contract that ties them up with the 
same salary for 7 years before their pay grade can change. This could be one main 
reason why they find it hard to hire and keep new drivers.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/401) 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
