Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 15th March 2018 
Multi-Media room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
Paul Moynihan  
Chief Officer 
Ann Doherty 
Nora O’Donovan 
David Ronayne  
Eddie Mullins  
Chief Supt. B. McPolin 
Cllr. C. O’Leary 
Adrienne Rodgers 
 
Also in attendance:  
R. Loughry, T. Power, S. McCarthy 
Apologies: 
 
Cllr F. Dennehy, P. Lynch, D. Boyle, L. Owens, B. Connolly, F. Finn,  
M. O’Connell, G. Canning, Cllr PJ Hourican 
 
 
Welcome 
The Vice Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted. The Vice 
Chairperson noted that Mick O’Connell has replaced Brenda Cahill as the new Cork City 
Partnership representative on the Committee. 
 
1. Minutes 
The minutes of 8th February, 2018 considered and on proposal of E. Mullins, seconded by 
Cllr. O’Leary were approved with no matters arising. 
  
2. Funding Stream Updates 
 
a) Healthy Ireland Funding Stream Update 
R. Loughry presented a progress report on the Healthy Ireland Fund. A HIF 
Committee review meeting was held on the 14th March and feedback overall was 
very positive in relation to the projects undertaken. R. Loughry noted that funds will 
be spent by 31st March, 2018. The Department has indicated that they will allow a 
lead into April for completion of projects.  
 
R. Loughry reported that projects for Phase 2 can continue from Phase 1 and new 
projects can also be applied for.  Two new themes will be added to Phase 2 – Mental 
Health & Alcohol. R. Loughry noted that new members will be incorporated into the 
HIF Committee linked to these new themes. The LCDC confirmed that they are 
happy for these new members to be included. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3. SICAP  
 
a) SICAP Annual Report Return 
T. Power confirmed that the SICAP Annual Report was returned to the Department 
on 13th March, 2018. 
 
b) SICAP Annual Plan 2018 presentation by Cork City Partnership Clg 
Breda Cahill and Jacqui Sweeney, Cork City Partnership gave a presentation on SICAP 
Annual Plan 2018 that was previously circulated to the LCDC.  
 
c) Review of SICAP AP 2018 on IRIS and  
d) Pobal’s Review on SICAP Annual Plan on IRIS 
T. Power noted that the SICAP Annual Plan 2018 that was uploaded on IRIS was 
reviewed against the tender submission and confirmed that everything is in order. It 
was noted that Pobal’s review of annual plan on IRIS was in order and approved. T. 
Power noted that the formal review is now complete.  
 
e) SICAP Annual Plan 2018 tender process feedback  
 
 
The Tender Sub-Group had the following informal feedback for the LCDC: 
The sup-group was happy overall with tender, in particular with small grant 
scheme and that the Women’s Group/Conference and Older People were so 
well reflected in the plan. The sub-group noted that actions are clear and 
precise.  
 
A concern was raised that Travellers and New Communities were not 
directly targeted in the Plan. Cork City Partnership had addressed these 
concerns noting that SICAP was not to duplicate existing services and they 
will link with these existing services. 
 
It was suggested that the annual plan would be shared with other 
groups/agencies including presentations on the positives, strategic value, 
efficiencies and collaboration of the plan.  
 
It was noted that the Annual Plan for 2018 cannot be varied but that this 
feedback will be taken into account for 2019.  
 
4) Libraries Strategy Presentation 
Mr. Liam Ronayne, City Librarian gave a presentation on the Libraries Strategy. The 
presentation included details on 3 national initiatives that are relevant to the LCDC – 
Right to Read, Work Matters and Healthy Ireland.  
 
Following the presentation, A. Rodgers suggested that the LEO and ETB meet with 
City Library and map resources in relation to the Work Matters Initiative.  
 
It was noted that libraries are a valuable resource and need to be resourced properly 
as they are a trusted and accessible space in our communities and can be used as a 
gateway to get messages across. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5) Regional Spatial Economic Strategy (RSES) Input 
P. Moynihan advised that there will be a RSES consultation process of in April and 
encouraged participation/interaction with the consultation process. It was noted 
that Cork City Council has made a submission to the Regional Assembly and the LECP 
was well reflected within the submission. T. Power to circulate report to Committee 
members.   
 
 
 
6) A.O.B. 
The Vice Chairperson congratulated the teams that were involved in the recent 
severe weather on their hard work and commitment and noted safety was to the 
fore. A. Doherty, C.E. noted that the Local Co-ordination Centre was key and had 
excellent systems/co-ordination in place. 
 
P. Moynihan noted that he is hopeful that new funding streams through the LCDC 
will have a more equitable system of allocating funds with the deprivation index and 
population being a factor in determining funding allocations.  
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting and the next meeting scheduled Thursday 19th April at 
4pm.  
 
 
 
 
Aaron O’Connell, 
Vice Chairperson 
