MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 07TH APRIL 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, N. 
O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor, F. 
Dennehy. 
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate & Community 
Affairs. 
Mr. J. Dempsey, Local Authority Engagement Director, Uisce 
Eireann. 
Ms. M. Attridge, Head of Water Operations, Uisce Eireann. 
Mr. B. O’Leary, Regional Operations Manager (Water), Uisce 
Eireann. 
Mr. J. Goulding, Water Networks Operations Manager, Uisce 
Eireann. 
Mr. J. Fitzgerald, Asset Operations Lead, Uisce Eireann. 
Mr. R. Dilon, National DBO Manager (Asset Operations), Uisce 
Eireann. 
Mr. B. Flannery, Asset Planning Lead Engineer, Uisce Eireann. 
Mr. V. Angland, Commercial Senior Manager Infrastructure 
Delivery, Uisce Eireann. 
Ms. E. Morey, Regional Communications Manager, Uisce 
Eireann. 
Ms. F. White, Head of Local Authority Engagement, Uisce 
Eireann. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate & Community 
Affairs.  
 
 

 
An tArdmhéara outlined the purpose and format of the meeting and sought the 
approval of Council to suspend standing orders in order to proceed directly to the 
single item on the agenda. 
 
1. 
WATER QUALITY IN CORK 
 
John Dempsey and Margaret Attridge from Uisce Éireann provided a presentation on 
their water services in Cork 
 
They confirmed that a written response would be issued the following day to all 
questions from Councillors received in writing.  
 
Additionally, they committed to following up with written responses to all verbal 
questions asked during the meeting. 
 
Below is the list of questions submitted to Irish Water by Council in advance of the 
Special meeting.  Further questions were raised at the meeting: 
 
Councillor Peter Horgan –  
1. The problem with the pumping station at the Atlantic Pond  and the recent incident 
along with the Costs that were incurred for same along with the plans to rectify and 
ensure it doesn’t happen again. 
 
2. The status of all Pumping stations, regardless of size, in the city limits and the cost for 
maintaining them in tabular form. 
 
3. The status of wastewater capacity in each of the main conurbations of the South East 
Ward - Blackrock, Mahon, Ballinlough, Douglas, Rochestown, Maryborough , Donny 
brook and Scairt.  
Councillor Shane O’Callaghan –  
1. Cork City Council first wrote to Uisce Éireann on 16th May 2024 requesting that the 
CEO Niall Gleeson come before a meeting of Cork City Council to answer questions 
about the persistent problems of water discolouration and water outages without 
sufficient notice in large areas of Cork. There have been a number of further requests 
by Cork City Council asking for his attendance since then. Why has it taken almost 11 
months for the senior management of Uisce Éireann to finally agree to attend a 
meeting of Cork City Council?  
2. Why have the senior management of Uisce Éireann only agreed to attend a meeting of 
Cork City Council on 7th April 2025 on condition that the meeting be held behind 
closed doors and not be open to either the press or the general public? 
3. Please give a detailed account of Uisce Éireann’s policy of making payments to 
members of the public who made complaints which are not resolved within a certain 
period.  
 
 

Councillor Noel O’Flynn –  
1. What is the average repair time for restoring low water pressure caused by a Breakage 
in the pipe network. 
 
2. How many water repair staff do they employ across the city to carry out emergency 
work. 
Councillor Michelle Gould –  
1. An update on UE's ability to provide water and wastewater infrastructure to new 
housing developments in Cork 
 
2. Will UE be able to able to deliver the infrastructure on time so that housing targets in 
Cork will be met and exceeded 
 
3. A commitment to road and footpath repair and reinstatement fully completed  
 
4. Ann update and full report on the cleaning and management of drains and sewers in 
Cork City outlining who is (a) responsible to carry out this work and in what areas 
and (b) who will be funding this work going forward and the projected costs to be 
incurred by UE and/or Cork City Council  
 
5. Will UE give a commitment to provide bottled water or alternative water supply to 
areas affected during works or by dirty, unclean water in general. 
 
6. When manganese levels are over the recommended daily intake amount, will UE 
issue a do not consume notice in the areas affected. 
 
7. Why were previous meetings cancelled and why is this meeting held in committee 
and not in public. 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
