MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 12th JANUARY 2026 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, 
N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, 
D. Boyle, N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. M. Davoren, A/Director of Services, Corporate, Community 
& Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. N. Murtagh, A/Director of Services, Local Area 
Development & Operations. 
Mr. C. O’Boyle, A/Director of Services, Planning & Integrated 
Development. 
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Quill family on the death of Máirín Quill. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Sylvia O’Donovan. 
• The Kane family on the death of William (Willie) Kane. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Flor O’Leary. 
• The Coogan family on the death of Rose Coogan. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Mary O’Leary. 
• The Hewitt family on the death of Richie Hewitt. 
• The Ring family on the death of Aiden Ring. 

• The Ryan family on the death of Michael Ryan. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Tim (Timmy) O’Donovan. 
• The Kenny family on the death of Pamela (Pam) Kenny. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Patricia (Patsy) Murphy. 
• The Riordan family on the death of Peggy (Margaret) Riordan. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Donal (Don) O’Donovan. 
• The Buckley family on the death of Mary Buckley. 
• The Good family on the death of Renee Nicole Good. 
• The Kitteringham family on the death of Pamela Kitteringham. 
• The Deeney family on the death of Patricia Deeney. 
• The O’Shea family on the death of Jessica O’Shea. 
• The Volkov family on the death of Alex Volkov. 
• The Bracken family on the death of Eileen Bracken. 
• The Keating family on the death of Timothy Joseph Keating. 
• The Mundow family on the death of Liam Mundow. 
• The Shirkie family on the death of Mary Chrissie Shirkie. 
• The Cronin family on the death of Breeda Cronin. 
• The Hanley family on the death of Jim Hanley. 
• The O’Reilly family on the death of Donie O’Reilly. 
• The Kenneally family on the death of Michael (Mick) Kenneally. 
• The Coughlan family on the death of Jeremiah (Jerry) Coughlan. 
• The Collins family on the death of Bernadette Collins. 
• The Burke family on the death of Thomas (Tom) Burke. 
• The Kirk family on the death of Jane Kirk. 
• The Drake family on the death of Mary Anne Drake. 
• The Vaughan family on the death of Elizabeth (Betty) Vaughan. 
• The Duke family on the death of Evelyn Duke. 
• The Gosnell family on the death of Martha Gosnell. 
• The Wolfe family on the death of Frances Wolfe. 
• The Herbert family on the death of Jimmy Herbert. 
• The O’Callaghan family on the death of John O’Callaghan. 
• The Sproul family on the death of Sean Sproul. 
• The McGrath family on the death of Ena McGrath. 
• The Cohalan family on the death of Kathleen Cohalan.  
• The O’Shea family on the death of Frank O’Shea. 
• The Forde family on the death of Jean Forde. 
• The Keane family on the death of Tom Keane. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Eleanor O’Sullivan. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Rose O’Leary. 
• The Nagle family on the death of Alan Nagle. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Coláiste an Spioraid Naoimh on winning first place in the Chemical, Physical 
and Mathematical Sciences Intermediate Group at the Young Scientist & 
Technology Exhibition. 

• Trish McCarthy School of Modern Dance on holding their annual Christmas 
panto. 
• Karina Lyne of Coláiste Choilm on winning the Educator of Excellence 
award at the Young Scientist & Technology Exhibition. 
• St. Finbarr’s Camogie Club on winning the Cork Senior County 
Championship, Munster title and reaching the All-Ireland Senior Camogie 
Final. 
• Ballincollig Camogie Club on reaching the All-Ireland Intermediate 
Camogie Final. 
• Coláiste an Spioraid Naoimh on winning second place in the Biological and 
Ecological Sciences Intermediate Group at the Young Scientist & 
Technology Exhibition. 
• St. Michael’s GFC on celebrating 75 years in existence. 
• Ringmahon Rangers on celebrating 75 years in existence. 
• FORAS Trust on fundraising for Field of Dreams with their limited-edition 
Sultans of Ping charity jersey. 
• Mahon Tidy Towns on their fantastic performance in the latest Irish Business 
Against Litter survey, coming 18th nationally. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR TOM MYERS AND MICHAEL MALONE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Chief 
Superintendent Tom Myers and Commodore Michael Malone to mark their retirement 
and incredible contribution to Cork City. 
 
3.2 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR ST. FINBARR’S HURLING AND FOOTBALL 
CLUB 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that a Civic Reception for St. Finbarr’s Hurling 
and Football Club would be held on 29th January 2026, and that location and time 
would be circulated to members. 
 
3.3 
E&U WHO ANNUAL BUSINESS MEETING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald to 
Viana do Castelo, Portugal, from 15th to 18th June 2026 for the E&U WHO Annual 
Business Meeting. 
 
3.4 
LORD MAYOR’S DELEGATION TO SAN FRANCISCO AND NEW YORK 
 
 
An tArdmhéara sought expressions of interest for participation in the Lord Mayor’s 
delegation to San Francisco and New York, 2nd to 8th March 2026. 
 
3.5 
BEST WISHES TO COMHAIRLEOIR T. TYNAN 
 
 
An tArdmhéara extended best wishes to Comhairleoir T. Tynan and wished him a 
speedy recovery. 
 

3.6 
NEW HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS  
 
 
 
An tArdmhéara noted that the sod had been turned on two new developments at the 
Sextant and CMP sites which will deliver approximately 800 units to Cork City 
Council. An tArdmhéara congratulated and thanked the Chief Executive, the Assistant 
Chief Executive and staff on their work in this area. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
None received. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 8th December 2025. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
GUS HEALY SWIMMIG POOL 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if she will agree for this Council to make a specific request 
for funding from Government Departments, the HSE and Swim Ireland for an 
expansion and upgrade of the Gus Healy Swimming Pool, which would include 
hydrotherapy, given the results of the Swim Gap Analysis by Swimming Ireland. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Leisureworld and Cork City Council (Parks & Recreation Department) are currently 
preparing costed plans for the upgrading of the Gus Healy pool, including possible 
funding options. A report will be brought before the South East LAC meeting for 
consideration in the coming months. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate. 
 
6.2 
GLASHABOY FLOOD RELIEF SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please provide a current update on the progress and the status in terms of 
timeline of the Glashaboy Flood Relief Scheme in Glanmire, currently underway with 
Sorenson’s. 
 

 
REPLY 
 
 
The Glashaboy Flood Relief Scheme was confirmed by the Minister for Public 
Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and Digitalisation under the 
Arterial Drainage Acts 1945 and 1995 as amended. The scheme, when complete, will 
provide flood protection to some 103 properties; 78 residential properties and 25 
commercial premises, and will address the flood risk in a number of locations in the 
Glanmire area. The proposed scheme is designed to provide protection against a 1 in 
100-year fluvial flood event. The construction stage of the scheme commenced in July 
2023. Works are ongoing across multiple locations in Glanmire, Riverstown and 
Sallybrook as part of the Glashaboy Flood Relief Scheme. The overall construction 
works are over 90% complete and the expected substantial completion date for the 
scheme construction is by Q2 2026. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development.  
 
6.3 
CITY LIBRARY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on the regeneration of the City Library on the Grand 
Parade. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The City Library Service is a key component of the cultural, literary, and recreational 
infrastructure of Cork City and it is an important element in the wider community now 
and into the future.  
 
The commitment to providing a new City Library of scale and substance is one that is 
a priority for Cork City Council. 
 
Work is ongoing to make this happen and further updates will be provided as this 
matter progresses. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.4 
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT IN BALLINCOLLIG-SOUTH MAGLIN 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE - given the number of large-scale residential developments constructed, 
under construction and planned in the Ballincollig South/Maglin Urban Expansion 
Area - what work is being undertaken to deliver community facilities to serve these 

new residential developments e.g. the provision of a community centre, medical 
facilities and educational facilities; and to itemise what work is being undertaken to 
bring land in the area zoned for use as public open space (ZO 15) into active use for 
recreational/sporting activities. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 sets out that development in South 
Ballincollig / Maglin shall be coordinated, phased and incorporate a mix of uses that 
form part of an emerging neighbourhood integrated with the wider area. Apart from 
residential uses, lands in this area are zoned specifically for education, town centre 
and public open space purposes. Recent large-scale residential development permitted 
in the area includes complementary non-residential uses such as creches, commercial 
/ retail uses and open space. There is also an existing range of childcare, community, 
medical and retail services in the wider Ballincollig area.  
 
Cork City Council liaises regularly with the Department of Education and Youth in 
relation to future school provision in this area. Cork City Council endeavours to 
develop and support community amenities based on emerging needs, often informed 
by population data. The Community team works collaboratively with established and 
emerging communities, following a community development methodology, to 
establish the need for community centres, amenities and services. This process builds 
the necessary capacity within communities to account for the capital investment in, 
and governance and maintenance of, community facilities. Experience has shown that 
this approach leads to sustainable and lasting partnership-based community facilities, 
specific to each local community. While Cork City Council remains committed to 
supporting community development which is well-resourced and where community 
groups and residents can access the services and facilities they need, this outcome is 
pursued over the course of continuous community engagement as new residential 
areas evolve.  
 
Similarly, the requirement for medical facilities will be assessed by service providers 
as new communities develop. The zoning regime is flexible and facilitates medical 
uses across residential and town centre-zoned lands.  
 
Much of the public open space-zoned lands in this area reflect lands susceptible to 
potential flooding. The City Development Plan specifies that public open space zoning 
comprises a wide range of land including passive recreation, natural areas and 
habitats. The development of active recreation and sporting activities in this area will 
be subject to future demand, resources and land ownership.  
 
These matters will be considered further during the formal review of the current City 
Development Plan. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.5 
ROCHES BUILDINGS AND SUTTONS BUILDINGS 
 

 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the director of housing advise what plans are in place to improve the quality of 
housing in Roches’ buildings and Sutton’s buildings.  The upgrading of velox 
windows, doors, windows, toilets, heating and insulation in these old houses is 
essential for the comfort of mainly elderly residents living in this historic housing 
scheme. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council has begun a programme to address issues around rain water 
protection in Roches Buildings dealing initially with guttering and down pipes. Any 
outstanding issues around roof and velux leaks will also be addressed as part of this 
programme. A similar programme will be progressed for Suttons Buildings in early 
2026. 
 
Cork City Council is progressing energy upgrades to its social housing stock under 
the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme funded by the Department of Housing, 
Local Government & Heritage. The programme provides funding for properties to be 
upgraded to a B2 energy rating with a set maximum funding available per property. 
The areas to be included in the programme for 2026 are now progressing through 
detailed design and construction stages. Noting the architectural heritage and specific 
building fabric of Roches and Suttons Buildings, over the coming months Cork City 
Council will be progressing a preliminary assessment to identify the appropriate route 
to energy upgrade of these buildings. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.6 
NORTHERN DISTRIBUTOR ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE outline how the Northern Distributor Road will complement and not 
hinder the full development of the North West Regional Park. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The Cork Northern Distributor Road will play a pivotal role in the sustainable 
development of Cork City, acting as a key enabler of growth—particularly in the 
northern part of the city. Its strategic importance was first identified in the Cork 
Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (2020) and was reaffirmed by its recent 
inclusion in the Sectoral Investment Plan for Transport under the National 
Development Plan. 
 
The need for a new park in the north west of the city was first identified in Cork 
County Council’s Cobh Local Area Plan 2017. Following the City Council boundary 

extension this objective was further reviewed and it was concluded that, with the 
benefit of improved access from the Northern Distributor Road and in light of the 
scale of planned population growth, there was an opportunity for a larger scale 
regional park which could provide an enhanced range of facilities and serve a wider 
catchment. As a result, the scope and ambition for the proposed park was expanded 
from a local city park to a more significant regional park of similar scale to 
Ballincollig Regional Park. The proposed park would therefore provide enhanced 
recreational facilities for the existing and future communities in the immediate area 
and within the wider city environs. This more ambitious approach was adopted by 
Members the 2022 City Development Plan.  
 
The North West Regional Park, as now planned, is dependent on the Cork Northern 
Distributer Road. The scope/scale of the facility envisaged in the Development Plan 
is feasible/ viable because of the improved multimodal access provided by the 
Distributer Road and with the benefit of an expanding population catchment. In 
addition, the roadway supports the development of a diverse range of recreational uses 
in different areas consistent with the differing topographical characteristics north and 
south of its alignment. 
 
The two planned projects are of significant scale and importance and they have the 
potential to be transformative for the northern part of Cork City, requiring state 
investment in the region of €300–€500 million. The projects are at the design stage 
and continued support from all stakeholders including the community, Council 
members, state agencies, and government will be essential to bring them to fruition. 
Members will be kept appraised of ongoing progress in the development of these 
schemes. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.7 
HOUSING – 2025 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
How many social, affordable and cost rental properties did Cork City Council deliver 
and allocate in 2025 and how does this compare to both the council and the 
government targets for this period and outline how many new applications were 
accepted onto the social housing list in 2025. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The Housing Directorate is currently in the process of collating finalised completion 
data for Quarter 4 2025 for submission to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage (DHLGH) to confirm and verify the total delivery for the 
year 2025. It would be premature at this point to provide finalised figures to Council 
prior to this verification and publication of these figures by the DHLGH. A full report 
on social and affordable housing delivery and allocations in 2025 will be provided to 
the elected members once this process completes. 

 
 
Number of New Households Approved for Social Housing Supports in 2025: 
 
766 households 
 
This excludes applicants qualified for HAP only, Mortgage to Rent and private 
rightsizers.   
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.8 
OUT OF SERVICE TRAFFIC SIGNS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive provide a report on out-of-service traffic safety signs in Cork 
City Council area, including: 
 
• Locations of non-functional electronic/solar flashing amber school beacons, 
periodic LED speed limit signs, and driver feedback signs; 
 
• Non-payroll costs to repair or replace them; and 
 
• Approved or pending sites for new installations, with estimated completion 
costs? 
 
REPLY 
 
Traffic Operations have not installed and are not aware of any periodic LED speed 
limit signs within the Cork City Council area. While there are a number of periodic 
speed limits across the city in particularly in the vicinity of schools, these are static 
signs and none of these have LED speed limit signs.  
 
The LED variable speed flashing signs are relatively new and are being proposed as 
part of the National Speed Limit review for proposed periodic speed limits at schools 
that is due to be implemented in 2027. 
 
In relation to Driver Feedback signs, there is a maintenance contract in place since 
mid 2025 to carry out routine maintenance on all signs and deal with any non-
functioning signs as we are made aware of them. Currently there are 2 reported out of 
order signs which are due to be replaced shortly. If there are further signs that need 
attention please forward details to trafficrequests@corkcity.ie . The cost of repair of a 
sign varies greatly from €200 to replace a circuit breaker to €5000 excl. VAT to supply 
and install a replacement sign.  
 
There are over 100 driver feedback signs currently in place citywide and due to the 
high maintenance requirement on such signs, there is no capacity to increase the 

signage stock across the city currently as there is a very limited budget available for 
maintenance. However, these signs are moveable and can be relocated as various 
infrastructure and traffic calming schemes are implemented.   
 
The ITS Section of Traffic Operations also maintain school warning signs under an 
existing maintenance contract. In 2024, a small number of faults were brought to the 
attention of the Section and were addressed in accordance with established 
maintenance procedures. As part of routine asset management, an annual inspection 
programme is currently being undertaken by the maintenance contractor. Inspections 
completed to date have not identified any outstanding operational issues. Any minor 
defects identified during inspection are rectified at the time where possible or 
otherwise logged for follow up as required. At present, there are no unresolved faults 
recorded on the system. If any issues are identified they can be reported to 
ITS@corkcity.ie  
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate. 
 
6.9 
ENNISMORE, MONTENOTTE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if Cork City Council has continued engagement with the 
owner of Ennismore in Montenotte with regards to the provision of a public park on 
these lands, as set out as being an objective in the city development plan; and if there 
has been any further progress since the answer to the question to the Chief Executive 
on this matter in January 2023? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The City Council is strongly committed to fostering public amenity spaces and 
advancing sustainable place making. It is actively engaging with relevant stakeholders 
regarding the future use of lands at Ennismore, Montenotte and remains focused on 
ensuring that the creation of a public park is a central element in any future plans, 
subject to the availability of the necessary financial resources. 
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
6.10 
CAPITAL PROJECTS IN CORK CITY FROM 2019 TO DATE 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher was deferred to the next 
meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 9th February 2026:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of government capital projects delivered in Cork 
City from 2019 to present date, cost of each project and the names of such projects 
that applied for the 1% arts scheme & an inventory of artwork delivered, in tabular 
form? 

 
6.11 
TRAFFIC INCIDENTS ON N40/SOUTHERN RING ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask Chief Executive to provide the most recently available annual figures for road 
traffic incidents on the N40/Southern Ring Road, noting whether there has been an 
increase in such incidents, and the extent to which this Council's emergency services 
have been called upon to respond to such incidents? 
 
REPLY 
 
Data held by Cork City Fire Brigade refers only to incidents where the brigade was 
mobilised. A more accurate figure may be available from An Garda Siochana or TII. 
 
The most recent annual figures Cork City Fire Brigade have relates to 2025, and 
during that year, Cork City Fire Brigade responded to 16 road traffic incidents along 
the South Ring Road (N40). The figure 16 above represents incidents within the extent 
of the N40 from Dunkettle to Curraheen and are only for road traffic incidents on the 
N40 / Southern Ring Road. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate. 
 
6.12 
TOILETS AT MARINA PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the opening of the toilets at Marina Park. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council is concluding contractual arrangements to enable those public toilet 
facilities to become operational in the coming weeks. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.13 
CORK CITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 

 
 
To ask the CE to outline the process for considering the modification of the Cork City 
Development Plan in view of the large number of submissions received. 
 
REPLY 
 
Since July 2025, Cork City Council has been working to apply the requirements of the 
section 28 guidelines for planning authorities on “NPF Implementation: Housing 
Growth Requirements” published by the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage. These guidelines set housing growth targets for each local authority to 
2040, and requested all local authorities to zone additional lands, by way of variation 
of development plans, for the short-term delivery of housing in accordance with these 
targets. Before deciding on which lands to recommend for rezoning, Cork City 
Council sought to gauge market interest in short-term housing delivery on appropriate 
lands by means of a non-statutory consultation (in this context, short-term means 
within 5 years). Landowners, developers and other interested parties were invited to 
make submissions on potentially suitable, serviced or serviceable lands in appropriate 
locations that meets the requirements of the guidelines.  
 
The consultation ran for six weeks between 30th September and 10th November 2025. 
115 submissions were received, collectively proposing an amount of land far 
exceeding that required under the guidelines.  
 
The Planning and Integrated Development team is currently assessing and analysing 
all submissions received against the criteria of the guidelines and good planning 
practice to best inform Councillors of the executive’s recommended approach to the 
variation to follow. Independent of the consultation, the Planning team has also been 
investigating other potentially suitable sites for rezoning, which will be factored into 
the overall assessment and analysis. As advised previously the Planning team has also 
been reviewing the existing rural housing policy within the City Development Plan 
and a separate workshop will be organised in January to brief Councillors in this 
regard. Environmental and flood risk assessments are required under planning law and 
will commence early in January in relation to all of these matters.  
 
The intention of the above is to coalesce these strands into a single proposed variation 
to the Cork City Development Plan in Q1 2026. Once the above analysis is complete, 
the Elected Members of Council will be full briefed and consulted with on the non-
statutory consultation, the proposals for rezoning additional residential lands and the 
rural housing policy review. These engagements will commence in January and 
Councillors will be notified of the dates very shortly. A combination of a full Council 
briefing with associated meetings will be utilised as the most effective and efficient 
means of garnering Councillor input to this important process.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.14 
TAKING IN CHARGE – MOUNT OVAL 
 

 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the status of taking in charge Mount Oval, to 
outline progress to date, and the time it will take to take the estate in charge. 
 
REPLY 
 
For any estate to be taken in charge by Cork City Council all services must be certified 
as being complete to the standard specified by Cork City Council e.g., Uisce Eireann 
Foul and Potable Network; Roads & Footpaths; Public Lighting; Surface Water; 
Parks. In addition any required wayleaves need to be put in place. This process 
commences once a developer confirms all works are complete. Various Directorates 
and Sections within Cork City Council undertake inspections and refer any defects to 
the developer to address. This process can continue over an extended period.  
 
In relation to Mount Oval, the inspection process has commenced, some required 
works have been identified and additional inspections are to take place. It is difficult 
to specify a timeline for the taking in charge as it is reliant on actions of Uisce Eireann 
& the developer but the process is underway and the Council is committed to 
completing the Taking in Charge of Mount Oval as expeditiously as possible.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.15 
SOCIAL HOUSING APPLICATIONS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive provide the following information in tabular format for 2023, 
2024 and 2025 (to date) in relation to social housing applications in Cork City: 
• Number of applications deemed ineligible, including a breakdown of primary 
reasons for ineligibility (with specific reference to income thresholds) 
 
• Number of applicants who presented to homeless services while awaiting a 
housing decision 
 
REPLY 
 
The table below shows the number of applications recorded on the iHouse System as 
closing with the reason recorded as “Ineligible – Income” during the period specified: 
 
Year 
Number of Applications Closed - 
Ineligible - Income 
2023 
57 
2024 
50 
2025 
53 

 
An assessment of need under Section 2 of the 1988 Housing Act is focussed on 
whether an individual or family has access to accommodation. Their social housing 
application status is not applicable to this assessment, therefore a social housing 
application which is still in progress does not impact the outcome of whether an 
individual or family are deemed as having a need for emergency accommodation.  As 
a result, we do not hold any dataset on the number of applicants who presented to 
homeless services while awaiting a housing decision. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 31st 
December 2025 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of the superior leasehold interest in the land situated at Innishmore, 
Ballincollig, Cork, to Castlepeak Properties Limited, c/o Ronan Daly Jermyn LLP, 
85 South Mall, Cork for the sum of €12,000 plus costs of €1,500.00, plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of the freehold interest in property known as “Inchigaggin House”, 
Inchigaggin Lane, Model Farm Road, Cork, being approximately 2.35 acres of 
land to John Casey, c/o Orbitus Law LLP, Penrose Wharf, Alfred Street, Cork for 
the sum of €525,000.00 (exclusive of VAT). 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir H. 
Kamegni, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
ARTS GRANTS 2026 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of 
Services, Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 10th December 2025 on the 
Arts Grants 2026. 
 
7.3 
VACANCIES ON BOARDS AND COMMITTEES  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh to 
the Association of Irish Local Government following the resignation of Comhairleoir 
S. O’ Callaghan. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 5th JANUARY 2026 

 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 5th January 2026. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 30/11/2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 30/11/2025. 
 
9. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – SPECIAL 
MEETING 25th NOVEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its special meeting held, 25th November 2025. 
 
10. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – 15th 
DECEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 15th December 2025. 
 
10.1 
MOTIONS 
 
10.1.1 
REVIEW OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, and A/Director of Services, Local Area Development & 
Operations, dated 9th December 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘To mark World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on the third Sunday 
in November, to reflect that cyclists have priority over turning vehicles when 
travelling straight through junctions, and to be consistent with the example of Dublin 
City Council, that Cork City Council will review its traffic lights to include flashing 
amber arrows for left-turning vehicles at junctions, and to synchronise the timing of 
both general and bike-specific traffic lights so that cycling may continue for the full 
time that general traffic lights are green, including specifically for eastbound 
movement from Parnell Bridge to Eamon de Valera Bridge along Albert Quay, and 
for westbound movement from Brian Boru Bridge to Christy Ring Bridge along Saint 
Patrick’s Quay and Camden Place.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/521) 
 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that as new active travel schemes are 
funded by the NTA, the design process will consider the relevant guidance and recent 
circulars as part of the overall design methodology in support of sustainable transport.  
 
The consideration of specific cycle heads will be considered in newly designed 
junctions in the context of site suitability, the future implementation of Bus 
Connects/abortive works and overall priorities for the scheme delivery. 

 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration. 
 
10.1.2 
FLASHING TRAFFIC CALMING SIGNS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 9th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council carries out an assessment of flashing traffic calming signs 
across our city and repairs those that are broken.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/533) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there are over 100 Driver Feedback 
Signs across the city. There is a maintenance contract in place for the maintenance 
and repair of these signs and over the next two years, routine maintenance will be 
carried out on all signs. If there are signs at specific locations that require repair, these 
can be submitted to trafficrequests@corkcity.ie and the requests will be referred to the 
maintenance contractor. 
 
10.1.3 
EMERGENCY MOTION ON PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN CORK CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 9th December 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘The Workers Party, as a matter of urgency, calls on Cork City Council to summon a 
meeting of local NTA Management and Union Representatives to discuss the current 
operations of Cork City’s Public Transport System and to raise the issue of passenger 
safety, particularly in relation to the safe and secure transportation of children, minors, 
the elderly, infirm, and disabled — in other words, the most vulnerable groups in 
society. 
 
Furthermore, we call for the introduction of a code of conduct that will ensure, going 
forward, the safe transportation of such vulnerable groups and individuals and 
guarantees they complete their journey in full and are conveyed to their destination in 
the same vehicle: that all city service routes be operated and fulfilled in this manner, 
without exception. That this be an embedded priority throughout the city’s public 
transport system, even if it means occasional disruption to the bus timetables. 
 
Such a code of conduct encompasses the recognition that public transport, as 
originally defined and conceived under Córas Iompair Éireann, is primarily a social 
service for the benefit of all in society.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 25/541) 
 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the action requested by this motion 
falls outside the remit of the Local Authorities.  However, this can be forwarded to the 
NTA and other service providers for their attention if approved by Committee. 

 
10.1.4 
YIELD SIGNS FOR PEDAL CYCLISTS, ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND 
MOPEDS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 9th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will trial the provision of yield signs for pedal cyclists, 
electric scooter users and e-moped drivers at traffic lights in the city, as provided for 
by the Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 2025, SI No. 473 of 2025.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/569) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the priority of the Operations 
Directorate is to maintain the current line marking inventory and bring the standard of 
existing degraded road markings to an acceptable level based on current resources and 
available funding. As new Active Travel schemes are designed in 2026, the contents 
of Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 2025, SI No. 473 of 2025 will be 
considered as a tool for implementation where suitable sites are identified. The 
provision of a zebra crossing with line marking RPC 005 (parallel zebra crossing 
across the roadway) necessitates all vehicles and pedal cyclists, electric scooter users 
and e-moped drivers to yield to pedestrians when approaching the line markings. As 
pedal cyclists, electric scooter users and e-moped drivers are not allowed to travel on 
a public footpath, they should be dismounted when using a zebra crossing with 
pedestrians. 
 
10.1.5 
REVIEW 
CAR-PARKING 
POLICIES 
TO 
PROMOTE 
ELECTRIC 
VEHICLES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 9th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will comprehensively review its car-parking policies to 
promote electric vehicles (EVs), including identification of specific EV parking 
spaces in prominent locations, such as the Marina Promenade, lower parking costs, 
including free parking at the park and ride, will recognise the new EV green flash 
number plates as red tape-free verification, will retrofit its own EVs with green flash 
number plates, will engage with stakeholders, including shopping centres, 
supermarkets and private car parks, to match these EV incentives, and will make it 
easy for people without private car-parking spaces to access road-opening licences for 
charging gullies through footpaths for convenient, low-cost home charging’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/580) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s current parking 
policy has been informed by the Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy 
(CMATS) which aims to promote greater accessibility by walking, cycling and public 
transport use. CMATS core principles with respect to parking management include: 

 
 
• 
Ensuring a quick turnover of spaces within the city centre; and 
• 
Discourage commuter parking within residential areas around the periphery of 
the city/town centre  
 
CMATS is scheduled for an update by the National Transport Authority during 2026 
and there will be an opportunity to investigate alternative parking management 
measures to promote a greater uptake in the purchase of electric vehicles at this stage. 
Any changes in parking policy will need to consider the wider objectives emanating 
from the review in terms of promoting active and sustainable transport options in the 
wider city.  
 
With respect to the provision of cross pavement gullies to support private residents 
charging their electric vehicle on the public road, Cork City Council are actively 
engaging with Zero Emission Vehicles Ireland with respect to the possibility of 
delivering a pilot project in response to a presentation recently delivered to the 
Environment, Water & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee by the Newton Court 
Sustainable Energy Community.  
 
There are legal issues with respect to the routing of a private cable in the public domain 
(either temporarily or permanently) as they are currently not permitted in Ireland due 
to the definition of “private wires” under section 37 of the Electricity Regulation Act 
1999. However, the Government published during the summer a Private Wires Policy 
Statement which will allow private wires to be delivered under a limited number of 
circumstances, including for the on-street charging of electric vehicles. To support 
this policy statement the Government is to bring primary legislation and supporting 
regulations before the Oireachtas to allow for the construction of such private wires, 
this planned for Q3 of 2026. In the meantime, Cork City Council will continue to liaise 
with ZEVI with respect to the delivery of the pilot project in the interim before the 
publication of the updated legislation. 
 
10.1.6 
SURVEY ON WALKING AND CYCLING INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 9th December 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will pursue a workshop or other suitable event/series of 
events to survey Cork City residents on their experience of walking and cycling in the 
city in a similar way to the recent “Masterplan for walking” Limerick City and County 
Council initiative and use the data gleaned to guide decisions on walking and cycling 
infrastructure going forward.’ 
 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/583) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Walking and Cycling Index 2025 
for the Cork Metropolitan Area is due to be published by the NTA in early 2026. The 
report is delivered by Walk Wheel Cycle Trust (formerly Sustrans) in collaboration 
with Cork City Council.  The data in the report comes from 2025 and will include 
local walking, wheeling and cycling data, modelling and an independent survey of 

residents that was conducted from April to August 2025.  Members will be notified of 
the details of the report when it issues. 
 
10.1.7 
CITY STRATEGY ON WALKING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Emergency Management & Climate Action, dated 9th December 2025 on the 
following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council organise community engagement meetings with the intention of 
creating a city strategy on walking as the encouraged and supported mode of 
transport.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/586) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council, in collaboration 
with Get Ireland Walking and Cork Sports Partnership, hosted the “Get Cork 
Walking” Workshop in February 2025. 
 
 
This strategic event brought together a diverse range of stakeholders, including 
representatives from the HSE, Green Schools, Healthy Ireland, and local community 
groups. The workshop served as a platform for discussion, knowledge sharing, and 
joint planning to advance walking as a core component of active living in Cork City. 
 
 
The primary focus of the workshop was to explore how organisations can work 
collectively to develop a systems-based approach to walking promotion. This 
approach aims to integrate walking into everyday life by addressing barriers, 
enhancing infrastructure, and creating supportive environments that encourage 
participation across all age groups and abilities. 
 
 
Stakeholders expressed a strong commitment to: 
 
• 
Promoting a culture of walking as a normal, enjoyable, and sustainable daily 
activity. 
 
• 
Ensuring accessibility and inclusivity, so that walking opportunities are 
available to everyone, regardless of ability, background, or location. 
 
• 
Collaborating across sectors to align policies, resources, and community 
initiatives for maximum impact. 
 
 
This initiative reflects Cork City Council’s ongoing dedication to improving public 
health, reducing carbon emissions, and fostering vibrant, connected communities. By 
working together, these organisations aim to make Cork a leading example of an 
active city where walking is safe, convenient, and valued. 
 
10.1.8 
DUNKETTLE TRAFFIC APP 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 

 
 
‘That this Council will seek the costings to adopt the operation of the Dunkettle traffic 
app to ensure the camera feeds on the app are restarted and maintained in our own 
roads CCTV ecosystem with funding streams from the Department of Transport, 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland and the National Transport Authority, to offset the 
cost to the Local Authority.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/167) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that An Garda Síochána have got an 
independent CCTV system located around the city centre to monitor and react to 
incidents, events and anti-social behaviour.  
 
 
On-duty Gardaí monitor CCTV feeds as well as emergency calls and all information 
being fed into their network which allows a more efficient deployment of resources 
on the ground. 
 
 
This CCTV is separate and not a shared system with Cork City Council for GDPR 
reasons. The Gardaí carry out speed monitoring using static and mobile speed 
cameras, to detect and issue penalty points for speeding and other driving offences. 
Any expansion of the current Garda CCTV system in public spaces would require 
permission under section 27 of the Garda Síochána (Recording Devices) Act 2023. 
This involves the Garda Commissioner authorising the installation and operation of 
CCTV for a) the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal 
offences, b) safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security, 
including securing public safety and public order, c) the protection of the security of 
the state. 
 
 
Any specific request for additional CCTV coverage should be discussed at the Joint 
Policing Committee (JPC) who would have a remit in this area and dependent on the 
CCTV monitoring purpose and the identification of specific sites for consideration, 
either the Gardaí or Local Authority must apply in writing to the Garda Commissioner 
for authorisation for the installation/operation of any new cameras for the purposes of 
the detection of criminal offences and commence compliance to the aforementioned 
act. 
 
10.1.9 
HGV RESTRICTION FOR LOWER KENT ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 20th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Lower Kent Road become restricted for the movement of Heavy Goods 
Vehicles (HGVs) and that signage be put in place to reflect such a restriction.’   
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/359) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that any proposed ban of heavy vehicles 
cannot be considered as a solution for one street only but a city-wide approach and the 
impacts of same on businesses and the operation of the city would need careful 

consideration. Such a proposal could only be considered in the context of CMATS 
and / or a HGV Movement Strategy.  
 
10.1.10 LOWER KENT ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 20th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council engage with the residents of lower Kent Road, Ballyphehane who 
have witnessed increased levels of traffic using the road due to many factors in the 
area including changes to the junction at Curragh Road. The proposed developments 
at the former Vita Cortex and CMP sites will no doubt exacerbate the situation and a 
traffic management plan needs to be put in place. This must include signage and traffic 
calming measures.’   
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. F. Kerins 25/367) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that traffic calming ramps have been in 
place on Lower Kent Road for a number of years. Two out of the three ramps were 
replaced in 2024 due to deterioration. Ramp ahead signs and a Children at Play sign 
are also in place.  
 
 
There is a National Speed Limit Review currently being rolled out. The first stage of 
this was the reduction of the default speed limit on Rural Local Roads from 80 km/hr 
to 60 km/hr on the 7th February of this year.  
 
 
The second stage of the National Speed Limit Review will look at reducing speed 
limits in Urban areas from 50 km/hr to 30 km/hr, however we are still awaiting 
guidance from the Department in relation to this. Lower Kent Road can be considered 
for a reduced speed limit as part of this review.  
 
 
The October 2025 update on request for traffic management plan during and after 
completion of development stated that during the construction phase of any 
development, where the use of any public road is required, the contractor shall submit 
a construction traffic management plan outlining any temporary traffic management 
plans required for the development. This is immediately prior to commencement of 
the developments.  
 
 
In relation to traffic management for completed developments, the Cork Metropolitan 
Area Transport Strategy is the overall transport plan for the Cork Metropolitan Area. 
CMATS represents a coordinated land use and transport strategy for the Cork 
Metropolitan Area to cover the period up to 2040. One of the objectives of CMATS 
is to increase uptake of active travel and sustainable modes of transport through the 
provision of infrastructure which will have the result of reducing the number of private 
vehicles in the city in the long term. BusConnects forms part of the strategy which 
looks at the overall city in terms of the enhancement of bus services. As part of 
BusConnects, Kinsale Road forms part of the Cork City South East Sustainable 
Transport Corridors Scheme where major improvements to the route and bus services 
will be rolled out to minimise reliance on the private car in this area.  

 
 
In relation to the review of urban speed limits, the Department of Transport issued 
guidance on the 16th October 2025 with regard to the implementation of 30 km/hr 
speed limits in urban areas with a view to having the changes implemented by the 31st 
March 2027.  
 
 
The updated response in relation to the request for a defined area plan for the area in 
the vicinity of Lower Kent Road stated that Kent Road is in an established residential 
suburb developed around the middle of the last century. While there are a number of 
sites being developed in the area, this is true for many parts of the city. The City 
Development Plan provides a land-use planning framework for this area and there is 
no real benefit in preparing an additional planning led area plan for this area. In the 
longer term, the wider surrounding area has regeneration potential and the Cork City 
Development Plan makes reference to a potential future strategy for the area.  
 
 
The particular matters raised by Members in the motions in relation to HGVs and 
traffic management fall under the wider transport strategy CMATS for the Cork 
Metropolitan Area. As outlined previously, the Cork Metropolitan Area Transport 
Strategy is the overall transport plan for the Cork Metropolitan Area. CMATS 
represents a coordinated land use and transport strategy for the Cork Metropolitan 
Area to cover the period up to 2040. One of the objectives of CMATS is to increase 
uptake of active travel and sustainable modes of transport through the provision of 
infrastructure which will have the result of reducing the number of private vehicles in 
the city in the long term. BusConnects forms part of the strategy which looks at the 
overall city in terms of the enhancement of bus services. As part of BusConnects, 
Kinsale Road forms part of the Cork City South East Sustainable Transport Corridors 
Scheme where major improvements to the route and bus services will be rolled out to 
minimise reliance on the private car in this area. 
 
11. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH 
- 
STRAITÉISEACHT, 
FORBAIRT 
EACNAMAÍOCH, 
FIONTAR 
& 
PLEANÁIL – 15th DECEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 15th December 2025. 
 
11.1 
MOTIONS  
 
11.1.1 
ENSURING RESPONSIBLE PLANNING FOR GAMING AND AMUSEMENT 
DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes with dismay and concern the recent decision by An 
Coimisiún Pleanála to approve a gaming arcade at Westside Retail Park, Ballincollig, 
and expresses concern about the potential social and community impacts of such 

developments, particularly near schools, family-oriented retail outlets, and residential 
areas. 
 
Council further notes that while the Cork City Development Plan 2022–2028 
recognises commercial leisure uses, it contains no specific policies addressing the 
location, concentration, or social impacts of gaming arcades or casino-type uses. 
 
Accordingly, Council calls for: 
• 
A review of planning policy to develop clearer criteria and controls for such 
uses; 
• 
Integration of these considerations into the next Cork City Development Plan 
and 
• 
A report from the Chief Executive outlining how planning enforcement can be 
strengthened to ensure compliance. 
 
Council reaffirms its commitment to protecting community wellbeing, public health, 
and social cohesion in all planning decisions.’ 
    
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/578) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that paragraphs 11.191 and 11.192 of the 
Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 address amusement centres and arcades, and 
casinos and private members’ clubs, respectively. These paragraphs set parameters 
that must be considered when assessing development proposals for such uses, 
including hours of operation, impact on amenities and adjoining properties, and 
concentration of such uses. This matter will be kept under review as part of the next 
City Development Plan. 
 
The Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, prescribes the enforcement 
proceedings that a local authority may take in the case where there is alleged 
unauthorised development. When the Planning Authority becomes aware of any 
alleged unauthorised development the prescribed steps are implemented. 
 
11.1.2 
CONTRACTORS BREACHING CONDITIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would ensure that contractors would adhere to the time 
including the rules and regulations around works being carried out. Currently 
contractors are breaching these conditions, and they are failing to communicate with 
local residents which in turn is creating anger and frustration in local communities.’ 
               
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/600) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that planning permissions that involve 
significant development normally contain a condition that requires a developer to 
submit a Traffic Management Plan (TMP). This TMP is assessed by and agreed by 
Traffic Operations. Any reported breaches of the conditions of a TMP are investigated 

by the Planning Enforcement Team. Experience to date has shown that engagement 
with the developer addresses most issues. Any unresolved issues may be addressed by 
undertaking enforcement proceedings.   
 
Where the works are not associated with a grant of planning permission, and there is 
a persistent issue with a contractor operating outside of permitted hours, again, 
experience to date has shown that consistent engagement with the developer will 
resolve most issues once it is brought to the attention of Traffic Operations. Any 
repeated breaches will be recorded and taken into account when setting conditions for 
future works. 
 
11.1.3 
DEVELOPMENT CHARGES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council exempt voluntary sporting development from development 
charges. This is farcical. Cork City Council gives grants to sporting organisations on 
an annual basis from the sports committee. The Council also contributes in relation to 
long term leases and the sports partnership. The benefits of sport to community are 
well documented. This needs to be corrected immediately.’ 
          
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 25/613) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that development contributions are 
attached to a grant of planning permission in accordance with the General & 
Supplementary Development Contributions Schemes 2023-2029, which were adopted 
by Council on 13th February 2023.  The Council applies a number of exemptions or 
percentage reductions in respect of particular categories of development.  These are 
set out in Table 5, under section 1.5 of the General Contribution Scheme.  The 
provision of facilities by organizations which are considered to be exempt from 
planning fees as outlined in Part 12, Article 157 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 as amended, with the exception of some specified developments, 
will be granted a 100% reduction in development contributions. 
 
11.1.4 
‘MEANINGFUL USE’ POLICY FOR DERELICT OR VACANT SITES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council report on whether a ‘meaningful use’ policy is to be applied 
to derelict or vacant sites in the City Centre and if the vacant site on Sullivan's Quay 
can be utilized as part of such a policy, a public park could be an option at this 
location.’ 
       
                     
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/640) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that the Cork City Development Plan 
encourages appropriate meanwhile uses for vacant commercial buildings and sites. 
However, Cork City Council does not have the power to compel owners of Vacant 
and Derelict Sites in private ownership to engage in meanwhile use. Owners of such 
sites are encouraged to return the site to use through the powers bestowed by the 
Derelict Site Act 1990 and the Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT). The vacant site 
at Sullivans Quay is included on the Cork City RZLT map, resulting in annual levies 
which are collected by Revenue until such time as the site is returned to use.  
 
11.1.5 
ADDITIONAL POWERS TO RESTORE DERELICT BUILDINGS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 15th December 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council supports the addition of compulsory sales orders and 
compulsory rental orders to the statutory powers available to local authorities, which 
would assist in strengthening progress restoring derelict buildings to active use, will 
write to the Government, including the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, to request these additional powers, will publish the derelict sites register in 
GIS map format online, will engage with dereliction campaigners Frank O’Connor 
and Jude Sherry to cross reference their register of derelict properties with its own 
derelict sites register, will report on how complete its derelict sites register is relative 
to Frank O’Connor and Jude Sherry’s register, will account for any discrepancies, will 
categorise the complete derelict sites register by the most prominent, high-priority 
sites, will detail actions and timelines to return these buildings to use, and will estimate 
how many people these buildings could house.’ 
    
 
     
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/651) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council employs a robust 
and wide-ranging approach to identify and resolve dereliction. A dedicated team of 
technicians and administrative staff investigate sites, conduct inspections, contact 
owners of potentially derelict sites to progress sites towards resolution or if required, 
formal placement on the register. Derelict property owners are frequently contacted 
to outline their options for returning a property to use, while those who fail to remove 
dereliction are subject to levies at 7% of the property value plus interest on unpaid 
levies. Cork City Council also utilises the powers of the Derelict Site Act 1990 
including its power of acquisition. A variety of return to use methods are applied, 
including provision of grants and owner engagement with owner action typically the 
fastest return to use option. 
 
The 
Derelict 
Sites 
register 
is 
currently 
available 
online 
at 
https://www.corkcity.ie/media/0mslbrne/211125-derelict-sites-register.pdf. 
The 
Department of Housing are currently collating national data with a view to providing 
this information in GIS format online.  
 
The Local Authority is the prescribed body to determine if a site is derelict and in 
doing so has regard to many factors including owner engagement. Any person can 
report a site that they consider may be derelict on the Cork City Council website –  

https://corkcity.submit.com/show/117  
 
All sites are reviewed on a regular basis and possible actions leading to a removal of 
dereliction identified. Prioritization takes place as a matter of normal process. There 
are over 380 sites being investigated for potential placement on the register, of which 
158 are currently on the register.  The first chart below outlines the status of each site 
currently on the register, while the second outlines the status of each site under 
investigation, with monthly reviews and progression of each site.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS 
STRAITÉISIGH - TITHÍOCHT – 16th DECEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 16th December 2025. 
 

12.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Housing Progress report for October 2025. 
 
12.2 
MOTIONS 
 
12.2.1 
HOMELESS MEMBERS OF THE TRAVELLER COMMUNITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th October 2025 on the following motion held in Committee:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will allow members of the Traveller community to register 
as homeless without requiring to remain in hotel or other emergency accommodation.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/514) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Section 2 of the 1988 Housing 
Act states the following:  
 
Homeless persons for the purposes of this Act. 
A person shall be regarded by a housing authority as being homeless for the purposes 
of this Act if— 
(a) there is no accommodation available which, in the opinion of the authority, he, 
together with any other person who normally resides with him or who might 
reasonably be expected to reside with him, can reasonably occupy or remain in 
occupation of, or 
(b) he is living in a hospital, county home, night shelter or other such institution, and 
is so living because he has no accommodation of the kind referred to in paragraph 
(a), 
and he is, in the opinion of the authority, unable to provide accommodation from his 
own resources. 
 
Given that this is the legislation that Cork City Council applies to all presentations to 
the City Council’s Homeless Office, if someone can continue to reside in their current 
accommodation, then they would not be considered homeless. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further consideration. 
 
12.2.2 
SPEED UP ALLOCATIONS FOR TURN KEY UNITS   
 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 12th December 2025 on the following motion referred back to the 
Committee:- 
 
‘That this Council will examine a policy where potential tenants would sign an 
insurance waiver on pre-installed fixtures in a home to take a social tenancy as is in 
order to speed up allocations for those on the list who wish to avail of turn key units.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/349) 

 
The report of the Acting Director of Servies stated that Cork City Council has a legal 
requirement to ensure all properties made available for allocation meet the Housing 
(Standards for Rental Housing) Regulations 2019. Upon a property becoming vacant, 
the Housing Directorate undertakes such works as may be necessary to ensure the 
property complies with the regulations. It is then returned for allocation. 
 
The Housing Directorate sought advice from the Office of Legal Affairs to establish 
if it is possible for potential tenants to sign a waiver in regard to aspects of the 
Regulations. 
 
The legal advice received is as follows: 
 
“The Housing (Standards for Rented Housing) Regulations 2019 (S.I. No. 137 of 
2019) (“the 2019 Regulations”) impose a statutory obligation on Landlords 
(including Local Authorities) of rented properties to ensure that the property meets 
certain minimum standards, as set out in the Regulations.  Compliance is mandatory. 
 
A waiver by a tenant will not negate the Council’s statutory obligations and it cannot 
be relied on.  As a statutory body, a Local Authority must act within the powers and 
duties conferred on it by legislation; to do otherwise is ultra vires (i.e. beyond the 
scope of the powers granted to it by law) and could expose the Authority to adverse 
consequences such as having to defend legal proceedings taken by tenants who suffer 
injury, loss or damage as a result of a Local Authority’s failure to ensure that the 
minimum standards imposed by the Regulations have been met.   
 
Cork City Council cannot lawfully rely on a waiver from a tenant and proceed with 
the letting of a property that fails to meet the Regulations.” 
 
13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 9th DECEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 9th December 2025. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 5th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 5th January 2026. 
 
14.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
14.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF NOVEMBER 2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
November 2025. 
 
15. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 

An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
16. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon as part of the Cork City Council Delegation trip to 
San Francisco, USA, 2nd - 9th March 2025. 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon as part of the VISIT Cork Delegation trip to Ottawa, 
Montreal and Toronto, Canada, 28th September - 4th October 2025. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the AILG/Maynooth University – Planning System 
in Ireland Joint Programme, held at Maynooth, Co. Kildare, 15th November 
2025. 
• Comhairleoir J. Maher as part of the technical visit to London – Public Realm, 
25th - 27th November 2025. 
• Comhairleoir K. McCarthy as part of the Cork City Council Delegation visit 
to Shanghai, China, 15th - 22nd November 2025. 
 
17. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
18. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
18.1 
NATIONAL HEALTHY CITIES MEETING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald to the National Healthy Cities Meeting in Carlow on 7th November 2025. 
 
18.2       MCGILL SUMMER SCHOOL  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. 
Shannon to Co. Donegal for the McGill Summer School, from 18th - 20th July 2024. 
 
19. 
TRAINING 
 
19.1 
LAMA AND AILG CONFERENCES AND TRAINING 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved attendance by Elected Members at all 
LAMA and AILG conferences and training during 2026. 
 
20. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
21. 
MOTIONS 
 

21.1 
MERCOSUR TRADE DEAL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘We the members of Cork City Council are asking all our MEPs and TDs to vote 
against the Mercosur trade deal. This deal has the potential to decimate the Irish beef 
industry through cheap and inferior imports from South American countries. The 
commitment to not support this deal was given in last year's Dáil Election and the 
European Elections. We are asking for these election promises to be upheld.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Flynn 25/612) 
 
21.2 
OCCUPIED TERRITORIES BILL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council opposes the exclusion of trade in services in the Occupied 
Territories Bill and writes to the Tánaiste and Minister for Finance, Simon Harris, and 
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Helen McEntee, calling on them to include 
a ban on trade in services in the Government's proposed Occupied Territories Bill with 
immediate effect.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 26/004) 
 
21.3 
SUPPORT OF AID ORGANISATIONS  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council supports Doctors Without Borders, Médecins Sans Frontières and 
other aid organisations such as Oxfam, Action Against Hunger, Danish Refugee 
Council, Norwegian Refugee Council, World Vision International, Caritas 
International and others and condemns the move by Israel to ban vital organisations 
that are saving lives in the continued human rights abuses being perpetrated by the 
Israeli State and will write to the Israeli Minister for Diaspora Affairs to notify him of 
this Council's condemnation.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 26/018) 
 
21.4 
SAFEGUARDING 
IRISH 
DEMOCRACY 
FROM 
FOREIGN 
INTERFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls on the Government to: 
1. Introduce a clear and comprehensive suite of laws to prevent and address 
foreign interference in Irish democratic processes, including elections, 
referenda and political decision-making; 
2. Create specific statutory offences for any person who knowingly enables, 
facilitates or colludes with a foreign government, foreign state-linked entity, 
or foreign actor, including non-state organisations or individuals acting on 

behalf of, or aligned with, groups with malign intent, for the purpose of 
influencing Irish democracy; 
3. Provide for effective sanctions, including criminal penalties, financial 
penalties and disqualification from public office where appropriate; 
4. Strengthen transparency and enforcement, including enhanced disclosure 
requirements and strengthened investigative and enforcement powers for 
relevant oversight, regulatory and policing bodies; 
5. Ensure that any such measures are proportionate, evidence-based, and fully 
consistent with Ireland’s obligations under EU law, including the protection 
of fundamental rights and legitimate democratic participation.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 26/023) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a proposed amendment to the motion was  
tabled to read as follows:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls on the Government to: 
1. Introduce a clear and comprehensive suite of laws to prevent and address 
foreign interference in Irish democratic processes, including elections, 
referenda and political decision-making; and domestic misinformation and 
disinformation, especially with AI; 
2. Create specific statutory offences for any person who knowingly enables, 
facilitates or colludes with a foreign government, foreign state-linked entity, 
or foreign actor, including non-state organisations or individuals acting on 
behalf of, or aligned with, groups with malign intent, for the purpose of 
influencing Irish democracy; 
3. Provide for effective sanctions, including criminal penalties, financial 
penalties and disqualification from public office where appropriate; 
4. Strengthen transparency and enforcement, including enhanced disclosure 
requirements and strengthened investigative and enforcement powers for 
relevant oversight, regulatory and policing bodies; 
5. Ensure that any such measures are proportionate, evidence-based, and fully 
consistent with Ireland’s obligations under EU law, including the protection 
of fundamental rights and legitimate democratic participation.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 26/023) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, A 
vote was called for on the approval of the amendment where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. 
Desmond, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, C. Kelleher, 
J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (22) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, A. Deasy. (2) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí B. McCarthy, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Dineen, F. 
Dennehy. (5) 

 
As those voting in favour of the amendment were greater than those voting against, 
An tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the amendment to the motion approved. 
 
21.5 
RECENT MILITARY OPERATION IN VENEZUELA 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to An Taoiseach Micheál Martin and the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs Helen McEntee calling on them and the Irish government to strongly 
condemn the Trump administration’s recent military operation in Venezuela, which 
resulted in the deaths of numerous people and the capture of Venezuela’s sitting 
President, Nicolás Maduro and his wife Cilia Flores on the basis that said military 
operation constituted a clear violation of the basic principles of international law, in 
particular the prohibition of the use of force against the territorial integrity and 
political independence of nation states pursuant to Article 2.4 of the United Nations 
Charter.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 26/026) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boylan, seconded by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, 
M.R. Desmond, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, C. 
Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (23) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, P. Dineen, A. Deasy. (3) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí H. Kamegni, F. Dennehy. (2) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
21.6  
HEALTH 
(REGULATION 
OF 
TERMINATION 
OF 
PREGNANCY) 
(AMENDMENT) BILL AND SUPPORTS FOR PREGNANT WOMEN 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council welcomes the outcome of the recent Dáil Éireann vote (73-
71 on 17 December 2025) to reject the restoration to the Order Paper of the Health 
(Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) (Amendment) Bill 2023.  
 
This Bill proposed significant changes to Ireland's abortion laws, including: abortion 
on request up to fetal viability (typically around 22-24 weeks); abolition of the three-
day waiting period; broader grounds for later-term abortions (such as fatal fetal 
abnormalities likely to lead to death before birth or within one year, or serious risk to 
the woman's health); and decriminalization of abortion services. 
 

This Motion calls on Cork City Council to write to An Taoiseach, Micheál Martin, 
expressing concern about the rising number of abortions in Ireland (approximately 
49,000 recorded from 2019 to the end of 2024, with numbers increasing annually to a 
record 10,852 in 2024) and urging the Government to work towards reducing abortion 
numbers by providing better supports for pregnant women, including financial 
assistance, housing, and other practical measures, while also actively promoting a 
positive cultural shift that affirms the clear message that every baby is a cherished and 
very welcome addition to our country.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 26/039) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, T. Shannon, P. Dineen, A. Deasy. (4) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, D. 
Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, M.R. 
Desmond, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, C. Kelleher, 
J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, H. Kamegni, F. Dennehy. (3) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
21.7        PALESTINE SOLIDARITY ACTIVISTS  
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘Eight imprisoned Palestine solidarity activists are currently being held in prison in 
the UK without bail. The way they’ve been treated is abhorrent. They have been 
denied some of their most basic rights, including the right to bail and a fair trial. Their 
communications with family and the outside world have been interfered with, denied 
and surveilled. They have been denied proper winter clothing and masks for COVID-
19 prevention purposes. In protest at these intolerable conditions, they have been on 
hunger strike for more than 9 weeks and at this point, are near death. 
 
The British state has used every tool at their disposal to try to isolate and break the 
spirit of the prisoners for Palestine, and now they have shown they do not care one 
iota if they die on this hunger strike. This council condemns this unacceptable and 
inhumane treatment of Palestine activists by the UK State and calls for the strikers 
demands to be met in full:  
 
1. End all censorship 
2. Immediate bail – this is vital to save the lives of those on strike  
3. The right to a fair trial  
4. The proscription of Palestine Action to be overturned  
5. Shut down Elbit Systems.’ 
 

(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 26/048) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
a proposed amendment to the motion was tabled to read as follows:- 
 
‘Eight imprisoned Palestine solidarity activists are currently being held in prison in 
the UK without bail. The way they’ve been treated is abhorrent. In protest at these 
intolerable conditions, they have been on hunger strike for more than 9 weeks and at 
this point, are near death. This Council declares our solidarity with these brave pro-
Palestine activists on hunger strike and calls on the British government to listen to 
their demands and end this inhumane treatment.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 26/048) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
A vote was called for on the approval of the amendment where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, D. Boylan, M. 
Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. 
O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. 
(18) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, A. Deasy. (2) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, M.R. Desmond, 
P. Dineen, F. Dennehy, T. Coleman. (7) 
 
As those voting in favour of the amendment were greater than those voting against, 
An tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the amendment to the motion approved. 
 
21.8 
VITAL MEDICAL EQUIPMENT FOR GAZA 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council commends the work of Irish Charities and Palestine 
Solidarity Organisations in raising funds for mobile maternity units intended for use 
in Gaza. The Council expresses its concern that currently this vital medical equipment 
is being denied entry to Gaza by the Israeli Government. The Council will write to An 
Taoiseach to express this concern and to request that the Irish Government use all 
powers at its disposal to ensure that this aid and all other medical aid is granted entry 
to Gaza as a matter of urgency.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’ Connor 26/055)  
 
 
 
 
 
 

This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
