MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 13th APRIL 2026 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, 
N. O’Flynn.  
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, 
B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, 
N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Ms. N. Carroll, A/Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Ms. 
D. 
Murphy, 
A/Director of Services, Emergency 
Management and Climate Action.  
Mr. J. Stapleton, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations. 
Mr. C. Ó Súilleabháin, Director of Services, City Centre 
Development & Operations. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Hegarty family on the death of Anthony (Tony) Hegarty. 
• The Jones family on the death of Peter Jones. 
• The Bamidele family on the death of Ganiyu Ishola Bamidele. 
• The Roberts family on the death of Jim (Jimmy) Roberts. 

• The O’Brien family on the death of Colm O’Brien. 
• The O’Neill family on the death of Eileen O’Neill. 
• The Daly family on the death of Cathy Daly. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Noreen O’Leary. 
• The Carlile family on the death of Janet Carlile. 
• The Moody family on the death of Marie Rosaleen Moody. 
• The Nolan family on the death of Edward Nolan. 
• The Barry family on the death of Tom Barry. 
• The Smith family on the death of Deirdre Smith. 
• The Lambe family on the death of Tadhg Lambe. 
• The Shields family on the death of Michael Shields. 
• The Banks family on the death of William Banks. 
• The Deane family on the death of Valerie Deane. 
• The Moynihan family on the death of Frank Moynihan. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Sheila McCarthy. 
• The Quinlan family on the death of Jim Quinlan. 
• The Delea family on the death of Sheila Delea. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Kathleen Murphy. 
• The O’Shea family on the death of Veronica O’Shea. 
• The Frawley family on the death of Thomas (Tom) Frawley. 
• The Kennedy family on the death of Nuala Kennedy. 
• The O’Callaghan family on the death of Eve O’Callaghan. 
• The Walsh family on the death of Hannah Walsh. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Charles McCarthy. 
• The Cremin family on the death of Kelly Cremin. 
• The Conway family on the death of Abina (Benny) Conway. 
• The O’Riordan family on the death of Gerard (Ger) O’Riordan. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Scoil Mhuire on winning the Munster Senior Schoolgirls Cup, the Munster 
Senior Schoolgirls League and the Daphne Hall All-Ireland Hockey Cup. 
• UCC Glanmire Ladies Basketball Club on reaching the Women’s Super 
League Final, playing Trinity Meteors on 12th April 2026 in Dublin. 
• Gaelscoil Uí Riada on competing as Cork Champions in the Cumann na 
mBunscol All-Ireland Sports Quiz Final 2026. 
• Highfield Rugby Club on winning their first Munster Senior Challenge Cup 
Title in 58 years. 
• Bishopstown Pitch & Putt Club and the Junior A team on their County Winter 
League Final win. 
• Keith Ricken on receiving a special recognition award for his 20 years of 
service to third-level GAA at the Rising Stars Awards ceremony. 
• Cork Deaf Team Pool on being crowned winners of the inaugural Inter Pro 
Pool Tournament. 
• Ballincollig Basketball Club on being crowned 2025/26 Domino’s Men’s 
Super League Champions. 
• Rory McIlroy on back-to-back Masters wins. 
 

3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR THE BAND 1 BRIGADE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for the 
Band 1 Brigade, Collins Barracks, on its centenary year. 
 
3.2 
WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald to 
Geneva from 18th to 23rd May 2026 for the 79th World Health Assembly. 
 
3.3 
IDAHOBIT DAY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara to Rennes from 
16th to 19th May 2026 to participate in programming around IDAHOBIT day. The visit 
would take place under an Erasmus funded programme. 
 
3.4 
LORD MAYOR’S VISIT TO LOWELL, MASSACHUSETTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara to Lowell, 
Massachusetts from 5th to 10th May 2026, to participate in the 200th anniversary of the 
founding charter of the city and mark the success of the city becoming the first 
UNESCO Learning City in the USA. 
 
3.5 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir A. Deasy to address An Chomhairle on motion 
51 on Appendix 1, Urgent Rehousing – Rat Infestation at Togher Flats:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes with grave concern the severe and ongoing rat 
infestation in the Togher Flats complexes, caused by structural defects such as 
collapsed sewers and defective underground pipes. 
 
This situation has led to at least one tenant being hospitalised with suspected Weil’s 
disease (leptospirosis), a serious and potentially life-threatening illness, and continues 
to endanger the health of multiple families. 
 
Cork City Council is called upon to immediately rehouse all affected families to good 
quality, suitable accommodation in the immediate area.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 26/248) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, 
A. Deasy, C. O’Connor. (14) 

 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, C. Kelleher, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (13) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. (1) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated.  
 
An Chomhairle noted that the motion will be considered, as referred by the Meetings 
Administrator, by the South West Local Area Committee. 
 
3.6 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir H. Kamegni to address An Chomhairle on 
motion 38 on Appendix 1, Douglas Library:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will urgently reinstate the open library service at Douglas 
Library on an interim basis until the Leaving Certificate examinations conclude in 
June, recognising its vital role as a safe, quiet study space for young people; will work 
with local councillors, Douglas Village Shopping Centre security, An Garda Síochána, 
and its own CCTV evidence to identify those responsible for anti-social behaviour and 
restrict their access accordingly; and will subsequently review the service to determine 
a fair, long-term solution that does not penalise the wider community for the actions 
of a minority.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 26/231) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
a vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, 
J. Lynch, A. Deasy, C. O’Connor. (15) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. 
Kelleher, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (13) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated.  
 
An Chomhairle noted that the motion will be considered, as referred by the Meetings 
Administrator, by the South East Local Area Committee. 

 
3.7 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn to address An Chomhairle on his 
and Comhairleoir P. Dineen’s motion as follows:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees to suspend Standing Orders to allow for consideration 
of a request to convene a Special Meeting of Council to examine the design, 
compliance, and implementation of the pedestrian and active travel scheme at 
Knockfree Avenue and Knockpogue Avenue. 
 
In seeking this Special Meeting, the Council notes: 
 
- 
Concerns raised by residents on local radio regarding pedestrian safety, 
accessibility, and local impact. 
- 
Observations from the Irish Wheelchair Association highlighting potential 
accessibility issues, including footpath widths below best-practice guidance and 
risks for wheelchair users and other vulnerable road users 
         
The purpose of the Special Meeting shall be: 
 
1- To receive a detailed technical briefing on the scheme design, including 
compliance with all relevant national accessibility and active travel design 
standards 
2- To assess whether the scheme, when completed, as currently designed, provides 
safe    and accessible infrastructure for all users, including people with disabilities, 
older persons, and families and children, in particular children with special needs. 
3- To review the governance and oversight arrangements in place between Cork City 
Council and the National Transport Authority 
4- To inform the members of council on the legal liabilities if any on the organisation 
is in whole or in part with other third parties involved in the scheme, 
 
The meeting shall invite relevant officials and stakeholders, including: 
 
▪ Senior officials from Cork City Council 
▪ Representatives of the National Transport Authority 
▪ Design and engineering consultants involved in the scheme 
▪ Representatives from relevant accessibility advocacy organisations.’ 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, 
J. Lynch, A. Deasy, C. O’Connor. (15) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. 
Kelleher T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (13) 

 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated.  
 
3.8 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir K. Collins to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees that central government must take all action available 
to support ordinary workers, families, carers, those with disabilities and pensioners 
who are struggling with the cost of living. This must include the reintroduction of 
energy credits and the full reduction of excise on fuel and home heating oil.’ 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, 
J. Lynch, A. Deasy, C. O’Connor. (15) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. 
Kelleher, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (13) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated.  
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
PROPOSED HOLDING OF AN EVENT  
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 7th 
April 2026 on the proposed holding of Cork Carnival of Science on 6th and 7th June 
2026 in Fitzgerald’s Park. 
 
4.2 
STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AT BLOCK 8003, 
BLARNEY BUSINESS PARK, SHEAN UPPER, BLARNEY, CORK, T23 EYH5 
 
 
Members considered and approved the Chief Executive Report to An Coimisiún 
Pleanála under Section 37E of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) 
for the application for permission to An Coimisiún Pleanála for a Strategic 
Infrastructure Development at Block 8003, Blarney Business Park, Shean Upper, 

Blarney, Cork, T23 EYH5.  In accordance with Section 37E of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 (as amended). 
 
 
The views of the following members were heard:- Comhairleoirí J. Sheehan, K. 
Collins and A. Deasy.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Kerins, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, An 
Chomhairle considered the following recommendation:- 
 
I believe the planning process has been completely disregarded in this instance.  
CCC were notified of this proposal just two days before public consultation closed.  
CCC received an extension but the community did not. 
The deadline to notify council was missed and people missed out on making 
submissions with regard to this proposed facility.  
Councillors are a vital source of information in the community and failing to inform 
them means the community were not informed of this proposal.  
There were small advertisements but no social media or word of mouth - it is clear 
that the community were not aware as there was not one single submission received 
by the public.  
The process was flawed and CCC should call for the immediate reopening of 
submissions.  
They should recognise that their role in this process was diminished and their hands 
were tied.  
They should recognise that the councillors play a key role in the process and that was 
taken from them because of the failure of ACP to notify council. 
 
 
An Chomhairle agreed that those views would be submitted as an addendum to the 
report of the Chief Executive by way of a Meetings Administrator’s Report. 
 
Comhairleoir Deasy further requested that his dissension to the development be noted 
in the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting.  
 
4.3 
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT 2025 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the Draft Annual Report 2025. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir M.R. 
Desmond, An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 9th March 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
STATUS OF DERELICT SITE AT FORMER KEATINGS FURNITURE 
BUILDING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise on the ownership status of the currently derelict Site at the 
Former Keatings Furniture building on Ballyhooly Road and if Cork City Council 
have plans to purchase this site to develop as a Community asset? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council Property Department engaged with the selling agent in respect of 
the above referenced property it made available for sale to the market. 
 
As part of that process, consideration is given to potential use for the entirety of the 
lands on which the property is constructed, with input from the Director of Services 
for both the Housing Directorate and the Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs 
Directorate. Engagement is ongoing between interested parties, the outcome of which 
will dictate any future use. An update will be provided in due course on conclusion of 
the process. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.2 
NORTH MAIN STREET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Given the strategic importance of the site, and in the context of the compulsory 
acquisition of Nos 62-65 inclusive, can the CE outline if No 61 North Main Street is 
being considered for purchase as part of the regeneration of this historic part of the 
city which would open up the entire block to mixed use development and become a 
new gateway along the historic spine of the city? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council Property Department did explore the acquisition of 61 North Main 
Street for inclusion in the redevelopment proposal for adjoining properties at 62-65, 
North Main Street, which will go to tender in Q2, 2026. The acquisition was not viable 
due to potential 3rd party interests which could not be confirmed, and which would 
delay the redevelopment of the adjoining properties. 61, North Main Street remains in 
private ownership.   

 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.3 
FESTIVALS - FOOTFALL RECORDED 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the footfall recorded at each of festivals supported by Cork 
City Council in 2025 and 2026 year to date in tabular form with an estimation on the 
economic benefit of such festivals? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The table below sets out the footfall for 2025 at festivals supported by Cork City 
Council. 
 
Footfall figures are not yet available for 2026.   
  
While the economic value of some of the festivals can be estimated e.g. Cork City 
Marathon estimated at 5 million per annum based on a study that was undertaken at 
similar event in Limerick, data in relation to economic impact from funded festivals 
is not captured specifically. Feedback from the CBA and Cork Chamber of Commerce 
can give an indication of economic value but a specific tool is not currently in place 
to gather this information. A review of same will be undertaken with key stakeholders 
with a view to establishing a process for gathering economic value.  
 
FESTIVALS SUPPORTED BY CORK CITY COUNCIL 
Festival  
Organisation 
Footfall 
2025 
Economic Value 
Funded Festivals 
  
  
  
Cork Folk Festival 
Cork Folk Festival 
7,056   
Cork International Choral Festival 
Cork International 
Choral Festival 
34,849   
Cork International Film Festival 
Cork International 
Film Festival CLG 
20,000   
Cork International Short Story 
Festival 
Munster Literature 
Centre 
1,100   
Cork Jazz Festival - The Big Fringe 
Cork Jazz Festival 
Committee 
4,350*   
Dragon of Shandon  
Cork Community Art 
Link 
20,000   
East Cork Early Music 
East Cork Early Music 
CLG 
325   
Cork Midsummer Festival 
Midsummer Festival 
80,572   

Pitch’d Circus & Street Arts 
Festival 
Circus Factory 
8,500   
Quiet Lights 
Islander Music 
1620   
Sounds From a Safe Harbour 
Sounds From a Safe 
Harbour 
20,000   
The Cork International Poetry 
Festival 
Munster Literature 
Centre 
1,300   
Cork City Council Festivals 
  
    
Cork St. Patricks Festival 
Arts & Events Section 
48,643   
Culture Night 
Arts & Events Section 
27,076   
Corkmas 
Arts & Events Section 
185000   
European Maritime Days (EMD) to 
Play 
Arts & Events Section 
11,000 €2million for accompanying 
EMD conference  
Marathon 
Community & Sport 
Section 
36,000 
Estimated at €5million per 
annum based on a study of 
Limerick Marathon which is a 
similar sized event. 
Cork Learning City 
Community & Sport 
Section 
39,000   
Non-Fire Night: 
Community & Sport 
Section 
    
Mayfield (estimate) 
  
2,970   
The Glen (estimate) 
  
900   
Pophams Park (estimate) 
  
1,404   
Nu Farm (Clicker) 
  
792   
Mahon (estimate) 
  
816   
Togher (estimate) 
  
1,820   
Gurranabraher Fun Day (Clicker) 
  
2,486   
NON-FIRE NIGHT TOTAL 
(estimate) 
  
11,188   
Cork on a Fork 
City Centre 
Development & 
Operations 
Directorate 
17,000   
 
*audience for aspect of the festival funded by Cork City Council 
 
 
Rebecca Loughry,   
 
  
 
Cormac Ó Súilleabháin, 
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community &   
 
 
City Centre Development 
Cultural Affairs  
 
 
 
 
& Operations 
 
6.4 
DERELICT SITES LEVY 
 

 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, by site in tabular form; 
 
• the sites that have had a derelict sites levy waived or reduced in each of the last 10 
years and the amount that was received by Council in each instance and the amount 
that was waived or reduced and the amount that was owed. 
 
• how long levies went unpaid for and whether the site currently has outstanding levies 
and the amount of same and whether the site is currently in use or remains derelict 
 
• whether Council was in receipt of proof of ‘undue financial hardship’ in payment of 
outstanding levies 
 
REPLY 
 
Derelict Sites legislation requires Cork City Council to take all reasonable steps to 
ensure land in their area does not become or continue to be derelict. This includes the 
requirement to maintain a public Derelict Sites Register, impose a 7% annual market 
value levy, undertake activities to encourage the removal of dereliction, consider the 
compulsory acquisition of sites, etc.  
 
The focus of all actions undertaken is to return properties to use and remove 
dereliction. Placement on the Register and Levy collection do not in themselves 
remove dereliction as it requires constant engagement and concerted pressure to get 
action and have dereliction meaningfully addressed. The Derelicts Sites team engage 
with owners in multiple ways to outline works necessary to remove dereliction, to 
advise owners of grants that may be availed of to remove dereliction, to inform owners 
of other available schemes.  
 
The success of these actions is confirmed by the rate of engagement from owners of 
properties that are on the Register: 
• Presently Engaging / Acquired / In acquisition schedule / Other 
engagement:  87% 
• Not engaging / No known owner / Acquisition underway without owner 
engagement:  13% 
Of those not engaging Compulsory Acquisition is being considered to ultimately 
resolve the problem.  
 
The Derelict Site Levy is intended as a stimulus and tool for returning a property to 
use. Cork City Council forward charge the derelict sites levy for sites on the Derelict 
Site Register for the full year ahead on an annual basis, in line with good debt 
collection practice. Owners of derelict properties which make contact and undertake 
works in a prompt manner qualify for a write off of forward charged levies, provided 
works are completed in a timely manner. This is backdated to the point meaningful 
works commenced, in recognition of the effort and related costs and to incentivise 
owners to speed up commencement of a return to use. As a result, annual levied figures 
are not necessarily an accurate reflection of anticipated collection. A significant 
number of site owners in any given year will engage with Cork City Council on notice 

of levies and commence and complete works. This creates the necessity for a write off 
of forward charged levies. 
 
Other actions likely to lead to a removal of dereliction, like seeking and obtaining 
planning permission, application and award of a vacant homes or other grant/tax 
incentive and in some instances a commencement of a sale can be considered as 
activity towards a removal of dereliction. Reductions in levies in each instance are site 
specific and only considered following satisfactory demonstration of meaningful 
activity towards a return to use.  
 
Write offs implemented since 2016 breakdown as follows: 
• 79% of write offs were completed as dereliction had been removed by the 
property owner or the property was vested/ acquired by Cork City Council 
• 8% of write offs were completed as a result of a vacant property refurbishment 
grant/ as a result of a determination by the Valuation Tribunal/ the properties 
were occupied and levies are not applicable 
• 5% were completed to assist a sale and redevelopment of a site &  
• 8% of levies were uncollectable 
 
It should also be noted that Cork City Council while facilitating a write off of derelict 
sites levies in appropriate circumstances do not remove a property from the Derelict 
Sites Register until such a time as the dereliction is removed. In cases, for example, 
where properties are sold levies are collected from existing owners and new owners 
are clearly informed that they are liable for the derelict property in terms of future 
levies and ultimate removal of dereliction.  
 
An overview of the levies invoiced, receipts and write offs for 2016 to 2026 (as of 
20/3/26) is outlined in the table below. The highlights from this table over the period 
include: 
• 203% increase in the number of sites invoiced (2016 to 2025) 
• 1,533% increase in value of invoices (2016 to 2025) 
• 1,182% increase in receipts (2016 to 2025) 
• Highest income year to date of €925,016 
 
 

 
 
Despite the complexity of addressing dereliction, nearly 600 properties in Cork City 
have been returned to use since 2023 – with half of those returned to use last year 
alone. The number of properties returning to use has shifted from dozens to hundreds 
per year – increasing from 57 in 2023, to 231 in 2024, and to 301 last year. 
 
The figures show that grants and incentives, combined with increased engagement and 
enforcement from the City Council’s Derelict Sites Team, are yielding positive results 
that are being felt in the form of reduced dereliction, increased vibrancy on city streets 
and new homes in the suburbs. 
 
Cork City Council, through the Derelict Sites team, is committed to addressing 
dereliction as expeditiously as possible. The Derelict Sites Team will continue to 
engage constructively with owners to find the optimal route to continue this positive 
trend in tackling dereliction in Cork City.    
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
6.5 
COMMUNITY CENTRE – BALLYVOLANE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CEO advise on proposals to build a community facility in Ballyvolane? Has 
a site been identified, and has any funding application been made to the government 
for this much-needed community facility. 
 
The senior minister has confirmed in the Dail that no application is currently in place 
for Ballyvolane, but funding streams remain available for appropriate community 
infrastructure projects.  Will the CEO now initiate a funding application for this long-
overdue community centre. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council through the Community Team actively supports the community in 
the Ballyvolane area. Along with colleagues in Parks and partners in HSE Community 
Work Department, the team is aware of the need for community infrastructure to serve 
the growing population locally. 
 
At present, there is no live funding stream from Central Government to fund new build 
community centres, with the recently announced Community Centres Investment 
Fund stream earmarked for refurbishments only. Cork City Council will continue to 
support efforts locally to identify a suitable premises or site for consideration. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
6.6 
FUNDING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the total funding received from Cork City Council 
(including, but not restricted to, community grant funding, arts grant funding and 
heritage grant funding) received by each individual community group, community 
association, advocacy group and non-governmental organisation in 2024 and 2025.  
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council administers a range of grant schemes which support a broad range 
of organisations to delivery a broad range of activities including community, arts, 
sport, heritage and environmental initiatives.   
 
Cork City Council does not retain one single database of grants awarded, therefore it 
is possible that not all schemes have been included in the reply, although every effort 
has been made to capture all schemes, within the timescale for reply.  Sports grants 
are not included.  
 
The reply to the question includes a large volume of individual tables.  For ease of 
reference theses have been added to sharepoint under a folder marked 06.2  Reply to 
Cllr Shane O’Callaghan’. 
 
The following grant schemes are detailed: - 
 
1. Arts Grant recommendations for 2024 
2. Arts Grant recommendations for 2025 
3. Artist and the Community Awards for 2024 and 2025 
4. Cork City Council Creative Ireland Programme Funding for 2024  
5. Cork City Council Creative Ireland Programme Funding for 2025 
6. Arts and Cultural Services Grants for 2024 and for 2025 
7. Circular Economy Grant Scheme  
8. Community Climate Action Fund. 
9. Local Enhancement Programme funding 2024 and 2025 
10. Cork City Council Community Development Grants 2024 & 2025. 
11. Local Community Heritage and Biodiversity Grant Scheme (2024 and 2025) 
12. Heritage Week Grant Scheme (2024) 
13. Architectural Conservation Area Grant (2024 and 2025) (note – the reason why 
there is only 1 entry for each year in this scheme is because all the other 
beneficiaries were individuals or companies that are not community groups / 
associations or NGOs).  
 

It should be noted that the schemes highlighted in italics are not funded by Cork City 
Council but are administered by Cork City Council on behalf of Government 
Departments and/or other bodies. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.7 
FORMER CORNMARKET GATES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the location of the ornate top halves of the former corn 
market gates at Grand Parade, which were removed during restoration; and if these 
can be restored to the gates? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The archways currently located at Grand Parade were moved to this location from 
Anglesea St in circa 1985 (from the former Anglesea Cornmarket and later Council 
Depot).The metalwork at the archways consisted of two separate components: a lower 
gate section, which is original and has been restored following appropriate repair, and 
an overthrow (the arched top), which was a later addition installed in more recent 
times.  
 
As part of the recent regeneration project, the metalwork at the archway was assessed 
by the Cork City Council Heritage Officer and the Project Design Team at both the 
design and construction phases, following which the historic gates were repaired and 
presented without the addition of the more recent overthrows. In this regard it was 
noted that, apart from being a recent addition, the overthrows were found to be in very 
poor condition and were not of heritage significance. They did not form part of the 
original design/construction and were not manufactured using traditional methods. 
They were constructed from steel rather than iron, and their method of fabrication was 
not consistent with that of the original lower gate sections. In light of the foregoing, 
the archway gates have been repaired and are now presented in the original format. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.8 
NUMBER OF VACANT CITY COUNCIL HOUSES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how many Cork City Council-owned housing units are 
currently vacant or boarded up, and what is the current average turnaround time to 
bring these properties back into active use for tenants. 
 

Could this information be provided in a tabular format, broken down by each Local 
Electoral Area/Ward of the city, and include the longest recorded vacancy period for 
any such property. 
 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Vacant dwellings and average turnaround times are reported each month in tabular 
format, broken down by each Local Electoral Area, under the Housing Directorate 
section of the Chief Executive Monthly Report.    
 
For ease of reference details of February 2026 report are outlined in the table below, 
with the average turnaround time of 36 weeks.   The longest recorded vacancy period 
for a property was 52 weeks while the shortest was 21 weeks. 
 
It is important to note that the reletting time includes the time taken to both repair and 
upgrade vacated properties to an acceptable letting standard and to relet those 
properties in line with the City Council's scheme of lettings.  
 
As such, the time taken to relet a property is dependent on the condition of a property 
at the time of return and how long it takes to relet a particular property depending on 
uptake and acceptance by applicants on the social housing list.   Cork City Council 
prioritises those with the least amount of work, with a view to getting the maximum 
number of properties returned to use as quickly as possible. 
 
In relation to the longest period of vacancy, the property in question was offered for 
tenancy on two occasions. 
 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.9 
UNUTILISED GREEN SPACES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 

 
To ask the CE if Cork City Council has procedures in place to permit the conversion 
of unutilised green space in housing estates to parking spaces; how residents can apply 
for same; and if no procedures are in place, if they will be established. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Converting public green space in housing estates to car parking spaces constitutes a 
material change of use where in addition the area of green space within the estate may 
be governed by conditions attached to the governing planning permission. In the case 
of private housing estates, such a material change of use requires planning permission, 
which is a public process subject to third-party submissions and appeal. All planning 
applications are assessed against the current Cork City Development Plan, which 
contains a number of objectives that protect green areas in residential estates from 
being used for other purposes, including zoning objective “ZO 1.7” which states that 
there will be a presumption against development on all open space in residential 
estates and that such lands shall be protected for recreation, open space and amenity 
purposes. The City Development Plan also applies to Council-owned or taken in 
charge estates. There is no procedure in place for such changes of use from open space 
to car parking. If a case arises that may have merit, the Council will have to determine 
on a case-by-case basis whether such a proposal would be supported by the City 
Development Plan and all other on site specific issues, and determine the appropriate 
course of action.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
 
 
John Stapleton, 
Director of Services,  
 
 
Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development 
Local Area Development & Operations 
 
6.10 
CLIMATE NEUTRAL / SMART CITY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if she, and Cork City Council, has considered The Supreme 
Court judgment in Coolglass Wind Farm Limited v An Bord Pleanála[1] of 4 
February 2026, on whether it will assist this City on commitments it has given to 
become an European Union Climate Neutral/Smart City by 2030? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The Council is aware and has reviewed the decision of the Supreme Court in this 
Strategic Infrastructure Development (SID) case. The decision redefines the role of 
section 15(1) of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act 2015 (as 
amended by the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 
2021) (Climate Act). It confirms that climate obligations now impose real, enforceable 
requirements on public bodies, beyond mere procedural obligations. 
 
The Supreme Court firmly however rejected the High Court’s expansive approach, 
which had effectively created an almost automatic presumption in favour of renewable 
energy projects. 
 

By order of the Supreme Court the matter has now been referred back to An Coimisiún 
Pleanála (ACP) who must now reconsider whether to grant permission for this SID, 
exercising the discretion afforded under section 37G (6) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2024, to properly engage with its obligations under section 15(1) of 
the Climate Act. 
 
In essence the substantive planning decision remains outstanding and the matter 
ongoing in so far as no final planning decision on this SID has issued. The Council 
awaits the determination of ACP in this regard and will thereafter take account of any 
outcome, as relevant and appropriate, both in terms of the planning and climate 
implications from a Council perspective.   
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services,  
 
 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development 
Emergency Management & Climate 
Action 
 
6.11 
PARKING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail how much Cork City Council pays to private car 
parks and foregoes in revenue at its own car parks, for free staff parking, the exact 
source of these resources, whether, how and how soon these could be redirected to 
free TaxSaver tickets or direct payments to staff, and to ask the Government for its 
full support with any issues? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The City Council does not currently pay private car parks for staff parking.  The North 
Main Street and Park and Ride car parks are not operating at full capacity therefore 
the use of these facilities by staff does not result in any loss of revenue.  As previously 
advised, the provision of parking to staff is the subject of a WRC conciliation 
agreement and therefore any change, including any incentives to make greater use of 
public transport, will be subject to negotiations with staff representatives. 
 
Mike Larkin, 
Director of Services, 
People & Organisation Development. 
 
6.12 
BUS CONNECTS CORRIDORS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on the Bus Connects corridors. 
 
 
REPLY 
 

The BusConnects programme for Cork is managed by the National Transport 
Authority (NTA) and includes a range of measures to significantly improve bus 
services within the City.  The proposed upgrade of the Strategic Bus Corridors is a 
key element of the overall programme and it will make public transport journeys faster 
and more reliable. 
 
The proposals for the Strategic Corridor upgrades were published in 2022 and were 
thereafter the subject of three rounds of non statutory consultation as part of an 
extensive public engagement process. Across the three rounds of consultation, the 
NTA received more than 9,800 submissions and these have informed the design 
development.  
 
The improvements proposed along the strategic transport corridors include circa 90km 
of dedicated bus lanes, 95km of cycle paths and significant pedestrian and public 
realm improvements. In early 2025, the NTA submitted the Preliminary Business Case 
(PBC) to the Department of Transport and this was approved by Government 
in October 2025. 
 
The NTA has confirmed that it has organised the proposals for the eleven corridors 
into three major schemes (North, South East and South West). The NTA is currently 
preparing three corresponding applications with a view to seeking the necessary 
statutory consent from An Coimisiún Pleanála. These submissions will be managed 
on a phased basis throughout 2026. Further updates and timelines will be provided to 
Members over the coming months as the applications are finalised by the NTA for 
submission An Commission Pleanala. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.13 
COMPULSORY PURCHASE ORDERS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to list, in tabular form, all properties subject to Compulsory 
Purchase Orders by Cork City Council in the last five years and the current status of 
those properties. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The following table is reflective of the number of properties acquired by the Property 
Department, Cork City Council from calendar year 2021 to 9th April 2026 utilising the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990. 
 
No. of 
Acquisitions 
Properties Sold/For 
Sale via the Open 
Market 
Properties in process 
of redevelopment 
25 
7 
23 

 
Schedule of Properties 
Nr. of 
Properties 
Address of Property acquired via Derelict 
Sites Act 1990 January 2020 – October 2025 
Current Status of Property 
2 
118 Barrack St & 119 Barrack Street, Cork 
Property sold privately for redevelopment. 
4 
62, 63, 64 & 65 North Main Street, Cork 
Property Department advancing redevelopment.  
1 
1 Elizabeth Terrace, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
4 Gerald Griffin Avenue, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
‘Greystone Cottage’, Cois Coilte, Mahon, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
5, Prosperous Place, Blackpool, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
20, Muskerry Terrace, Blarney, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
2 
23, Lower John St & 24 Lower John St, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing redevelopment 
1 
49/50, Old Market Place, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment. 
1 
14, The Grove, Shanakiel, Cork 
Private sale agreed. Conveyance advancing. 
2 
15/16, Kyle Street, Cork 
Private sale agreed. Conveyance advancing. 
3 
21, 22 & 23 Thomas Davis Street, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing a development process 
1 
7 St Patricks Terrace, Lower Glanmire Road, 
Cork  
To be placed for sale on the open market 
1 
3 Ardcairn Villas, Churchyard Lane, Cork 
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment 
1 
“Levista”, 25 Bernadette Way, Boreenmanna 
Road, Cork  
Housing Directorate advancing refurbishment 
1 
115 Gardiners Hill, Cork  
To be placed for sale on the open market  
1 
5 &6 Woods Street, Cork  
Housing Directorate advancing redevelopment 
 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.14 
DERELICT/VACANT SITES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the following derelict / vacant sites:  
 
• 
62 to 65 North Main Street  
• 
Keatings Fitted Furniture  
• 
Kyrll's Quay - The site of the Cork Timber Slate & Cement Company & old 
toilets  
• 
site adjacent to tax office in Blackpool  
 
REPLY 
 
Please see as follows response to the respective properties referenced in the question 
of Councillor John Maher. 
 
• 
62-65, North Main Street, Cork: The project information documentation to 
support advertisement of a tender for the redevelopment of the above 

referenced City Council owned properties is being finalised to inform 
interested parties when advertised in Q2, 2026. 
 
• 
Keatings Fitted Furniture: Cork City Council Property Department continues 
to engage with the selling agent in respect of the above referenced private 
property which has been made available for sale to the market. Due diligence 
in respect of a possible acquisition is ongoing and consideration is being given 
to potential use for the entirety of the lands on which the property is 
constructed, with input from the Director of Services for both the Housing 
Directorate and the Corporate Community & Cultural Affairs Directorate. A 
further update on this matter will be provided when available. 
 
• 
Kyrl’s Quay Site: Site clearance and stabilisation work on this City Council 
owned property is nearing completion, which will facilitate access to 
undertake a series of site surveys and investigations to inform project 
information documents and enable advertisement of a tender process seeking 
redevelopment proposals. It is envisaged this tender will be advertised in 
Q2/Q3, 2026. 
 
• 
Site adjacent to tax office in Blackpool: This privately owned site at Revenue 
House, Blackpool, adjacent to the tax office, was recommended for placement 
on the Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) map by Cork City Council. This 
took place in 2023. The RZLT is a Revenue administered scheme which 
collects a tax on the site value of 3% of the market value. Cork City Council 
do not have access to amounts levied or collected.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.15 
SABOTAGE OF SUBSEA CABLES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Given the Department of Communications’ warning this week that coordinated 
sabotage of subsea cables could disconnect the entire island of Ireland from the global 
internet, what specific actions will Cork City Council take if international connectivity 
is lost for a prolonged period and what contingency plans are in place to maintain 
essential services such as citizen portals, emergency response coordination, planning 
systems, and Smart City operations during such a disruption? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council is part of the national government virtual private network which is 
the backbone for connectivity across the public sector in Ireland.  There are several 
alternate routes for international connectivity, these are managed by central 
government departments including the Department of Communications. The majority 
of local applications are hosted in Ireland and require local connectivity.  
 

The emergency response service providers can use a national tetra radio satellite 
system when traditional communications networks fail (as per recent national weather 
events). This system has been recently launched by national government as a country 
wide system. 
 
It is difficult to predict the impact of such a cataclysmic event whereby all 
international connectivity was indefinitely suspended; however, Cork City Council is 
part of the LG-Core cyber group and Gov-Core cyber group where local government 
and government departments share active threat intelligence with the NCSC (national 
cyber security centre). Cork City Council also has invested in off site redundancy, 
cyber insurance and third party clauses to provide contingency measures in the event 
of a targeted cyber disruption. 
 
Cork City Council has invested in a significant digital transformation however it 
provides its customers with a multi-channel service offering which includes our 
customer service call lines operated by 7/8 staff daily and walk in counters at city hall. 
These are alternative service channels which can be expanded in the event of such a 
national emergency where the digital alternative is not available for a length of time.  
 
Ruth Buckley, DEng. 
Chief Information Officer & Head of Information Systems 
 
6.16 
DRONE FOOD DELIVERY SERVICE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Shannon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To Ask the Chief Executive: 
To report to City Council on the recently introduced drone food delivery service 
operating from the vicinity of the Marina Market, specifically what if any engagement 
has taken place with the operator. Under what legislation / regulations are they 
permitted to operate in the City / Suburbia, regarding security, health & safety, 
planning, privacy and the impact on birds and other wildlife in the area specifically 
around the Marina and Atlantic Pond. What other drone operators are there in the city 
and what impact will these new drones have on existing drone operators. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council is aware of this drone delivery operation, and the City Council is 
currently exploring the wide range of issues associated with a project of this kind. 
 
The City Council notes the Government’s recently published (August 2025), Ireland's 
National Policy Framework for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) (or “drones”), 
which sets a ten-year strategy to manage drone growth, focusing on the use of airspace 
and planning, compliance and enforcement, and enterprise and innovation. One of the 
actions in the National Policy Framework for UAS seeks the Irish Aviation Authority 
to support the training and capacity building of local authorities and planners on the 
use of airspace and planning. Any changes to policies or regulations in relation to 
UAS that may be required in future will be considered by Cork City Council in 
consultation with the IAA. 

 
Drone infrastructure such as drone bases or drone delivery hubs may require planning 
permission, while the flying of drones is regulated by the IAA.  In relation to drone 
infrastructure, there is currently no specific guidance for drone hubs in current 
planning legislation. As drones, or UAS, is a new and evolving technology, the Cork 
City Development Plan does not have any specific land-use policies regarding the use 
of drones. However, existing planning legislation and development plan policy (e.g. 
zoning, etc) applies to drone infrastructure and at present this is being considered in 
the context of the referenced drone delivery operation. 
 
It is understood that the IAA are due to meet with the Roads and Transport SPC on 
this issue shortly where relevant issues and questions in respect of this matter can be 
tabled for discussion. The Planning Department will also reach out separately to the 
IAA to determine how they propose to regulate and manage this activity going forward 
clarifying the role of the local authority in the process.   
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS  
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 2nd 
April 2026 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (7.48m2 approximately), 
together with a wayleave (167.38m approximately by 2.55m approximately) on 
land located at Estuary Way, St. Michael’s Drive, Mahon, Cork, to ESB Networks, 
for a nominal sum of €1.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of the freehold interest in two areas of ground (15.6m2 approximately 
and 14m2 approximately), together with a wayleave (176.97m approximately by 
3.39m approximately) on land located at Clover Hill Court, Bessboro Road, 
Mahon, Cork, to ESB Networks, for a nominal sum of €1.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir H. 
Kamegni, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal by way of exchange of property known as No. 3 Mount St. Joseph’s 
Avenue, Gurranabraher, Cork to Rachel Allen, c/o Frank Nyhan & Associates 
LLP, 11 Market Square, Mallow, Co. Cork in exchange for the property owned by 
the said Rachel Allen at No. 31 Killala Gardens, Knocknaheeny, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 

 
4. Disposal by way of exchange of property known No. 36 Bantry Park Road, 
Fairhill, Cork to Paul & Mary Fennelly, c/o Matthew Bermingham & Company 
Solicitors, 2 Terence MacSwiney St., Fermoy, Co. Cork in exchange for the 
property owned by the said Paul & Mary Fennelly at No. 82 Killala Gardens, 
Knocknaheeny, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
SECTION 85 AGREEMENT FARM INSPECTIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development and Operations, dated 24th March 2026 in relation to a Section 85 
Agreement with Cork County Council with regard to Farm Inspections in the Cork 
City Council administrative area.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE: 
to enter into this agreement pursuant to Section 85 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
for the purposes of the exercise by Cork County Council on behalf of Cork City 
Council of its powers, functions and duties as a Local Authority insofar as they relate 
to, concern and/or involve the performance of farm inspections under the National 
Agricultural Inspection Programme in respect of those farms now situated in the City 
of Cork.” 
 
7.3 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT STRAW HALL, FARREN 
STREET, CORK 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed development at 
Straw Hall, Farren Street, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive 
thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, 
as amended, dated 8th April 2026.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Straw Hall, Farren Street, in the City of Cork and the report of the 
Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Straw Hall, Farren Street, in the City of Cork be 
carried out as recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City 
Council, which was put before Council on the 13th April 2026.” 
 
7.4 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT LAUREL HEIGHTS 
PHASE 2, SHANAKIEL, BLARNEY STREET, CORK 

 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed development at 
Laurel Heights Phase 2, Shanakiel, Blarney Street, in the City of Cork and the report 
of the Chief Executive thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000, as amended, dated 8th April 2026.  
 
 On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution, noting the dissention 
of Comhairleoir A. Deasy:-  
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Laurel Heights Phase 2, Shanakiel, Blarney Street, in the City of Cork 
and the report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved 
pursuant to the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000, as amended, that the development at Laurel Heights Phase 2, Shanakiel, Blarney 
Street, in the City of Cork be carried out as recommended in the said report of the 
Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was put before Council on the 13th April 
2026.” 
 
7.5 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT 12 GERALD GRIFFIN 
STREET, CORK 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed development at 12 
Gerald Griffin Street, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive thereon 
as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, dated 8th April 2026.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at 12 Gerald Griffin Street, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at 12 Gerald Griffin Street, in the City of Cork be carried out as 
recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was 
put before Council on the 13th April 2026.” 
 
7.6 
BIODIVERSITY FORUM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 23rd March 2026 regarding the nomination 
of two Elected Members to the Biodiversity Forum. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir N. 
O’Connor to the Biodiversity Forum. 
 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir D. Boyle to 
the Biodiversity Forum. 
 
 
 
 
7.7 
2026 COMMUNITY GRANTS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs on:- 
 
• Recommended Community Associations Capital Grants 2026. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs on:- 
 
• Recommended Community Development Small Scale Programme Grants 2026. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 7th APRIL 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 7th April 2026. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 28th FEBRUARY 2026 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 28/02/2026. 
 
8.2 
AUDIT COMMITTEE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following reports from the Audit Committee in 
pursuance of the provisions of the Local Government Audit Committee Regulations, 
2014: 
  
1. On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle considered and approved the Audit Committee Work 
Programme 2026  
 
2. On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle considered and approved the Audit Committee 
Charter 2026  
 
3. An Chomhairle considered and noted the Audit Committee Annual Report for 
year ended 31/12/2025 
 
4. An Chomhairle considered and noted the Audited Annual Financial Statement for 
year ended 31/12/2024 
 

5. An Chomhairle considered and noted the Audit Committee Report on the Annual 
Financial Statement 2024. 
 
6. An Chomhairle considered and noted the Statutory Audit Report for year ended 
31/12/2024. 
 
 
8.3 
MOTIONS 
 
8.3.1 
HOUSEHOLD AND COMMERCIAL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES 
 
 
 
In the absence of the proposer, the following motion was withdrawn:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would reinstate ownership and direct management of 
household and commercial refuse collection services, and that it would reintroduce a 
waiver scheme for pensioners, persons with disabilities, and other eligible 
individuals.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/477) 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 23rd MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 23rd March 2026. 
 
9.1 
MOTIONS 
 
9.1.1 
UPLOADING OF COUNCIL MEETING VIDEO FILES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs, dated 9th March 2026 on the following 
motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees to amend Standing Orders to allow the uploading of 
Council meeting video files and retention of these for 12 months in a publicly 
accessible forum to increase transparency and accountability of Council meetings.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 26/170) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that further to previous reports to Party 
Whips, members will be aware that the new electronic meeting infrastructure was 
installed for the November 2025 meeting of council. Party Whips previously agreed 
that the approach should be to introduce the system on a step-by-step basis, with the 
initial focus being on improving the livestream output, organising speakers and e 
voting. 
 
Whilst there was a technical issue with the system at the December meeting of 
Council, in general the system is working extremely well and feedback has been 
extremely positive. The number of viewers has increased significantly, with around 
150-250 viewers per meeting.  

 
The Public-i system has the technical capacity to record and archive meetings and 
there would certainly appear to be a demand for this from the public, elected members 
and the media. However, this may require an amendment to standing orders required, 
through the formal statutory process and guidelines for the use, recording and 
archiving of meetings.  
 
The Meetings Administrator is currently researching different approaches with other 
Local Authorities and public bodies, and a proposal will be brought to Party Whips 
for consideration. 
 
9.2 
NAMING OF BRIDGE AT PROBY’S QUAY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following shortlist of names regarding the naming of 
the new bridge at Proby’s Quay:- 
 
 
Recommended Shortlist – Bridge at Proby’s Quay  
 
1. Proby’s Bridge  
2. Brewery Bridge  
3. Frank O’Connor Bridge  
4. Seamus Murphy Bridge  
5. Wallace Bridge 
 
A vote was called for to identify the two preferred nominations, where there appeared 
as follows:- 
 
FOR PROBY’S BRIDGE: (0) 
 
FOR BREWERY BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, H. Kamegni, P. 
Horgan, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, C. O’Connor. (7) 
 
FOR FRANK O’CONNOR BRIDGE: Comhairleoir B. McCarthy. (1) 
 
FOR SEAMUS MURPHY BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, 
T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. 
Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (14) 
 
FOR WALLACE SISTERS BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, K. Collins, K. 
McCarthy, F. Kerins, J. Lynch. (5) 
 
An tArdmhéara declared Brewery Bridge and Seamus Murphy Bridge to be the two 
nominations with the highest number of preferences. A vote was called for to approve 
the name of the bridge as Brewery Bridge or Seamus Murphy Bridge, where there 
appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR BREWERY BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, C. 
O’Connor. (11) 
 

FOR SEAMUS MURPHY BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, 
N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. 
Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, 
G. O’Brien. (16) 
 
As those voting for Seamus Murphy Bridge were greater than those voting for 
Brewery Bridge, An tArdmhéara declared that the new bridge would be named 
Seamus Murphy Bridge. 
 
9.3 
NAMING OF BRIDGE AT LAMBLEY’S LANE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following shortlist of names regarding the naming of 
the new bridge at Lambley’s Lane:- 
 
 
Recommended Shortlist – Bridge at Lambley’s Lane  
 
1. Crosses Green Bridge  
2. Cumann na MBan Bridge  
3. Frederick Douglas Bridge  
4. Sir Henry’s Bridge  
5. Joan Denise Moriarty Bridge  
6. Mother Jones Bridge  
7. Richard Beecher Bridge 
 
A vote was called for to identify the two preferred nominations, where there appeared 
as follows:- 
 
FOR CROSSES GREEN BRIDGE: (0) 
 
FOR CUMANN NA MBAN BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, 
N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. 
Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (19) 
 
FOR FREDERICK DOUGLAS BRIDGE: (0) 
 
FOR SIR HENRY’S BRIDGE: (0) 
 
FOR JOAN DENISE MORIARTY BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, C. O’Connor. (7) 
 
FOR MOTHER JONES BRIDGE: Comhairleoir B. McCarthy. (1) 
 
FOR RICHARD BEECHER BRIDGE: (0) 
 
An tArdmhéara declared Cumann na MBan Bridge and Joan Denise Moriarty Bridge 
to be the two nominations with the highest number of preferences. A vote was called 
for to approve the name of the bridge as Cumann na MBan or Joan Denise Moriarty 
Bridge, where there appeared as follows:- 
 

FOR CUMANN NA MBAN BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, 
N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. 
Desmond, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien. (19) 
 
FOR JOAN DENISE MORIARTY BRIDGE: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, 
B. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, C. O’Connor. (8) 
 
As those voting for Cumann na MBan Bridge were greater than those voting for Joan 
Denise Moriarty Bridge, An tArdmhéara declared that the new bridge would be named 
Cumann na MBan Bridge.  
 
10. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - COMHSHAOL, 
UISCE & ÁISEANNA – 18th MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 18th March 2026. 
 
10.1 
MOTIONS 
 
10.1.1 
DOG FOULING FINES  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 19th May 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That this Council will establish a new byelaw that will ensure dog fouling fines can 
be levied against those who do not clean up after their dog with a provision that those 
in control of a dog must have items to clean up the dog with; and that this Council will 
in tandem seek to provide dog bags at high footfall locations and public parks to 
support this measure.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/114) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there is currently primary legislation 
in place addressing the substantive issue outlined in the motion. 
 
The Litter Pollution Act 1997 provides the legal basis for the issuing of litter fines for 
dog fouling. Section 22 of the Act states that “where faeces has been deposited by a 
dog, the person in charge of the dogs shall immediately remove the faeces and shall 
ensure that it is properly disposed of in a suitable sanitary manner.” Accordingly, this 
firmly places the responsibility on the dog owner/ person in charge to clean up after 
their dog. Enforcement of the provisions of the Act requires that Litter Warden must 
actually witness both the dog depositing faeces and the person in control of the dog 
neglecting to remove the faeces.  
 
There is no budget in place to install, maintain and service dog poo bag dispensers 
and the resourcing of bins and dispensers at any significant scale would not be 
inconsiderable. It is worth noting that as with all forms of littering a degree of personal 

responsibility must be taken by dog owners and the cost to individuals purchasing 
their own dog poo bags is not prohibitive. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration. 
 
10.1.2 
COFFEE CUP DEPOSIT SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Emergency Services and Climate Action, dated 12th September 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Further to motion 24/048 this Council will begin a consultation period to introduce a 
Coffee Cup Deposit scheme in a move to eliminate single use takeaway coffee and 
teacups in the city. In doing so the Council must ensure that all coffee shops, cafes 
and hotels are contacted, and their agreement sought to work together in order to 
reduce the huge number of tonnes of rubbish from the local municipal waste network. 
This Council will also explore options of reusable cups including the plastic free 
options.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. C. O’Connor, Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/246) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that coffee cup deposit schemes have 
been trialled in some areas in Ireland with mixed success. Killarney offers an example 
of a successful reusable coffee cup scheme, where almost 50 businesses have replaced 
single-use cups with a deposit and return scheme for takeaway drinks. This initiative 
is led by the local business community and is a voluntary initiative, requiring 
individual businesses to opt to sign up to the scheme.  Such initiatives have to be 
business led and require significant support and commitment from businesses in order 
to succeed.  Schemes which are not business led tend to be the ones which fail or are 
less successful. Thus, the success of a reusable coffee cup scheme in Cork city would 
depend on the voluntary widespread participation from local businesses. As per the 
reply to Motion 24/048 the City Council and the Environmental Awareness Officer 
stand ready to support business representative organisations or groups of businesses 
who wish to lead this type of initiative.  
 
I would also draw Members attention to past initiatives undertaken in Cork City 
Council with respect to disposable cups on the City Hall Campus. In 2018 Cork City 
Council was the first local authority in the country to stop supplying single use 
disposable tea and coffee cups in their offices.  All disposable cups were removed 
from the campus and staff were encouraged to bring their own reusable cup, mug or 
travel container. In our canteen disposable cups were removed and replaced with mugs 
which can be used by staff consuming tea or coffee within the canteen. 
 
10.1.3 
BAN DOGS FROM CORK CITY’S CEMETERIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 12th September 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 

‘That Cork City Council introduce a byelaw which prohibits dog owners from 
bringing dogs into Cork City’s cemeteries. The byelaw should provide for a ban on 
all dogs entering any cemetery in Cork City and provide that any dog owner who 
causes or permits their dog to enter a cemetery within the city boundaries can be issued 
with an on-the-spot fine.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/355) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that in general there is not a 
problem with dogs in our burial grounds. People living close to cemeteries enjoy daily 
walks in the grounds or making time to visit the graves of loved ones, often bringing 
a family dog with them. The current Cork City Parks, Cemeteries and Open Spaces 
Byelaws specify that a dog must be kept on a lead in public parks and cemeteries. 
There is signage in the cemeteries reminding people to keep dogs on a lead and to 
clean up dog litter. Where a specific problem arises, we can get the Dog Wardens to 
do inspections. It is not considered necessary to prohibit dogs. 
 
10.1.4 
PLANT BASED TREATY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs and Acting Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 12th September 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council endorses the Plant Based Treaty to support a transition 
towards a plant-based food system in Ireland; and shall identify actions within the city 
that support this, such as supporting community gardens and the development of a city 
market garden, providing plant-based options at hospitality events, and the inclusion 
of related goals in the Sustainable and Healthy Food Policy for Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/384) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that the Plant Based Treaty “aims to put 
food systems at the forefront of combating the climate crisis to halt the widespread 
degradation of critical ecosystems caused by animal agriculture and to promote a shift 
towards healthier, sustainable plant-based diets”.  
 
It is recommended that the members of the committee review the treaty and give 
further consideration to the endorsement of it given that the scope of the “demands” 
outlined in the treaty are far reaching. It would be important for all Directorates of the 
Council to do their due diligence and review the treaty fully to evaluate if it aligns 
with their work plans and strategies should the committee choose to recommend it for 
endorsement.  It is important to note Cork City Council through several Directorates 
and sections including Community, Climate and Parks & Recreation support many 
community gardens and food initiatives across the city as well as the Cork Food Policy 
Council. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
10.1.5 
REVOKE INDIVIDUAL’S STREET PERFORMER AND AMPLIFICATION    
PERMIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 16th January 2026 on the following 
motion, noting the dissatisfaction of Comhairleoir O. Moran with regard to the naming 
of an individual:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council revoke the street performer permit and the amplification 
permit issued under the City Council bye-laws to the street performer who calls 
himself “Bubba Shakespeare” (who operates mainly on Oliver Plunkett Street). Both 
the street performer permit and the amplification permit should be revoked as a result 
of the repeated failure by “Bubba Shakespeare” to keep his noise levels below the 
permitted 75 decibel limit despite numerous requests for him to do so and his 
consistent disregard for the concerns expressed by local business owners who find it 
extremely difficult to work and do business due to level of noise being generated by 
him.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/627) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s Street 
Performer Byelaws set out clear requirements relating to sound levels and the conduct 
of permit holders. Under Section 8 – Sound Levels, performers using amplification 
must ensure that sound does not exceed 75 dB, measured in the immediate vicinity of 
the performer.  
 
While concerns have been raised by businesses in the Oliver Plunkett Street area 
regarding noise levels associated with this performer, Cork City Council has not 
received any verified measurement, monitoring record, or other independent evidence 
confirming that the 75 dB limit has been exceeded. Officers from Cork City Council 
have engaged with the performer on multiple occasions to remind him of the 
requirements and encourage compliance, but no sound-level assessment has 
confirmed a breach of the limit set in the byelaws. 
 
With respect to your request for revocation, Section 15 – Revocation of Permits 
provides that a permit may only be revoked where: 
• 
the permit holder has contravened or failed to observe the Byelaws on three or more 
occasions, 
• 
the Council has issued written notice of the alleged breaches, and 
• 
the performer has been given an opportunity to reply before any revocation decision 
is made. 
 
These procedural steps form a mandatory part of the revocation process, and any 
decision must be supported by appropriate evidence and documentation as required 
under the byelaws. 
 

Cork City Council will continue to monitor the area and engage with affected 
stakeholders.  
 
10.1.6 
‘NO WAIT CARDS’ FOR URGENT TOILET ACCESS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 16th March 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
 
• Supports equal access to toilet facilities for people with chronic and invisible 
illnesses 
• Recognises the need for ‘No Wait Cards’ to be placed on a statutory footing for 
people with chronic and invisible illnesses who require urgent access to toilet 
facilities. 
• Develops a voluntary ‘No Wait’ initiative, which invites local businesses to 
participate by allowing urgent toilet access to people who hold a valid a ‘No 
Wait Card.’ 
• Provides recognition or incentives to business for their participation in the ‘No 
Wait’ initiative, through promotional material such as window stickers, or 
through advertising in local business networks. 
• Works with the relevant health organisations and disability groups to raise 
awareness of the initiative with retail businesses. 
• Undertakes to ensure toilets are provided as a standard service in parks and areas 
under Council control.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. P. Horgan, Cllr. C. O'Connor, Cllr. J. Maher 26/014) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the voluntary ‘No Wait’ initiative, 
which invites local businesses to participate by allowing urgent toilet access to people 
who hold a valid a ‘No Wait Card'' is delivered by the registered charity Crohns & 
Colitis Ireland.  
 
Cork City Council will examine the implementation of the 'No Wait' initiative, 
through our Age Friendly programme within the Community Team of the Corporate, 
Community & Cultural Affairs Directorate in collaboration with Crohns & Colitis 
Ireland. As an immediate measure, the Community Team will disseminate 
information regarding the 'No Wait' Scheme to Cork Business Association, Cork 
Chamber and other members of our Age Friendly Alliance. Furthermore, the 
Community Team will circulate information on the 'No Wait' initiative to our 
community partners via the Cork City Age Friendly Older Persons Council to raise 
awareness of the scheme as well as inviting a speaker from Crohns & Colitis Ireland 
to address an Age Friendly public Forum Meeting in City Hall.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
10.1.7 
RODENT COMPLAINTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th March 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council would undertake a publicity campaign to notify residents across 
Cork City, regardless of rental or ownership model, of the measures involved in 
addressing rodent complaints with the National Environmental Health Service (EHS) 
in accordance with the provisions of the Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act 1919 and 
that this Council would establish a dedicated email for rodent complaints.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 26/016) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Health Service Executive (HSE) 
National Environmental Health Service is responsible for enforcing the provisions of 
the Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act 1919.  
 
Environmental Health Officers as authorised officers under the Rats and Mice 
(Destruction) Act 1919, investigate complaints regarding rodents and take appropriate 
action as required. 
 
Cork City Council’s Environment Section is responsible for investigating and 
addressing waste complaints within the City that can lead to rodent issues.  
 
Cork City Council will refer this motion to the National Environmental Health Service 
for their consideration. 
 
10.1.8 
STRATEGY FOR THE GLASHEEN RIVER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th March 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That a strategy for the Glasheen River be advanced as per the recommendations of 
the 2025 presentation to the Environment Strategic Policy Committee.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 26/020) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the outcome from the presentation to 
the SPC in May 2025 was that stakeholders would come together and agree a realistic, 
cost-effective plan for the Glasheen River.  
 
The Planning & Development Management Directorate have identified several 
possible natured-based projects for the Glasheen River and submitted funding 
applications to LAWPRO for the implementation of these projects. This process is 
currently ongoing. 
 
 

In recent months the Local Area Development & Operations Directorate has 
undertaken significant maintenance works along the Glasheen River which required 
engagement with ecological specialists, Inland Fisheries Ireland and local residents. 
The maintenance works undertaken have restored the capacity and conveyance along 
the watercourse resulting in improved flow and water quality. The work also included 
clearing and cleaning bridges and culverts along the watercourse. A new trash screen 
was also installed to prevent illegal dumping getting lodged under Clashduv Bridge 
which previously created blockages, increasing water levels and flood risk. All trash 
screens are checked and maintained routinely and in advance of rainfall events. 
 
Cork City Council has also secured funding to carry out a survey and investigation of 
all storm sewers and private outfalls discharging to the Glasheen River to locate and 
identify any foul misconnections. This survey will require the City Council to hire 
specialist contractors. The tender documents for this work are currently being 
prepared. It is expected that the procurement process and the survey work will be 
completed this year. Once the survey is complete, a plan will be put in place and 
funding sought for the remediation of any misconnections identified. 
 
The measures and plans outlined above will improve the Glasheen River from an 
environmental and capacity perspective. The Committee will be kept informed as 
these plans are progressed. 
 
10.1.9 
IDENTIFY ROUTES FOR GRITTING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th March 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will identify key commuter pedestrian routes, such as Kent 
Station to the city centre, and significant arterial commuter pedestrian routes; and 
ensure that these are added to gritting routes in icy conditions.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 26/035) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council identifies and 
treats priority pedestrian routes during periods of freezing conditions, with particular 
emphasis on areas around hospitals, schools, bridge crossings, hills, and high demand 
routes. Secondary routes are then treated as resources allow. 
 
The route between Kent Station and the City Centre is considered a high demand route 
and is therefore included as a priority pedestrian route. 
 
The Roads Operations Department reviews its Winter Service Operations Plan 
annually and will continue to seek opportunities to expand treatment routes within the 
limits of available resources 
 
10.1.10 WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBLE PICNIC BENCHES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th March 2026 on the following motion:- 
 

‘That the Council will install wheelchair accessible picnic benches at Marina Park and 
look to rolling out wheelchair accessible benches to all parks going forward.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 26/109) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council ordered a 
wheelchair accessible picnic table for the Marina Park earlier this year. The table is 
expected to be installed in the coming weeks.  
 
The trial of the Marina Park bench will inform decisions for similar measures in other 
high demand parks subject to the availability of required funding. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir M.R. 
Desmond, An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting 
past 8pm. 
 
11. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - POBAL, CULTÚR & 
COMHFHORBAIRT ÁITE – 19th MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 19th March 2026. 
 
11.1 
MOTIONS 
 
11.1.1 
ENGAGEMENT WITH COMMUNITY GROUPS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 2nd March 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council, considering the views of the Public Participation Network, 
reviews and then adopts the following when engaging with community groups or the 
public: 
 
• 
“A Guide for Inclusive Community Engagement in Local Planning and Decision 
Making”, 2nd Edition, October 2023, Department of Rural and Community 
Development and the Gaeltacht 
• 
“A Vision for Community Well Being in Cork City”, Public Participation 
Network Cork City 2024 
• 
Aarhus Convention Directive 2003/35/EC on Public Participation 
 
And that this Council support and monitor these activities through the Community 
Section of Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs Directorate.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 26/096) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team continue to work closely with the Public Participation Network, 
administering funding available through Government as well as supporting the 
Secretariat and co-ordinator with developmental projects, governance and finance. 
The Community Team will link with the co-ordinator of the Public Participation 
Network to support the adoption of and examine mechanisms in monitoring the utility 
of: 
 
• 
“A Guide for Inclusive Community Engagement in Local Planning and Decision 
Making”, 2nd Edition, October 2023, Department of Rural and Community 
Development and the Gaeltacht 
• 
“A Vision for Community Well Being in Cork City”, Public Participation 
Network Cork City 2024 
• 
Aarhus Convention Directive 2003/35/EC on Public Participation. 
 
11.1.2 
NEW CITY CENTRE LIBRARY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 19th March 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
“That the Council will give a detailed update to members on progress being made on 
the new City Centre library as soon as ever possible.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 26/108) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that providing a new City Library of scale 
and substance is one that is a priority for Council. The whole City Library Service is 
a key component of the cultural, literary, and recreational infrastructure of Cork City 
and it is an important element in the wider community now and into the future.  
 
Work is ongoing to make this happen and there is a standing commitment to 
communicating updates as this matter progresses. Cork City Council has submitted a 
preliminary business case to the Department of Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage for the delivery of a world-class library for Cork city. 
 
It involved a robust examination of several options including the use or reuse of 
existing buildings and new-build options to deliver a new flagship city library in the 
Grand Parade area in a timely and cost-effective manner. 
 
The City Council awaits a decision on the PBC and looks forward to moving to the 
next stage in the process.  
 
As has been flagged previously a briefing of members will take place at the 
appropriate juncture. 
 
11.1.3 
VULNERABLE PERSONS REGISTER 
 

 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, and Director of Services, Emergency 
Management & Climate Action, dated 16th March 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That the Council examines the feasibility of establishing a Vulnerable Persons 
Register for Cork City, on an opt-in basis and in compliance with GDPR (Data 
Protection), to support emergency planning and coordinated responses during extreme 
weather events or other emergencies, in collaboration with relevant statutory and 
community agencies.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 26/138) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that Cork City Council, through the 
Community Team in the Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs and the 
Emergency Management & Climate Action Directorates currently oversee the 
Community Response Forum. This Forum will be stood up when required, in response 
to an emergency situation, to deliver on the Council’s commitment to supporting 
communities across our city. Its membership includes other state bodies including but 
not limited to the Health Service Executive and Tusla.  
 
Vulnerable Persons Registers are presently held by member organisations of the forum 
e.g. the HSE and Tusla.  Other organisations also hold Vulnerable Persons Registers 
e.g. The Gardai, Electric Ireland, Uisce Eireann, other Utility Companies etc.  The 
forum will work with these partner agencies to support vulnerable person in our city 
and ensure coordinated responses during extreme weather events or other 
emergencies.  Other members of the Forum e.g. Community Groups, also have local 
communication networks which can also be utilised during an emergency response to 
maximise information dissemination and support to communities. 
 
Finally, Cork City Council also have an ICT system in place (MapAlerter) which can 
be used by all, including vulnerable persons, to keep themselves informed of events 
which 
may 
impact 
on 
them. 
 
Users 
register 
with 
this 
system 
(www.mapalerter.ie/signup) and can chose what types of alerts to receive and how 
they wish to receive same e.g. SMS or email. 
 
11.1.4 
CORK CITY CENTRAL LIBRARY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 19th March 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees with the 10 "Must Have" points put forward by the 
voluntary Cork Library Action Group, namely: 
 
1. Ample physical space to meet the needs of a world class, 21st century library 
befitting a modern European city. This must be no less than the 7,700m2 
envisioned in the URDF funding application. A building of stature. The new 
library must be a landmark location. A building of style and scale. A cathedral of 
learning with architecture in keeping with surrounding buildings. 
 

2. An accessible city centre location. The library is the most used cultural building 
in Cork and must remain in a location that is widely accessible to all, both day 
and night. It should be connected to at least two streets and have a large public 
façade. The design should be neurodivergent friendly and include a sensory space. 
 
3. Different spaces to meet different needs. The best modern libraries provide 
three distinct environments, spread across interconnected floors. 
a. An entrance floor that acts as a new enclosed City Square and connects to the 
public realm at the front of the building. This space will allow people to meet, 
chat and connect. 
b. A middle floor designed to feed and spark the imagination with dedicated 
spaces for children and young people that can host workshops/clubs (e.g. 
Lego clubs, art clubs, computer clubs etc) 
c. A top floor with a focus on life and learning with space for workshops, 
classes, study rooms, project rooms and at least 175 study spaces. 
 
4. A mix of cultural spaces to include a lecture and performance space, exhibition 
space, meeting rooms for bookclubs and other cultural groups. 
 
5. An enhanced Rory Gallagher Music Library with sufficient space for 
collections, recitals, rehearsal and recording. 
 
6. An enlarged Centre for Cork Local Studies that holds the collective memory of 
the people of our city. 
 
7. Sustainability at its heart. This includes effective use of natural light, a reduced 
environmental impact and a green rooftop garden. It should also include floor to 
ceiling windows that take in views of the river. 
 
8. More than a collection of books; it should be a library of things. A place where 
you can borrow a guitar, a sewing machine or a chessboard. 
 
9. Facilities for all. This means accessible baby changing facilities, toilets, a small 
kitchen, a breastfeeding room and places for people to sit and relax in warmth. A 
space for all. 
 
10. The support of the people therefore we call on Cork City Council to urgently 
undertake a public consultation on this important project. 
 
Cork City Council therefore agrees to write to the Minister with responsibility for 
libraries to seek his urgent engagement on making these calls a reality as part of a new 
world class city library, befitting the republic’s second city.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. N. O’Connor, Cllr. D. Boyle, Cllr. B. McCarthy, Cllr. J. Sheehan, 
Cllr. J. Maher, Cllr. F. Kerins, Cllr. C. O'Connor 26/169) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has the provision 
of a New City Library of scale and substance at the centre of Cork as a priority. The 
aim has always been to provide a space and facilities to the best standard, and to have 

the City Library as a key component of the Cultural and Literary life of the city and 
its people. 
  
Many of the points that are highlighted in this motion have been considered within the 
scope of the design and project work that will be part of the provision of the new City 
Library once approval is forthcoming from the Department. A business case has been 
lodged and a decision is awaited.  
 
As has been flagged previously a briefing of members and consultation as required 
will take place at the appropriate juncture. 
 
11.1.5 
UPGRADE OF MACCURTAIN STREET 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 21st January 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council apply to the Government for the Per Cent for Art Scheme 
from the upgrade of MacCurtain Street, Bridge Street and Harley Street. That Cork 
City Council install a statue of Tomás MacCurtain on the foot of St. Patrick’s Hill 
along with an information plaque to honour Tomás and his family.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/574) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that we will query with the National 
Transport Authority whether a budget for public art can still be accessed now that the 
MacCurtain Street scheme is complete.  
 
A new Public Art Policy is in development and will be brought forward to Council in 
the first half of 2026. A Commemorations policy will be included in this, and the Arts 
Office will report to the Arts Committee in the development of a proposed policy on 
acquiring, commissioning and funding public commemorative sculpture. 
 
Noting that two separate motions are before the committee - each proposing sculptures 
of two individuals for the same location - this policy should also include a process for 
agreeing individuals and events to be commemorated. 
 
A mural honouring Tomás MacCurtain was installed on the corner of Bridge Street 
and Coburg Street in 2023. It was painted by Peter Martin and Shane O’Driscoll of 
Ardú Street Art Initiative and designed in collaboration with students at St. Angela’s 
and Christian Brothers Secondary Schools. 
 
11.1.6 
CITY WIDE CORK CITY TIDY TOWNS UMBRELLA GROUP 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 11th September 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 

 
‘That Cork City Council put plans in place to facilitate the setting up of a city wide 
Cork City Tidy Towns Umbrella Group under the Community, Culture and 
Placemaking SPC.  
 
Community Tidy Towns Groups right across the City would be invited to join this 
Umbrella Group which should help them grow through the sharing of ideas, initiatives 
and strategies currently being undertaken by the wide variety of individual 
Community Tidy Towns Groups across the city. Cork City Council can, through this 
group, advise on various opportunities for funding, grants and any other opportunities 
for shared development.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 25/232) 
 
The report of the A/Director of Services stated that Tidy Towns groups are 
independent organisations established across the city, that work closely with Cork 
City Council. Last year, a South City Tidy Towns group was established, which is an 
umbrella group for the voluntary organisations in this section of the city, with a view 
to shared learning, equipment, and training. It is intended to widen participation 
shortly to include other groups across the city. 
 
11.1.7 
RESIDENTS ASSOCIATION HANDBOOK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 19th March 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will produce a Residents Association Handbook and compile a 
centralised list of recognised residents associations in the administrative area of the 
local authority.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/229)  
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team will work with the SICAP Programme through Cork City 
Partnership to develop a Residents Association Handbook for use across Cork city.  
 
12. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 10th MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 10th March 2026. 
 
13. 
CITY CENTRE COMMITTEE – 25th MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the City Centre Committee from 
its meeting held, 25th March 2026. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 7th APRIL 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 7th April 2026. 

 
14.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
14.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF FEBRUARY 2026 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
February 2026. 
 
 
 
14.2 
MOTIONS 
 
14.2.1 
ONLINE SYSTEM FOR CLAIMS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council develops an online system for people who wish to make 
claims against Council.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 26/161) 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to refer the motion back to the Finance & Estimates Committee 
for further consideration. 
 
15. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd March 2026. 
 
16. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd March 2026. 
 
17. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd March 2026. 
 
18. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th March 2026. 
 
19. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 30th MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 30th March 2026. 
 

20. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – SPECIAL MEETING 31st 
MARCH 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its special meeting held, 31st March 2026. 
 
21. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
 
22. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh and S. Martin at the AILG Training Seminar, 
Module 2, Housing for All, held at Radisson Blu Hotel, Co. Limerick, 19th 
March 2026. 
 
23. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
24. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
24.1 
NATIONAL HEALTHY CITIES MEETING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attendance of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald 
at the National Healthy Cities Meeting, taking place on Friday 8th May 2026 in SETU 
Arena, Waterford. 
 
25. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
26. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for February 2026. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, An Chomhairle approved motion 31, Drug 
Dealing in the Inner City/South Parish Area, amended to read as follows:- 
 

‘That concern be expressed about the growth of open drug dealing in the inner 
city/South Parish area and Turners Cross, and seek a co-ordinated inter agency 
approach to undermine its occurrence.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 26/223) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28. 
MOTIONS 
 
28.1 
STATUTORY WAIVER OR EXEMPTION SCHEME FOR LOCAL 
PROPERTY TAX 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls on the Minister for Finance, Deputy Simon Harris TD, 
to introduce a statutory waiver or exemption scheme for the payment of Local 
Property Tax (LPT) for households located in residential housing estates that: 
o Have been fully completed for a period exceeding five years; and 
o Have not yet been formally taken in charge by the relevant local authority.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Flynn 26/187) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
O’Callaghan, a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared 
as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, K. Collins, K. McCarthy, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (5) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, M.R. Desmond, 
P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. 
O’Connor. (11) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. (1) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
28.2 
PROVISION OF FREE PERIOD PRODUCTS IN SCHOOLS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion, requesting that a 
report prepared by the Women’s Caucus also be included in the letter:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council: Recognising that access to period products is a basic matter 
of dignity, health and equality, and that no child should miss school due to lack of 
access; 

 
Noting Cork City Council’s Period Dignity Project success. Calls on the Chief 
Executive to: 
 
Write to the Minister for Education requesting a fully funded, universal scheme to 
provide free period products in: 
 
- 
All post-primary schools, and 
 
- 
Senior classes in primary schools (from 4th class upwards), 
 
Delivered in a stigma free manner.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 26/192) 
 
28.3 
TOURIST TAX 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to An Tánaiste and Minister for Finance Simon Harris, 
the Minister for Public Expenditure Jack Chambers and the Minister for Housing & 
Local Government James Browne calling on them and the Irish government to 
introduce legislation which permits local authorities to levy a “tourist tax” on hotels 
within their respective local authority areas, and which:  
 
- 
makes it the responsibility of the elected members of each local authority to 
decide on whether to introduce such a levy in their local authority area; 
 
- 
makes it the responsibility of the elected members of each local authority to 
decide on the rate of any such levy on an annual basis;  
 
- 
ensures that the entirety of funds raised from the “tourist tax” is allocated to the 
local area committees or municipal district councils of the relevant local 
authority; and  
 
- 
ensures that it is the responsibility of the local councillors on those local area 
committees or municipal district councils to decide on how the funding is to be 
spent within their local electoral area or municipal district.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 26/193) 
 
28.4 
CITIZENS’ 
ASSEMBLY 
ON 
ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE, 
DIGITALISATION AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion, noting the dissention 
of Comhairleoirí A. Deasy and P. Horgan:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Taoiseach, the Chair of the Oireachtas 
Committee on Artificial Intelligence and the Chair of the AI Advisory Council, 
supporting the recommendation of the first interim report of the committee to establish 

a Citizens’ Assembly on Artificial Intelligence, Digitalisation and Technology to 
facilitate inclusive public dialogue and democratic input on AI policy and ethics.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 26/205) 
 
28.5 
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY THAT PROMOTES RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion, noting the dissention 
of Comhairleoir A. Deasy:- 
 
‘That ongoing global instability affecting the cost of, and access to fossil fuel based 
energy, obliges us to follow and strengthen a national energy policy that promotes 
renewable energy through the appropriate taxation of fossil fuel use; while also 
placing investment priority to an even greater extent towards public transport.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 26/224) 
 
28.6 
REVIEW OF THE VACANT HOMES TAX 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Government, including the Ministers for 
Housing and Finance, seeking a review of the Vacant Homes Tax: to increase the rate 
from 0.7% to the typical rate of 5% in other countries; address the gap between liable 
properties and vacancy data from the Census, GeoDirectory and ESB; make sure it 
applies to all vacant homes; establish a clear public reporting mechanism beyond the 
current self-declaration model; and create a single, integrated national dataset on 
buildings, covering ownership, usage, condition and vacancy/dereliction.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 26/233) 
 
28.7 
MONEY COLLECTED VIA VACANT / DERELICT PROPERTY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Finance asking him to instruct 
revenue to repay any monies collected via vacant / derelict property to each local 
authority and allow each local authority to spend the collected monies to improve their 
respective areas.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 26/236) 
 
28.8 
REVIEW OF DELIVERY DRONES 
 
In the absence of the proposer, the following motion was withdrawn:- 
 
‘That this Council expresses its concern at the hundreds of complaints made by the 
public over Manna delivery drones in recent weeks, especially since this is just the 
testing phase for expansion across the entire T2 geozone. This Council demands that 
Manna conduct a full review of the impact of these drones on the public, the 

environment and the impact of the IAA restrictions on other drone users in the testing 
phase be done before any further expansion of the service.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 26/238) 
 
28.9 
UNAUTHORISED GRAFFITI ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
• Acknowledges the growing problem of unauthorised graffiti on public and 
private property in Cork City. 
• Commends the National Transport Authority (NTA) for keeping bus shelters 
under its management free of graffiti and calls on ESB Networks, Eir, and all 
other telephone, broadband and utility providers to pursue a similar policy by 
keeping their poles, cabinets and street furniture graffiti-free. 
• Calls for stronger enforcement of the Litter Pollution Act 1997 to tackle this 
issue.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 26/244) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
