MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 11th MARCH 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir K. McCarthy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, G. 
Keohane. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, M. Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, 
B. McCarthy, D. Boylan. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí D. Cahill, L. Bogue, T. Shannon, D. Forde. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí M. Finn, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, P. 
Dineen, F. Kerins. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, O. O’Leary. 
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. A. Doherty, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Housing 
Operations.  
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing Delivery & 
Regeneration. 
Mr. D. O’Brien, Interim Director of Services, Community, 
Culture & Placemaking. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Roads & Environment  
Operations. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Mr. F. Reidy, Director of Services, Strategic Planning & 
Economic Development. 
Ms. R. Loughrey, Senior Executive Officer, Community, 
Culture & Placemaking. 
Ms. 
Edith 
Roberts, 
Senior 
Engineer, 
Infrastructure 
Development. 
Ms. A. Murnane, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations. 
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Mahony family on the death of William Mahony. 
• The O’Shea family on the death of Mary O’Shea. 
• The Barry family on the death of Sheila (Julia) Barry. 
• The Jordan family on the death of Breda Jordan. 
• The Mahony family on the death of Susan Rose Mahony. 
• The Sheehan family on the death of Kathleen Sheehan. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Noel McCarthy. 

• The Finn family on the death of Pa Finn. 
• The O’Callaghan family on the death of Liam O’Callaghan. 
• The Drinan family on the death of Tadhg Drinan. 
• The Hosford family on the death of Paddy Hosford. 
• The Ruane family on the death of Saoírse Ruane. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Laura O’Sullivan. 
• The Manning family on the death of Greg Manning. 
• The McDonnell family on the death of Patty McDonnell. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Valerie O’Leary. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES   
 
• Cillian Murphy on winning the Oscar for Best Actor for ‘Oppenheimer’ at 
the Academy Awards 2024. 
• Blackrock Hurling Club on hosting the club’s 140th Anniversary. It was a 
super event and a huge crowd attended.  
• Gaelscoil an Ghoirt Álainn as 30 bliain a cheiliúradh / Gaelscoil an Ghoirt 
Álainn on the celebration of their 30th anniversary. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
LORD MAYOR’S CIVIC, COMMUNITY & VOLUNTARY, AND CULTURE 
AWARDS 2024 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that the Lord Mayor’s Civic, Community & 
Voluntary, and Culture Awards Ceremony will be held on Wednesday 10th April 2024 
in the Concert Hall. 
 
3.1.1 
LORD MAYOR’S CIVIC AWARDS 2024 
 
An tArdmhéara advised, and An Chomhairle approved, the Lord Mayor’s nominations 
for Civic Awards 2024 as follows:- 
 
- 
Gary McCarthy, in recognition of his community work and long-term 
commitment to empowering young people through music. 
 
- 
Norman O’ Rourke, in recognition of his contribution to music and cultural 
heritage in Cork City.  
 
- 
Dr. Naomi Masheti, in recognition of her commitment to the Cork Migrant 
Centre. 
 
- 
Fahmeda Naheed, in recognition of her service and dedication to the Irish-
Pakistani community in Cork. 
 
- 
Jean Downey, in recognition of her work with Bishopstown Tidy Towns.  
 
- 
Donncha O’ Callaghan, in recognition of his outstanding contribution to Rugby 
in Munster, and his work with UNICEF Ireland. 

 
3.2 
COUNCILLORS’ ATTENDANCE AT ST. PATRICK’S DAY 2024 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle of arrangements for St. Patrick’s Day 2024 
and encouraged members to attend. 
 
3.3 
CIVIC RECEPTION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Munster 
Rugby. 
 
3.4 
LORD MAYOR-LED DELEGATION TO SAN FRANCISCO AND NEW 
YORK 
 
 
An tArdmhéara noted the success of the recent Lord Mayor-led delegation to San 
Francisco and New York. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir J. Maher to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would conduct a formal public consultation on the closure of 
walkway between Ard Patrick Close and Avenue and ensure full views are heard from 
all communities before making a decision. 
 
I believe a full formal consultation will have all voices heard and hopefully deliver a 
solution that works for all.  
 
The residents would be grateful if you could support this motion.’ 
 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss the motion at the end of 
the meeting. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
None received. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Canty, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
 Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 12th February 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Finn, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Finn, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Special Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 20th February 2024. 
 

6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
CRAWFORD WOODS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To seek information regarding the anticipated timeframe for Crawford Woods to be 
officially taken in charge by Cork City Council. 
 
Could you kindly inform the Council of the expected date or provide an update on the 
progress towards this transition? 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council Estates Team are not in receipt of a Taking in Charge application 
or a plebiscite for Crawford Wood’s residential estate.  
 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
 
6.2 
KELLEHER’S BUILDINGS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise on the current status of vacant Housing Units in Kelleher’s 
Buildings? 
 
How many of these Units are currently vacant and when exactly will each of these 
Units be refurbished and allocated? 
 
REPLY 
 
Work is presently nearing completion on five vacant properties in Kelleher’s 
Buildings. It is expected these properties will be available for letting within the next 
fortnight. 
 
A further three properties are also under repair with contractors, the required works to 
these properties is expected to be completed in the next 12 weeks. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Operations. 
 
6.3 
96 NORTH MAIN STREET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 

 
 
Could the Chief Executive detail the current status of the preferential rents being 
charged to eligible students as per the terms of the disposal of 96 North Main Street 
by Cork City Council? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
As per the terms of the July, 2021 disposal of 96 North Main Street, 16 bed spaces in 
8 twin rooms were offered to eligible students in the Coleman Court student 
accommodation development. Offers to students are made via the accommodation 
teams at UCC and MTU who are very well placed to be able to identify eligible 
students in need.  These places were offered at a net rate of €100 per bed space per 
week inclusive of all services, heat and light, refuse etc (discounted from €200 per bed 
space).  These arrangements will continue until the 2033/2034 academic year and in 
line with the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). 
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
6.4 
FEASIBILITY STUDY ON BLARNEY STREET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE on the current status of the feasibility study for Fair Street and Blarney 
Street and when will the residents be consulted? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The NTA have provided funding to look at the feasibility and options to explore if or 
how active travel measures may be provided to improve Fair Street and Blarney Street 
as part of a wider active travel project at nineteen locations citywide. A consultant has 
been appointed and is currently carrying out surveys and assessing each location to 
inform an options report which will be produced in Q2 of this year. This Options 
report will have to be fully assessed before any preferred solutions are identified.  Only 
at this stage will it be possible to go to public consultation with the identified preferred 
solutions.  
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate. 
 
6.5 
TAKING IN CHARGE – LEHENAGHMORE/MATHEW HILL 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Could the Chief Executive update me on the status of the council's plans regarding the 
taking in charge of the housing estates situated at Lehenaghmore/Mathew Hill 
between the Forge Hill Junction and Lehenaghmore Park in Togher. 

Could you kindly provide information regarding: 
 
1. The timeline for the council's decision-making process regarding the taking in 
charge of these housing estates? 
2. Any updates or progress made in assessing the conditions and requirements for 
the taking in charge process? 
3. Any challenges or obstacles that the council has encountered in this process? 
4. Any projected timelines for the completion of the taking in charge procedure? 
 
REPLY 
The timeline for the council's decision-making process regarding the taking in 
charge of these housing estates? A Taking in Charge application was received by 
Cork City Council for both Matthew Hill and Laurel Brook residential estates on the 
14/09/2020 and Manor Farm (various phases) on 20/08/2020 and 30/07/2021. Under 
Section 180 of the Planning and Development Act where, “…a development for which 
permission is granted under section 34 or under Part IV of the Act of 1963 includes 
the construction of 2 or more houses and the provision of new roads, open spaces, car 
parks, sewers, watermains or drains, and the development has been completed to the 
satisfaction of the planning authority in accordance with the permission and any 
conditions to which the permission is subject, the authority shall, where requested by 
the person carrying out the development…as soon as may be, initiate the procedures 
under section 11 of the Roads Act, 1993.” Cork City Council processes in accordance 
with these provisions in the legislation.  
Any updates or progress made in assessing the conditions and requirements for 
the taking in charge process?  
Matthew Hill Residential Estate:  
Public Lighting is in charge. Roads & Footpaths – The developer has completed 75% 
of identified snags to bring the estate up to taking in charge standard. Foul Network – 
Applicant and UE to negotiate and agree required works. Storm Network – snag list 
outstanding. Potable Water – snag list outstanding.  
Laurel Brook Residential Estate:  
Public Lighting is in charge. Roads & Footpaths – applicant is in receipt of snag list. 
Foul Network – Applicant and UE to negotiate and agree required works. Storm 
Network – snag list outstanding. Potable Water – snag list outstanding. Wayleave – 
outstanding.  
Manor Farm Residential Estate:  
Public Lighting: To be re-inspected. Roads & Footpaths – applicant in receipt of snag 
list. Foul Network – snag list outstanding. Storm Network – snag list outstanding. 
Potable Water – snag list outstanding. Wayleave – outstanding. 
Any challenges or obstacles that the council has encountered in this process?  The 
applicant and UE (Foul Network) have yet to reach an agreement on required works 
to be addressed.  

Any projected timelines for the completion of the taking in charge procedure?  It 
is dependent on receipt of snags from Cork City Council Internal Directorates, the 
applicant addressing outstanding snags, agreeing to UE required works and 
formalising wayleaves to the relevant over the coming months. 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
 
6.6 
VERNON MOUNT HOUSE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
Having regard to the fact that Vernon Mount has now been on the Derelict Sites 
Register for over 3 years, I would ask the Chief Executive to outline the current status 
of Vernon Mount House and when the process of bringing Vernon Mount House into 
public ownership (whether via a Compulsory Purchase Order or otherwise) is likely 
to commence. 
 
REPLY 
 
The Derelict Sites Team have been engaging with multiple partners in relation to 
Vernon Mount.  The land surrounding the building is currently occupied by the 
Munster Motor Cycle Club.  Owners of the property and their representatives do not 
reside in Ireland.  Despite these challenges, any consideration for acquisition of the 
site would need to consider existing uses, access, costs and future uses.  While Cork 
City Council would like to see more use of the area, any such plan would be subject 
to the availability of resources.   
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
6.7 
COVERED BIKE PARKING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. Finn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can I ask the Chief Executive for an update on the provision of covered bike parking 
in the city centre? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
I can confirm that Cork City Council is looking into this matter and have identified a 
potential site for covered bike parking provision in the City. 
 
Engagement with the property owners is ongoing with a view to putting in place an 
agreement to facilitate this service. 
 

If an agreement can be reached with the owner of the premises, it is proposed to 
progress this project in 2024 with a view to having same operational before the end of 
the year. 
 
Funding has been secured as part of the 2024 NTA Active Tarvel Funding provision 
to deliver this project, if the required agreements can be secured. 
 
At this point in time it is not possible to give a definitive timeframe for the 
development of this infrastructure as there are still too many unanswered questions 
and steps to be completed in this project. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate 
 
6.8 
FR. O’LEARY MEMORIAL BOYS CLUB 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Nugent, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE report on the Fr. O'Leary Memorial Boys Club on Shandon Street and if 
funding could be found to re-open the hall, the Shandon Area Renewal Association 
and other local groups would be interested in its use. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Fr. O’Leary Memorial Boys Club on Shandon Street is not in the ownership of 
the City Council but rather the HSE - as such the matter would rest with them. 
 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
 
6.9 
ACCESS TO PROPERTY THROUGH COUNCIL OWNED LAND 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the policy that exists for private landowners with land 
without direct access, to access such property through City Council publicly owned 
land? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
 
Any such application would need to be in the form of an application for a Right of 
Way/Wayleave across City Council owned land which would be examined on a case-
by-case basis.  The City Council would first determine that it has full ownership and 
possession of the subject land and if in a position to proceed, the application would be 
assessed for approval/conditions to grant such rights. 
 

Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations. 
 
6.10 
KILCULLY/UPPER GLANMIRE PEDESTRIAN SAFETY SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the expected timeline for delivery of the Kilcully phase of 
the Kilcully/Upper Glanmire Pedestrian Safety Scheme; and if delivery will be 
accelerated following significant recent road traffic incidents, resulting in serious 
injury and damage to property? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Construction work is currently underway on the approved pedestrian improvements 
at Upper Glanmire. The scheme is progressing well and the works are expected to be 
substantially complete in Q2 2024 with snagging and other minor works extending 
into the summer period. The proposed Kilcully pedestrian improvements will take 
longer to deliver due to the need for land acquisition, project funding and completion 
of detailed design & environmental surveys. Subject to continued funding for the 
scheme, it is expected that the detailed design and land acquisition for the project will 
be progressed in 2025 with procurement to follow thereafter. Members will be kept 
appraised of related progress. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.11 
COMMUNITY CLIMATE ACTION FUND 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE report on the Community Climate Action Fund and if submitted 
applications are progressing? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
On 14 April 2023, Cork City Council launched the Community Climate Action Plan 
Fund. The Community Climate Action Officer and the Climate Action Unit engaged 
in extensive public engagement with target recipients. The Fund was promoted 
through press, social media and workshops and through networks such as the Public 
Participation Network.  The Community Climate Action Officer continued to provide 
support and encourage communities to apply until the Fund closed on June 16. The 
Fund received 35 applications, totalling €1,742,269.02, for a total Fund amount of 
€860,000.  
 

In November 2023, Cork City Council received and returned all necessary 
documentation to the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications 
(DECC).  We are awaiting confirmation of Funding approval from DECC.  
 
Fearghal Reidy, 
Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development. 
 
6.12 
SOCIAL HOUSING TENANTS IN 2023 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of new social housing tenants, cost rental tenants, 
rightsizing tenants/owners and affordable purchase owners respectively moved into 
new homes in 2023 in Cork city in tabular form. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Cork City Council does not allocate tenancies in Cost Rental developments.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services,  
 
 
Director of Services. 
Housing Operations.  
 
            Housing Delivery & Regeneration. 
 
6.13 
LEHENAGHMORE ROAD IMPROVEMENT SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. O’Leary, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive provide an update on the Lehenaghmore Road Improvement 
Scheme and outline when it is anticipated that works will commence? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Part 8 Planning for the proposed Lehenaghmore Road Improvement Scheme was 
approved by Council in 2021. The scheme requires the acquisition of over eighty plots 
Type 
 
No. for 2023 
Social Housing   
 
726 
Rightsizing  
 
60 
Cost Rental  
 
*Not applicable 
Affordable Housing 
 
111 
Total: 
897 

from twenty five land owners. In order to secure same, a Compulsory Purchase Order 
(CPO) for the scheme was published and submitted to An Bord Pleanala in August 
2022. An Bord Pleanála is assessing the objections received to the CPO and is 
currently scheduling the date for the related oral hearing to be held in May. Its 
determination on the land acquisition order is to be expected shortly thereafter.  
 
In the meantime, the project team has been finalising the detailed designs for the 
works. It has also entered into negotiations with land owners aimed at securing the 
required lands through agreement where possible. Agreements have now been reached 
with the majority of land owners and negotiations at an advanced stage in respect of 
the remaining plots.  
 
It is expected that the necessary land acquisition arrangements will be concluded 
shortly (whether by approval to the CPO or direct agreement with landowners) thereby 
enabling the Council to proceed with the publication of tenders for the works subject 
to continued grant funding for the scheme. It is estimated that the construction phase 
will be of approximately twelve months duration. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.14 
BANDUFF ROAD FLOODING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Tynan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
In relation to my questions from November 6th  2023 (see below) about the Banduff 
Road flooding, I am requesting an update from the CEO. 
 
 
Questions to the CEO:  - 6th November, 2023 
 
1. In light of the persistent flooding on Banduff Road, I am asking if the flooding was 
exacerbated by the dumping of hundreds of tonnes of demolition material, such as 
concrete, taken from Merchant's Quay and Douglas Village shopping centre onto 
the bog floodplain of the Glen River Valley located adjacent to the Banduff Road, 
over a twelve year period from the 1990's to the early 2000's? 
 
2. Is Cork City Council actively investigating this issue? 
 
3. Are there any plans being drawn up to remove the dumped demolition material 
from the Glen River Valley? 
 
REPLY 
 
1. Following completion of the investigation of the flooding which occurred on the 
Banduff Road as a result of Storm Babet I can confirm that the issue was that the 
drainage network serving the roadway was overwhelmed by the Orange Level 
Weather Event.  This section of roadway is served by soakaways on the private 
lands adjoining the road.  During this unprecedented event these became water 

logged and reached their capacity.  The water thus had no where else to go and 
ponded on the roadway until after the event and the soakaways returned to normal 
operating parameters. 
 
2. Cork City Council is still actively investigating the most appropriate solutions to 
the flooding issue at Banduff Road. All of the potential solutions identified to date 
either involve modifications to the present drainage system on the private lands or 
the construction of a temporary pumping solution (which would be very expensive 
to deliver and operate).  This process is ongoing and we hope to choose a preferred 
solution in the coming months. 
 
3. The placing of material in this area was undertaken prior to May 2019 when the 
area was under the jurisdiction of Cork County Council. Its noted that no 
enforcement action was taken by the County Council. Having completed our 
review there are no plans to undertake any enforcement at this time. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads/Environment Operations. 
 
David O’Brien, 
Interim Director of Services, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 29th 
February 2024 on the following property disposal:- 
 
1. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of land (1908m² approximately) 
situated at Kennedy Quay, Cork to Leeside Quays Ltd. c/o Ronan Daly Jermyn 
Solicitors, 85 South Mall, Cork for the sum of €125,500.00. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Shannon, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
EXTINGUISHMENT OF A SECTION OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY ON 
KENNEDY QUAY FROM VICTORIA ROAD TO FURLONG STREET, 
CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attached report and recommendation of 
the Director of Services, Roads & Environment Operations, dated 11th January 2024, 
following public consultation, on the proposed extinguishment of a section of the 
public right of way on Kennedy Quay from Victoria Road to Furlong Street, Cork, 
pursuant to Section 73 (1) (a) of the Roads Act 1993. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 

 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVES THAT  
 
One submission having been received within the prescribed statutory period set out in 
section 73 (1) (a) of the Roads Act 1993, the contents of which were outside the scope 
of the proposed extinguishment, it is now hereby Ordered that the following Public 
Right of Way be extinguished with effect from the date of the making of this Order:- 
 
“On Kennedy Quay from the point marked AA at Furlong Street on said map for a 
distance of approximately 158.27 Metres to point marked BB at Victoria Road.  
 
The width at point AA is 12.77 Metres and the width at point BB is 12.45 Metres.” 
 
7.3 
ACTIVE TRAVEL IMPROVEMENT WORKS AT GLEN RYAN AND 
CATTLE MARKET AREA - SECTION 38 APPROVAL 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boylan, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the Director 
of Services, Infrastructure Development, dated 21st February 2024, following public 
consultation, on the proposed Glen Ryan and Cattle Market Area Active Travel Works 
pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of 
the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
7.4 
REPORT UNDER SECTION 179 OF THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ACT, 2000 – 2015, ST. CATHERINE’S CEMETERY EXTENSION, 
KILCULLY, CORK  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
Director of Services, Operations, dated 23rd February 2024 on the proposed 
development at St. Catherine’s Cemetery, Kilcully. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at St Catherine’s Cemetery, Kilcully and the report thereon, it is hereby 
resolved pursuant to the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the development at St Catherine’s Cemetery  
in the City of Cork be carried out as recommended in the said report  which was put 
before Council on the 11th March  2024.” 
 
7.5 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 
1 NA FUINSEOGA, SPRING LANE, 
CORK - FOCUS HOUSING ASSOCIATION CLG 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 22nd February, 2024 in relation to a loan 
facility for Focus Housing Association CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 1 Na Fuinseoga, Spring Lane, Cork. 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Nugent, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Forde, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €287,184 be granted to Focus 
Housing Association CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of one unit of accommodation at 1 Na Fuinseoga, Spring Lane, Cork”. 
 
7.6 
2024 COMMUNITY GRANTS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Specialist Social Inclusion, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 7th March 2024 on:-  
 
• The 2024 Community Associations Capital Grants.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Nugent, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Finn, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Specialist Social Inclusion, 
Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 7th March 2024 on:- 
 
• The 2024 Community Development Small Scale Programme Grants. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 4th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 4th March 2024. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/01/2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/01/2024. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 26th FEBRUARY 2024  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 26th February 2024. 
 
10. 
ROADS & TRANSPORTATION STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 19th 
FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Roads & Transportation 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 19th February 2024. 
 
10.1 
MOTIONS 
 
10.1.1 
MAINTENANCE OF SEGREGATED CYCLE LANES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 

‘That Cork City Council report on if annual funding is available for the maintenance 
of segregated cycle lanes and if a works programme is in place, a number of cycle 
lanes have damaged, missing or dirty cycle wands for instance.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Nugent 23/530) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that limited funding is made available 
annually from City Council own resources to carry out remedial works to damaged 
bollards. Replacement of bollards is carried out on a case-by-case basis, based on 
complaints received.  Anyone wishing to report a damaged or missing bollard should 
contact the City Council’s Customer Service Unit on 021-4924000 or 
servicecentre@corkcity.ie.   
 
Given the fact that bollards are located adjacent to live traffic, the cleaning of same 
poses particular health and safety risks i.e. the interaction of cleaning crews with 
vehicular traffic.  Thus, to implement a regular cleaning regime would be both very 
expensive with significant traffic management costs as well as very time consuming.  
At present there are not adequate financial or human resources available to carry out 
a regular cleaning regime for the cleaning of cycle lane bollards. 
   
10.1.2 
BRIEFING AND CONSULTATION WITH THE TII 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Councillors will hold a briefing and consultation with the TII at the 
Roads and Transportation SPC relating to the correct naming of roads in their current 
programme of works in upgrading signage. And that briefings are also held in LACs 
for relevant Councillor input at a ward level.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 23/554) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) 
in consultation with Cork City Council (CCC) are currently carrying out a major 
review and upgrade of Directional Road Signage in and around the Cork City area.  
This area was omitted previously from the National Road Re-Signing Project carried 
out by TII due to the many traffic management and other changes planned at the time 
by CCC which involve changes to directions of traffic flow and routing of traffic 
through the City streets. 
 
In conjunction with the construction of the new Active Travel works in the City and 
the Dunkettle Interchange scheme it was decided that it would be an opportune 
opportunity to review and upgrade the road traffic signage in and around the City and 
its environs.  Some of the existing signage in this area had reached end of life and had 
not been reviewed in its totality for many years. 
 
The project involves the full review of National Route Directional, Advance 
Directional and Route Confirmatory signage in the Cork City and environs area with 
a view to upgrading and revising the signage as required. Other ongoing projects have 
been considered as part of this review such as the Mac Curtain Street Public Transport 

Improvement Scheme, the proposed upgrade of the M28 and other ongoing Cork City 
Council projects.  A total of 889 no. new sign faces will be installed with 
approximately 100 of the signs requiring new post and foundations due to their 
condition, age and capacity. To date 383 signs have been delivered to site with 207 
installed. The project is due to be completed on site in March 2024. The project applies 
to National Route signage only. The terminal destinations to be signed on national 
route signage are set out in the Traffic Signs Manual and as such no individual roads 
will be signposted. If there is a location of particular concern, this can be referred to 
TII for consideration. 
 
10.1.3 
CAMERA DETECTION OF RUNNING A RED TRAFFIC LIGHT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That the CE will implement camera detection of running a red traffic light.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. Finn 23/563) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Road traffic legislation provides only 
An Garda Síochána can enforce red traffic light violations. Enforcement using CCTV 
is not legally permitted currently. Local Authorities have no role in this regard and 
any change to this responsibility would require changes to national legislative. 
 
10.1.4 
LACK OF TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT ACROSS THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will address the lack of traffic enforcement across the City 
including the Patrick Street ban and the constant breaking of law across the new 
developed Mac Curtain Street, Wellington Road, Coburg Street, Leitrim Street, 
Patrick's Quay by increasing traffic enforcement staff and by working with Gardaí to 
ensure loading bays are protected for workers, bus stops for buses and footpaths are 
for pedestrians.’  
  
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 23/586) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that offences under the Roads Traffic 
Acts, Roads Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations and the parking byelaws may 
be enforced by An Garda Siochana or the Parking Enforcement Team of Cork City 
Council. Cork City Council employs a Parking Enforcement Manager, two Traffic 
Warden Supervisors as well as eighteen traffic wardens to undertake this role. In 
accordance with the governing legislation the system deployed by Cork City Council 
is based on Fixed Charge Penalty Notices (FCPN).   
 
The Parking Enforcement Team of Cork City Council issue FCPNs for a range of 
offences including parking on footpaths, parking in bus stops, illegal parking in 
loading bays, parking on cycle lanes, parking in No Parking Areas, parking beyond 

the permitted time, illegal parking in disabled parking spaces etc. Tickets issued in 
recent years are:   
 
- 2021: 31,856    
- 2022: 49,933  
- 2023: 49,524  
 
The Parking Enforcement Team do not have powers to issue tickets for breaking red 
lights, stopping in yellow boxes, driving in bus lanes (including driving on St Patricks 
Street at hours not permitted), etc. National legislation confers this power to An Garda 
Siochana.   
   
The Parking Enforcement Team operate 08.30 to 18:30 Monday to Saturday. Budget 
2024 provided additional resources to work 10 additional Sundays and 10 weeks of 2 
additional evening shifts of parking enforcement. The additional parking enforcement 
has commenced and will be spread throughout the year, concentrating on areas and 
times of extra demand for Parking Enforcement. All streets that form part of the Mac 
Curtain Street project have been and continue to be prioritised and enforced by the 
Parking Enforcement Team both during their normal operating hours and on the 
additional shifts.   
 
The motion from the Councillor will be referred to An Garda Siochana for their 
consideration. 
 
10.1.5 
RESIDENTS’ PARKING PERMITS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That the ridiculously over-complicated system around applying for/renewing 
residents’ parking permits - including the poorly-designed online portal - is reviewed 
again and made more user friendly.’   
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 23/542) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that following a request from Councillors 
relating to a perceived abuse of the Parking Permits, Councillors reviewed and 
introduced changes that were incorporated into the Parking Permit Policy and Parking 
Permit Scheme 2022. The changes were made to endeavour to make the policy and 
scheme more robust and less likely to abuse and thereby ensure that only valid 
applicants are in receipt of a Residents Parking Permit as well as encouraging the 
switch to more sustainable transport modes.  
 
The review resulted in four changes being made in 2022:  
 
1. One additional piece of information is to be submitted by an applicant depending 
on the nature of residency i.e., if the applicant is a homeowner the applicant is 
required to submit the page(s) of their home insurance policy that clearly states 
the name of the insured, the property being insured and that both the building & 
contents are insured. All monetary values or specific risks or claims history can 

be redacted by the applicant. If an applicant does not have home insurance, the 
applicant can submit alternative documentation to demonstrate home ownership 
in lieu of house insurance; If the applicant is a tenant the applicant is required to 
submit proof the property/tenancy is registered with the Residential Tenancies 
Board.   
 
2. Variation to the maximum number of Residents Parking Permits to be issued.  
 
3. Modification of the fees associated with Residents Parking Permits.  
 
4. Introduction of Resident’s – Vehicle Hire Parking Permits to cater for residents 
who do not own a vehicle but may need to rent a vehicle from time to time.   
 
In implementing the above changes, a couple of issues arose that have been addressed:  
 
• 
An applicant, while a homeowner, that does not have home insurance. For this 
type of applicant, a Declaration has been introduced that is completed and signed 
by the applicant, specifies alternative documents to be submitted, and is signed 
by a Peace Commissioner.  
 
• 
An applicant that is neither a homeowner nor a tenant e.g., child / partner/ parent 
etc. of the owner occupier. To allow consideration of this type of application, a 
Declaration has been introduced and is available to be completed by the applicant 
and signed by a Peace Commissioner. 
      
A remaining issue from the changes made in 2022 is the non-registration of rented 
properties with the Residential Tenancy Board. There is a legal requirement that 
rented properties are registered by the Residential Tenancy Board. The requirement 
under the scheme that a rented property is registered is to ensure that the property is 
genuinely available as a rented property and the applicant resides in such property. 
This has and continues to be an issue for a few applicants. However, this is also the 
type of tenancy that is have the most potential for abuse.  
   
The policy and scheme are documents adopted by Council and can be amended by 
Council should they wish to do so.     
 
10.1.6 
SHARED BIKE STATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That the NTA be encouraged to significantly increase the number of shared bike 
stations in the City across a wider radius of locations.’   
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/010) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Public Bike Scheme is operated 
and managed by the National Transport Authority. Committee queries and 
recommendations regarding future proposals, current services etc will be referred to 
the Authority for response and follow up. 

 
10.1.7 
ADDITIONAL BUS SERVICES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council engage with the NTA, Bus Éireann and concert organisers to 
ensure we have additional bus services for Bruce Springsteen Concert, Live at the 
Marquee, Musgrave Park and late-night services for the Jazz Weekend and Christmas 
2024.’  
  
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/033) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that in accordance with national 
legislation, events with an anticipated large audience, such as a Bruce Springsteen 
Concert, are required to apply for an event licence. The application for an event licence 
requires the event organiser to submit their proposed event management plan and this 
must include a traffic management plan. These proposals are considered and modified 
by all interested parties e.g., An Garda Siochana, Fire Services, Ambulance Service, 
Traffic, etc. Development Management manage this process and once agreed, issue 
the event licence to the event organiser. Accordingly, this request will be referred to 
the Development Management Section.  
 
10.1.8 
FOOTPATH AUDIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council carry out an audit of all footpaths across each ward and within 
the City Centre and prepare a report of how much it'll cost to reinstate and repair and 
apply to central Government for funding.’  
  
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/035) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is responsible for 
the maintenance of the public footpaths in Cork City. This footpath infrastructure is 
comprised of footpaths of very different materials (granite blocks, paving slabs, 
concrete and tar paths etc.) of very different ages.  As part of public realm, active 
travel projects and other developments, public footpaths are constantly upgraded and 
renewed. 
  
Cork City Council also has a record of footpath defects gathered from numerous 
sources, including the public through the CRM, our own engineering assessments, 
public liability claims and Councillors requests for service. All funding for footpath 
maintenance and repairs comes from the City Council’s own resources, as allocated 
by Members through the annual budget process.  There is no funding available from 
the Department of Transport for footpath maintenance and any repairs must therefore 
be funded from very limited Council own resources. 
     

When allocating resources for the annual footpath renewal contract, the record of 
footpath defects is used to identify and locate the worst sections of footpaths for 
inclusion in the contract. We are confident that this results in the worst condition 
footpaths, at a given time, being repaired first. In addition to the annual footpath 
contract, the Roads Operations Division deploys our outdoors crews to carry out 
localised repairs on an emergency basis, where and when needed. 
   
As well as the Council having limited financial resources, we also have limited human 
resources.  To carry out a survey of the more than 3 million square metres in area of 
footpath in the City is a mammoth task that would require substantial human resources 
to carry out. The benefits of expending such very significant resources on such a 
survey is also questionable.  We believe that this money would be better spent tacking 
the known issues that have been identified with footpaths across the City.  Also, the 
Council has neither the internal staff nor budget for substantial engineering 
consultancy inputs to carry out this City wide survey task. Furthermore, the output of 
this task would not be immediately used as there is limited budget for very large-scale 
renewal of the footpaths.  The worst sections of footpath are already known and do 
not required such a survey to be identified.   
 
It is also important to note that the Council operates one of the longest running stand 
alone road opening licensing units in the Country and was instrumental in the 
development of the Guidelines for Managing Openings in Public Roads (the Purple 
Book) – the national standard for reinstatement of road openings. The Council has a 
dedicated team of roads inspectors ensuring that permanent reinstatements are carried 
out in accordance with the Purple Book. 
  
We are satisfied that the quality of footpath reinstatement across the City is to a high 
standard.  However, if any Councillor or member of the public is aware of a 
reinstatement of poor quality, this can be reported to the Customer Service Unit on 
021-4924000 so that same may be investigated.  Upon completion of some works, in 
many cases, a temporary reinstatement may be put in place and this may seem of poor 
quality.  The key point with these is that they are only temporary to allow the footpath 
to reopen to public use and are not the permanent finished reinstatement. Permanent 
reinstatement will follow in due course. 
 
10.1.9 
REVIEW OF THE PUBLIC BIKE SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 9th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council insist upon a date for the current review of the Public Bike 
Scheme to be published to all Councillors and for the NTA to come to City Hall to 
discuss the expansion of the shared bike scheme to the Northside and Southside of the 
City. We have lost the kiosk on Coburg Street with no development in Blackpool, 
Shandon, St. Luke’s, Dillons Cross, The Barracks, while no station exists in the 
growing areas of Blackrock and Douglas.’  
  
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/036) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated the Public Bike Scheme is operated and 
managed by the National Transport Authority. Committee queries and 
recommendations regarding future proposals, current services etc will be referred to 
the Authority for response and follow up.  
 
11. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 19th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 19th February 2024. 
 
11.1 
COMMUNITY AND PUBLICATION HERITAGE GRANT SCHEME 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Finn, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Strategic 
& Economic Development, dated 19th February 2024 on the Community Heritage and 
Publication Grant payments. 
 
11.2 
ARCHITECTURAL CONSERVATION AREA GRANT SCHEME 2024 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Strategic 
& Economic Development, dated 19th February 2024 on the Architectural 
Conservation Area Grant Scheme 2024. 
 
11.3 
MOTIONS 
 
11.3.1 
REGISTER OF VACANT HOUSES/APARTMENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 19th February 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That to assist greater residential use of vacant buildings in the City Centre, this 
Council adopt a more flexible policy on unit size, particularly in relation to one 
bedroomed apartments.’ 
 
   
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/011) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council applies national 
apartment size standards. Apartment unit sizes and other apartment standards are set 
out in the national ‘Sustainable Urban Housing: Design Standards for New 
Apartments Guidelines for Planning Authorities’ 2020, as updated in July 2023. These 
guidelines include ‘specific planning policy requirements’ or SPPRs, and under 
Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) local authorities 
are obliged to apply these SPPRs, which take precedence over any conflicting policies 
or objectives of development plans. SPPR 3 in the guidelines sets minimum apartment 
sizes, and these are the standards applied in Cork City and around the country. 
 

The Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 refers to these guidelines in relation to 
apartment size. It should be noted that the guidelines were updated in 2018 to reduce 
the minimum size of studio apartments. While setting prescriptive quantitative 
standards, the guidelines provide for the practical and flexible application of the 
general requirements of these guidelines in relation to certain refurbishment schemes 
where property owners must work with existing building fabric and dimensions and 
highlight the need for more effective usage of existing underutilised accommodation. 
These guidelines are applied in the assessment of planning applications, and each 
application is assessed on its merits having regard to all applicable law and all relevant 
policy. 
 
11.3.2 
FORUM ON THE FUTURE OF CORK CITY CENTRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 19th February 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘Given concerns about the future of the City Centre including vacancies, cost of 
parking, anti-social activities - and a wish to ensure a vibrant future - that Cork City 
Council initiates a forum early in 2024 in the Concert Hall to include all business 
interests operating in the centre with a view to looking at the changes, challenges and 
opportunities that are impacting on the City and to develop strategies to address those; 
this process to include the various business groupings, the Gardaí and to include a 
look at re-calibrating the Council’s core group.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 23/545) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Centre is changing with a 
mix of new investments along with business closures.  City centres globally are facing 
challenges as a result of the evolving nature of retail, increased hybrid working, and 
increasing costs.  Cork City Council is implementing a City Centre Economic and 
Revitalisation Strategy, which was agreed by the Council in 2022.  This focusses on 
enhancing the experience of the city centre.  In recent times there has been significant 
transformation of the city centre, with increased pedestrianisation, investment in 
public realm, enhanced outdoor dining, sculpture trails and outdoor performance.  
There has also been an enhancement and increase in the festivals and events, by way 
of example the Cork on a Fork food festival.  This is set to continue as further planned 
investment in the city centre is set to continue, all with the purpose of enhancing the 
city centre as a place to visit, live and work in.  Now that the plan is over two years 
since its preparation, it is time to take stock.  Therefore, Cork City Council will hold 
a symposium on the city centre that will provide an update on the actions set out in 
the plan, a review of international trends and good practice and a workshop of 
businesses.  This may inform policies and strategies for the city centre. 
 
11.3.3 
LIST OF DERELICT SITES IN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 19th February 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 

 
‘That the Chief Executive urgently reviews the Derelict Sites Register in light of 
information from campaigners indicating that there are upwards of 700 derelict sites 
in the City; and compiles a list for Councillors of those properties which can within 
the next three months be served with a Compulsory Purchase Order by Council.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 24/101) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is currently 
addressing a portfolio of 705 Vacant and Derelict properties, which have been 
identified via a number of outlets including: 
• 
Formal public referrals 
• 
Representations from the Elected Members and general public 
• 
Representations from other Directorates 
• 
Targeted area based inspections by our inspectors. 
 
Not all vacant sites are derelict.  While the criteria for dereliction is set out in 
legislation, Cork City Council has to be mindful of case law in that regard when 
making such a determination. 
 
Each property is an individual case with its own specific circumstances.  Each 
property is subject to multiple inspections and engagement with property owners by 
City Council.  The objective of Cork City Council is to support property owners to 
remove dereliction.  A range of instruments are available, including placement on the 
Derelict Sites Register along with a suite of grants and tax incentives.  In addition to 
providing briefings to elected members, the Council is delivering a series of public 
events to inform relevant stakeholders of the supports available to remove dereliction.   
Of the 705 Derelict and Vacant properties, 390 are either confirmed as derelict or are 
being investigated under the Derelict Sites Act.  162 properties have been placed on 
the Derelict Sites Register.  This represents a year-on-year increase of 49% increase 
over the number on the register at the start of 2023.   
 
Additionally a parallel process is now in place to act as an early warning system for 
properties at risk of falling in danger.  A pilot study recently conducted has identified 
a number of properties in the City Centre initially where owners will be advised of the 
necessity to act on the recommendations of the City Council to remove dereliction. 
The team continuously review the full portfolio to determine the best remedy  for the 
property including CPO.  The CPO process in itself involves a lengthy procedure and 
carries a considerable risk which is largely borne by the local authority. Cork City 
Council acquired 6 derelict sites in 2023 and this figure will increase on 2024.  The 
CPO process is now supported under the Urban Regeneration and Development Fund.  
It is not possible to put precise timeframes to each of these as it will depend on the 
nature of engagement with the property owners, along with decision processes of other 
bodies, such as An Bord Pleanala.  
 
 
 
 

12. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 20th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 20th February 2024. 
 
12.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Housing Progress report for December 
2023. 
 
12.2 
MOTIONS 
 
12.2.1 
INCLUDE MOBILITY SCOOTERS UNDER GRANTS FOR OLDER PEOPLE 
AND PEOPLE WITH A DISABILITY PROGRAMME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Operations, dated 15th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council includes mobility scooters under the Grants for Older People 
and People with a Disability programme. 
 
Mobility scooters have become an essential mode of transportation for individuals 
with mobility challenges, enabling them to maintain their independence and 
participate fully in community life. These scooters play a crucial role in enhancing the 
quality of life for older people and those living with disabilities, providing them with 
the freedom to navigate their surroundings. 
 
By incorporating mobility scooters into the existing Grants for Older People and 
People with a Disability programme, we can directly assist individuals in obtaining 
these devices. This support will alleviate the financial burden that often accompanies 
the purchase of a mobility scooter, making it more accessible to those who require it. 
 
Additionally, by including mobility scooters in the grant program, we send a clear 
message of inclusivity and support to our older residents and fellow citizens with 
disabilities. It is vital that we empower all members of our community to live their 
lives to the fullest and participate in society without limitations.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. O’Flynn 23/322) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council along with all 
local authorities determine whether a grant is payable in the first instance in 
accordance with the Statutory Regulations, Housing (Adaptation Grants for Older 
People and People with a Disability), Regulations 2007 [S.I. No. 670 of 2007], 
Amendment Regulations 2014 [S.I. No. 104 of 2014] and the criteria outlined therein, 
and if so, the works which are necessary to make the accommodation more suitable 
for the applicant. 
 

The scheme comprises a range of grants for necessary improvement works or 
adaptations to houses, in order to facilitate the continued independent occupancy of 
their own homes by older people and people with a disability. These schemes cover 
works reasonably necessary for the purposes of rendering a house more suitable for 
the accommodation of applicants.  It does not include the provision of grant funding 
towards mobility scooters which is the responsibility of the Health Service Executive 
(HSE).  As confirmed by the Minister for Health, in answer to a parliamentary 
question in April 2023, the HSE provides aids and appliances to a wide section of the 
community including older people, people with diverse chronic illnesses, and people 
with disabilities.  Mobility scooters are among the many products provided. 
   
12.2.2 
ONE REP POLICY FOR HOUSING ALLOCATION REPRESENTATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Operations, dated 15th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council consider the implementation of a one rep policy for housing 
allocation representations to ensure that duplication of representation does not occur. 
This has been implemented in Limerick City and County Council with much success 
and eases the burden on both Councillors and the housing allocations team.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 23/578) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council had engaged with 
Limerick City and County Council in relation to their recently piloted one 
representative policy.  It is understood that this pilot policy is being formally reviewed 
at present by Limerick City and County Council.  On conclusion of this review, Cork 
City Council will re-engage with Limerick City and County Council and will report 
back to Members in due course. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
12.2.3 
PREVENTATIVE HOUSING MAINTENANCE MEASURES   
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Operations, dated 15th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council report on preventative housing maintenance measures for the 
year ahead and if a programme of works will be influenced by stock surveys and 
prioritise dealing with dampness/mold and the installation of smoke and carbon 
monoxide alarms as required for each housing unit.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Nugent 24/029) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council would continue 
its current planned preventative maintenance programme which includes the 
inspection and servicing of central heating boilers. 

 
As previously advised to Members, Cork City Council is one of two local authorities 
piloting the roll-out of the National Asset Management System.  As part of this 
project, and utilising funds secured under the €11m loan for stock survey purposes, it 
is planned to undertake a significant number of housing stock surveys during 2024.  
The results of the stock surveys will be used to determine priority work items for 2024 
and following years.   
 
13. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 22nd FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its special meeting held, 22nd February 
2024. 
 
13.1 
LOCAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE ANNUAL REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Local Community Development 
Committee Annual Report. 
 
14. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 13th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 13th February 2024. 
 
15. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 4th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 4th March 2024. 
 
15.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
15.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF JANUARY 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
January 2024. 
 
16. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th February 2024. 
 
17. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th February 2024. 
 
 
 
 

18. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th February 2024. 
 
19. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th February 2024. 
 
20. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th FEBRUARY 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th February 2024. 
 
21. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
22. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoirí S. Martin, D. Forde and T. Shannon at the LAMA Spring 
Seminar 2024, Building for Success, held at Abbey Hotel, Donegal Town, 19th 
- 20th January 2024. 
• Comhairleoirí S. Martin and T. Shannon at the AILG Annual Training 
Conference, held at Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow, 14th - 15th February 
2024. 
 
23. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir P. Dineen – Cork Local Drug and Alcohol Task Force – January 
to December 2023. 
• Comhairleoir P. Dineen – CORE – January to December 2023. 
• Comhairleoir P. Dineen – Cork International Film Festival – January to 
December 2024. 
• Comhairleoir T. Moloney – MTU Stadium Management Committee – March 
to October 2023. 
• Comhairleoir L. Bogue – National Sculpture Factory – January to December 
2023. 
• Comhairleoir D. Boylan – Cork City Partnership – 2023. 
• Comhairleoir J. Sheehan – HSE Regional Health Forum – 2019 to 2023. 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher – AILG – 2023. 
• Comhairleoir G. Kelleher – Southern Regional Assembly – 2023. 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon – Cork Healthy Cities – 2023. 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon – WHO – 2023. 

• Comhairleoir T. Shannon – National Healthy Cities Network – 2023.  
 
24. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved attendance at conferences/seminars tabled 
on the night. 
 
25. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
26. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORT 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for January 2024. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1, that have been referred to the 
relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
28. 
MOTIONS 
 
28.1 
CUH HOUSEKEEPING WORKERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Department of Health and to the HSE in respect 
of CUH housekeeping workers having their entitlements to annual leave obstructed 
and in respect of agency staff for coverage in lieu of proper staffing, to request that 
senior management engage with their workers and their chosen trade unions to rectify 
the situation for the workers affected.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. L. Bogue, Cllr. T. Tynan, Cllr. O. O’Leary 24/121) 
 
28.2 
VISIT TO THE WHITE HOUSE ON ST. PATRICK’S DAY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘In light of the ongoing support by the Biden administration for the genocidal actions 
of the Israeli state in Gaza, including arming and funding that state, this Council asks 
all parties and politicians in Ireland to send a clear message by boycotting the visit to 
the White House on St. Patrick's Day.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. B. McCarthy, Cllr. L. Bogue 24/127) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Tynan, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion, where there appeared as follows:- 
 

FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, B. McCarthy, L. Bogue. (3) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, G. Keohane, T. 
Fitzgerald, M. Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, D. Boylan, D. Cahill, K. McCarthy, D. 
Forde, D. Boyle, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, F. Dennehy, C. Finn, O. O’Leary. (18) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir P. Dineen. (1) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
28.3 
MILITARY CONFLICT IN THE WESTERN PART OF THE CONGO 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council joins in the concern of the Congolese community of the large scale 
of deaths occurring in the western part of that country, due to military conflict.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/147) 
 
28.4 
SIPTU CAMPAIGN ON RESPECTING TRANSPORT WORKERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council supports in full the elements within the campaign by SIPTU 
on respecting Transport Workers and will write to the Minister for Transport to seek 
his support for the campaign also.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/150) 
 
28.5 
ADDITIONAL BICYCLE PARKING SPACE AND EQUIPMENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to all major supermarkets with car parks to request 
additional bicycle parking space and equipment due to growing use of these facilities.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Bogue 24/151) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir J. Maher to address the meeting on the following 
motion, after which a discussion took place and it was agreed that the matter be 
referred back to the North East Local Area Committee for further consideration: - 
 
‘That Cork City Council would conduct a formal public consultation on the closure of 
walkway between Ard Patrick Close and Avenue and ensure full views are heard from 
all communities before making a decision. 
 

I believe a full formal consultation will have all voices heard and hopefully deliver a 
solution that works for all.  
 
The residents would be grateful if you could support this motion.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
 
