MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 11th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. Martin, P. Rice, F. Kerins, P. Dineen. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. Harmon, 
A. Deasy, T. Coleman.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Housing 
Operations.  
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing Delivery & 
Regeneration. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Community, Culture & 
Placemaking. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Roads & Environment 
Operations. 
Mr. J. Stapleton, A/Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Ms. A. Murnane, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations. 
  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Keeffe family on the death of John Joe O’Keeffe. 
• The Walsh family on the death of Denis Walsh. 
• The Cronin family on the death of Betty Cronin. 
• The Buckley family on the death of Ignatius Buckley. 
• The Burke family on the death of Noel Burke. 
• The Doherty family on the death of Gabriel Doherty. 
• The Cummins family on the death of Peter Cummins. 
• The Desmond family on the death of Sheila Desmond. 

• The Foley family on the death of Frank Foley. 
• The Hickey family on the death of Philomena (Phyl) Hickey. 
• The Holland family on the death of Margaret Holland. 
• The Tudor family on the death of Nicole Tudor. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Tim O’Sullivan. 
• The Waters family on the death of Fr. Michael Waters. 
• The O’Keeffe family on the death of Maurice O’Keeffe. 
• The Hanley family on the death of Mark Hanley. 
• The Holbrook family on the death of Christy Holbrook. 
• The O’Leary family on the death of Tony O’Leary. 
• The Corbey family on the death of Noelle Corbey. 
• The Cotter family on the death of Denis Cotter. 
• The Barry family on the death of Michael Barry. 
• The Cooke family on the death of Richard T. Cooke. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Rita Murphy. 
• The Ahern family on the death of Donal Ahern. 
• The Keating family on the death of Joan Keating. 
• The Towler family on the death of Pat Towler. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Colm O’Donovan. 
• The McAuliffe family on the death of Mary McAuliffe. 
• The Kelly family on the death of Veronica (Vera) Kelly. 
• The Nolan family on the death of Kathleen (Kay) Nolan. 
• The O’Reilly family on the death of Teresa O’Reilly. 
• The Casey family on the death of Regina Casey. 
• The Alari family on the death of Marisa Alari. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Mahon Tidy Towns on their Tidy Towns Achievement. 
• Douglas Tidy Towns on their Tidy Towns Achievement. 
• Seán Sherlock T.D. on his seventeen years’ service as a TD for Cork. 
• Michael McGrath on his twenty years’ service as a Public Representative and 
being appointed European Commissioner. 
• Brian Dillon’s GAA on winning the Rebel Óg football final on 20 October 
2024. 
• The Kabin Studio on being nominated for the IPB Pride of Place Award in 
Monaghan on 2 November 2024. 
• Brand Blarney on being nominated for the IPB Pride of Place Award in 
Monaghan on 2 November 2024. 
• LGBT Archive on being nominated for the IPB Pride of Place Award in 
Monaghan on 2 November 2024. 
• Blackpool Youth Club on being nominated for the IPB Pride of Place Award 
in Monaghan on 2 November 2024. 
• Sexual Health Centre on being nominated for the IPB Pride of Place Award 
in Monaghan on 2 November 2024. 
 
 
 

3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
NEW CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara welcomed the new Chief Executive of Cork City Council, Valerie 
O’Sullivan. 
 
3.2 
LORD MAYOR-LED DELEGATION TO CHINA 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle of the success of last week’s Lord Mayor-led 
delegation to China, which included valuable visits to Cork’s twin city of Shanghai, 
and partner city of Shenzhen. 
 
3.3 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR BALLINCOLLIG TIDY TOWNS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for 
Ballincollig Tidy Towns for its recent award of Ireland's Tidiest Town 2024 at the 
Tidy Town awards. 
 
3.4 
COVENTRY IRISH SOCIETY ANNUAL BALL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of An Leas 
Ardmhéara Comhairleoir H. Kamegni to Coventry from 26th - 29th September 2024 
for the Coventry Irish Society Annual Ball. 
 
3.5 
62nd LORD MAYOR’S GALA CHRISTMAS CONCERT 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that tickets are on sale for the 62nd Lord 
Mayor’s Gala Christmas Concert, taking place on Saturday 7th December 2024. 
 
3.6 
LORD MAYOR’S TRAVEL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara Comhairleoir 
D. Boyle to Chicago from 14th to 17th November 2024 in order to accompany Cónal 
Creedon for receipt of an international arts award.  
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that notifications of intention to suspend 
standing orders had been received as follows:- 
 
An tArdmhéara called on Comhairleoir B. McCarthy to read his motion:- 
 
TWO-TIER PAY FOR SCHOOL WARDENS 
 
‘That this Council expresses its total opposition to two-tier pay for school wardens. 
 
Council believes that school wardens working in areas that used to be part of the Cork 
County Council jurisdiction should receive the same rate of pay as that currently paid 

to school wardens employed in areas that were part of the Cork City Council 
jurisdiction before the 2019 merger.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/567) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, a vote was called for on the suspension 
of standing orders to take motion 25 on the Appendix, Two-Tier Pay For School 
Wardens, at the end of the meeting, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, P. 
Dineen, G. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. Harmon. (16) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. 
Desmond, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (11) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell. (2) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara called on Comhairleoir T. Tynan to read his motion:- 
 
‘Water workers are facing intimidation and the possibility of withheld pay if they do 
not comply with directions from Irish Water who is not their employer. The workers 
need support and clarity from their employer, Cork City Council.’ 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Tynan, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to take the motion at the end 
of the meeting, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, D. Boylan, M. Gould, K. Collins, 
B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, P. Rice, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, J. 
Lynch, L. Harmon. (15) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. 
Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (14) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
 
 

SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara called on Comhairleoir P. Rice to read his motions:- 
 
HOMELESSNESS  
 
‘Cork City Council notes with deep concern the latest homeless figures that show that 
homelessness in the State has hit a record high of 14,429, including 4,401 children.  
 
Cork City Council believes that homelessness isn’t inevitable and that solutions are 
available.  
 
Cork City Council, therefore, agrees to write to the Minister for Housing to request 
that he scale up the Finnish Housing First model that focuses on providing people with 
homes and wrap-around supports.  
 
In addition, Cork City Council agrees that the Government must legislate to stop 
people becoming homeless in the first place by ending no-fault evictions that are 
pushing families into homelessness.  
 
Finally, Cork City Council agrees to request additional funding from central 
Government to build more social and affordable homes for people in Cork.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/465) 
 
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY  
 
‘Cork City Council notes with concern the City’s latest “affordable” home scheme 
where homes cost up to €389,498 plus a 5% equity stake to be repaid in future.  
 
Cork City Council agrees that this scheme stretches the definition of affordability to 
breaking point.  
 
Cork City Council, therefore, agrees to write to the Minister for Housing to request an 
urgent review of the Affordable Housing Act and the creation of new guidelines for 
the construction and sale of genuinely affordable homes.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/466) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Rice, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss both motions at the end of 
the meeting. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
An Chomhairle considered the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 14th October 2024. 

 
An Chomhairle noted the correction to Item 7.3 of the October Meeting of An 
Chomhairle. On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boylan, seconded by Comhairleoir 
C. Kelleher, An Chomhairle approved the amended Resolution as follows:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Railyard Apartments, Albert Quay, in the City of Cork and the report 
of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to 
the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Railyard Apartments, Albert Quay, in the City of 
Cork be carried out as recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork 
City Council, which was put before Council on the 14th October 2024.” 
 
An Chomhairle noted a correction to Item 3.5 of the October Meeting of An 
Chomhairle. On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by 
Comhairleoir G. Kelleher, An Chomhairle approved the travel of An tArdmhéara to 
Brussels from 7th – 9th October 2024, to attend the Should I Stay or Should I Go 
Conference, organised by the Lisbon Council.  
 
An Chomhairle approved the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 
14th October 2024. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
FLOODING ON BANDUFF ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Tynan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
In relation to my following questions from November of last year, I am again asking 
the acting CEO for an update on this issue, especially in light of the recent flooding 
affecting the area. 
 
Questions to the CEO: 
 
1. In light of the persistent flooding on Banduff Road, I am asking if the flooding 
was exacerbated by the dumping of hundreds of tonnes of demolition material, 
such as concrete, taken from Merchant's Quay and Douglas Village shopping 
centre onto the bog floodplain of the Glen River Valley located adjacent to the 
Banduff Road, over a twelve year period from the 1990's to the early 2000's? 
 
2. Is Cork City Council actively investigating this issue? 
 
3. Are there any plans being drawn up to remove the dumped demolition material 
from the Glen River Valley? 
 
REPLY 
 
1. Following completion of the investigation of the flooding which has occurred on 
the Banduff Road in recent times I can confirm that the issue is that the drainage 

network serving the roadway was overwhelmed by the rainfall events. This section of 
roadway is served by soakaways on the private lands adjoining the road. During 
significant rainfall events, these become water logged and reach their capacity. The 
water thus has nowhere else to go and ponds on the roadway until after the event and 
the soakaways returned to normal operating parameters. 
 
2. Cork City Council is still actively investigating the most appropriate solutions to 
the flooding issue at Banduff Road. All of the potential solutions identified to date 
either involve modifications to the present drainage system on the private lands or the 
construction of a temporary pumping solution (which would be very expensive to 
deliver and operate). There is ongoing communication with the adjoining landowner 
to agree a solution. 
 
3. The placing of material in this area was undertaken prior to May 2019 when the 
area was under the jurisdiction of Cork County Council. Its noted that no enforcement 
action was taken by the County Council. Having completed our review there are no 
plans to undertake any enforcement at this time. 
 
David Joyce  
 
 
 
 
Rebecca Loughry 
Director of Services  
 
 
 
Director of Services 
Roads & Environment Operations Directorate 
Community, 
Culture 
& 
Placemaking Directorate 
 
6.2 
BISHOP LUCEY PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on Bishop Lucey Park? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The scheme contractor, Cumnor Construction Ltd, commenced work on the Bishop 
Lucey Park Project in mid-April 2024 following completion of the enabling works 
contract which included archaeological investigations, surveying, removal and storage 
of material and park features etc. The contractor has completed approximately 35% 
of the improvement works to date. This work includes tree protection measures, site 
clearance, fountain removal & refurbishment, stone and metalwork conservation, civil 
and structural works, drainage and underground services, construction of a new 
maintenance cabin etc. Work is ongoing on archaeological and conservation measures 
to the old city wall, soft and hard landscaping, electrical installations, boundary 
restoration works, etc. The overall construction programme is 18 months duration and 
the park is on schedule for reopening to the public in late 2025. Members will be kept 
appraised of the ongoing progress in the interim. 
 
Gerry O’ Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
 

6.3 
SOUTH PARISH 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen was deferred to the 
next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 9th December 2024:- 
 
 
I ask that you would provide clarity on the following. 
 
1, Clarify the boundary of the South Parish. 
2, Clarify how many parking spaces have been removed from within the South Parish 
in the past 10 years  
3, With regard to the loss of many parking spaces and with a future plan to remove 
more much needed parking spaces in the South Parish may I ask as to what has 
happened to, and where are the locations of the parking spaces that were paid for by 
way of contributions via the planning process. In particular once again to the 3 
planning applications that were granted and are mentioned below. 
 
1, Planning permission ref. T.P. 00/24158 Schedule of conditions Part 9F 
Contribution: £11,502.00 for the provision of car parking spaces. 
[Reason for condition] "Adequate and sufficient car parking cannot be provided 
within the site curtilage. This contribution is to a fund for the provision by Cork City 
Council of car parking facilities adjacent to the City Centre. The proposed car parking 
areas will facilitate the proposed development" 
 
2, Planning permission ref. T.P. 02/26527 Schedule of conditions Part 11 G 
Contribution: €19,778.00 for the provision of car parking spaces. 
[Reason for condition] "Adequate and sufficient car parking cannot be provided 
within the site curtilage. This contribution is to a fund for the provision by Cork City 
Council of car parking facilities adjacent to the City Centre. The proposed car parking 
areas will facilitate the proposed development" 
 
3, Planning permission ref. T.P. 9519625 Schedule of conditions Part 8 Contribution: 
£2304.00 for the provision of 2 car parking spaces. “Prior to commencement of 
development the developer must make a contribution to Cork Corporation towards the 
cost of works viz provision of 2 No carparking space facilitating the proposed 
development. The present value of the contribution is £2304. The amount payable will 
be determined by the Consumer Price Index prevailing at the date of payment” 
[Reason for condition] "Adequate and efficient car parking cannot be provided within 
the site curtilage. This contribution is to a fund for the provision by the corporation of 
car parking facilities adjacent to the City Centre. The proposed car parking areas will 
facilitate the proposed development" 
 
6.4 
EVENT CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if she will request a presentation on the latest delay to the 
Cork Event Centre to be made to Elected Members by a representative of the 
Department of Housing, in person, and who has been appointed to the Project 
Development Board by the Minister? 

 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Cork Event Centre was included as a Government commitment under the revised 
National Development Plan in 2021. This underlines the Government’s support for 
urban regeneration, enhanced amenity and heritage, associated quality of life 
standards, balanced regional development, and the regeneration and development of 
Cork City Centre.  
 
The Government decision of 22nd October, 2024 re-affirms its commitment to and 
ongoing Exchequer funding support for an Events Centre in Cork City, given its 
strategic alignment with the growth ambition for Cork City, as set out in the National 
Planning Framework and the National Development Plan. The decision requires that 
the procurement process begins afresh and that a project development board, led by 
Cork City Council, be established to expedite the process.  
 
The Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage wrote to the City Council 
on the 31st October outlining details of the Government decision and the next steps 
required of the Council in order to begin formation of the project development board, 
including identification of potential board members and drafting the terms of reference 
for the board. The Council has since responded to the Department with a draft terms 
of reference and I expect these initial steps will be completed by the end of next week.  
 
Responsibility for the new process rests with the project development board and as 
such any briefings of locally elected members will need to be considered by the board, 
once it is established. 
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
6.5 
NO OF VACANT HOMES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of homes vacant by ward for longer that 12 months, 18 
months, 24 months, 30 months etc in 6 monthly intervals in tabular form? 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
Cork City Council Housing Operations Directorate presently has 129 properties for 
repair longer than 12 months from an overall stock of 10,800 representing 1.19% of 
properties. 
 
15-18 properties are vacated by tenants each month that are required to be repaired 
and returned to stock representing between 180 and 216 void properties each year. 
There are more properties vacated in the NE and NW wards each month and this is 
reflected in the below table. 
 

The Housing Operations Directorate has a dedicated team managing the repair of 
vacant properties. A total of 208 properties were returned for allocation in 2023 and 
this figure is expected to increase to 250 properties in 2024. The City Council has also 
seen a reduction in turnaround times for void properties by 57% from over 75 weeks 
in 2021 to 32 weeks in 2023. This is in addition to a reduction in the costs of void 
returns by 29% from over €26,000 in 2021 to €18,600 in 2023.    
 
It is important to recognise that Cork City Council prioritises the return of properties 
with the least work required with the aim of returning the maximum number of houses 
each year. This can lead to properties requiring extensive repairs, such as fire damaged 
houses, requiring longer return times. 
 
The priority is to return as many houses as soon as possible for allocation. 
 
The Housing Operations Directorate is presently working with our colleagues in the 
Housing Delivery and Regeneration Directorate to progress a dedicated programme 
to refurbish extensively damaged properties as soon as possible. 
 
 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services   
 
 
 
 
  
Housing Operations.  
 
6.6 
RETIRING EMPLOYEES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE confirm the following information regarding the 46 employees of City 
Council whom I understand have/will become retirees this year, 2024. 
 
A general outline/profile of which depts. from which staff have/will retire, for 
example: Senior and junior executives, emergency services, managers and 
administrators, engineering, technical and scientific, trades, outdoor supervisors, 
forepersons, drivers and general operatives.  
 
The total cost of salaries/wages, and superannuation (2024) for the retiring employees. 
The total amount of lump sum payments (2024). 
 
REPLY  
 
A total of 62 retirements have occurred or are anticipated in 2024. This is made up of 
59 current employees and 3 former employees with preserved benefits. 
Area 
12-18 
Months 
18-24 
Months 
24-30 Months 
30-36 Months 
>36 Months 
NE 
20 
12 
6 
3 
3 
NW 
17 
14 
19 
6 
16 
SC 
1 
2 
2 
2 
0 
SE 
2 
1 
0 
0 
0 
SW 
2 
0 
1 
0 
0 

 
The total annual cost of wages and salaries for employees retiring in 2024 is 
€2,708,218* 
 
The total annual superannuation cost for employees retiring in 2024 is €845,220*. 
 
The total amount of once-off lump sums for retirements from 1st January to 15th 
November is €3,557,532*. 
 
* 
actuals for period 1st January – 15th November 2024/projected for period 16th November – 31st December 
2024  
 
The profile of retirees is as follows:- 
 
Fire Service 
1 
Library Service 
6 
Administration 
7 
Technical, Engineering & Scientific 
2 
General Services 
43 
Preserved Benefits 
3 
 
The City Council is budgeting for 46 employees to retire in 2025.  
 
The total annual cost of wages and salaries for employees retiring in 2025 is 
€2,775,400. 
 
The total annual superannuation cost for employees retiring in 2025 is €637,510 
 
The total amount of once-off lump sums for retirements from 1st January to 15th 
November is €2,683,227. 
 
The profile of retirees is as follows:- 
 
Fire Service 
6 
Library Service 
3 
Administration 
8 
Technical, Engineering & Scientific 
7 
General Services 
22 
 
 
Mike Larkin, 
Director of Services, 
People & Organisation Development. 
 
6.7 
HOUSING MAINTENANCE REQUESTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir L. Harmon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of requests for housing maintenance received 
in 2023 and this year to date 2024; the amount of requests completed; the amount 

outstanding and how much was spent on housing maintenance in that time period 
broken down by Electoral Ward in tabular form and the number of staff assigned per 
ward to complete. 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
Service Requests  
 
Year  
North West 
North East 
South 
Total 
2023 
7,305 
4,893 
7,836 
20,034 
2024 (Jan-Oct) 
5,157 
3,571 
6,420 
15,148 
 
Resolved Service Requests  
 
Year  
Resolved 
2023 
13,947 
2024 (Jan-Oct) 
15,433 
 
No of staff per depot area  
 
 
North West 
North East 
South 
No of staff per 
Area 
37 
26 
30 
 
Revenue Expenditure 
 
Year  
North West 
North East 
South 
Across All 3 
Areas  
2023 
€3,653,464 
€2,302,920 
€2,677,231 
€7,580,186 
2024 (Jan-Sept) 
€2,194,738 
€1,526,438 
€2,131,829 
€6,678,182 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services   
 
 
 
 
  
Housing Operations.  
 
6.8 
PARKING FINES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of parking fines issued during the 'out-of-hours' 
pilot by Cork City Council traffic wardens, providing the date, time, location and type 
of offence for each fine issued; and the additional staff costs associated with the pilot? 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
A provision was made in Budget 2024 to allow for additional parking enforcement to 
occur on several Sundays and evening shifts spread across the year.   
 

The pilot is ongoing until the end of the year. To date a total of 469 Fixed Charge 
Penalty Notices have been issued during the additional periods. 
 
A breakdown of income and associated staffing costs is shown below. This does not 
include other associated costs e.g., additional processing costs, overheads, etc.  
 
Sunday / 
Evening 
Number of 
FCPNS issued 
Value Paid 
Estimated Cost  
Sundays 
368 
€18,370 
€18,224 
Evenings 
101 
€5,995 
€5,257 
Totals: 
469 
€24,365 
€23,881 
 
 
The ‘out of hours’ pilot is implemented on a voluntary basis and a minimum number 
is required to deploy the Traffic Wardens from a health & safety perspective.  
 
As previously advised a review of certain streets is being undertaken with a view to 
putting in place physical infrastructure in order to mitigate against illegal parking on 
evening and weekends. When in place the number of fines issued during this pilot 
process would be anticipated to reduce by approx. 40% 
 
 
Breakdown of Fixed Charge Penalty Notices: 
 
Sunday Overtime 2024 - Breakdown of Offences 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
Evening Overtime 2024 - Breakdown of Offences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads/Environment Operations. 
 
6.9 
FIRE COVER REVIEW 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE to provide an update on the fire cover review being undertaken by Cork 
City Council, and when this review will be published? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council is currently undertaking a Fire Service Cover Review which will 
inform the future optimisation of fire cover throughout the entire city. 
 
In 2020 due to the boundary extension and re-structuring of the Fire Services to 
include Building Control, it was considered that a full Strategic Review of the Fire 
and Building Control Department would be timely.  In the context of the growth and 
development ambitions for Cork City and the expected expansion in population over 
the next 20/30 years it was concluded that there was a need to ensure that the Fire 
Services and Building Control Section was fit for purpose and ready to address the 
increasing demands and complexities that growth would bring.  
 
Crowe Ireland were appointed to complete a Strategic Review of Cork City Council 
Fire and Building Control Department. Their remit was to undertake a strategic review 
of the structures, services and resource utilisation of Cork City Fire and Building 

Control Department to ensure that it is prepared to deliver an efficient and effective 
service to cater for the future development of Cork City. The primary objective of the 
review was to provide Cork City Council with a long-term strategy for the delivery of 
Fire and Building Control services to its citizens, businesses and stakeholders.  
 
The review made a number recommendations under three main themes: 
• Strategy and Planning 
• Organisation and People 
• Operations and processes. 
 
We are currently in the Implementation Phase of the Strategic Review. The current 
area of focus is the Fire Risk Cover Review, which is currently being carried out by 
Crowe Ireland. This is assessing how to provide the most effective and efficient Fire 
Service to the people of Cork including those in the extended boundary area.  A report 
on the Fire Risk Cover review for Cork City is due to issue in Quarter 4, 2024. 
 
Rebecca Loughry 
Director of Services 
Community, Culture and Placemaking. 
 
6.10 
EVENTS CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Rice, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE how much Cork City Council has spent on the Events Centre to date? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council has spent €1.6 million on the Event Centre to date.  
 
John Hallahan, 
Chief Financial Officer. 
 
6.11 
NORTHERN DISTRIBUTOR ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive Officer for an update in the plans for the Northern 
Distributor Road. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Cork Northern Distributer Multi-Modal Road (CNDMR) is a short-term objective 
of the Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (2020).  The proposed new road 
will provide a strategic orbital transport corridor around the north side of Cork City 
thereby improving Cork City’s overall transport network. It will include dedicated bus 
lanes and related infrastructure such as bus stops etc, dedicated cycle lanes, high 
quality footpaths, pedestrian crossings, and a traffic lane in each direction. The 

proposed road will be approx. 14km in length and will also provide high quality place 
making/public realm at specific points along the route and extensive landscaping 
throughout.  
 
The strategic assessment for the CNDRMR was completed and approved in December 
2023 and the project is currently at the Route Options Report Stage. In this phase 
consideration is given to the viable alternative routes with assessment of these options 
against a set of standard assessment topics. Constraints and opportunities also inform 
the appraisal. This includes such factors as the existing built up area, topography, 
environmental factors, access to employment, access to zoned land etc. The resultant 
route options report will be finalised and submitted for NTA in the current month. The 
Report details the emerging preferred route for the Northern Distributer and following 
receipt of NTA approval the related non-statutory public consultation process will be 
undertaken. It is anticipated that this will be commenced before year end. This 
consultation process will inform the detail of the final route to be brought forward into 
the preliminary design stage. It is anticipated that the design team will be progressing 
with the preliminary design phase for the scheme in the coming year and Members 
will be kept appraised of related progress. 
 
The Cork northern distributor road is considered to be a critical enabler for the Cork 
Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy. As such it is not just essential to the continued 
growth and economic development of the northern part of the City, it also enables and 
supports the rollout of sustainable transport measures within the City centre and wider 
metropolitan area.  
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 31st 
October 2024 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (34.58 m² approximately) 
situated to the rear of No. 122, Ardcullen, Hollyhill, Knocknaheeny, Cork to 
Thomas & Majella Murphy, c/o Murphy Condon Solicitors, 69, Shandon Street, 
Cork for the sum of €1.00. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir M. 
Gould, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal by way of lease of property (3713.1 m² approximately) situated at the 
junction of Mick Barry Road and Kinsale Road, Cork, by way of lease for a term 
of 4 years and 9 months, to Irish Pioneer Works (Fabricator) c/o RDJ LLP, 85, 
South Mall, Cork at an annual rent of €25,000.00.  
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground measuring (7.18m² 
approximately) together with a grant of wayleave (28m² approximately) on land 
situated at Brooklodge, Glanmire, Cork to Gas Networks Ireland, P.O. Box 51, 
Gasworks Road, Cork for the sum of €500.00, together with costs of €1,200.00 
plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 4 NICHOLAS COURT, TRAVERS 
STREET, CORK - CORK SIMON COMMUNITY CLG   
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration, dated 21st October, 2024 in relation to a loan 
facility for Cork Simon Community CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 4 Nicholas Court, Travers Street, Cork.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €204,355 be granted to Cork 
Simon Community CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 one-bed unit of accommodation at 4 Nicholas Court, Travers Street, 
Cork.” 
 
7.3 
TAKING IN CHARGE OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT LONG 
SHORE DRIVE, JACOB’S ISLAND, BALLINURE, CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations Directorate, dated 21st October 2024, in relation to the 
proposed taking in charge of roads serving the development at Long Shore Drive, 
Jacob’s Island, Ballinure, Cork. 
  
On the proposal of Comhairleoir G. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Having considered the Report of the Director of Services, Roads & Environment 
Operations Directorate, dated 21st October 2024, and the provisions of Section 11 (1) 
of the Roads Act 1993, it is now hereby declared by this Order that the said roads 
serving Long Shore Drive, Jacob’s Island, Ballinure, Cork, are public roads.” 
 
7.4 
SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL – ST. JOSEPH’S NATIONAL SCHOOL – 
SECTION 38 APPROVAL 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 

Director of Services, Roads & Environment Operations Directorate, dated 25th 
October 2024, following public consultation, on the proposed Safe Routes to School 
– St. Joseph’s National School pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, 
as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009.  
 
7.5 
SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL – ST. LUKE’S NATIONAL SCHOOL – 
SECTION 38 APPROVAL 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir G. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the Director 
of Services, Roads & Environment Operations Directorate, dated 25th October 2024, 
following public consultation, on the proposed Safe Routes to School – St. Luke’s 
National School pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by 
Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
An Chomhairle further noted Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh’s request that his 
dissatisfaction be recorded. 
 
7.6 
DRAFT NIGHT-TIME ECONOMY STRATEGY 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Draft Night-Time Economy Strategy for 
Cork City. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 4th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 4th November 2024. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 30/09/2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 30/09/2024. 
 
BUDGET MEETING  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, Chair of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, a vote was called for on the deferral 
of the Budget Meeting to 4th December 2024 where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. 
Horgan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, L. Harmon, A. 
Deasy, T. Coleman. (20) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, P. Rice, F. 
Kerins, P. Dineen, J. Lynch. (8) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 

As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried, and the deferral of the Budget Meeting to 4th December 2024 
approved. 
 
8.2 
FINANCE – RATES 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Chief Financial Officer, dated 
4th November 2024, on the Abatement of Rates in respect of Vacant Properties. 
 
8.3 
MOTIONS 
 
8.3.1 
TRANSITION COUNCILLORS’ POSITION TO FULL TIME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 31st October 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That the Council will engage in the process of transitioning Councillors’ position 
from part time to full time and ensure effective governance for our community. 
Councillors are elected by the people, and they play a vital role in representing their 
interests in the community, overseeing the Local Government activities and 
developing policy.  There is no doubt that the population is growing fast and in recent 
years, the demands on Councillors have increased drastically. For example, they must 
manage greater expectation for the public engagement and deal with more complex 
issues than before. All of this requires more dedication and time. A full-time position 
in my opinion would attract a diverse pool of candidates in this field.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/513) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that any process for transitioning 
Councillors to a full-time role would not be for Cork City Council to progress. Such 
change would be a matter for consideration by the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, and would require primary legislation to be enacted. 
 
8.3.2 
DEPUTY LORD MAYORS ROLL LIST 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 31st October 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That the Council will start the process to display a Deputy Lord Mayors Roll List for 
public reference. I request the Council's support to approve the installation of this 
Deputy Lord Mayors Roll List because the history of our town's leadership is an 
important part of our City and community’s heritage. Presently, no information, no 
list of past and present Deputy Lord Mayors is accessible for public viewing. 
Displaying a Deputy Lord Mayors Roll List in a prominent location within the Council 
building would allow Council staff and visitors to easily refer to this information, 
promoting civic pride and awareness of our beautiful City and town’s history.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/516) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that the history of what is now the Office 
of Lord Mayor is long and varied, the position effectively represents the civic head of 
local government. Reflecting that history, the Cork City Council website lists the 
Provosts, 
Mayors 
and 
Lord 
Mayors 
of 
Cork 
from 
1199 
to 
date: 
https://www.corkcity.ie/en/council-services/councillors-and-democracy/lord-mayor-
of-cork/previous-mayors-of-cork/ The role of Deputy Lord Mayor was legislated for 
in the 1990’s and a full listing of the Deputy Lord Mayors of Cork since 1999 is also 
publicly accessible on Council’s website through the above link. It is my view that it 
would not be practical to capture the entirety of the history of the position of Lord 
Mayor by way of installing additional roll lists and to do so would significantly detract 
from the existing Lord Mayor roll as well as the photographic display which was 
installed in the Lord Mayor’s Chambers in 2012. 
 
8.3.3 
DISINFORMATION 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 3rd October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council commits to using factual and accurate information, based on 
credible sources, in the Council’s discussion and debates.  
  
The Council is aware of the harmful impact that misinformation and disinformation 
has on marginalised communities, including but not limited to those protected under 
the Equal Status Act, namely on the grounds of gender, marital status, family status, 
age, disability, sexual orientation, race, religion and membership of the Traveller 
community.  
 
In making this commitment, Cork City Council affirms its obligation as a Local 
Authority, as per Section 42 of the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission Act 
2014 (the public sector duty), to have regard to the need to: 
  
a) eliminate discrimination,  
b) promote equality of opportunity and treatment of its staff and the persons to whom 
it provides services, and  
c) protect the human rights of its members, staff and the persons to whom it provides 
services.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/531) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that in submitting reports and matters of 
official business to the Elected Members in the performance of their duties, the 
Executive at all times endeavours to present factual and accurate information relating 
to the matter/s at issue. In doing so, and in the performance of its functions, Cork City 
Council, as a public body, is committed to the requirements of the Irish Human Rights 
and Equality Commission Act 2014. 
 
 

8.3.4 
NATIONAL 
OVERSIGHT 
AND 
AUDIT 
COMMITTEES 
KEY 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 3rd October 2024, on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees to hold an annual special public meeting in response 
to the publication of the National Oversight and Audit Committees Key Performance 
Indicators with short reports presented by each Director and an opportunity for 
members to make a short contribution and submit 3 questions in advance.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 24/534) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the proposal for a Special Meeting 
to be convened annually in response to the publication of the National Oversight and 
Audit Committees (NOAC) Key Performance Indicators is a matter for the Elected 
Members to consider. In doing so, it should be noted that detailed reporting on the 
functions and operations of the City Council is done regularly through the committee 
structures of Council, supplemented by questions to the Chief Executive on a monthly 
basis. These structures provide an effective and robust mechanism for the executive 
to engage with and provide information to the Elected Members in relation to 
functions and activities and to respond to any questions from the councillors regarding 
same. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 29th OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 29th October 2024.  
 
10. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 21st 
OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 21st October 2024. 
 
11. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 21st OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 21st October 2024. 
 
12. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE – 22nd OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 22nd October 2024. 
 
 

13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 15th OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 15th October 2024. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 4th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 4th November 2024. 
 
14.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
14.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
September 2024. 
 
14.2 
ABATEMENT OF RATES ON VACANT PROPERTIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Chief Financial Officer, dated 
4th November 2024 on the abatement of Rates in respect of vacant properties. 
 
15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 29th OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 29th October 2024. 
 
15.1 
MOTIONS 
 
15.1.1 
NEW PUBLIC PARK AT SULLIVAN’S QUAY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Strategic 
& Economic Development, dated 25th October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council agrees that the site of the old Fás / Tax Offices on Sullivan’s Quay 
would be an ideal spot for a new public park. 
 
Cork City Council, therefore agrees to engage with the owners of the site on the 
possibility of leasing / purchasing this site for this purpose.   
  
A progress report on this project will be submitted to the Council within six months.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/530) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Green and Blue Infrastructure 
Strategy set out in the Cork City Development Plan 2022- 2028 identifies strategic 
lands for city parks over the short, medium and long term. This site is not included in 
the strategy. The site has a high profile in a prominent location in the city centre. It 
has a flexible zoning objective in the heart of the city centre. The cost to the Council 

to acquire this site is therefore likely to be substantial. The site is subject to the 
Residential Zoned Land Tax. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 29th OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 29th October 2024. 
 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 29th OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 29th October 2024. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 5th NOVEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 5th November 2024. 
 
18.1 
MOTIONS 
 
18.1.1 
EXTINGUISH YORK HILL AS A ROAD FOR THROUGH TRAFFIC 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 5th November 2024 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council extinguishes York Hill as a road for through traffic. It is 
intended that this action will stop drivers using the illegal right turn onto Summerhill 
North and allow tragic flow better on Summerhill North.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/396) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Enforcement of driving offences is a 
matter for An Garda Síochána and enforcement at this junction by AGS is ongoing. 
The illegal right turn manoeuvre from York Hill onto Summerhill North is not the 
only contributory factor to the traffic congestion on Summerhill North. Should York 
Hill be extinguished as a route for through traffic the traffic making that illegal right 
turn will simply continue to St. Lukes and make the right turn here onto Summerhill 
or alternatively make the right turn from St. Lukes Avenue (although this is very 
narrow) and contribute to the same line of traffic congestion on Summerhill North. 
The biggest issue is traffic volume which will not be resolved by the enforcement of 
the illegal right turn. In the medium to long term, the BusConnects proposal is to 
install filtered permeability on York Hill but this will be installed along with other 
wider traffic measures in the area based on the traffic modelling carried out for that 
project. As requested by the Minister, Cork City Council in conjunction with the NTA 
Bus Connects Team and Bus Eireann will undertake an evaluation of the short term 
feasibility of implementing the Bus Connects filtered permeability on York Hill, 
without the other bus connects measures in the area, and if deemed feasible to for early 
implementation will put forward such a proposal for consideration to be delivered 
ahead of Bus Connects via a mechanism to be agreed between the parties. 
 

19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 30th OCTOBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 30th October 2024. 
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh and S. Martin at the LAMA Autumn Seminar, held 
at Newgrange Hotel, Navan, Co. Meath, 17th - 18th October 2024. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the IPB Members Engagement Meeting, held at 
Mullingar Park Hotel, Mullingar, Co. Westmeath, 4th October 2024. 
• An Leas Ardmhéara Comhairleoir H. Kamegni at the Irish Coventry Society 
Event, held at Coventry, UK, 26th - 29th September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Module 5 Training, Local Authority 
Finance and Budget Process, held at Sligo Park Hotel, Co. Sligo, 24th October 
2024. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received.  
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
23.1 
LA TOUCHE LEGACY SEMINAR 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of Comhairleoir S. 
Martin to Greystones from 20th - 21st September 2024 for the La Touche Legacy 
Seminar. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None received.  
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORT 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for September 2024. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 

27. 
MOTIONS 
 
27.1 
INCREASED POLICING  
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would write to the Chief Superintendent of An Garda 
Síochána in Anglesea Street and request an increased level of visible police presence 
in the MacCurtain Street area and surrounding areas on an ongoing basis. 
 
Significant investment in infrastructural development in this area has resulted in 
increased footfall in the VQ area and local businesses are benefitting from this. 
 
However, this area has also become a focal and meeting point for various people 
engaging in on street drinking, drug dealing, drug taking and associated activities on 
an ongoing basis at all times of the day and night. This is a barrier to economic growth 
and development in this area, and a high visibility Garda presence there on foot on an 
ongoing basis will certainly help to resolve this problem.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 24/407) 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a 
proposed amendment to the motion was tabled to remove the term “VQ” from the 
motion:- 
 
 
A vote was called for on the approval of the amendment where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, P. 
Horgan, F. Kerins, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (9) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. 
Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, S. Martin, 
D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, T. Coleman. (14) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí P. Rice, L. Harmon. (2) 
 
 
As those voting against the amendment were greater than those voting for, An 
tArdmhéara declared the amendment to the motion defeated. 
 
 
An Chomhairle approved the motion without amendment. 
 
27.2 
VARIOUS HEALTH ISSUES AND CAPITAL INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE 
CITY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek a meeting to be held with the CEO of the HSE to discuss 
the various health issues and capital infrastructure in the City and how this Local 
Authority can engage with such projects.’ 

 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/553) 
 
27.3 
CORK-AMERICAN RELATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘In light of the recent US Election result, this Council will seek a meeting with the 
current US Ambassador to Ireland to discuss the interests of Cork City and Cork-
American relations and will seek a similar meeting with the next Ambassador 
appointed by President-Elect Trump.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/558) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm.  
 
27.4 
EXPANSION OF POSTAL VOTING 
 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘To request the Electoral Commission to allow the expansion of postal voting in all 
Elections outside of the narrow current guidelines.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/559) 
 
27.5 
INVITATION TO PRESIDENT-ELECT OF THE USA 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to President-Elect of the United States of America, 
Donald J. Trump, to congratulate him on his historic election victory. Additionally, 
that Cork City Council extend an invitation to him and to Robert F. Kennedy Jr. to 
visit the City of Cork at their earliest convenience.  This invitation is crucial due to 
the significant number of American multinational corporations based in Cork, 
including Apple, Amazon, Pfizer, Johnson & Johnson, Stryker, Merck, Eli Lilly and 
EMC. Strengthening this relationship is vital for our economic prosperity. 
 
Furthermore, the invitation holds special significance given the historical ties between 
the Kennedy family and Cork, highlighted by President John F. Kennedy’s visit in 
1963.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 24/563) 
 
In the absence of a seconder, the motion was not approved. 
 

27.6 
CLARIFICATION FROM MINISTER EAMON RYAN 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to Minister Eamon Ryan, seeking clarification on his 
recent remarks in this Chamber (21/10/2024) concerning public transport 
enhancements under Project Ireland 2040. Minister Ryan mentioned that Cork City 
“needed to double its size.” According to the National Planning Framework (NPF), 
the target for Cork City is a population growth of 50% to 60% by 2040, calculated 
using modelling, projecting a population of 335,853. However, the Minister’s 
statement implies a different scenario, suggesting the current population of 
approximately 226,000 will increase to 452,000, which is 116,114 more than the NPF 
estimate. Can the Minister explain this discrepancy and clarify the demographic 
composition of the additional population, as well as how they will be employed, 
housed, and integrated?’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 24/566) 
 
In the absence of a seconder, the motion was not approved. 
 
27.7 
UNSAFE DRINKING WATER IN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes that safe drinking water and sanitation are 
internationally recognized human rights; and will write to the Irish Human Rights and 
Equality Commission seeking an investigation into the issue of unsafe drinking water 
in the City, caused by the sudden deterioration of the City's water mains two years 
ago, without the provision of an alternative source of safe drinking water by Uisce 
Éireann, how this is affecting households and individuals in the City, including those 
with medical and additional needs, and the response of Uisce Éireann, the 
Commission for Regulation of Utilities and other accountable bodies.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/570) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir P. Rice to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
HOMELESSNESS  
 
‘Cork City Council notes with deep concern the latest homeless figures that show that 
homelessness in the State has hit a record high of 14,429, including 4,401 children.  
 
Cork City Council believes that homelessness isn’t inevitable and that solutions are 
available.  

 
Cork City Council, therefore, agrees to write to the Minister for Housing to request 
that he scale up the Finnish Housing First model that focuses on providing people with 
homes and wrap-around supports.  
 
In addition, Cork City Council agrees that the Government must legislate to stop 
people becoming homeless in the first place by ending no-fault evictions that are 
pushing families into homelessness.  
 
Finally, Cork City Council agrees to request additional funding from central 
Government to build more social and affordable homes for people in Cork.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/465) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Rice, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a vote 
was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, H. Kamegni, P. Rice, 
F. Kerins, J. Lynch, L. Harmon. (9) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. 
(11) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí P. Horgan, D. Boyle. (2) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir P. Rice to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY  
 
‘Cork City Council notes with concern the City’s latest “affordable” home scheme 
where homes cost up to €389,498 plus a 5% equity stake to be repaid in future.  
 
Cork City Council agrees that this scheme stretches the definition of affordability to 
breaking point.  
 
Cork City Council, therefore, agrees to write to the Minister for Housing to request an 
urgent review of the Affordable Housing Act and the creation of new guidelines for 
the construction and sale of genuinely affordable homes.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/466) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Rice, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a vote 
was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 

 
FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, H. Kamegni, P. Rice, 
F. Kerins, J. Lynch, L. Harmon. (9) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. 
(11) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí P. Horgan, D. Boyle. (2) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
