 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 13th September, 2018 – 
Multimedia Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy  
Chairperson 
Paul Moynihan 
Cllr. Chris O’Leary 
Cllr PJ Hourican 
Dan Boyle 
Joe Curtin 
Bernie Connolly 
Aaron O’Connell 
Nora O’Donovan 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Siobhan Goulding 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
 
Apologies: 
Ann Doherty, Eddie Mullins, Fiona Finn, Ger Canning, Lawrence Owens, 
David Ronayne, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, Mick O’Connell, Priscilla Lynch 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted. The Chairperson 
introduced and welcomed Ms. Siobhan Goulding, Department of Employment Affairs and 
Social Protection to the LCDC.  
 
 
2. Minutes 
The minutes of 26th July, 2018 were considered and on proposal of PJ Hourican, seconded by 
Bernie Connolly were approved with no matters arising. 
 
 
3. Funding Streams Update: 
 
a)  Healthy Ireland Fund Application 2018 
R Loughry noted that the Department confirmed that the LCDC’s Healthy Ireland Fund 
Round 2 application has been approved for funding of up to €75,000 subject to a number of 
actions being revised. R Loughry confirmed that the LCDC had revised and resubmitted their 
application to the Department. Currently waiting on final confirmation from the 
Department. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
b) Community Enhancement Programme 2018 
R Loughry updated the LCDC on the Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) 2018 and 
noted that a total of 55 applications were received. The SICAP Sub Group met on the 10th 
September to assess the applications and make a final recommendation to the LCDC of grant 
approvals. A list of recommended projects totalling €149,241 was circulated. 
 
c) Community Enhancement Programme – Men’s Shed Fund 2018 
R Loughry updated the LCDC on the Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) – Men’s 
Shed Fund 2018 and noted that a total of 10 applications were received, 1 of which was 
invalid as the group was not affiliated with the Irish Men’s Shed Association. One Men’s 
Shed application was transferred from the CEP 2018 to the CEP 2018 - Men’s Shed Fund. The 
SICAP Sub Group met on the 10th September to assess the applications and make a final 
recommendation to the LCDC of grant approvals. A list of recommended projects totalling 
€13,043 was circulated. 
 
On the proposal of Aaron O’Connell, seconded by Cllr PJ Hourican the allocation of funds 
under both the Community Enhancement Programme 2018 and Community Enhancement 
Programme -Men’s Shed Fund 2018 were approved. 
R. Loughry noted that the Department had asked the LCDC to hold unsuccessful applications 
on file as further funding may become available under the CEP. The LCDC agreed that if 
funding was made available that the SICAP Sub Group would reconvene and make a final 
recommendation to the LCDC of grant approvals. 
 
 
4. Annual Report 2017 
T Power noted that subject to LCDC approval, the Cork City LCDC draft Annual Report 2017 
will be submitted to the Corporate Policy Group on 17th September and to full Council on 
24th September, 2018. On the proposal of Cllr PJ Hourican, seconded by Dan Boyle the draft 
Annual Report 2017 was approved. 
 
 
5. SICAP 
T Power noted that the SICAP Sub Group met with Pobal on 12th September re Pobal’s 
Annual Engagement with Cork City LCDC. LCDC engagement regarding the planning and 
targeting for 2019 was discussed. Pobal provided a Social Inclusion Analysis Report that was 
circulated to members. The SICAP Sub Group sought a breakdown of figures in relation to 
this report. T. Power to circulate information once it becomes available. T Power also noted 
that the Distance Travelled Tool will be rolled out in 2019. 
a) Asylum Seekers Regulation Change 
An email from the Department re Asylum Seekers Regulation Change was circulated for 
information. It was agreed that the LCDC would talk to the Programme Implementer re 
these changes.  
 
b) Annual Plan 2019 Input  
T Power noted that the SICAP Annual Planning process for 2019 is commencing. Programme 
Implementer is to submit Annual Plan for 2019 to the LCDC by 16th November. The LCDC is 
required to sign off on the Annual Plan by 14th December, 2018.  
 
c) Emerging Needs Group 2019 
The Emerging Needs Group and KPI’s for 2019 are to be agreed at the next LCDC meeting. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
T Power to schedule a meeting with the Programme Implementer to discuss the Asylum Seekers 
Regulation Change, SICAP Annual Plan 2019, KPI’s and Emerging Needs Group 2019. T Power to 
circulate meeting information and invite LCDC to attend. A O’Connell, B Connolly and F. Dennehy 
expressed an interest in attending this meeting.  
 
d) Case Study 2018  
T Power noted that Cork City Partnership is to submit the 2018 Case Study to Pobal by 5th 
October. The case study theme agreed was ‘Engagement Strategies with SICAP Target 
Groups/ Communities’. T Power will circulate the case study to members once it becomes 
available.  
 
e) Sub Group Membership 
T Power confirmed that S Goulding will take up the vacant seat on the SICAP Sub Group. 
 
f) SICAP 2015-2017 End of Programme Report 
The SICAP 2015-2017 End of Programme Report Executive Summary was circulated to 
members for information.  
 
 
6. Public Participation Network Report 
J Curtin gave a report on the PPN and noted that the PPN had agreed a number of priority 
areas for the remainder of 2018 including JPC Review, preparation for the boundary 
extension, Atlantic Social Hub Project, URBACT project, WHO Healthy Cities and the 
development of the City of Sanctuary Movement. J Curtin to forward PPN report to T Power 
for circulation.  
 
 
7. Boundary Extension  
P Moynihan gave an update on the boundary extension and sought the formal endorsement 
of the LCDC to engage with the new County PPN groups. P Moynihan noted that there will 
have to be an adjustment factor to take new Local Government arrangements in Cork into 
account and this needs to be highlighted at Departmental level. The LCDC endorsed this 
approach.  
 
 
8. Presentation LCDC 
T Power gave a presentation to members on the LCDC – background, guiding principles, 
functions, membership and standing orders. T Power to circulate presentation to members.  
 
 
9. LECP 
 
It was agreed that Youth will be the theme for the LECP update for the next meeting. 
 
 
10. A.O.B. 
a. DRCD visit to Cork 
P Moynihan noted that 3 representatives from the Department of Rural and 
Community Affairs visited Cork City Council on 23rd August in relation to the 
Council’s Library and Community function. P Moynihan noted that he would like to 
extend an invitation to the Department to attend a Cork City LCDC meeting. The 
LCDC confirmed their agreement. It was noted that an invitation to the Minister is 
always open and that the LCDC would welcome the Minister at any time. 

 
 
 
 
 
b. Voter Initiative 
As a support mechanism for new communities in Cork, a voter initiative was 
launched in September to raise awareness of voting entitlements of migrants and 
asylum seekers.    
c. Research Project UCC 
T Power informed of a request from UCC to work with Cork City LCDC in a Research 
Study “A Critical Evaluation of the Implications of Participatory Governance for Civic 
Engagement and the State”. The LCDC agreed to participate.  
 
d. Cork Food Policy Council Cork Food Harvest Festival  
The LCDC were advised that the Cork Food Policy Council – Cork Food Harvest 
Festival is being held on 20th and 21st October.  
 
e. Alfresco Online Document Sharing  
It was agreed to trial the Alfresco online document sharing portal for LCDC members 
over the coming months. 
 
f. Other 
An Atlantic Social Lab presentation will be given to the LCDC at its next meeting on 
the 11th October at 3.30pm. 
 
 
Dan Boyle, PPN Representative tendered his resignation from the LCDC with immediate effect. The 
Chairperson and Chief Officer both extended thanks to D Boyle for his time, contribution and 
positive commitment to Cork City LCDC.   
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting and the next meeting scheduled Thursday, 11th 
October, 2018 at 3.30pm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, 
Chairperson 
 
 
 
 
 
