MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 9th JUNE 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, 
G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Ms. A. O’ Rourke, Director of Services, Housing. 
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Cassidy family on the death of Ellen Cassidy. 
• The Potts family on the death of Tom Potts. 
• The McDonnell family on the death of George McDonnell. 
• The Buckley family on the death of Sean Buckley. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Paul Moynihan on his retirement from Cork City Council. 
• Cork City Council and staff on the holding of the Cork Marathon. 
• Cork City Council and staff on the hosting of European Maritime Day. 

• David Howard on the incredible achievement of winning the ‘East of Ireland 
Amateur Men’s Title’ in Baltray, Co. Louth.  
• Fr. Charlie Kiely on the celebration of his 25 years’ service as a priest. 
• Cheeky Cherubs on celebrating 20 years in business. 
• Horizons Montessori on celebrating 20 years in business. 
• Cork Senior Hurling Team on winning the Munster Hurling Championship. 
• Blondie Café on the opening of their new business. 
• Gaelscoil na Duglaise on their Sciath na Scol Camogie title and Boys C2 title. 
• Blackrock Hurling Club and Alan Connolly, Robbie Cotter and Wayne 
Sherlock on their Munster Hurling Final win. 
• Mossy Duggan on presentation to Marymount of a Cork jersey signed by all 
former captains. 
• Mahon Tidy Towns on hosting of Street Feast 2025. 
• SIPTU on the hosting of Senator Bernie Sanders together with Dr. Jane 
Sanders in Cork Council Trade Union. 
• Cork City Hospital Children’s Club on ‘Lap the Lough’ initiative. 
• Let’s Play Cork on operation of Lapp’s Quay as an Open Street. 
• Douglas GAA Club and Shane Kingston on his Munster Hurling Final win. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
LORD MAYOR’S CHARITY BALL 
 
An tArdmhéara thanked members who attended the Lord Mayor’s Charity Ball on 
Friday 6th June 2025 in the Vienna Woods and acknowledged a great night. 
 
3.2 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR UCC BLUE DEMONS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that a Civic Reception would take place for UCC 
Blue Demons on Thursday 12th June 2025. 
 
3.3 
CORK ROCKS FOR RORY 
 
 
An tArdmhéara informed members of the ‘Cork Rocks for Rory’ launch taking place 
Friday 13th June 2025 and the great line-up of events planned. 
 
3.4 
ANNUAL MEETING 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that the Annual Meeting would take place on 
Friday 20th June 2025 at 6pm.  
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
None received. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 

 
• Special Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 7th April 2025. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 12th May 2025. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
NORTHSIDE OF CORK CITY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive commits to present the development of a strategic plan to 
reimagine the Northside of Cork City in the year 2025, in a presentation to council to 
include deliverable actions across the Northside involving, placemaking, retail, 
infrastructure capable of early delivery and at a higher level the bringing forward of 
plans for regeneration of properties which may attract government funding under the 
Infrastructure Investment Fund. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 sets out a strategic development 
framework for the whole of Cork City. It is the first statutory development plan that 
encompasses Cork City and all its suburbs, including the towns of Blarney, Tower and 
Glanmire, the villages of Kerry Pike, Killeens and Upper Glanmire, the contiguous 
suburban areas including Ballyvolane, and the immediate hinterland areas. 
 
The Plan coalesces several national, regional and metropolitan strategies, including 
the National Planning Framework (NPF), Southern Regional Spatial and Economic 
Strategy (RSES), Cork Metropolitan Area Strategic Plan (Cork MASP) and Cork 
Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (CMATS). The Plan covers a broad range of 
issues, including the provision of homes, jobs, schools, retail, amenities and strategic 
infrastructure, and brings together a wide range of sustainable planning principles 
informed by broad consultation with residents and interest groups in Cork City and a 
suite of studies, international comparators and socio-economic forecasts and 
assessments. This comprehensive development strategy is set out at a whole-city level. 
 
The north side of the City is a vast area, covering almost 100 km2 with a population 
of over 86,000 people in the 2022 Census (NE and NW LEA). Within the overall 
citywide strategy, the City Development Plan identifies several areas of the north side 
of Cork City for more focused strategic planning, including Glanmire, Blarney and 
Ballyvolane, among other areas. Once the strategic planning of each these areas has 
been undertaken, they will together form an overall plan for the north side within the 
city-wide context. Significant work has already been undertaken on the north side of 
Cork City – including the publication in March 2025 of a ‘Integrated Urban Strategy’ 
for Shandon that sets out an action-oriented roadmap for the Shandon neighbourhood 
– and significant works continues to be carried out, notably on a major body of work 

to prepare a framework plan for the North Blackpool / Kilbarry area. Significant works 
on active travel, public realm and amenities have been and are being delivered across 
the north side. Projects which are currently at construction or were completed over the 
past eighteen months include the Ballyvolane Strategic Corridor Improvement 
Scheme, Blarney Business Park Active Travel Connection, Glashaboy Flood 
Protection Scheme, NW City Pedestrian Facility Improvements, Glanmire Roads 
Scheme Ph 2, Hazelwood Rd Junction, McCurtain St PTI Scheme, Glanmire Road 
Improvements Ph 1, Dunkettle to Glanmire Pedestrian/Cycle Route, Knapps Square 
Improvements and the Upper Glanmire Pedestrian Scheme.  The current pipeline of 
schemes at the planning/design stages also includes for infrastructure improvements 
at Kilcully, Kerry Pike, Blarney, Knockpogue Ave/ Knockfree Ave, Glenryan/ Cattle 
Market Ave, Mayfield to Glen, Dunkettle to City, Banduff Rd, Nashes Boreen, 
Colmcille Ave etc.  
 
Other projects referenced in the City Development Plan that are proceeding in the 
north side of Cork City include the Northwest Regional Park, North Docklands 
Infrastructure and the Cork Northern Distributor Multimodal Road, which have the 
potential to unlock investment opportunities that previously only existed in other parts 
of the City, bringing equivalence of opportunity. Cork City Council will continue to 
work with other stakeholders including the IDA, State agencies and Government 
departments to realise the potential in the north side.  
 
Significant social and affordable housing schemes are currently being considered and 
delivered across the northside. Cork City Council also continues to deliver, on a 
phased basis, the Regeneration Masterplan for Knocknaheeny which includes the 
provision of 650 new homes, new public realm and associated infrastructure 
underpinned by an annual Social Economic and Environmental Programme (SEEP) 
of community interventions. A large residential development at Old Whitechurch 
Road is also planned to deliver over 520 homes with a mix of tenure types proposed 
across the entire scheme, including the reservation of a site for the development of a 
school by the Department of Education . This project has commenced with Phase 1 of 
an Affordable Housing Scheme with 38 three bedroom homes recently advertised for 
prospective purchasers, and on completion will deliver a total of 86 Affordable Homes 
and 9 social housing homes.  
 
The measures, plans and projects referred to above will be assessed to identify gaps 
and opportunities for the next City Development Plan. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin  
Director of Service,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne,  
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 

6.2 
VACANT PROPERTIES IN NORTH EAST LOCAL ELECTORAL AREA 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise as to exactly how many City Council owned properties are 
currently vacant in the North East Local Electoral area and how long will it take to 
return each of these properties to service, and provide much needed Homes for the 
many families in our City currently looking for a Home? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council currently has 90 vacant properties in the North East Local Electoral 
Area.   
• 18 properties are awaiting tenancy  
• 72 properties are currently under repair 
 
It is important to note that the reletting time varies across programmes, and includes 
the time taken to both repair and upgrade vacated properties to an acceptable letting 
standard and to relet those properties in line with the City Council's Scheme of 
Lettings. The degree of work required can vary greatly between properties. Cork City 
Council prioritises those with the least amount of work, with a view to getting the 
maximum number of properties returned to service as quickly as possible. 
  
As such, the time taken to relet a property is dependent on the condition of a property 
at the time of return and how long it takes to relet a particular property depending on 
uptake and acceptance by applicants on the social housing list.    
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.3 
AVERAGE PROCESSING TIME FOR APPLICATIONS TO HOUSING LIST 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive provide an update on the current average processing time for 
applications to the Cork City Council Housing List? I have been reliably informed by 
a number of constituents that it is taking an unreasonably long time for applications 
to be assessed and progressed. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The conduct of a social housing assessment is carried out under the criteria detailed 
in the Social Housing Assessment Regulation 2011, in particular Section 12 refers; 
 
12. (1) Subject to proper completion of the application form by the household 
and to paragraph (2), the housing authority of application shall deal with 

the application within a period of 12 weeks of receipt or, where the authority 
has requested additional information for the purpose of verifying information 
relating to the application, within 6 weeks of the receipt of such additional 
information. 
 
As the time frame for assessing an application is dependent on the Assessment Officer 
having all the required information, it is not possible to give an average length of time 
to process an application. However, the table below gives an indication of the volume 
of application being received in recent years. 
 
Period 
Number of 
Applications 
Received 
Q.1/2019 
294 
Q.1/2020 
251 
Q.1/2021 
274 
Q.1/2022 
298 
Q.1/2023 
391 
Q.1/2024 
468 
Q.1/2025 
428 
 
Once an application is received in the Allocations Section it is reviewed to ensure it 
includes all the necessary documentation. This would include personal information 
for all household members, income details for the preceding 12 months for all 
household members, documentation in relation to separation/divorce and property 
ownership. If any of this documentation is missing the application form may be 
returned to the applicant with a letter advising what information is required. This 
initial review is done to reduce the likelihood of delays at assessment stage. 
 
Once a completed application has been received it is forwarded to an Assessment 
Officer for full assessment. The Assessment Officer may require additional 
information or clarification in relation to the application. In most cases this relates to 
information regarding income, previous tenancies with a local authority/Approved 
Housing Body, access & maintenance arrangements, documentation regarding 
Mortgage Arrears Process (MARP) (if relevant) or proof of citizenship/permission to 
remain in the country. If the information is not received within the appropriate time 
frame an application will remain closed until the applicant re-engages.  
 
It should be noted that changes to the Household Means Policy introduced in March 
2021 means that an Assessment Officer is now required to review documentary 
evidence of income for the preceding 12 months. This can involve a number of 
interactions with an applicant. In addition, the changes in the income bands introduced 
in January 2023 saw an increase in applications from households who were previously 
not eligible.  Also, the removal of the Central Broker function on the iHouse system 
means that we can no longer determine if an applicant has an open application with 
another local authority.  This means that we may need an applicant to provide a letter 
from a local authority in whose area they previously lived confirming they do not have 
a tenancy or open application with them. Alternatively, we may have to contact the 
local authority to investigate this. This additional work, which was not required in 
previous years, can result in delays in processing an application. 

 
In all cases we endeavour to process an application as quickly as possible. While 
applications are processed in the order they are received, we do prioritise applicants 
identified to us as being particularly vulnerable. This would include those in 
emergency accommodation or at risk of imminent homelessness, Care Leavers, those 
accommodated in a Domestic Violence refuge or persons unable to leave hospital due 
to lack of suitable accommodation.   
 
In all assessments where the application is approved, the applicant’s credit time on 
our social housing list is back dated to the date the application was received. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.4 
ACTIVE TRAVEL FUNDING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
How much money has Cork City Council received in Active Travel funding in the 
years 2022.  2023. 2024. and 2025? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The City Council secured funding for Active Travel and Public Transport 
Infrastructure projects as follows:  2022 = €29.88m, 2023 = €35.29m, 2024 = 
€33.10m.  
 
As previously advised, the initial funding allocation for 2025 amounts to €34.5m 
 
The funding was provided over the period in question to advance a broad range of 
projects including – 
 
• Passage Greenway (Phase 1- Mahon to Marina) 
• Mary Elmes Pedestrian & Cycle Bridge  
• South Mall Cycle Infrastructure  
• Victoria Rd to McSwiney Quay Interim Cycle Scheme 
• Melbourne Rd and Donovan's Rd to Glasheen Cycle Improvements 
• Grange Rd to Tramore Valley Park (incl N40 Pedestrian/Cycle Bridge) 
• Horgan's Quay Cycle Lane 
• MacCurtain Street Public Transport Improvement Scheme 
• Knapps Square Improvement Scheme 
• City Centre Pedestrian Upgrades 
• Western Road Pedestrian Improvements 
• Ballybrack Active Travel Scheme 
• Marina Promenade Pedestrian and Cycle facilities 
• Glanmire to City Centre Ph 1 (Village to Dunkettle Roundabout) 
• Skehard Rd Phase 3 

• Half Moon Lane Upgrade Works 
• L2998 Upgrade of Dunkettle Road (Phase 1) 
• South Douglas Road (Junction Improvement Scheme) 
• Junction Surveys 
• Mahon Area Street Renewal Scheme 
• Pedestrian Safety Improvements  
• Donnybrook Hill Pedestrian Upgrades 
• Kilcully & Upper Glanmire Pedestrian Improvement Scheme 
• Curragh Road Improvement Scheme 
• Hazelwood Road - Junction Upgrade 
• Rapid Deployment Active Travel Measures 
• Active Travel Measures at Innishmore, Ballincollig 
• Active Travel Staff Costs 
• Beamish & Crawford Urban Regeneration 
• Cork City Wayfinding Project 
• Ballyvolane Strategic Transport Project -North Ring Road to Ballincolly 
• Blarney Business Park Linkage 
• Automatic Cycle Lane Counting/Usage Monitoring  
• MID Improvements 
• City Centre Pedestrianisations 
• Driver Feedback Signs  
• Cycle Detection at signalised Junctions  
• SCOOT/Urban Traffic Control Review 
• Bus Stop and Shelter Upgrades 
• ITS Pedestrian Junction Upgrade Schemes 
• ITS Public Lighting Projects 
• ITS Infrastructure review - Signal Controlled Pedestrian Crossings 
• Active Travel - Multi Intervention & Pedestrian Crossings  
• Additional Bike Parking Infrastructure 
• SRTS - Scoil Naomh Caitríona  
• SRTS - St. Lukes NS  
• SRTS - Bishopstown Community School  
• SRTS - Glanmire Community College  
• SRTS - Scoil Naomh Iosaf, Riverstown  
• Lehanaghmore Road Improvement Scheme 
• Glanmire to Riverstown Greenway 
• Northern Distributor Road - Route Selection  
• Kerry Pike Ped Improvement Scheme  
• Frankfield Road Active Travel Project  
• Active Travel Measures at Leo Murphy Road, Ballincollig 
• Cooney's Lane Pedestrian Improvement Scheme  
• Lee to Sea Cycle Route 
• Southern Multimodal Corridor  
• Model Farm Road Bridge Design  
• Viaduct to City Cycle Route Ph 1 Viaduct to Kinsale Road 
• Banduff Road Improvement Scheme 
• Passage Greenway Project (Phase 2 Mahon to Passage West) 

• Glanmire to City Ph 2 (Dunkettle to City) /Pathfinder Project 
• Curraheen Pedestrian & Cycleway Upgrade  
• SRTS – Gaelscoil na Duglaise  
• SRTS – Cork Educate Together NS  
• SRTS - Scoil Barra Naofa Buachailli 
• SRTS - Scoil Barra Naofa Cailini 
• Douglas to Grange Cycle Route 
• Sarsfield Road to MTU Active Travel Scheme  
• Sarsfield Road to Clashduv Road Cycle link  
• Airport Rd Improvements 
• Monahan Rd Extension Scheme 
• Rochestown Rd to Douglas Active Travel Scheme 
• Blarney Village Cycle Route  
• Bessboro to Mahon - Pedestrian and Cycle Scheme  
• Mary St, Douglas St, White St Upgrades 
• Glen Ryan and Cattle Market Area Active Travel Improvement Works 
• Maryborough Woods Active Travel improvement Works 
• Knockpogue Avenue and Knockfree Avenue Active Travel Improvement 
• Cork North Docks Public Realm And Transport Infrastructure 
• Wellington Road Improvements 
• Colmcille Avenue Active Travel Improvements 
• Nashs Boreen Active Travel Scheme 
• Shanakiel/Strawberry Hill Cycle Scheme 
• Cork Docklands to City Centre Road Network Improvement Scheme 
• The Glen and North Ring Road Environs Sustainable Transport Improvement 
Scheme 
• South Quays Public Transport Improvement scheme 
• SRTS – North Monastery School 
• SRTS – Gaelscoiland Teaglaigh Naofa  
• Bus Connects – Black Ash Park and Ride 
 
Members will continue to be updated on the progress of the various projects and also 
on the ongoing development of the overall programme of works and related funding. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development Directorate. 
 
6.5 
MOSS TREES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail, in tabular form, the total Spent by Cork City 
Council on purchase, installation, maintenance of the Moss Trees initiative and to 
specify where they are stored now and if there is any cost involved to Cork City 
Council with their current storage location? 
 

 
REPLY 
 
 
The total spend is tabulated as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The trees are currently located at the Tramore Valley Park and there are no costs 
associated with their storage. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.6 
TENANT IN SITU 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of tenant in situ families/households that were sale agreed 
or at conveyancing, for which insufficient funding was received, that are still at risk 
of homelessness and whether the Dept Housing have indicated the release of 
additional funds to purchase these homes. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Housing Directorate is engaging with the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage on its overall acquisition programme for 2025, and on that 
basis is reviewing each individual acquisition to determine the best source of funding 
for same, e.g. SHIP Renewal programme.  In the context of this wider review of the 
Acquisitions programme, final data is not currently available.  The Council is, 
however, engaging with tenants and landlords on all outstanding cases as a case 
determination is made. 
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services 
Housing. 
 
 
 
Date 
Amount 
Details 
Total 
22/10/2020 
€213,063.60 Purchase cost 
 
06/11/2020 
€28,763.59 
Purchase cost 
 
27/11/2020 
€124,287.10 Purchase cost 
 
27/11/2020 
€16,778.76 
Annual Maintenance 
 
01/02/2021 
€17,755.30 
Annual Maintenance 
 
05/02/2021 
€2,396.97 
Repairs 
 
09/12/2022 
€17,880.00 
Annual Maintenance 
 
24/07/2024 
€8,940.00 
Annual Maintenance 
 
19/07/2024 
€14,497.70 
Annual Maintenance 
 
 
 
 
€444,363.02 

6.7 
SOCIAL HOUSING SUPPORT – PROCESSING TIME FOR APPLICATIONS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
That the CE set out the current processing time for applications for social housing 
support; the reasons for current delays; and what action is being taken to ensure that 
applications are processed in a timely manner. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The conduct of a social housing assessment is carried out under the criteria detailed 
in the Social Housing Assessment Regulation 2011, in particular Section 12 refers; 
 
12. (1) Subject to proper completion of the application form by the household 
and to paragraph (2), the housing authority of application shall deal with 
the application within a period of 12 weeks of receipt or, where the authority 
has requested additional information for the purpose of verifying information 
relating to the application, within 6 weeks of the receipt of such additional 
information. 
 
As the time frame for assessing an application is dependent on the Assessment Officer 
having all the required information, it is not possible to give an average length of time 
to process an application. However, the table below gives an indication of the volume 
of application being received in recent years. 
 
Period 
Number of 
Applications 
Received 
Q.1/2019 
294 
Q.1/2020 
251 
Q.1/2021 
274 
Q.1/2022 
298 
Q.1/2023 
391 
Q.1/2024 
468 
Q.1/2025 
428 
 
 
Once an application is received in the Allocations Section it is reviewed to ensure it 
includes all the necessary documentation. This would include personal information 
for all household members, income details for the preceding 12 months for all 
household members, documentation in relation to separation/divorce and property 
ownership. If any of this documentation is missing the application form may be 
returned to the applicant with a letter advising what information is required. This 
initial review is done to reduce the likelihood of delays at assessment stage. 
 
Once a completed application has been received it is forwarded to an Assessment 
Officer for full assessment. The Assessment Officer may require additional 
information or clarification in relation to the application. In most cases this relates to 
information regarding income, previous tenancies with a local authority/Approved 
Housing Body, access & maintenance arrangements, documentation regarding 

Mortgage Arrears Process (MARP) (if relevant) or proof of citizenship/permission to 
remain in the country. If the information is not received within the appropriate time 
frame an application will remain closed until the applicant re-engages.  
 
It should be noted that changes to the Household Means Policy introduced in March 
2021 means that an Assessment Officer is now required to review documentary 
evidence of income for the preceding 12 months. This can involve a number of 
interactions with an applicant. In addition the changes in the income bands introduced 
in January 2023 saw an increase in applications from households who were previously 
not eligible.  Also, the removal of the Central Broker function on the iHouse system 
means that we can no longer determine if an applicant has an open application with 
another local authority.  This means that we may need an applicant to provide a letter 
from a local authority in whose area they previously lived confirming they do not have 
a tenancy or open application with them. Alternatively, we may have to contact the 
local authority to investigate this. This additional work, which was not required in 
previous years, can result in delays in processing an application. 
 
In all cases we endeavour to process an application as quickly as possible. While 
applications are processed in the order they are received, we do prioritise applicants 
identified to us as being particularly vulnerable. This would include those in 
emergency accommodation or at risk of imminent homelessness, Care Leavers, those 
accommodated in a Domestic Violence refuge or persons unable to leave hospital due 
to lack of suitable accommodation.   
 
In all assessments where the application is approved, the applicant’s credit time on 
our social housing list is back dated to the date the application was received. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.8 
BONDED HOUSE WAREHOUSES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on the planning status around the historic Bonded House 
Warehouses, which are now in a very poor state. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Bonded Warehouses are Protected Structures of national significance. The site is 
in private ownership and the responsibility for the site and building rest with the 
owners.  
 
There is a live planning application on this site (An Bord Pleanála ref. 308596-20, 
Cork City Council ref. TP 19/38589) granted by An Bord Pleanála on 22/3/2021 for 
the redevelopment of the Custom House site at North Custom House Quay and South 
Custom House Quay, Custom House Street, Cork City, to provide a 240-bedroom 

hotel, 25 no. hotel serviced suites and a range of commercial uses including, retail, 
office, food and beverage, distillery, tourism and leisure.  
 
Cork City Council fully supports the development of this important heritage and 
gateway site. Following engagement, the owner remains focused on developing the 
site in line with the granted planning permission and Cork City Council will assist 
where possible, including exploring potential funding opportunities, to see this 
realised. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin 
Director of Services 
Planning and Integrated Development 
 
6.9 
 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To mark World Bicycle Day, to reflect that cyclists have priority over turning vehicles 
when travelling straight through junctions, and to be consistent with the example of 
Dublin City Council, that Cork City Council will review its traffic lights to include 
flashing amber arrows for left-turning vehicles at junctions, and to synchronise the 
timing of both general and bike-specific traffic lights so that cycling may continue for 
the full time that general traffic lights are green, including specifically for eastbound 
movement from Parnell Bridge to Eamon de Valera Bridge along Albert Quay, and 
for westbound movement from Brian Boru Bridge to Christy Ring Bridge along Saint 
Patrick’s Quay and Camden Place. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The use of flashing amber left turn signal for vehicles approaching a junction (with a 
green cycle signal for a straight through cycle movement) was introduced in the 2023 
cycle manual by the NTA. 
 
As funds are provided by the NTA, each new Traffic signal site is reviewed site 
specifically and designed for multi modal operation. In the first instance, it is desirable 
that left-turning motor traffic and straight-ahead cyclists would be separately staged 
to eliminate conflict risk but this is not always feasible during the design process. The 
signalling configuration above, does allow for above signalling configuration for 
cyclists with partial conflict but is not advised in certain situations as a result of high 
volumes of left turning traffic, two way cycle tracks, poor site and intervisibility lines 
in addition to high bus and truck left turning use. In addition, the traffic signal 
configuration may not be amended in isolation but further civil works may be required 
to facilitate the junction design. 
 
In conclusion, the facility will be actively considered in any future NTA active travel 
funded schemes as part of the toolkit for signalling as part of overall network and 
modal management as designs allow. 
 
Paul Moynihan,   

Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations 
 
6.10 
TOGHER FLAT COMPLEXES – MAINTENANCE WORKS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Further to the recent update from the Director of Services, Housing Directorate, to the 
South West Ward Local Area Committee regarding the current prioritisation of 
maintenance works at the Togher flat complexes, I would be grateful if you could 
provide the following: 
 
-A timeline for when interim internal and external maintenance works are 
scheduled to be carried out at the flat complexes located at Clashduv Road, 
Togher Road, and Sycamore Park. 
-A list in tabular format of all internal and external maintenance works  
completed to date at each of these locations, indicating the type of work carried 
out and the date of completion. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Housing Directorate is continuing to prioritise maintenance requests to these 
complexes. The Council is aware of the need for a longer-term renovation and 
refurbishment of this portfolio of apartment complexes and is at the early stages of 
reviewing this longer-term strategic refurbishment opportunity, and the Directorate 
will ensure members are fully informed as soon as any strategy is developed.  It should 
be noted that this will be a longer-term programme, requiring careful design and 
sustainable remediation, as well as needing significant additional funding. 
  
Below are details of all repairs carried out at Clashduv Road, Togher Road and 
Sycamore Place from the 04/6/2023 to 04/6/2025. 
 
Address 
No. of Internal  
Repairs 
Completed  
Types of Work 
 
No. of 
External 
Repairs 
Completed 
Types of Work 
 
Clashduv Road 
81 
Plumbing, Heating,  
Electrical, Plastering 
52 
Electrical,  
Plumbing, Windows, 
Carpentry & roofing 
Sycamore Place 
53 
Plumbing, 
Heating,  Masonry 
Electrical, Plastering 
22 
Electrical,  
Plumbing,  Carpentry, 
Masonry  
Togher Road 
51 
Plumbing, Heating,  
Electrical, Plastering, 
DPG 
48 
Electrical,  
Plumbing, Windows, 
Carpentry & roofing 
 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  

Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.11 
SITE IN GERALD GRIFFIN STREET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on the proposed construction start date on the site in 
Gerald Griffin Street as it is a number of years now since enabling works were 
completed. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The proposed housing development at the Gerald Griffin Street site is currently going 
through a public procurement process.  This process is nearing completion, as it is at 
the tender stage.  On successful conclusion of the tender process, it is the intention of 
the Council to award a contract, and this will include for a Part 8 planning process.  
Once Part 8 planning approval is in place the project will then progress to the 
construction stage, which is due to commence in Q4 of 2025. 
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.12 
FOREIGN TRAVEL EXPENDITURE 2024 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Further to my question raised at the City Council Meeting on 10th March, 2025, and 
subsequent correspondence which confirmed the total sum expended on foreign travel 
by Cork City Council in 2024 as €244,218.37: Can the Chief Executive give an outline 
of the procedures employed for the approval of foreign travel requests, and kindly 
detail the processes employed in discharging all foreign travel costs, outlays and 
expenses, as well as confirm if the CE considers it prudent to publish quarterly reports 
detailing all foreign travel expenditure incurred by staff and City Councillors in a like 
manner to the quarterly data currently published by Dublin City Council? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Approval for foreign travel on Council business is required for both Elected Members 
and Council employees.  Elected Members seek approval for international travel 
through full Council meetings.  A new Staff International Travel Policy for Council 
employees was introduced on 25th March 2025 to strengthen governance in this area.  
 
Applications for foreign travel approval for Council staff require the submission of a 
detailed business case, which is subject to review by line management and the relevant 
Director of Services. Final approval rests with the Chief Executive, or Assistant Chief 
Executive (as appropriate).  

 
The business case consists of a detailed concept note, explaining the purpose of the 
proposed travel, expected outcomes, and plans for follow up and implementation of 
concept after the visit. The business case must demonstrate alignment of the proposed 
travel with Council objectives, demonstrate what external funding opportunities have 
been sought to support the travel, and demonstrate adherence to the appropriate 
procurement processes in line with the Public Spending Code. 
 
In the event that travel takes place, a report must be prepared by the travelling member 
of staff on the impact of the visit and outlining proposed next steps no more than two 
weeks after the travel is completed. A copy of the business case and report template 
is available for circulation, and the International Relations Office in the Corporate, 
Community & Culture Directorate is the central secretariat for the organisation’s 
foreign travel, maintaining a register of foreign travel under the new Policy to 
facilitate audit, review and budget preparation or amendment. The Office is 
furthermore a resource for the organisation in planning and executing tangible and 
value for money programmes of engagement for Cork City Council. 
 
Council’s draft International Relations Strategy proposes to further strengthen the 
governance role of the International Relations and Tourism Strategic Policy 
Committee with regard to foreign travel. Under the proposed Strategy, the SPC will 
review reports of foreign travel and project reports, ensuring impact, value for money, 
and alignment with the strategic objectives set out in the Strategy, in addition to 
adherence to the Public Spending Code. 
 
To date, the Council has not maintained a central register of foreign travel.  However, 
the introduction of the new Foreign Travel Policy, will offer the opportunity to collate 
foreign travel details across the organisation. Whilst it is not proposed to publish these 
details immediately, once the new procedure and process is embedded it would be 
possible to publish such details. This matter will be referred to the Corporate Policy 
Group for discussion in due course. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.13 
62-65 NORTH MAIN STREET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding the buildings at 62-65 North Main 
Street and to provide detail regarding the Council’s plans to bring the said properties 
out of dereliction? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council is progressing viability assessments of several options to 
strategically redevelop properties known as 62-65 North Main Street (inclusive) 

enabling the preparation of a conceptual design for consideration and approval by the 
Executive. 
 
On conclusion of the viability assessment process it is envisaged a formal 
development proposal will be advanced for planning permission and ultimately 
commencement of redevelopment. 
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
 
 
Cormac Ó Súilleabháin 
Director of Service,  
 
 
Director of Service, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
City Centre Development & Operations.  
 
6.14 
 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a single staff member within an appropriate 
Directorate who can act as a focal point for issues relating to urban core residential 
areas like St Luke's, South Parish and Blackpool? These areas are part of the historic 
urban fabric but have distinct qualities and needs within the city. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Councils Community Team works with communities across Cork City with 
a focus on communities, the voluntary sector and agencies working together in 
partnership for the betterment of the community. The Area leads and their contact 
information are: 
 
• 
South West Ward: Kieran O’ Connell. kieran_oconnell@corkcity.ie Ph: 0860105462 
• 
South East Ward: Martha Halbert martha_halbert@corkcity.ie Ph: 086 6034102 
• 
South Central Ward: Martin Dineen martin_dineen@corkcity.ie Ph: 086 7968946 
• 
North West Ward: Sandy McGroarty sandy_mcgroarty@corkcity.ie Ph: 086 1275325 
• 
North East Ward: Stephen Murphy stephen_murphy@corkcity.ie Ph: 087 9814803 
  
The Community email is also available: community@corkcity.ie  
  
Any update to area leads will be communicated.  
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.15 
DERELICT BUILDINGS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the derelict buildings in our city centre: 
 
Roches Stores- Debenhams’ Building - Patrick Street  

Savoy Shopping Centre - Patrick Street  
Old Maher's Sports / Flor Griffins on Parnell Place  
62 - 65 North Main Street 
North Main Street Shopping Centre 
Old Argos Building - Grand Parade 
Old Grand Parade Hotel - Grand Parade  
4 - 5 Fr Matthew's Quay  
 
REPLY 
 
Several of the above referenced properties, identified for update, do not fall within the 
category of ‘Derelict’ as defined in the Derelict Sites Act 1990. They would instead 
be categorised as ‘Vacant’. 
 
These include:  
• Roches Stores Building  
• Savoy Shopping Centre   
• Old Argos Building  
• North Main Street Shopping Centre  
 
Those properties are privately owned and are inspected periodically, continuously 
monitored and subject to active engagement with the property owners to encourage 
and support the return to use of properties. 
   
In respect of the following Derelict properties, please be advised as follows; 
 
• 62 – 65 North Main Street, Cork: 
Cork City Council is progressing viability assessments of several options to 
strategically redevelop the City Council owned properties known as 62-65 
North Main Street (inclusive) enabling the preparation of a conceptual design 
for consideration and approval by the Executive. 
On conclusion of the viability assessment process it is envisaged a formal 
development proposal will be advanced for planning permission and 
ultimately commencement of redevelopment. 
 
• Old Grand Parade Hotel  
This property is in Council ownership and forms part of the Grand Parade 
urban block which incorporates the existing City Library. Plans are being 
developed to consider development options for this important city centre block 
in the context of the Council’s wider ambitions for the regeneration of the area 
in line with URDF funding secured to date which will see the upgrade of the 
public realm and redevelopment of Bishop Lucey Park in 2025.  
 
• 4-5, Father Matthew Quay, Cork. 
This site is privately owned and is subject of ongoing engagement between 
Cork City Council Planning & Integrated Development Directorate and the 
property owner which will hopefully see the return of the property to use as a 
commercial premises in the short term. 
 
• 7 & 8 Parnell Place, Cork. (Formerly Maher's Sports / Flor Griffins) 

The property is currently in private ownership and the City Council is engaging 
with the owner to help realise its redevelopment as quickly as possible. 
 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Service, 
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.16 
PROPERTIES IN NEED OF RETROFITTING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
Could the CE provide a report in relation to the number of Cork City Council’s almost 
11,000 properties in need of retrofitting to bring them up to energy efficient standards 
and how many of Cork City Councils tenants have put in requests for housing 
maintenance in tabular form e.g leaks, window, doors, boilers, heating and more to 
include a breakdown of these by wards for the periods of 2024 to 1/06/2025. 
 
REPLY 
 
The Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Program (Phase 2) will run from 2021 to 2050. 
Prior to 2025 the aim was to ensure that each house would have a building energy 
efficiency rating of B2 or better or the cost optimal equivalent. From 2025 the project 
aims to ensure that all Cork City Council social housing properties achieve a building 
energy rating of B2 or better.  Cork City Council has approximately 9,000 social 
housing units that need to be improved to achieve the B2 standard. From 2026 
onwards the aim will be that all properties retrofitted will achieve an energy rating of 
A3 or better. All properties built prior to 2008 will be assessed to see what measures 
need to be installed to ensure that they achieve the A3 building energy rating standard, 
and a programme of renovation will then be required to be developed, subject to 
funding.  Cork City Council will continue to explore all possibilities for funding what 
will be a very ambitious and significant programme of retrofitting. 
 
 
The tables below set out Tenant Requests for Housing Maintenance for the periods 
2024 and 2025 broken down by area and type. It is not currently possible to produce 
these figures fully by local ward area. 
 
 
2024 
Tenant 
Requests 
(01/01/2024-31/12/2024) 
South 
Area 
North 
East 
Area 
North 
West 
Area 
Transition 
Areas 
Disabled Adaptations  
34 
27 
26 
10 
Fitting 
48 
13 
35 
12 
Masonry 
213 
105 
142 
66 
Plastering 
102 
84 
126 
62 
Roofing 
249 
209 
189 
119 
Specialist Services 
302 
182 
237 
116 

Electrical 
1058 
665 
739 
404 
Heating Repairs 
1375 
905 
1332 
736 
Painting and Glazing 
7 
9 
4 
6 
Plumbing 
2020 
1189 
2001 
742 
Security 
10 
8 
9 
2 
Carpentry 
918 
607 
772 
388 
TOTAL: 
6,336 
4,003 
5,612 
2,663 
 
18,614 
 
 
2025 
Tenant 
Requests 
(01/01/2025-
01/06/2025) 
South 
Area 
North 
East 
Area 
North 
West 
Area 
Transition 
Areas 
Disabled Adaptations  
31 
22 
29 
7 
Fitting 
14 
7 
23 
4 
Masonry 
106 
53 
59 
25 
Plastering 
53 
29 
15 
30 
Roofing 
140 
116 
98 
57 
Specialist Services 
135 
91 
109 
68 
Electrical 
435 
314 
315 
184 
Heating Repairs 
547 
376 
540 
337 
Painting and Glazing 
2 
2 
1 
1 
Plumbing 
819 
520 
744 
349 
Security 
3 
5 
3 
1 
Carpentry 
416 
329 
329 
184 
 
TOTAL: 
2,701 
1,864 
2,265 
1,247 
8,077 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to discuss motion 57 on 
Appendix 1, Long-Term Vacancy of Council Homes, at the end of the meeting, where 
there appeared as follows:-  
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, 
F. Kerins, P. Dineen, N. O’Connor, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor. (20) 
 

AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, M.R. Desmond, 
D. Cahill, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, A. Deasy. (9) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, and the vote was 
carried by a 2/3 majority as prescribed in standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared 
the vote carried and the proposal to suspend standing orders approved. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to discuss motion 47 on 
Appendix 1, Derelict Buildings on North Main Street, at the end of the meeting, where 
there appeared as follows:-  
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, 
J. Lynch, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (15) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M.R. Desmond, S. Martin, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, 
C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (14) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
An Chomhairle noted that the motion will be considered, as referred by the Meetings 
Administrator, by the South Central Local Area Committee. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 29th 
May 2025 on the following property disposals:-  
 
1. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground measuring 197.5 m² 
(approximately) situated adjacent to 75, Hollyville, Hollyhill, Knocknaheeny, 
Cork to Alan & Bernadette Raggett, c/o Conor Buckley Solicitor, 80, Oliver 
Plunkett Street, Cork for the sum of €1.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
Collins, An Chomhairle approved the disposal.  
 
2. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground measuring 55.5 m² 
(approximately) situated to the rear of No. 107, Ardcullen, Hollyhill, 

Knocknaheeny, Cork to Carolann Murphy & John Paul Murphy, c/o O’ Dowd 
Solicitors LLP, 6, Crestfield Centre, Glanmire, Cork for the sum of €1.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir M. 
Gould, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal of the freehold interest in property known as 3 & 3A Iona Park to 
Adrienne Looney, c/o Charles C. Daly & Co. Solicitors, 2, Westbourne Place, 
Cobh, Cork for the sum of €4,000.00 plus costs of €1,500.00 plus VAT.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir O. 
Moran, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
4. Disposal of the freehold interest in property known as 22, Wycherley Terrace, 
College Road, Cork to David Morton, c/o BDM Boylan Solicitors, Clarkes Bridge 
ouse, Hanover Street, Cork, for the sum of €64.00 together with costs in the sum 
of €550.00 plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
5. Disposal by way of exchange of property known as 9, Beara Drive, 
Knocknaheeny, Cork to James & Michelle Ross, c/o Frank Nyhan & Associates 
Solicitors, 11, Market Square, Mallow, Cork, in exchange for the property owned 
by the said James & Michelle Ross, at 90, Killala Gardens, Knocknaheeny, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
6. Disposal by way of lease of the ground floor unit situated at No 79, Glenamoy 
Lawn, Mayfield, Cork by way of lease to Cork City Partnership CLG c/o O’Flynn 
Exham Solicitors, 58, South Mall, Cork subject to a rent of €520.00 per annum.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of land (approximately 1.52 hectares), 
situated adjacent to Ashbrook Heights, Lehenaghmore, Cork to the Minister for 
Education, c/o Chief State Solicitor’s Office, Osmond House, Ship Street Little, 
Dublin 8, for the sum of €2,000,000.00 (exclusive of VAT). 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir H. 
Kamegni, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
8. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of land (approximately 3.08 hectares), 
situated at Brooklodge, Glanmire, Cork to the Minister for Education, c/o Chief 
State Solicitor’s Office, Osmond House, Ship Street Little, Dublin 8, for the sum 
of €1,500,000.00 (exclusive of VAT). 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Maher, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
TAKING 
IN 
CHARGE 
OF 
RESIDENTIAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
AT 
BLACKTHORN DRIVE, BLACKSTONE BRIDGE, KILLEENS, CORK. 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations Directorate, dated 22nd May 2025, in relation to the 
proposed taking in charge of roads serving the development at Blackthorn Drive, 
Blackstone Bridge, Killeens, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Having considered the report of the Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations Directorate, dated 22nd May 2025, and the provisions of Section 11 (1) 
of the Roads Act 1993, it is now hereby declared by this Order that the said roads 
serving Blackthorn Drive, Blackstone Bridge, Killeens, Cork, are public roads.” 
 
7.3 
TAKING IN CHARGE OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT GLEANN 
IRIS, RATHPEACON, KILLEENS, CORK. 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations Directorate, dated 22nd May 2025, in relation to the 
proposed taking in charge of roads serving the development at Gleann Iris, 
Rathpeacon, Killeens, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Having considered the report of the Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations Directorate, dated 22nd May 2025, and the provisions of Section 11 (1) 
of the Roads Act 1993, it is now hereby declared by this Order that the said roads 
serving Gleann Iris, Rathpeacon, Killeens, Cork, are public roads.” 
 
7.4 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT INNISHMORE 
  
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed residential development at 
Innishmore, Ballincollig, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive 
thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, 
as amended, dated 5th June 2025. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed residential development at 
Innishmore, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, D. Cahill, H. 

Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. 
Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (25) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, K. McCarthy, A. Deasy. (3) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed residential development at Innishmore 
approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Lynch, seconded by Comhairleoir C. 
Kelleher, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Innishmore, Ballincollig, in the City of Cork and the report of the 
Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Innishmore, Ballincollig, in the City of Cork be 
carried out as recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City 
Council, which was put before Council on the 9th June 2025.” 
 
7.5 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT 24 THOMAS DAVIS 
STREET 
  
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed development at 24 
Thomas Davis Street, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive thereon 
as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, dated 5th June 2025.  
  
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Tynan, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at 24 Thomas Davis Street, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Thomas Davis Street, in the City of Cork be carried out as 
recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was 
put before Council on the 9th June 2025.” 
 
7.6 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT BOREENMANNA ROAD 
  
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed residential development of 
Clanrickarde Lodges at Boreenmanna Road, in the City of Cork and the report of the 
Chief Executive thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000, as amended, dated 5th June 2025. 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the proposed residential development of 
Clanrickarde Lodges at Boreenmanna Road, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
  
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, T. 
Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, P. 
Horgan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. 
Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, C. O’Connor. (22) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, D. Boylan, K. McCarthy, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien. (7) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed residential development of Clanrickarde 
Lodges at Boreenmanna Road approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the 
following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Boreenmanna Road, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Boreenmanna Road, in the City of Cork be carried out as 
recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was 
put before Council on the 9th June 2025.” 
 
7.7 
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF BUS INTERCHANGE AT THE BLACK 
ASH PARK AND RIDE – PART 8 PLANNING 
 
 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 179 (4) (a) of Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed 
development of Bus Interchange at the Black Ash Park and Ride and the report of the 
Director of Local Area Development and Operations thereon, as required under 
Section 179 (3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended).  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development of Bus Interchange at the Black Ash Park and Ride and the report of the 
Director of Services, Local Area Development and Operations dated 29th May 
2025,  it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the 
Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the proposed development of 
bus interchange at the Black Ash Park and Ride be carried out as recommended in the 
said report of the Director of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, Cork 
City Council.” 
 
 

7.8 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS STRATEGY  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle considered and approved the International Relations 
Strategy.  
 
7.9 
ANNUAL REPORT 2024 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle considered and approved the Annual Report 2024. 
 
7.10 
SPORTS CAPITAL GRANTS ALLOCATION FOR 2025 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the Sports Capital Allocation Grant Scheme 
2025. 
 
7.11 
CORK CITY COUNCIL STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the proposed amendments to the Standing Orders 
governing the business of Cork City Council. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
vote was called for to provide for meetings of Strategic Policy Committees without 
external representatives present to discuss certain items e.g. grant recommendations 
as outlined in the proposed amendments to the Standing Orders, where there appeared 
as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. 
Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. 
Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, C. O’Connor. (17) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman, 
G. O’Brien. (12)  
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed amendment approved. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir T Tynan, a 
vote was called for on the holding of Ordinary Meetings at the earlier time of 5.00p.m. 
as outlined in the proposed amendments to the Standing Orders, where there appeared 
as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, 
T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. 
Horgan, S. Martin, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. 
Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 

 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. 
McCarthy, F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch. (8) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed amendment approved. 
 
An Chomhairle approved the proposed amendments to the Standing Orders governing 
the business of Cork City Council. On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the 
following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
amendments to Standing Orders and the report of the Director of Services, Corporate, 
Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 7th May 2025, pursuant to the provisions of 
Section 44 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended, that the revised Standing 
Orders governing the business of Cork City Council be adopted.” 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 3rd JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 3rd June 2025. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 30/04/2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 30/04/2025.  
 
8.2 
WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION MAYORS SUMMIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved acceptance of the invitation from the World 
Health Organisation for Cork City to host the World Health Organisation Mayors 
Summit in Autumn 2026.    
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 26th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 26th May 2025. 
 
10. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - CAIDREAMH 
IDIRNÁISIÚNTA & TURASÓIREACHT – 19th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 19th May 2025. 
 
 
 
 

10.1 
REPORT ON LORD MAYOR-LED DELEGATION TO SAN FRANCISCO 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate, 
Community and Cultural Affairs, dated 14th May 2025 on the recent visit to San 
Francisco. 
 
11. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - COMHSHAOL, 
UISCE & ÁISEANNA – 20th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 20th May 2025. 
 
11.1 
LOCAL AUTHORITY WATERS PROGRAMME PRESENTATION 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentation by Mr. Barry Deane, South 
West Regional Co-ordinator, Local Authority Waters Programme (LAWPRO) on the 
Water Action Plan 2024: A River Basin Management Plan for Ireland and the work 
of LAWPRO.  
 
11.2 
PRESENTATIONS ON THE GLASHEEN STREAM IN CORK CITY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentations by Ms. Letizia Cocchiglia on 
the Freshwater Ecology Survey of the Glasheen Stream in Cork City and Dr. Simon 
Harrison on the Glasheen River – Overview of the current situation and moving 
forward. 
 
11.3 
MOTIONS 
 
11.3.1 
FEBRUARY PARK OPENING HOURS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development and Operations, dated 16th May 2025 on the following motion 
which was held in committee:- 
       
‘That Cork City Council extend February park opening hours till 6.30pm each evening 
and ensure that weekend opening hours match weekday opening hours as agreed by 
the Council of 2019 - 2024.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/086) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the current opening hours for parks, 
follows a principal of opening at 8.30am, and closing at a designated time to take 
account of approximate time of dusk during the year. These parks do not have public 
lighting which is a Health & Safety factor considered in these closing times. 
 
November to February – 5pm closing 
March & October – 6pm closing 
April & September - 8pm closing 
May & August – 9pm closing 

June & July - 10pm closing 
 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration. 
 
11.3.2 
STREET PERFORMER BYE LAWS 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development and Operations, dated 19th May 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council amend the Cork City Council Street Performer Bye Laws 
2024 by the insertion of the following section after section 8: 
 
“8A. The equipment used by a Street Performer shall not include any electronic 
amplifier, amplification system or loudspeaker.”  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/119) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that when Cork City Council approved 
the making of the Bye Laws in May 2024 the Councillors requested that the Bye Laws 
be reviewed after 18 months. Accordingly, they are due for review in November 2025.  
It should be noted that to date most performers such as singers, guitarists, circus 
performers use amplification and backing tracks to support their performances. 
Regarding the noise levels, any performers that Cork City Council inspectors have 
met that may have been exceeding the 75dB prescribed level have always obliged by 
lowering the volume when asked.  
 
Cork City Council will consider all information during the 18 month period before 
making any amendments. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, An Chomhairle agreed to suspend 
standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm.  
 
11.3.3 
COMPOSTING CENTRES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development and Operations, dated 19th May 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council will locate composting centres in accessible locations to 
accept food waste and other easily biodegradable items; or support a social enterprise 
to collect waste in this way for sale or redistribution as compost.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/136) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council accepts food waste 
at its Civic Amenity Site in Tramore Valley Park, this waste is collected under licence 
by a third party and ultimately is recycled / reclaimed by composting and other 

biological transformation processes. Cork City Council previously operated a 
composting centre at TVP however, vermin and odour issues arose around the process 
which resulted in the current situation being implemented, where food waste received 
at the centre is sealed in bins for collection and export for composting off site. As part 
of our climate change goals and in terms of minimising and recycling waste streams, 
Cork City Council is happy to work with any local enterprise and provide as much 
advice and support as possible in terms of biodegradable waste. 
 
11.3.4 
ANIMAL WELFARE ISSUES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development and Operations, dated 19th May 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council provide a report to each Local Area Committee by the next 
scheduled committee on all animal welfare issues currently at play in each of the five 
electoral wards of Cork City and if the following areas will be addressed in full: 
 
• Number of animal cruelty cases reported  
• Processes that Cork City Council have in place and personnel in charge for 
animal welfare  
• Actions carried out by Cork City Council in the last 12 months, in tabular form 
• Fines and court proceedings given to those found guilty of animal cruelty.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/153) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the primary responsibility for animal 
welfare lies with the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, under the 
Animal Health and Welfare Act 2013. 
 
Cork City Council has certain responsibilities in relation to dogs under the Control of 
Dogs Acts, namely the provision of a Dog Shelter and a Dog Warden service. The 
CSPCA, as an agent of the Council, and reporting to the Parks & Recreation 
Department, operate these services for the Council, having a purpose-built Shelter at 
Mahon and employing three Dog Wardens. 
 
On average the CSPCA receive approx. three calls a week from across the city in 
relation to possible dog cruelty cases, some of which prove to be mischievous, and 
endeavour to follow up and investigate. A number of cases are resolved by a visit from 
the Dog Warden, surrender of the dog, or if necessary, are further escalated by referral 
to the ISPCA whose officers have powers under the Animal Health and Welfare Act 
2013 to investigate such cases and issue fines.  Dog Wardens do have powers to issue 
fines for dog control related issues. 
 
While the Housing Directorate does not have direct responsibility for animal welfare 
or a dedicated Animal Welfare Officer, 19 cases of animal welfare concerns have been 
reported to the Housing Directorates for the period May 2024 to April 2025.  Cork 
City Council generally will refer any welfare issues to the ISPCA for investigation in 
the first instance. 
 

An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration. 
 
11.3.5 
EFFECTS OF PAIR TRAWLING IN CORK HARBOUR 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th May 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council invite Ecologist and Fisheries Scientist, Ross Macklin to give 
a presentation and report to the Environment, Water and Amenity Strategic Policy 
Committee regarding the effects of pair trawling in Cork Harbour and other Irish 
coastal areas, including how it is: 
 
- 
contributing to the collapse of inshore marine ecosystems;  
 
- 
having a devastating impact on the environment;   
 
- 
having a detrimental effect on the livelihoods of small fishermen; and  
 
- 
threatening the long-term socio-economic viability of coastal communities.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/175) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that should the Committee be agreeable, 
the necessary arrangements will be put in place for requested presentation and report 
to be given at an upcoming meeting. 
 
12. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - POBAL, CULTÚR & 
COMHFHORBAIRT ÁITE – 22nd MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 22nd May 2025. 
 
12.1 
MINUTES OF THE ARTS COMMITTEE FEBRUARY 2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Arts Committee meeting held 
on 26th February 2025. 
 
12.2 
MINUTES OF AN GRÚPA FORBARTHA GAEILGE MEETING MARCH 
2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the An Grúpa Forbartha Gaeilge 
meeting held on 10th March 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12.3 
MOTIONS  
 
12.3.1 
ACCOMMODATION CENTRES FOR INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs, dated 21st May 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises the eviction of families, including those with 
children going to school, from Designated Accommodation Centres for International 
Protection in Cork, and supports, including by practical measures, their continued 
accommodation, at least until alternative accommodation is available.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/241) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team and chaired by the Lord Mayor facilitate and have representation 
at the Community Response Forum, this platform allows for discussion on various 
aspects of integration in Cork City.  The transfer of residents, including families 
currently residing in Accommodation Centres for International Protection in Cork 
City was discussed in detail at the last forum.   
 
 
Multiple agencies present at the meeting will now discuss the impact of these transfers 
with their own Management teams.  The Local Authority Integration Team (LAIT) 
based within the Community Team agreed to raise the issue at national LAIT meetings 
where the LGMA could highlight the impact on integration, as a result of transfers, 
with the Department of Justice, Integration and Home Affairs. 
  
 
IPAS currently manage all aspects of accommodation for International Protection 
applicants and offer alternative accommodation for people who have been issued with 
a notice to transfer.  While acknowledging the wide-ranging impact of transfers, the 
current system is under pressure to accommodate new arrivals nationwide and 
therefore people with status are required to move from their current residence.  
Supports are in place in each location to assist clients on the transfer list, this includes 
Peter McVerry Trust, who hold regular clinics assisting with housing, and Cork City 
Council’s LAIT who can facilitate connections with LAITs in other geographical 
areas who can offer supports on arrival.  
 
12.3.2 
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF CORK CITY FIRE BRIGADE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Emergency Management & Climate Action, dated 21st May 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That the CE provide an update on the fire cover review being undertaken by Cork 
City Council, and that an update be provided on the future development of Cork City 
Fire Brigade.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/257) 
 

 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Fire Cover Review will be 
published in late May or early June at the latest.  An engagement with Council can be 
arranged once the report has been published. 
 
12.3.3 
AUDIT OF PLACENAMES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the joint report of the Director of Services, 
Local Area Development and Operations, and Director of Services, Corporate, 
Community and Cultural Affairs, dated 21st May 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would conduct an audit of the different placenames that are 
placed at the entrance to different areas with a view to highlighting gaps in areas and 
bringing consistency to the naming process. This can be done in co-operation with the 
various community associations with a view to increasing the sense of identity for 
different communities.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 25/262) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Council (Parks & Recreation 
Department) have worked with many local community groups, primarily Tidy Towns 
organisations, when approached, in supporting them in the provision of welcome signs 
in their areas. The City Council itself does not provide the signs, but will continue to 
provide support to local groups when asked to have identity placenames in their local 
areas. 
 
Cork City Council through the Community Team support a range of Community 
Associations and Groups across the city annually. In September, the Community 
Section will host a Community Associations Forum and in advance will examine 
potential for an audit of signage and signage needs for collation and consideration by 
Council. 
 
12.3.4 
RENAMING OF BISHOP LUCEY PARK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the report of the Director of Services, Corporate, 
Community and Cultural Affairs, dated 22nd May 2025 on the following motion:- 
‘That, in view of the Ryan Report, the McAleese Report and the most recent Report 
of The Scoping Enquiry into Sexual Abuse in schools run by Religious Orders, Cork 
City Council forthwith remove the name of Bishop Cornelius Lucey, under whose 
watch and term of office and administrator, both as serving priest and bishop of the 
Diocese of Cork and Ross, much of the abuse, documented, proven or alleged, be it 
sexual or physical or psychological, occurred, from the public park on Grand Parade 
for whom he was named by a previous decision of Council.  
In addition, that the park be renamed Páirc na mBan Chorcaí to do honour to the 
women and girls who were victims of the institutional abuse that occurred under his 
reign both as priest and bishop and also to do honour to the women of Cork who 
participated valiantly in our War of Independence, such as Muriel McSweeney and 

Mary McSweeney among others, and to celebrate the lives of Cork women who have 
distinguished themselves in Poetry, Literature, Theatre, Music, Art and Academia and 
those who have voluntarily contributed to the causes of Social Justice through various 
forms of community work and campaigning for betterment of social conditions 
throughout the city.’  
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 25/109)  
The report of the Director of Services stated that this motion was referred from the 
Party Whips meeting of 24th March 2025 to the Community, Culture & Placemaking 
Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
There are currently no plans as part of the redevelopment of the park to rename Bishop 
Lucey Park.  Should Council request that this matter be progressed a process will be 
undertaken to explore same. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Tynan, seconded by Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the report of the Director of Services where 
there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, M. 
Gould, K. Collins, D. Cahill, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
J. Lynch, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien. (15) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, B. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, 
P. Horgan, N. O’Connor, C. O’Connor. (8) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried, and the report of the Director of Services approved. 
 
13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 13th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 13th May 2025. 
 
14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 3rd JUNE 2025  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 3rd June 2025. 
 
14.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
14.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF APRIL 2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of April 
2025. 
 

15. 
SPORTS COMMITTEE – 14th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Sports Committee from its 
meeting held, 14th May 2025. 
 
16. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th May 2025. 
 
16.1 
MOTIONS 
 
16.1.1 
OLD WATER FONT AT THE LOUGH 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 22nd May 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘I ask that the old water font (painted yellow) situated on the southeast corner of the 
Lough be repurposed and re commissioned so as to provide fresh water for hydration 
for the many numbers of the public who utilise the Lough as an area to exercise. I also 
ask that a doggie water font be situated at the base of the said old water font so as the 
many dog walkers can allow their pets to hydrate also.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Dineen 24/434) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Parks Department keeps this 
fountain in good decorative order. However, there are no available staff resources at 
present to facilitate this request but the proposal will be kept under review should an 
opportunity arise to progress.  
 
As the initial reply stated, we don’t have the staff time to follow up on this at present. 
Any repurposing work will require investigation of water connection possibilities, 
specialist knowledge of old drinking fountains and the management of this work. If 
an opportunity arises in the medium term we will follow up. 
 
17. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th May 2025. 
 
18. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th May 2025. 
 
19. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th May 2025. 
 

20. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th May 2025. 
 
21. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
22. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the IPB AGM, held at Galway City and County 
Council Offices, Co. Galway, 2nd May 2025.  
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the Public Affairs Ireland Upcoming Audit and Risk 
Committee Workshop, held at Grand Canal Hotel, Co. Dublin, 29th March 
2025. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Module 3 Training Seminar, 
Emergency Response – Councils supporting Communities in Weather Crises, 
held at Radisson Blu Hotel, Co. Sligo, 22nd May 2025. 
 
23. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – Cork ETB – January to May 2025. 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – Cork Local Drug Task Force – January to May 2025. 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – CORE – January to May 2025. 
 
24. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
None received. 
 
25. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
26. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for April 2025. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 

An Chomhairle noted that motion 57, Long-Term Vacancy of Council Homes, would 
be discussed under suspension of standing orders. 
 
28. 
MOTIONS DEFERRED FROM MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE HELD 
ON THE 14th APRIL 2025 
 
28.1 
TENANT IN SITU SCHEME 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council notes that the Tenant in Situ Scheme was an essential tool in 
preventing homelessness. 
 
It allowed local authorities to buy properties from landlords who otherwise would 
have carried out no-fault evictions.  
 
Last year, hundreds of families in Dublin were prevented from becoming homeless 
because of this effective scheme. 
 
Cork City Council is deeply concerned that the Minister for Housing James Browne 
has cut funding to this scheme and introduced criteria that will result in more people 
becoming homeless. 
 
Cork City Council urges the Minister for Housing to immediately reverse his decision 
and to reinstate the scheme in full.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/186) 
 
29. 
MOTIONS 
 
29.1 
END THE SALE OF ISRAEL BONDS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council agrees that the Central Bank of Ireland can and must act to 
end the sale of Israel Bonds under its authority. 
 
It must immediately end regulation of the bonds. It must end its complicity in 
genocide. This is a moral obligation and a legal obligation under the Genocide 
Convention, international human rights and CFT legislation, under Irish Human 
Rights Law and Ireland as a neutral country must not act in any way to facilitate these 
bonds unless there is an immediate cease fire, end to killing and a lasting peace.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. T. Tynan, Cllr. K. Collins 25/298) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. 
Boylan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. 

Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. 
(19) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí S. Martin, A. Deasy. (2) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, D. Cahill. (2) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
29.2 
RAISE THE ROOF RALLY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises the impacts of the housing and homelessness 
emergency on workers, families and communities in Cork and endorses the Raise the 
Roof rally in Cork on 21st June at 2pm gathering at the National Monument on Grand 
Parade.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. M. Gould, Cllr. F. Kerins, Cllr. O. Moran, Cllr. H. Kamegni, Cllr. B. 
McCarthy, Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/300) 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, P. Horgan, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, C. O’Connor. (11) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, S. 
Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, G. O’Brien. (8) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
29.3 
SCOIL ÍOSAGÁIN FARRANREE 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Education and ask her to reverse the 
decision that was made not to fund Scoil Íosagáin Farranree. The application was 
made to fit out a fourth ASD class and employ one teacher and two sna’s.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/304) 
 
 
 
 
 

29.4 
AWAAB'S LAW 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
 
‘I call on Cork City Council as a matter of urgency to forward the following motion 
to the Minister for Housing, Minister for Health, and Taoiseach Micheál Martin: 
 
 
I am highlighting the severe conditions that renters of both social and private 
accommodation are facing, with regards to mould and dampness in their homes. 
 
 
In a recent case in the UK, a coroner blamed the death of a young child on unsafe 
living conditions due to mould.  
 
 
The UK is currently preparing legislation on this issue.  Awaab's Law, is named after 
the tragic case of 5-year-old Awaab Ismail, who died after being exposed to damp and 
mould in his council flat. This legislation is due to be signed into law by Autumn of 
this year, which reflects on the urgency of the problem. 
 
 
I call on the Government to enact similar legislation in this jurisdiction in order to 
avoid preventable illness and death due to unsafe living conditions caused by mould 
and damp.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 25/313) 
 
29.5 
TRADE WITH THE OCCUPIED PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to An Taoiseach Micheál Martin urging him to 
include both goods and services in any proposed redrafted bill banning trade with the 
Occupied Palestinian Territories.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/336) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir M. Gould to address the meeting on the 
following motion, after which a discussion took place, and An Chomhairle approved 
the motion:- 
 
LONG-TERM VACANCY OF COUNCIL HOMES 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes: 
 
-  
Families in Cork city are crying out for homes while homes are being left to rot 
-  
FOI data released to Sinn Féin shows at least 345 Council homes are vacant in 
Cork City 
-  
196 of these have been vacant longer than 12 months and 99 have been vacant 
longer than 2 years 

-  
The latest NOAC report found it takes on average 32.49 weeks to return homes 
in Cork city to use 
-  
The €11,000 provided by central government for return of vacant properties to 
use is too low for properties that need significant repair and red-tape and 
bureaucracy create barriers to accessing these funds 
 
And agrees to: 
 
• 
Write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage requesting 
he urgently revise his approach to returning these homes to use and end long-
term vacancy of Council homes by allowing Cork City Council do their job, 
renovate these homes and allocate them to families and people who desperately 
need them.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/338) 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
