Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 17th May 2018 
Multi-Media Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy 
Chairperson 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
Paul Moynihan 
Nora O’Donovan 
Dan Boyle 
Bernie Connolly 
Ger Canning 
Priscilla Lynch 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
Apologies: 
Ann Doherty, David Ronayne, Eddie Mullins, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, Cllr. 
Chris O’Leary, Adrienne Rodgers, Laurence Owens, Mick O’Connell, Fiona 
Finn, Cllr PJ Hourican 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted.  
 
 
2. Minutes 
The minutes of 19th April, 2018 were considered and on proposal of Dan Boyle, seconded by 
Bernie Connolly were approved with no matters arising. 
  
 
3. Healthy Ireland Fund Application 2018 
T. Power confirmed that the Healthy Ireland Fund Application closing date has been 
extended from 11th May to 25th May, 2018 and the maximum that can be applied for is 
€75,000.  
It was agreed by the LCDC that the application would be finalised and presented to the 
SICAP sub-group on 24th May who would approve sign off on the LCDC’s behalf. 
Five of the eight actions are repeat actions from round 1. The Department has indicated that 
round 2 actions will be approved if continued from round 1. Following the application 
submission, a contract will be issued immediately (prior to a decision being made on the 
application) and 10% of funding will be granted. The LCDC will be notified of the decision by 
August/September. Projects will run to 31st March, 2019.  
 
CYPSC (Children and Young People Services Committee) can also make submissions to HIF 
and the LCDC can submit joint submissions with them. CYPSC was contacted in this regard 
and it was confirmed that they will make their own application for 2018. It was noted that 
for round 3 of funding the LCDC will make a stronger connection with CYPSC and look at the 
possibility of submitting a joint application.   
 
 
 
The LCDC agreed that prior to round 3 that strategic planning of project proposals will take 
place to streamline the application process. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4. LECP Inclusive Arts Presentation 
Eoin Nash gave a presentation on LECP initiative Inclusive Arts. E. Nash is hoping to make 
Cork a centre of excellence for inclusive arts. This is a new concept which will allow Cork City 
to become leaders in this area. An Inclusive Arts Platform and an Inclusive Arts Strategic 
Group has been established. This Strategic Group will report to LCDC. The Strategic Group 
will include 3-5 representatives from the Inclusive Arts Platform; having an older person 
representative on the group was also suggested. E. Nash to talk to P. Lynch regarding HSE 
representative on this group. T. Power to liaise with the Age Friendly Forum in relation to E. 
Nash giving them a presentation. It was suggested that the Minister for Arts be invited to 
Cork and the LCDC confirmed that they fully supports this.   
 
5. Review of Membership 
T. Power noted that the review of membership is in progress at present and that the report 
will be presented to the CPG on Monday, 21st May, 2018 with a recommendation to vary the 
number of LCDC members upwards to 19 to include a youth representative and a 
Department of Social Protection representative.  
 
 
6. A.O.B. 
P. Moynihan acknowledged and congratulated the following: 
 
Cork City marathon sanctuary runners. 
 
The LGBTI inter-agency group in their work and the delegation that travelled to San 
Francisco representing Cork City and the inclusive message that they are portraying.  
P. Moynihan noted that the Department has acknowledged the additional workload and 
confirmed that two new posts had been advertised and interviews had been held in this 
regard. The specialist grade 7 post will be filled by Tony Power and the development worker 
grade 6 post will be filled by Stephen Murphy.  The LCDC board extended their 
congratulations to both. 
It was noted that Africa Day will take place on 25th May, 2018 and that a number of events 
were planned including a film night, an African art exhibition, a seminar and a family fun day  
in Fitzgerald’s Park on Saturday, 26th May. T. Power to circulate the schedule of events. 
P. Lynch wished to thank everyone for their support in relation to the green ribbon (mental 
health) campaign and Emergency Management during Storm Emma.  
In relation to public health, P. Lynch noted that a demographic profile of health needs to 
2030 highlighted that we have an older aging population and chronic disease including 
cancer as a serious concern. P. Lynch is hoping to make this available to the LCDC. 
Health Innovation Hub will build health messaging into public areas.  
G. Canning noted that there is an increase in non-nationals and noted that training is 
available to allow them attain the level of English needed to help them secure employment - 
IELTS qualification. G. Canning also noted that an information piece is available regarding 
voting. G. Canning is to circulate details. 
This concluded the business of the meeting and the next meeting scheduled Thursday, 14th June, 
2018 at 4pm.  
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, 
Chairperson 
