MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 12th MAY  2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, 
P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, N. 
O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, 
G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Ms. A. O’ Rourke, Director of Services, Housing. 
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
APOLOGIES  
 
Comhairleoir P. Dineen. 
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• Condolences on the passing of His Holiness Pope Francis. 
• The Hyde family on the death of Luke Hyde. 
• The Flatley family on the death of Garda Kevin Flatley. 
• The Coleman family on the death of Marie Coleman. 
• The Twomey family on the death of Matthew Twomey. 
• The Budden family on the death of Mary Budden. 
• The Wiley family on the death of Flan Wiley. 

• The O’Leary family on the death of Dan O’Leary. 
• The Casey family on the death of Thomas Casey. 
• The Ryan family on the death of Breda Ryan. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Angela McCarthy. 
• The O’Mahony family on the death of Grace O’Mahony. 
• The O’Shea family on the death of Julia O’Shea. 
• The O’Hara family on the death of Joan O’Hara. 
• The Cullen family on the death of Leonard Cullen. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of John O’Donovan. 
• The Coughlan family on the death of Mary Coughlan. 
• The Googan family on the death of Bridget (Bridie) Googan. 
• The Larkin family on the death of Jim Larkin. 
• The O’Regan family on the death of Denis O’Regan. 
• The O’Connor family on the death of Peter O’Connor. 
• The Horgan family on the death of Roy Horgan. 
• The Walsh family on the death of Tom Walsh. 
• The Lane family on the death of Breda Lane. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Pope Leo XIV on his election. 
• Rachel Blackmore on her retirement from horseracing after 16 years. 
• Avondale United on fielding their first senior women’s team and their first 
senior league title. 
• Ringmahon Rangers on being crowned League Winners. 
• Cork International Choral Festival on celebrating 70 years. 
• Joe Duffy on his retirement from broadcasting. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
WELCOME TO THE LORD MAYOR OF BELFAST 
 
 
An tArdmhéara welcomed Councillor Micky Murray, Lord Mayor of Belfast, who 
was in attendance in the public gallery 
 
3.2 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR THE IRFU 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for the 
IRFU on celebrating 150 years of Irish Rugby. 
 
3.3 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CORK MUSEUM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Cork 
Museum on its 80th anniversary. 
 
3.4 
ANNUAL MEETING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of the Annual Meeting of Cork 
City Council on Friday 20th June 2025. 

 
3.5 
UNVEILING OF TIDY TOWNS PLAQUE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara confirmed the arrangements of the unveiling of the Tidy Towns 
plaque in Ballincollig on Sunday 18th May 2025 to celebrate the town’s winning of 
the National Supervalu Tidy Town’s Competition, and invited members to attend. 
 
3.6 
LORD MAYOR’S CHARITY BALL 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that tickets are on sale for the Lord Mayor’s 
Charity Ball, which takes place on 6th June 2025 in Vienna Woods, and encouraged 
all to support. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
PROPOSED HOLDING OF AN EVENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 2nd 
May 2025 on the proposed holding of Cork Carnival of Science on 7th and 8th June 
2025 in Fitzgerald Park. 
 
4.2 
DANCE CORK FIRKIN CRANE – FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR ROOF 
REPAIR 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 6th May 
2025 on the proposed financial contribution of €127,364 to Dance Cork Firkin Crane 
for roof repair. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Special Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 7th April 2025. 
 
An Chomhairle agreed that these minutes would be amended to reflect the attendance 
of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy and further approved at the June Meeting of An 
Chomhairle.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 14th April 2025. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Special Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 29th April 2025. 
 

6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
NORTHSIDE OF CORK CITY 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald was deferred to 
the next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 9th June 2025:- 
 
To ask the Chief Executive commits to present the development of a strategic plan to 
reimagine the Northside of Cork City in the year 2025, in a presentation to council to 
include deliverable actions across the Northside involving, placemaking, retail, 
infrastructure capable of early delivery and at a higher level the bringing forward of 
plans for regeneration of properties which may attract government funding under the 
Infrastructure Investment Fund. 
 
6.2 
RENT PAYMENT CALCULATION 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can Cork City Council put plans in place to cease the process of Means Testing Child 
Maintenance Payments when calculating Rent Payments, ensuring to include HAP 
Tenancies and Social Housing Applications. Other Local Authorities such as Cork 
County Council and Dublin City Council have already implemented this process to 
the best of my knowledge.  
 
Can this process be put in place, and if so, when? And if not, why not? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The assessment process for social housing applications is governed by the Social 
Housing Assessment Regulations 2011.   Cork City Council operates under the 
Household Means Policy issued by the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage.   This details the income types that are to be included for assessment 
purposes.   Maintenance payments received are included as a source of income.   Any 
decision, therefore, regarding the exclusion of this payment in the assessment process 
for social housing supports would have to be decided at a national level. 
In the context of calculating rent payments, the City Council is currently completing 
a project to fully examine the terms of the existing differential rent scheme.   The 
inclusion or otherwise of maintenance payments will be examined in the context of 
this project. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
 
 
 
 

6.3 
HENRY STREET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Henry Street. Who owns it ? 
 
 
Since Covid Henry Street has been in the possession of and controlled by the MUH. 
 
While it was understandable during the Pandemic the crisis is now no more and this 
public street is still to this day closed off to general traffic. 
 
 
I ask the CEO to confirm the following. 
 
 
1, Can the CEO confirm that we Cork City Council have charge over Henry Street 
Cork ? 
 
 
2, Can the CEO confirm that we Cork City Council receive a payment from the MUH 
for use of this public highway, and if so how much ? 
 
 
3, Can the CEO confirm what exactly is the reason why the MUH needs this public 
road for their use post Pandemic ? 
 
 
4, Can the CEO confirm that we Cork City Council will reopen this public street to 
the general public for general use and if so provide a date for when this will happen ? 
 
 
REPLY 
1. The City Council has charge over the street. 
 
2. Cork City Council does not receive a payment from the MUH for use of this space.  
 
3.  The space continues to be used by MUH in delivering their services.  
 
4. The Cork City Council is engaging with the MUH and local stakeholders with 
regard to future use of the space.  
 
Paul Moynihan 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.4 
TENANT IN SITU 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask, in tabular form, the number of current applications on file for tenant in situ, 
the total cost to the Exchequer and Cork City Council if all Applications were 
processed and honoured and the number of people the total applications on file would 
be prevented from entering homelessness. 
 

 
REPLY 
 
 
There are currently 25 no. properties at sale agreed stages under the Tenant in Situ 
scheme, and we are reviewing the total projected cost currently in the context of the 
Circular Housing 11/2025 –Social Housing Second Hand Acquisitions Programme 
2025 whereby the funding envelope has changed and conditions have been attached 
to all acquisitions, including the refurbishment work parameters.  The estimated total 
cost of acquisition is €7.3 million but this is being reviewed in the context of the new 
Circular.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 no. further applications for Tenant in Situ are under various stages of review in the 
current process. No further data is to hand as all cases are undergoing assessment 
currently in light of the new Circular, and property valuations have yet to be concluded 
on eligible units.   
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.5 
TENANT IN SITU 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the amount of HAP payments that would be paid out in a 
12-24 month timeframe if all the applications for Tenant in situ accessed HAP in the 
situation where Exchequer and Government support for the TIS remained closed. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Of the 24 cases that are currently under review, 14 of these are HAP recipients. 
 
The monthly total related to these cases getting HAP support totals: €13,180 
The annual total related to these cases getting HAP support totals: €158,157 
The 24-month total related to these cases getting HAP support totals: €316,314 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. of TiS Units - Sale 
Agreed/Conveyance  
Cost of Acquisition (excl 
works) 
No. of people in residence 
25 
€7.3 million 
44 Adults + 26 Children 

6.6 
 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the amount money it would cost the Exchequer and Cork 
City Council if all the families currently with a live tenant in situ application were to 
enter emergency accommodation for a period of 12 months.  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
There are 24 households with a live tenant in situ application. Depending on 
placement, availability, family size and whether it was a Supported Temporary 
Accommodation (STA) or Private Emergency Accomodation (PEA) the costs would 
vary. 
 
An average family in a STA, costs around €55k per annum for a family and a single 
adult in a STA is just over €8k per annum. This cost does fluctuate for smaller or 
larger families and varies for individuals in larger STAs which are more cost effective. 
Private Emergency Accommodation is considerably more costly given the family 
sizes. Cost of individuals in PEA is costing close to €40K per annum and families 
between €60k – €100k per annum (depending on family size).  
 
Of the live applications, there are 6 are single households which would have estimated 
max cost of €240k per annum, the remaining are 18 households with an average of 
2+2 which is a STA costs roughly €700K and in a PEA €1mill 
 
In total for a 12-month period that number of households could have a maximum cost 
up €1.24 million.  
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.7 
HOUSING ADAPTATIONS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if Cork City Council is currently reviewing its policy on 
housing adaptations for older residents and persons with disabilities, particularly in 
cases where individuals have lived in their homes for several decades. In instances 
where extensions or home modifications are recommended by medical professionals 
but subsequently refused, is it now Council policy to default to housing transfers? 
 
Furthermore, can the Chief Executive clarify whether the social, emotional, and 
community impacts of displacement—especially for those over the age of 60—are 
being adequately considered in decision-making, or if financial constraints are the 
overriding factor in such refusals? 
 

REPLY 
 
In so far as is practicable, the City Council will aim to carry out adaptations to a 
property to enable applicants for housing extensions/adaptations to continue to live as 
independently as possible in their current accommodation.    
 
In all cases where applications are received for adaptations to City Council owned 
properties, the City Council requests an Occupational Therapist to visit the property 
to assess the requirements of the persons on behalf of whom the application for 
adaptations to the property they are occupying has been received.   The Occupational 
Therapist will then make recommendations to the City Council thereafter.   The 
recommendations are reviewed in accordance with the terms of the annual Department 
of Housing, Local Government and Heritage Disabled Persons Grants 
(DPGs)/Improvement Works in Lieu (IWILS) funding allocations circular, which 
requires local authorities to examine the following criteria: 
 
Appropriateness & Compliance  
Extensions should only be carried out where no alternative option is available. Local 
authorities must explore alternative options including transfers within stock (own 
stock or long term leased properties), transfers to an available and suitable unit within 
the Approved Housing Body sector or the use of judicious acquisitions.   The design 
of any adaptations or extensions, should be appropriate to the severity of the 
disabilities identified.   Specialist reports (OT reports etc.) and recommendations 
should be evaluated whilst taking financial considerations into account.   Local 
authorities must comply with the Building Regulations, in particular Part M – Access 
and Use, and have regard to the associated Technical Guidance Documents published 
by the Department of Housing.  
 
Cork City Council is therefore obliged under our funding parameters to investigate 
alternative options, if available, which will include discussion of the option of a 
transfer for the household, however this would only be in the context of determining 
if the household would consider a transfer to an existing adapted property or bungalow 
in the first instance.  In some cases, applicants will choose to transfer to more suitable 
accommodation, particularly as the Council is developing a strong programme of 
delivery of accommodation for older persons, and persons with a disability. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.8 
EVENT CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Following on from my supplementary question at the Council meeting on 14th April 
2025 (which the Council Executive failed to answer), I would ask the Chief Executive 
for further details regarding the €1,604,551.00 expended by Cork City Council on the 
Cork Events Centre between 1st January 2014 and the end of October 2024, including: 
 

- 
clarification as to how much of the €1,604,551.00 was signed off on/approved 
by the then Chief Executive in her role as Accounting Officer for Cork City 
Council during that period; 
 
- 
an explanation as to how, in the written response to my question at the Council 
meeting on 14th April, the total amount given as expended by Cork City Council 
on the Cork Events Centre is €1,604,551.00 whereas when one adds up each 
individual sum given in the response it comes to only €1,526,891.93; 
 
- 
a detailed description of what the remaining €77,659.07 (being the differential 
between €1,604,551.00 and €1,526,891.93) was expended on; 
 
- 
clarification as to how much of the work done and services rendered by each 
individual organisation, company, partnership and service provider on the Cork 
Events Centre project during that period in exchange for the payment of 
€1,604,551.00 will definitely be used/be of assistance in any future Cork Events 
Centre project; 
 
- 
clarification as to how much of the work done and services rendered by each 
individual organisation, company, partnership and service provider on the Cork 
Events Centre project during that period in exchange for the payment of 
€1,604,551.00 could possibly be used/be of assistance in any future Cork Events 
Centre project; 
 
- 
clarification as to how much of the work done and services rendered by each 
individual organisation, company, partnership and service provider on the Cork 
Events Centre project during that period in exchange for the payment of 
€1,604,551.00 will definitely not be any use/assistance in any future Cork 
Events Centre project. 
 
REPLY 
 
The Chief Executive, as Accounting Officer for Cork City Council is responsible for 
the safeguarding of public funds and for the regularity and propriety of the transactions 
of the organisation. The Chief Executive has a responsibility for ensuring that 
appropriate systems of internal financial control are maintained and operated in 
carrying out these transactions and therefore does not sign off on each individual 
payments made by the Council. 
 
The Council’s purchase to pay process is the system of internal controls to ensure that 
the Council’s non payroll expenditure is approved in advance of payment, and that all 
payments are made in accordance with that original approval. This process is the 
means by which a Chief Executive fulfils their responsibility as Accounting Officer.  
As part of this process, CE orders are prepared for expenditure in excess of €20,000. 
All expenditure relating to the Event Centre followed the Council's purchase to pay 
process.  
 
The €77,659.07 which was included in the total amount of € 1,604,551.00 but 
excluded from the detail was for legal fees associated with the VEAT challenge in 
April 2020. The €77,659.07 was included on an excel spreadsheet analysis file but 

when transferred to a word document file the amount was mistakenly excluded during 
the transfer. This amount had been included in detailed analysis previously supplied 
to councillors. 
 
I apologies for this administrative error. 
 
A governance structure has been established to steer the re-tendering of the Events 
Centre Project. The advices and learnings form the original process are available to 
the Project Delivery Board. It is not possible to speculate at this stage as to what works 
and services:-  
 
iv. 
will definitely be used/ be of assistance,  
v. 
could possibly be used/ be of assistance, or  
vi. 
will definitely not be any use/assistance in any future Cork Events Centre 
project. 
 
All work carried out and reports prepared for Cork City Council on the Cork Events 
Centre up to October 2024 will be available to the Council and the Project 
Management Delivery Team (PMDT) when it is appointed in the coming weeks. The 
PMDT will decide when and what information and material it will utilise from this 
resource as the project procurement and delivery progresses. 
 
John Hallahan 
Head of Finance. 
 
6.9 
HOW MANY RESIDENTIAL UNITS TO BE DELIVERED IN SOUTH 
DOCKS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the following be added to the list of CE questions please? 
 
Can you outline how many residential units are to be delivered in the South Docks 
including the Sextant site? 
 
Of those delivered how many or what percentage will be 
(A) private? 
(B) affordable to buy? 
(C) affordable to rent? 
(D) social housing ? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Cork City Development Plan sets out that Cork’s North and South Docklands are 
to accommodate up to 10,000 homes. The intention is that this will be realised through 
a mix of tenure.  
 
To date 3,390 homes have been granted planning permission in the North and South 
Docklands, with the following mix: 

(a)        2,196 private (65%) 
(b)        110 affordable (3%) 
(c)        591 cost rental (17%) 
(d)        493 social (15%) 
 
Currently, this represents a 65% - 35% tenure mix between private and social, 
affordable and cost rental homes. 
 
The final delivered tenure mix is subject to change.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin 
Director of Services 
Planning and Integrated Development. 
 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the question to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further discussion. 
 
6.10 
TENANT IN SITU 2025 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on all engagements with the DHLGH and the relevant 
Ministers regarding the Tenant in Situ 2025 and in particular the 33 families whose 
homes are currently at sale agreed but for whom Cork City Council did not receive 
sufficient funding. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Minister for Housing Local Government and Heritage, James Browne, T.D., has 
met with the Chief Executive of Cork City Council, the Assistant Chief Executive and 
the Director of Housing. 
Cork City Council continues to engage with the DHLGH on its Acquisitions 
Programme 2024/2025 and a detailed review of all potential acquisitions and 
associated costs is in progress.  
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.11 
DERELICTION 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail exactly the staff, including how many there are 
and their titles/grades, who have responsibility for dealing with dereliction, to confirm 
which of them have full-time, dedicated responsibility for dealing with dereliction, 
and to comment on how this compares with Limerick City & County Council, which 

has had a derelict properties unit since 2017 with legal expertise, whether Cork City 
Council’s approach is satisfactory and how the Chief Executive proposes to strengthen 
it, with a view to Cork City Council having the best, most effective approach to ending 
dereliction in Ireland? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The resources assigned to the Cork City Council’s dedicated Derelict Sites team has 
grown each year in 2023 and 2024 and currently consists of the following permanent 
resources: 
• Grade 7 – Vacant Homes Officer & Team Lead  
• Senior Technician – Dereliction team member  
• Grade 5 – Dereliction team member  
• Grade 4 – Dereliction team member  
• Grade 3 – Dereliction team member  
• Grade 3 – Dereliction team member  
 
In addition to the above, a significant number of Cork City Council staff, across a 
variety of Directorates, contribute a significant portion of their time working on 
dereliction and vacancy. This includes inputs from Planning, Conservation, Building 
Control, Property, Housing, Law, etc. Clear governance structures are in place at a 
working group and review group level, comprising staff from the aforementioned 
directorates, to ensure tackling Dereliction remains a top priority for the City Council 
and that actions are tracked and monitored consistently and effectively.  
 
Cork City Council has its own Law Department which offers critical legal advice to 
the Derelict Sites on a continual basis. 
 
Between 2023 to 2025 Cork City Council significantly increased its activity and 
output in all areas of dereliction and vacancy. A city-wide survey of over 13000 
properties was conducted in 2023 to quantify the situation and correlate census and 
other data. The number of sites on the Derelict Site Register has subsequently 
increased from 95 in 2021 to 175 in 2024 following this focus on identification.  An 
additional 240 properties are being investigated and progressed under the Derelict 
Sites Act, bringing the total number of properties being actively advanced to over 400, 
double the number of properties being investigated in 2022. A further 300 properties 
are on Cork City Council’s vacant homes register, while an additional 419 properties 
are availing of the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant which brings long term 
vacant and derelict properties back into use.  Cork City Council is administering over 
€24 million Euro of funding on this grant alone. This brings the total number of 
properties being progressed for a removal of vacancy or dereliction by Cork City 
Council’s Derelict Sites team to over 1000, a fivefold increase on the 2020 total. 
 
In 2024 the focus was placed on removing dereliction with enhanced processes, 
additional engagement schedules and the hosting of several ‘In the Community’ 
events, utilizing local spaces like libraries for pop up dereliction and vacancy events. 
These delivered information on grants, planning and other dereliction related topics 
to hundreds of attendees, including trade and industry stakeholders at an annual 
‘Urban Fabric’ city center seminar of 120+ attendees. This resulted in over 230 
properties being returned to use through activity by the Derelict Sites team in 2024, a 

tripling of activity between 2021 and 2024. This consisted of 170 properties returned 
through grants and an additional 62 through the application of the Derelict Sites 
Act.  Derelict Site Levy collection increased to €517,500, the highest figure in the 
country and representing a 300% increase on 2023. A further 36 properties availed of 
Heritage and Conservation funding through Cork City Council, many of these large-
scale projects on significant cultural buildings that removed or avoided dereliction.  
 
Following updated ways of working since 2023 Cork City Council has become the 
second best placed Local Authority nationally, behind Limerick, for Derelict Sites 
activity, placing first on certain indicators. Compulsory Purchase Activity has 
increased, and Cork City Council has an active list of over 80 properties registered 
with the Department of Housing as potential acquisitions through URDF funding and 
expects to see activity remain steady in this area. Cork City Council also works with 
Limerick City and County Council, and all other Local Authorities, through the 
Department of Housing’s facilitated ‘Vacant Homes Officer meet ups’, at which best 
practice is shared.  The experience of Limerick City and County Council was also 
shared in a guidance document by the Housing Agency in April of 2025 and this 
document is being utilized by Cork City Council derelict sites team. 
 
Cork City Council will continue to identify and implement best practice in this 
important but challenging area. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin  
Director of Service,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.12 
ENGLISH MARKET ROOF 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on repair works on the English Market roof? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
As a consequence of structural changes to Directorates within Cork City Council in 
December 2024, responsibility for the management of the English Market transferred 
to the Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
In January 2025, the Property Department was tasked with a review of the overall 
property, which includes the main roof covering both the Grand Parade and Princes 
Street elements of the premises, for the entire market.  
 
This review identified the categorisation of works required to the external fabric of 
the market and to improve trader welfare facilities and customer experience within the 
market itself. The review also identified the need to undertake a wider drainage 
infrastructure review of the English Market which will commence later in 2025. 
 
Improvement works will commence with the façade, roof and interior of Hilsers in Q2 
2025. In tandem with those works, a more thorough investigation of the main roof of 

the English Market will be undertaken which will inform the best option for the 
upgrade and improvement of the roof taking into consideration time, cost and 
disturbance. Once a preferred option is determined the subsequent works will be 
procured subject to the necessary funding being in place. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin  
Director of Service,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
6.13 
LVP CARDS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive provide details of the organisations from which LVP Cards 
are procured, and confirm the total expenditure in respect of each Card in 2024, under 
the following categories: 
Travel Costs, Accommodation, Restaurants, Hospitality, Conference Costs, Gifts 
(visitors), Workwear, Other, and what system is in place to ensure that the Line 
Managers (please confirm number) charged with monitoring the use of LVP Cards 
can justify each and every item of expenditure made, and in relation to the Irish Rail 
Card, what is the general nature/purpose of majority of journeys undertaken. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The current arrangement for the provision of LVP cards is with Bank of Ireland 
operating under a national arrangement put in place by the Office of Government 
Procurement (OGP).  
 
Under this arrangement, Bank of Ireland provide personalised corporate purchasing 
cards to individuals within Cork City Council, authorised by primary and secondary 
authorisers within the Finance Department designated under the corporate agreement. 
 
Total Spend under the following categories for 2024: 
 
Travel: €26,507 
 
Workwear: €9,675  
 
Accommodation: €2,228  
 
The use of LVP cards is only permitted in limited scenarios for accommodation when 
it cannot be recouped through the Travel & Subsistence System 
 
Restaurants: €2,156  
 
The use of LVP cards for restaurants is not permitted with limited exception for areas 
like the Foyer with unique operational needs. 
 
Conference Costs: No expenditure.  

 
Hospitality: No expenditure. The use of LVP cards for this category is not permitted. 
 
Gifts: No expenditure. The use of LVP cards for this category is not permitted. 
 
There are 46 Log sheet Approvers & 36 Deputy Log sheet approvers 
 
The log sheet approver is the person responsible for ensuring that LVP purchases 
comply with this Policy and Procedure. 
They must be either the supervisor of the card holder or be at least one grade higher 
than the card holder and have an intimate knowledge of the cardholder’s role and what 
quantity and type of goods/services are required to fulfil that role.  
 
The log sheet approver will certify all purchases to validate that they conform to all 
sections of this policy and that the cardholder has complied with all requirements set 
out herein. This certification must be evidenced by signing and dating the cardholder 
weekly log sheet to confirm that the log sheet approver is satisfied that procedures 
have been followed as per the policy. 
 
Once the procedure is complete, the log sheet approver signs the log sheet, passes the 
log sheet with the corresponding documentation, including the Bank of Ireland 
statement to the System Approver. 
 
There are 31 System Approvers and 26 Deputy System Approvers. 
 
The system approver/deputy system approver is responsible for certifying that all 
purchases are in order and that payment can be made to Bank of Ireland. This 
certification will be carried out on the LVP system, "Lighthouse" and will authorise 
the Finance Department to charge the expenditure to the reporting officer's general 
ledger codes. They are also responsible for ensuring that log sheet approvers have the 
necessary knowledge and capacity to allow them to carry out their role and 
responsibilities.  
 
Before carrying out certification on the Lighthouse system, the system approver or 
deputy must be satisfied that: 
 
➢ All cardholders in their section have returned their log sheet and attached 
original documentation to the log sheet approver and the log sheet has been 
signed by the cardholder and the certifying log sheet approver. 
➢ That the log sheet approvers have the necessary knowledge and capacity to carry 
out their responsibilities. 
➢ The log sheet has been reconciled to the monthly purchasing card statement 
from Bank Of Ireland.   All prescribed time limits for certification and for 
returning of information to the Finance Department are complied with. 
 
Irish Rail LVP card 
 
The majority of the journeys undertaken using the Irish Rail Card are to Dublin for 
officials to meet with Government officials and to attend the offices of the LGMA and 
other sectoral meetings. 

 
John Hallahan 
Head of Finance. 
 
6.14 
CITY CENTRE LIBRARY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on plans to build a new city centre 
public library? And whether plans have been commissioned for same and, if so, what 
stage these plans are at? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The City Library Service is an important component of the cultural, literary, and 
recreational infrastructure of Cork City and its community now and into the future. 
Providing a New City Library of scale and substance is a priority for the Council and 
a key objective for the City. 
  
Work is ongoing to make this happen.   
 
Rebecca Loughry 
Director of Services 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.15 
RESPOND HOUSING SITE ON THOMAS DAVIS STREET 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the status of the Respond Housing site on Thomas Davis 
Street in Blackpool; and if re-development of the site is expected to be completed? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The intention is to re-develop the site at Thomas Davis Street and an application for 
funding under the Capital Advance Leasing Facility (CALF) has been submitted by 
Respond to the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH) 
for the development of 28 one- and two-bedroom properties by Respond with the 
support of Cork City Council. The funding application is currently being assessed by 
the DHLGH.   
As soon as approval for funding is granted for same, works will commence onsite in 
a timely manner with the Contractor who has successfully tendered to construct the 
Project on behalf of Respond.   
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  

 
6.16 
SOCIAL HOUSING DELIVERY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
That the CE provide an update on social housing delivery in 2024, 2023 and 2022 
under the headings 'new build', 'acquisition' and 'leasing', with reference to the targets 
set out in Cork City Council's Housing Delivery Action Plan (2022-2026). 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council’s (CCC) overall delivery programme is outlined in its Housing 
Delivery Action Plan (HDAP) (2022-2026).  The Action Plan was prepared to be in 
line with targets set under Housing for All (2022-2026) by the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH), the relevant adopted Development Plan, 
together with the Cork Joint Housing Strategy, and the Housing Need Demand 
Assessment (HNDA). 
 
Cork City Council’s target for social housing provision under Housing for All is 3,023 
homes. 
 
Reflective of this target and the HNDA, a more ambitious target was set for social 
housing provision in the Council’s HDAP of 3,934 homes.  A parallel target for 
overall affordable housing provision is set at 1,737 homes, with 378 homes to be 
delivered directly by Cork Council and the balance of 1,359 homes to be delivered by 
the Approved Housing Body (AHB) and Land Development Agency (LDA) Sector.   
 
It should be noted that since adoption of the HDAP, significant change has occurred 
to programme, affected by several events and challenges including international 
economic headwinds such as the introduction of the Tenant in Situ scheme, 
construction cost hyperinflation, phasing out of Leasing provision, and global supply 
chain disruption.   
 
The projected pipeline and constituent delivery elements have therefore been adapted 
on a regular basis as a result, e.g. build delivery was projected to peak in the period 
2023-2024, however delivery is now more evenly distributed between each of the 5 
years of the plan.   
 
A significant acquisitions programme was also commenced in the period 2023-2025 
with particular emphasis on the Tenant in Situ Scheme, which was not anticipated.  
This is reflected in our most recent version of the HDAP, which contains this 
important update, and which also details the DHLGH targets for avoidance of any 
confusion. 
 
The tables below detail the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage 
(DHLGH) targets set for Cork City Council covering the period 2022 to 2024, together 
with details of delivery for the same period. 
 

 
 
 
 
Cork City Council has therefore exceeded its DHLGH social housing delivery target 
for 2022-2024 by 382 homes.  A strong pipeline of delivery remains for the years 
2025-2026, the Council is therefore confident of meeting, and exceeding, its DHLGH 
targets. 
 
Cork City Council’s overall target for delivery under its HDAP from 2022-2026 is a 
total of 3,934 homes, with 2,309 social homes delivered to date (59% of target). 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.17 
HOUSING APPLICATION POLICY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive outline Cork City Council's housing application and 
allocation policy in relation to single or separated women being prevented from being 
accepted onto the social housing list because of their former husbands or partners 
refusal to engage with Cork City Council's requirements to give personal details. 
 
I am dealing with a number of cases where women are being discriminated against 
because of their ex-husbands/ex-partners refusal to sign off or submit details which is 
stopping the process of the women in question been accepted on to the social housing 
list or being allocated social housing. I believe this is completely unfair that the refusal 
of an ex-partner to provide necessary details which creates significant and unfair 
barriers to accessing social housing support. 
DHLGH TARGETS 2022-2024 
Housing for All  
  
  
  
  
YEAR 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Total 2022-2024 
TARGET – Build 
515 
538 
548 
1601 
TARGET - Long-Term Leasing 
129 
102 
95 
326 
TARGET – Acquisitions 
0 
0 
0 
0 
TARGET – Total 
644 
640 
643 
1927 
 
 
DELIVERED by CORK CITY 
COUNCIL 2022-2024 
  
  
  
  
YEAR 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Total 2022-2024 
DELIVERED - Build – Total 
517 
540 
632 
1689 
DELIVERED - Long-Term Leasing 
158 
155 
22 
335 
DELIVERED – Acquisitions 
56 
109 
120 
285 
DELIVERED – Total 
731 
804 
774 
2309 

 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Applications for social housing support received by Cork City Council are assessed 
under the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 and in accordance with the 
Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011 and all related guidance provided by 
the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage. The current application 
form for social housing support is a national template and was provided under S.I. 
116/2021. The Checklist as part of this application states the following: 
 
Documentation Required in Relation to Separation/Divorce 
 
- Copy of separation/divorce agreement for both applicants where applicable 
The agreement must identify: 
• The extent of maintenance being received or paid by the applicant 
• The circumstances under which the maintenance payments can cease 
If there is no agreement in place, a letter from the applicant’s solicitor or a legal 
affidavit signed by a practising solicitor must be included with the application. The 
letter should confirm: 
 
• That there is no formal separation agreement 
• That there are no court proceedings pending under family law legislation 
• The position in relation to maintenance and other payments 
• Overnight access/custody arrangements for children 
• Property ownership 
• Evidence of maintenance payments received for previous 12 months, prior to 
the date of application 
 
While it is preferable to have both parties sign the affidavit, we recognise that this is 
not always possible and, in these circumstances, we will accept an affidavit signed 
only by the applicant. In these cases, the affidavit should state that it is not possible to 
obtain the other party’s consent. The same information is required for all applications 
where these circumstances apply. 
 
When an applicant submits a completed application for social housing, they sign a 
declaration confirming that the information they have provided as part of the 
application is correct and that the local authority under the Housing Acts of 1966-
2014, may request and obtain information from other organisations. These include 
another local authority, the Criminal Assets Bureau, An Garda Síochána, the 
Department of Social Protection, the Health Service Executive, the Revenue 
Commissioners or an Approved Housing Body. In addition, in accordance with our 
Social Housing Support – Assessment & Allocations Section Privacy Notice we may 
access information from sources where an applicant has chosen to make their 
information publicly available, such as social media sites. Any of these sources may 
be used to assist us in verifying the information provided to us as part of an 
application. 

 
It should be noted that applicants must remain eligible for, and in need of, social 
housing support up to and at the point of allocation of that support. A household’s 
changing circumstances may result in the household becoming ineligible for State 
support.  
 
An assessment review will be carried out where there is a change in the household’s 
circumstances where that change would be considered to affect the household's 
qualification for social housing support e.g., change in employment status, income, 
additional children. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that their 
information on their application is kept reasonably up to date as regard changing 
circumstances. 
 
Cork City Council therefore recognises the challenges faced in such circumstances 
and has implemented fair procedures which are cognisant of same, as detailed above. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that notification had been received from 
Comhairleoir M. Gould of her intention to suspend standing orders, and called on 
Comhairleoir M. Gould to read her motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
- 
Sends our condolences and thoughts to the family and friends of Luke Hyde 
following his tragic and untimely passing 
- 
Agrees to urgently erect signage at entry points to the River Lee warning of the 
danger of swimming 
- 
Undertakes a safety assessment of all entry points to the River Lee within the 
city centre area to ensure that any necessary precautions to prevent accident are 
in place 
- 
Begins to develop an awareness campaign highlighting the potential dangers of, 
and safety precautions needed for, swimming in the River Lee 
- 
Requests a meeting with the second officer at Cork City Fire Brigade, Victor 
Shine, to discuss how the Cork City Fire Brigade can be best supported to 
prioritise safety and prevent future tragedy.’ 
 
An Chomhairle agreed not to suspend standing orders and requested a written report 
of the current arrangements and provision be issued by the Director of Services, Local 
Area and Development and Operations.  
 
 
 

SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that notification had been received from 
Comhairleoir O. Moran of his intention to suspend standing orders. Comhairleoir O. 
Moran proposed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm until 
such time as the business of the Meeting Agenda was complete. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, D. Boylan, M. Gould, B. 
McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. 
Lynch, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (15) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. 
Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher. 
(11) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
SECTION 38 APPROVAL – YORK HILL  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the Director 
of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 24th April 2025, 
following public consultation, on the proposed changes to York Hill traffic flow 
pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended. 
 
7.2 
2025 COMMUNITY GRANTS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Corporate, 
Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 1st May 2025 on:- 
 
• The 2025 Community Associations Capital Grants.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir G. O’Brien, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 1st May 2025 on:- 
 
• The 2025 Community Development Small Scale Programme Grants. 

 
An Chomhairle further noted declarations of interest from Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, 
T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond and M. McDonnell. 
 
7.3 
PROPOSED 
RESIDENTIAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
AT 
ROPE 
WALK, 
BLACKROCK 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed residential 
development at Rope Walk in Blackrock, in the City of Cork and the report of the 
Chief Executive thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000, as amended, dated 8th May 2025.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Rope Walk, Blackrock, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Rope Walk, Blackrock, in the City of Cork be carried out as 
recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was 
put before Council on the 12th May 2025.” 
 
7.4 
SOUTH-WEST REGIONAL HOMELESSNESS ACTION PLAN 2025-2028 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the South-West Regional Homelessness 
Action Plan 2025-2028. 
 
7.5 
CORK CITY COUNCIL STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
An Chomhairle noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate, Community 
& Cultural Affairs, dated 7th May 2025 on proposed amendments to Cork City 
Council’s Standing Orders, which will be considered by An Chomhairle at the 
Ordinary Meeting of 9th June 2025.  
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 6th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 6th May 2025. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/03/2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/03/2025. 
 
 
 
 

8.2 
MOTIONS 
 
8.2.1 
COUNCIL MEETING START TIME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 6th May 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘In order to address the impasse with standing orders and the time constraints on the 
monthly Council Meeting. I wish to propose henceforth the earlier start time of 
4.30pm. This will allow the order of business to be concluded by 8pm. I would further 
propose that the writer of the non-statutory motions at the end of each meeting be the 
only ones allowed to address the Council floor to outline their feelings on the said 
motion. The speaker/writer (only) of the motion should be allowed 5 minutes to 
address Council who thereafter will agree to accept the motion or permit a vote is 
taken. If there are to be any amendments to the said non-statutory motion this 
amendment in writing must be given to the Lord Mayor prior to the meeting start time. 
The writer (only) of any amendment should be permitted to address the Council floor 
for not more than 3 minutes after which the Council will decide to accept/reject the 
amendment or proceed to a vote on the said amendment. Should the writer of the 
motion accept the amendment, then the Council shall agree the motion as amended or 
a vote is taken.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Dineen 25/162) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a review of Standing Orders is 
currently underway. Any proposal to amend standing orders should be considered as 
part of that review process. Issues in relation to speaking time and times of meetings 
have been considered as part of the process and recommendations will be brought to 
Council for consideration. 
 
8.2.2 
HOSTING OF A CABINET MEETING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 6th May 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Will the Lord Mayor and Chief Executive propose to the Government Cabinet the 
hosting of a Cabinet meeting in City Hall.  
 
This has happened in the past and having a Cork Taoiseach who is a former member 
of Cork City Council and Lord Mayor would make it truly an historic occasion.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Cahill 25/170) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Lord Mayor and Chief Executive  
will jointly write to the Taoiseach inviting the Cabinet to hold a meeting in City Hall,  
hosted by Cork City Council. 
 
 

8.2.3 
TOBACCO FREE CAMPUSES 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 4th April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
   
‘That Cork City Council, in line with its healthy city status, would work to ensure all 
their premises/complexes are tobacco free campuses.’ 
 
     
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 25/131) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that in compliance with the Public Health 
(Tobacco) Act 2002 to 2013 and Protection of Children’s Health (Tobacco Smoke in 
Mechanically Propelled Vehicles) Act 2014, Protection of Children’s Health 
(Tobacco Smoke in Mechanically Propelled Vehicles) (Fixed Charge Notice) 
Regulations 2015, smoking is illegal in any place of work and this includes offices, 
depots and council vehicles. The same practice applies to vaping. Therefore the 
Council does seek to ensure that smoking is prohibited in all City Hall campuses. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 28th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 28th April 2025. 
 
10. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – 22nd 
APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 22nd April 2025. 
 
10.1 
MOTIONS 
 
10.1.1 
CCTV IN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 22nd April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council in liaison with the Gardaí put in place a plan to erect CCTV 
monitoring on all traffic light junctions in the city centre and key junctions in the 
suburbs.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 25/007) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that An Garda Síochána have an 
independent CCTV system located around the city centre to monitor and react to 
incidents, events and anti-social behaviour.  
 
On Duty Gardaí monitor CCTV feeds as well as emergency calls and all information 
being fed into their network which allows a more efficient deployment of resources 
on the ground. This CCTV is separate and not a shared system with Cork City Council 

for GDPR reasons. The Gardaí carry out speed monitoring using static and mobile 
speed cameras, to detect and issue penalty points for speeding and other driving 
offences. Any expansion of the current Garda CCTV system in public spaces would 
require permission under Section 27 of the Garda Síochána (Recording Devices) Act 
2023. This involves the Garda Commissioner authorising the installation and 
operation of CCTV for a) the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of 
criminal offences, b) safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public 
security, including securing public safety and public order, c) the protection of the 
security of the state.  
 
This motion and report can be brought to the attention of the local Garda management 
for consideration, acknowledging that the authorisation of the Garda Commissioner 
will be required for the installation/operation of any new cameras. 
 
10.1.2 
PAINTING OF YELLOW BOXES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 22nd April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council in the interest of public safety put a plan in place to re-paint 
all the yellow boxes at all the junctions in the city.  
 
Due mainly to lack of maintenance, most of these yellow boxes have now completely 
disappeared and this presents a significant danger to all road users every day’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 25/009) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Lining & Signing services in 
Cork City Council are delivered as follows: 
 
- Former Transition Area: Delivered by Area Engineer via an annual tendered contract 
(as was the case, prior to transition). 
 
- Former City Area: Delivered by the direct labour Traffic Crew within Traffic 
Division.  
 
The Traffic Crew in the Traffic Division (currently a team of 9 persons), are 
responsible for the following services, and are prioritised as below: 
 
1. 
Emergency Call Outs 
2. 
Road Closures 
3. 
Delivery of lining & signing programme.  
 
Once Emergency Call Outs and Road Closures are addressed, the Traffic Crew 
allocate the remaining time to lining & signing work with lining work being subject 
to weather conditions.  
 
The requests for lining / signing work far exceeds the resources available to meet this 
demand. The order of programme delivery is set having regard to the following 
hierarchy: 

 
• 
Safety related issues,  
• 
Actions to support the city centre,  
• 
Mobility related issues, 
• 
Traffic issues,  
• 
Others. 
 
All road lining is reinstated on the resurfaced roads which form part of the annual 
resurfacing contract directly by the external contractors as part of their resurfacing 
works.  
 
Consideration is being given as to how to optimise the delivery of this service going 
forward, however if there are particular locations that require repainting, these can be 
submitted to trafficrequests@corkcity.ie for consideration. 
 
In the case of yellow boxes in the expanded city area which are maintained by Roads 
Ops, these will be inspected and renewed if necessary. 
 
10.1.3 
DETAILED MERGING SIGNAGE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 22nd April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will erect detailed merging signage at the intersections of merging 
roads to encourage safer driving and merging practices in areas like the Bloomfield 
interchange, Kinsale Road Flyover, the Mahon slip roads, the Douglas slip roads, the 
Maryborough slip and any other junction that requires merging to join traffic.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/112) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that as the motion relates to national roads 
only, this has been referred to Transport Infrastructure Ireland for response. 
 
The response will be brought forward to the next meeting of the Committee 
 
10.1.4 
PENALTY POINTS IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 22nd April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would initiate the process of the automatic and instant 
implementation of penalty points being added to the licence holders of vehicles who 
are deemed guilty of breaking the rules of the road in terms of violating parking laws, 
breaking red lights at junctions, sitting in yellow boxes, taking illegal turns on various 
roads and a variety of other offences that create a danger to other road users.  
 
Obviously, Cork City Council would certainly need to engage with various other 
stakeholders, such as the Gardaí and the relevant Government Departments, in order 
to initiate and subsequently implement these new progressive legislative measures. 

Cork City Council as a progressive Local Authority, that it is, should lead in the 
initiation and subsequent implementation of these measures. 
 
The implementation of penalty points to a drivers licence certainly is helping as a 
deterrent to speeding on our national roads and this proposal is simply asking to widen 
the net on the automatic implementation of penalty points, in order to curb repeat 
offenders to the offences as listed above’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 25/116) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that An Garda Síochána have an 
independent CCTV system located around the city centre to monitor and react to 
incidents, events and anti-social behaviour. 
 
On Duty Gardaí monitor CCTV feeds as well as emergency calls and all information 
being fed into their network which allows a more efficient deployment of resources 
on the ground. 
 
This CCTV is separate and not a shared system with Cork City Council for GDPR 
reasons. 
 
Automatic implementation of penalty points would require CCTV to be put in place 
at relevant locations. Any expansion of the current Garda CCTV system in public 
spaces would require permission under section 27 of the Garda Síochána (Recording 
Devices) Act 2023. This involves the Garda Commissioner authorising the installation 
and operation of CCTV for a) the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution 
of criminal offences, b) safeguarding against and the prevention of, threats to public 
security, including securing public safety and public order, c) the protection of the 
security of the state. 
 
Any specific request for additional CCTV coverage should be discussed at the Joint 
Policing Committee (JPC) who would have a remit in this area and dependent on the 
CCTV monitoring purpose and the identification of specific sites for consideration, 
either the Gardaí or Local Authority must apply in writing to the Garda Commissioner 
for authorisation for the installation/operation of any new cameras for the purposes of 
the detection of criminal offences and commence compliance to the aforementioned 
act. 
 
10.1.5 
IMPROVE PASSENGER FERRY SERVICES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development & Operations, dated 22nd April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will engage with the Port of Cork and other stakeholders to 
improve passenger ferry services to the UK, France and Spain from Cork; including 
improving the frequency and accessibility of passenger travel from the city via the 
Port of Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/135) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council supports 
enhancing the ferry connectivity from the UK, France and Spain to Cork.  The Council 
will engage with Port of Cork to ascertain what proposals are under consideration in 
relation to such services and revert to Members. 
 
10.1.6 
COMMITTEE TO REVIEW CURRENT TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEMS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 16th December 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘I ask that a subcommittee of the relevant agencies i.e. Cork City Council, Taxi 
Federation, Bus Éireann, An Garda and others as deemed required plus one Councillor 
from each ward be set up with a remit to review our current traffic management 
systems and bring forward and introduce the changes required to alleviate the current 
traffic chaos in all areas and the chaos endured by motorists following an incident 
under the jurisdiction of Cork City Council. I would further ask that this committee if 
set up would discuss and implement a traffic management strategy for all areas should 
an incident occur whereby a road closure is necessary. 
 
This committee should meet every 3 months.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Dineen 24/545) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that it is national policy, supported by 
Cork City Council City Development Plan, to encourage active travel and sustainable 
transport and many projects to support same, costing millions or Euro, have been 
funded nationally and delivered by Cork City Council over the last number of years. 
The impact of such policy and schemes is deliberately and actively to reduce road 
space for cars and provide more road space for public transport, taxis, cycling and 
walking.  This national policy, supported by local implementation, will continue with 
the objective is to encourage people to leave their car at home and available of 
sustainable transport modes. 
  
There are dozens of traffic diversions or road closures implemented every week to 
facilitate emergences and planned works. Such diversions and closures are managed 
to minimise disruption have regard to need, urgency, location of works etc. to the 
greatest extent possible given the current road network. It is not possible, practical or 
implementable to manage such works by a multi-agency committee.  
 
The Director of Services invited the members to a visit to the Cork City Council 
Traffic Control room.  Gardai and TII are to be invited to the next meeting of the 
Committee to discuss the traffic issues on the N40, in particular at the Bloomfield 
Interchange. 
 
 
 
 

11. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH 
- 
STRAITÉISEACHT, 
FORBAIRT 
EACNAMAÍOCH, 
FIONTAR 
& 
PLEANÁIL – 24th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 24th April 2025. 
 
11.1 
MOTIONS 
 
11.1.1 
TAKE BACK THE CITY CENTRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 24th April 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council in unison with other Government agencies and elected reps 
formulate a plan to take back the City Centre.’ 
      
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/343) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a dedicated Directorate for the City 
Centre has been established, and a number of initiatives are underway which will 
make positive differences such as the revitalisation of the city streets.  The Cork 
Futures Group is being established to shape a City Strategy and Delivery 
Programme.  The City Centre Development & Operations Directorate will work with 
all stakeholders in its implementation.  
 
11.1.2 
VACANT HOUSING GRANT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 24th April 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will seek through the Department to expand the vacant housing 
grant to include empty sections above shops in our city centre and urban villages along 
with additional staff tasked with such bespoke housing grants.’ 
             
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/164) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Local Authorities were informed by 
the Department of Housing in March 2025 that a proposed ‘Living over the shop’ 
grant is currently with Government for consideration.  While details are limited at this 
time, it is understood to be along the lines of the existing Vacant Property 
Refurbishment Grant, with similar supports. Local Authorities await the outcome of 
this proposal. 
 
 

11.1.3 
PROTECTION 
OF 
RESIDENTIAL 
AMENITIES 
AND 
PLANNING 
INTEGRITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 24th April 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will change use of planning permission to be required where 
residential amenities e.g. garden areas are being sold off to a private purchaser to be 
used as a private car park.  This motion is in the interest of the integrity of the site, to 
protect residential amenities for residential tenants, to protect streetscapes and in the 
interest of sustainable communities.’ 
     
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/181) 
  
The report of the Director of Services stated that the legal framework determining the 
requirements for planning permission is established by the Planning and Development 
Act, 2000 (as amended) and the Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 (as 
amended). In any given instance, a determination is required to establish whether 
planning permission is required, in accordance with the legislation.  
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee for further 
consideration. 
 
11.1.4 
ENHANCE PASSIVE SURVEILLANCE IN THE CITY CENTRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 24th April 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will report on policy to enhance passive surveillance in the 
city centre, particularly Patrick’s Street, through over-the-shop accommodation and 
nighttime economy measures like cafés, restaurants and bars.’ 
      
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/211) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s Night Time 
Economy Pilot Scheme sponsors an initiative called Coffee House Lates which 
encourages and supports Cork’s coffee houses to keep their businesses open later into 
the evening.  The most recent event took place on the evenings of Friday 14th and 
Saturday 15th of March and was a great success.  It saw eleven independent cafés open 
late and included a multitude of free events ranging from coffee tasting to live music, 
comedy, art and tarot reading. It is hoped that initiatives such as this will encourage 
businesses to open late more regularly and embrace the night time economy thus 
enhancing the vibrancy of the City Centre. 
 
The City Council is also promoting living over the shop and recently published a 
notice on etenders seeking interested parties to deliver a demonstrator ‘living over the 
shop’ proposal for housing in Cork City Centre. 

 
11.1.5 
AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS (AEDS) IN HOUSING 
ESTATES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 24th April 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will adopt as part of the conditions for planning applications for 
new housing estates that developers must install Automated External Defibrillators 
(AEDs) and that a review will be undertaken to install AEDs in all existing residential 
developments across Cork city.’ 
        
 
      
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/113) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Automated external defibrillators 
(AEDs) are specialised medical apparatus intended to be used in emergency situations. 
They are typically installed in housing estates (and other locations such as workplaces, 
sports clubs, etc.) by local community groups, residents’ associations or developers, 
who are then responsible for the location, maintenance and upkeep of AEDs. There is 
no statutory provision or mechanism with the development management process to 
mandate the installation of specialised emergency medical apparatus such as AEDs in 
all new housing developments. The National Ambulance Service (NAS) hosts the 
National AED Network where the location of defibrillators can be registered by the 
relevant operators to assist the NAS in their work. 
 
11.1.6 
USE OF COUNCIL OWNED KIOSK ON GRAND PARADE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 24th April 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council explores the feasibility of offering one of the kiosks located 
on Grand Parade for use by An Garda Síochána as a dedicated city centre base. This 
initiative would replicate the successful presence of the Garda van in the city centre 
over the Christmas period, providing a highly visible Garda presence. The kiosk 
would serve as a point of contact for the public to report crime, seek assistance, and 
enhance the perception of safety in the city centre. Additionally, it would act as a 
deterrent to criminal activity and contribute positively to the overall security and well-
being of city centre users.’ 
         
 
       
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/108) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the potential use of the currently 
unoccupied kiosk at the end of the South Mall and Grand Parade is under 
consideration.  Cork City Council will engage with An Garda Síochána to assess the 
feasibility of the proposal as set out in this Notice of Motion and revert to the 
Committee.  
 
 

11.1.7 
VALIDATED PARKING SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 13th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That given high costs of parking in and around the city centre, especially in facilities 
operated privately, Cork City Council investigates the possibility of a validated 
parking scheme in co-operation with private parking owners where goods receipts can 
be validated and used for discounted parking. This to be supported by the economic 
fund derived from rates and other incomes.’  
  
    
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 24/167) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council currently provides 
over 1,000 public short term car parking spaces across two multi storey car parks (Paul 
Street Car Park & North Main Street Car Park). Both these car parks offer the lowest 
hourly charge in the city of €1.70 per hour in North Main Street Car Park and €2.70 
per hour in Paul Street Car Park. 
  
In addition, Cork City Council provides a further 900 spaces in the Black Ash Park & 
Ride. There are six other significant car parks in the city with approximately 2,400 car 
parking spaces that are privately operated. Some other smaller private car parks are 
also in operation.  
 
Historically Cork City Council engaged unsuccessfully with the private car park 
operators in the city to implement agreed initiatives across all parking facilities to 
maximise marketing opportunities and manage displacement. The Planning & 
Integrated Development Directorate can engage with the newly created City Centre 
Directorate to investigate the feasibility, potential and interest among operators for a 
new parking initiative, such as that outlined in the city centre with Council kept 
updated. In the meantime, the Council will continue to promote our own facilities 
including extended opening hours at appropriate festive periods. 
 
12. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS 
STRAITÉISIGH - TITHÍOCHT – 23rd APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd April 2025. 
 
12.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Housing Progress report for February 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12.2 
MOTIONS 
 
12.2.1 
FACILITIES FOR ROUGH SLEEPERS AND USERS OF HOMELESS 
ACCOMMODATION 24/222 & IMPROVED HOMELESS SERVICES 25/002 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th February 2025 on the following motions which had been held in 
Committee:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will collaborate with other stakeholders to provide a ‘third 
space’ in the City Centre, including welfare facilities, with appropriate security, for 
rough sleepers and users of homeless accommodation in the City.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/444)  
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
 
- 
Remembers Vanessa O’Callaghan and all those who have passed on the streets of 
Cork City.   
- 
requests the Chief Executive utilise all powers available to her to open a 
temporary facility for those sleeping rough to access basic needs - somewhere to 
eat, charge phones and shower - over the winter period 
- 
agrees to name this facility in honour of Vanessa as requested by her family 
- 
⁠begins longterm planning for improved homeless services recognising the 
complexity of rough sleeping  
- 
calls for a more visible Garda presence to prevent attacks on the most vulnerable.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/002) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that homeless individuals who present 
with complex needs are supported in their Emergency Accommodation in a joint 
response by Cork City Council, the City Council’s NGO partners and the HSE.   
Housing First also responds to longer term needs of those individuals in the city.  The 
report stated that in 2024, there were 19 tenancies created by the Housing First Team 
and that there was a total of 46 active Housing First tenancies in the city.   The report 
further stated that Housing First is a housing led approach to those who are longer-
term homeless experiencing mental health, physical health, substance misuse and 
other challenges. 
 
The report advised that it must be noted that emergency accommodation is available, 
and should an individual require emergency accommodation they should present to 
the APS office in Lapps Quay for advice and support. The report also stated that Cork 
City Council is engaging with relevant stakeholders in the provision of improved 
services for rough sleepers and users of homeless services. 
 
The report noted that Cork City Council passed a Vote of Sympathy at the meeting of 
An Chomhairle held on 9th December, 2024 to the O’Callaghan family on the death 
of Vanessa O’Callaghan. In accordance with Cork City Council's Standing Order No. 
9A, a motion to honour an individual shall be referred to Party Whips for 
consideration.  

 
12.2.2 
FIREPLACES IN CITY COUNCIL-OWNED PROPERTIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th February 2025 on the following motion referred back to the 
Committee:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will remove or close open fireplaces in City Council-owned 
properties as part of routine refurbishment between tenancies; and offer to do so as 
part of energy upgrades.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/568) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Housing Directorate’s Energy 
Efficiency Retrofit Programme includes for the removal/close up of fireplaces as part 
of the energy efficiency upgrade works and this programme has been very successful 
to date and is proposed to expand in the future. 
 
The report stated that with regard to vacant properties, and their refurbishment, this is 
assessed on a case-by-case basis and will depend on the level of works required, 
ventilation requirements and the suitability of the proposed works to any individual 
property.  
 
12.2.3 
KNOCKNAHEENY REGENERATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th April 2025 on the following motion referred back to the 
Committee:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would apply to the Government for funding to include 
Courtown Drive, Courtown Park, Kilkieran Close and Coolmaine Crescent in the 
Knocknaheeny Regeneration with regards the installation of new windows and doors 
and where relevant porches along with the installation of solar panels and updated 
heating systems similar to the retrofitting of the houses that took place on Harbour 
View Road.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 24/615) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Council is currently engaged 
in the delivery of the Cork City Northwest Regeneration Masterplan & 
Implementation Report (‘Masterplan’), which was adopted by Council, with funding 
being made available for the delivery of the contents of the Masterplan only by the 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, Cork City Council is committed to reducing the carbon 
footprint of its existing housing stock. To that end it has embarked on a thirty year 
program to ensure that all of its housing stock has an energy rating of B2 or better by 
2050.  
 

The program known as the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Program (EERP) phase two 
commenced in 2021 and has two milestones: 
 
a. 
25% completion by 2030 
b. 100% completion by 2050 
 
The program is funded by the DHLGH, Cork City Council and the Energy Efficiency 
Obligation Scheme. The measures funded or part funded by the DHLGH include roof 
Insulation, wall insulation, windows and doors, heat pump installation, LED lighting, 
project management and building energy rating certificates (BER).  
 
The report further stated that in 2024 the Council was allocated funding to complete 
one hundred and sixteen houses. The Council exceeded this target by completing one 
hundred and twenty three houses. The Council has a current pipeline of two hundred 
and ninety houses which will be progressed in 2025.  
 
Courtown Drive, Courtown Park, Kilkieran Close and Coolmaine Crescent are not 
included in the present pipeline but will be considered for future years of the 
programme. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further consideration. 
 
12.2.4 
HOUSING NEEDS OF CHILDREN WITH AUTISM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘At this time, thousands of families are on the City Council housing waiting list. 
Amongst these families, there are well over one thousand children with autism. 
 
Many of these children have reports from qualified professionals in this field who 
recommend to the housing authority at City Hall that the needs of these children are 
met regarding residential space and safety. 
 
I urge this Council to call on the Minister for Housing to recognise the plight of these 
children and to act with urgency to provide the necessary staff and funding to Cork 
City Council so that the needs of these children are met.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 25/130) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s Allocation 
Scheme which has been in place since 2017 requires us to give consideration to the 
extent to which the current accommodation of a household meets any accommodation 
requirement arising from an enduring physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual 
impairment of a member of the household.    Allocations are made under the order of 
priority in the Scheme taking into account all the relevant information provided by the 
applicant household including the applicant’s credit time on the social housing support 
list, family size and type of dwelling required. 
 

The report further advised that the 2021 amendment to the Social Housing Assessment 
Regulations 2011 allowed for the replacement of the need for a Consultants Letter if 
seeking support on disability or medical grounds with the new Medical/Disability 
Information Form (HMD Form 1). The form was designed in consultation with local 
authority and HSE representatives. The purpose of the form is to ensure that we are 
given the appropriate information in a more structured, uniform way to allow us to 
assess an applicant.   It assists us to ensure that the individuals or families most in 
need of housing on Disability Grounds will be given the appropriate priority.  
 
The report stated that the City Council does not have a record of the number of 
households reporting a specific condition or medical need, therefore we cannot advise 
how many children with a diagnosis of autism are currently on the social housing list.  
Any applicant household who has a family member with autism can submit a HMD 
Form for assessment and the appropriate prioritisation will be awarded.   In addition, 
if deemed necessary, changes can be made to the house type they are qualified for.  
The report noted that while we appreciate that a household’s living conditions can 
have a serious impact on a child with autism, there is significant variation in housing 
requirements because of the condition.   Some reports provided to support housing 
needs indicate that the requirements relate primarily to educational supports whereas 
other children require their own bedroom and level access accommodation.   As with 
the diagnosis itself, the housing needs can vary so it is not possible to provide a “one 
fits all” prioritisation.  
 
The report further stated that it should also be noted that we have many other applicant 
households with a disability or medical condition.   Applicants with conditions such 
as multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia, cerebral palsy and terminal cancers for example 
also have housing needs that need to be met, and their current housing situation may 
also be having a detrimental effect on their lives.  
 
The Director’s report further advised that because Cork City Council operates the 
Choice Based Letting system families who have a child with autism who they feel 
require outdoor space or distance from a busy road can bid on properties which they 
feel are appropriate to their needs. Each advert on CBL provides details of the property 
along with photographs so that the applicant can make an informed decision to suit 
their circumstances. 
 
The Director stated that she does not feel it would be appropriate to prioritise one 
group of applicants with a medical/disability need over another group. Reviewing 
each case on its own merits and making the appropriate decision to meet each 
household’s housing needs is the most effective way to ensure that those most in need 
are given the prioritisation they require.   
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting for one 
hour past 8pm. 
 
 
 

12.2.5 
HAP INSPECTIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council provide figures in tabular form for the number of HAP 
inspections that were carried out in 2024; how many passed and failed; and of the ones 
that failed, how many subsequently passed on the retest.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/157) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services set out in tabular form the number of HAP 
Inspections carried out in 2024 and the number that passed and failed.    
 
The report advised that as figures specific to HAP properties are not available in regard 
to the number which passed on retest, the overall figures for total dwellings inspected 
and number reaching compliance have been included. 
 
The report provided, for reference, the overall number of dwellings inspected in 2022 
and the number compliant has been included as this clearly shows the large 
improvements that have been achieved both in number of properties inspected and 
percentage of properties achieving compliance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - POBAL, CULTÚR & 
COMHFHORBAIRT ÁITE – SPECIAL MEETING 1st MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its special meeting held, 1st May 2025. 
 
14. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 15th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 15th April 2025. 
 
 
 
 
HAP Inspections 
Carried out in 2024 
Number  
that Passed 
Number  
that  
Failed 
Total Dwellings 
Inspected in  
2024 
Total Dwellings 
Compliant in  
2024 
1,791 
348 
1,434 
10,279 
5,198 
Total Dwellings 
Inspected in 2022 
Total Dwellings  
Compliant in 2022 
5,936 
951 

15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th April 2025. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th April 2025. 
 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th April 2025. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 28th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 28th April 2025. 
 
19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 6th MAY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 6th May 2025. 
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir C. Kelleher as part of the Visit to San Francisco, USA – St. 
Patrick’s Day Trip, 2nd - 9th March 2025. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
23.1 
 IPB INSURANCE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the attendance of 
Comhairleoir S. Martin at the IPB Insurance Annual General Meeting, held in Galway 
City on 2nd May 2025. 
 
 
 

23.2 
PAI AUDIT AND RISK COMMITTEE WORKSHOP 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the attendance of 
Comhairleoir S. Martin at the PAI (Public Affairs Ireland) Upcoming Audit and Risk 
Committee Workshop, held in Dublin on 29th April 2025. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for March 2025. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS DEFERRED FROM MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE HELD 
ON THE 10th MARCH 2025 
 
27.1 
DEVOLVE 
ACTIVE TRAVEL 
BUDGET TO TARGET EXISTING 
FOOTPATHS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council call on Government to devolve at least 10% of the Active 
Travel Budget to target old and existing footpaths and bring them up to a safe and 
healthy standard. The practice of insisting on the inclusion of a cycle lane or nothing 
happens needs to stop. Walking is the most popular and efficient means of active travel 
and needs to be encouraged and facilitated more.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/344) 
 
27.2 
LICENCING OF QUADRICYCLE DRIVERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘This Council calls on the Government to: 
1. Introduce legislation to allow individuals aged 16 and over to drive light 
quadricycles (such as the Citroën Ami) on Irish roads, following the example 
of several European countries. 
2. Establish a clear framework for driver training and safety requirements to 
ensure young drivers are adequately prepared, potentially through a modified 
version of the Essential Driver Training (EDT) scheme. 

3. Recognise light quadricycles as a safer and more environmentally friendly 
alternative to scooters and motorcycles, offering increased protection and zero 
emissions for young drivers. 
 
Rationale: 
Ireland is one of the few European countries that does not permit teenagers to drive 
light quadricycles, despite their availability and affordability. Countries such as 
France, Spain, and Italy allow 14 to 16-year-olds to operate these vehicles under 
specific training and licensing schemes. Introducing similar legislation here would 
promote safe, sustainable mobility options for younger people and reduce reliance on 
higher-risk two-wheeled vehicles. 
 
This motion calls for modernisation of road traffic laws to reflect advancements in 
light vehicle technology and provide practical transport solutions for young people 
across Ireland.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/107) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, An Chomhairle approved the motion 
revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘This Council calls on the Government to: 
1. Introduce legislation to allow individuals aged 16 and over to drive light 
quadricycles (such as the Citroën Ami) on Irish roads, following the example 
of several European countries. 
2. Establish a clear framework for driver training and safety requirements to 
ensure young drivers are adequately prepared, potentially through a modified 
version of the Essential Driver Training (EDT) scheme. 
3. Recognise light quadricycles as a safer and more environmentally friendly 
alternative to scooters and motorcycles, offering increased protection and zero 
emissions for young drivers. 
4. That all motorists possessing a category B driving license shall have the right 
to drive mopeds and light quadricycles, as if they possessed a category AM 
(mopeds and light quadricycles) licence, as is the case for B category licences 
issued before October 21, 2006. 
 
Rationale: 
Ireland is one of the few European countries that does not permit teenagers to drive 
light quadricycles, despite their availability and affordability. Countries such as 
France, Spain, and Italy allow 14 to 16-year-olds to operate these vehicles under 
specific training and licensing schemes. Introducing similar legislation here would 
promote safe, sustainable mobility options for younger people and reduce reliance on 
higher-risk two-wheeled vehicles. 
 
This motion calls for modernisation of road traffic laws to reflect advancements in 
light vehicle technology and provide practical transport solutions for young people 
across Ireland.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/107) 
 

28. 
MOTIONS DEFERRED FROM MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE HELD 
ON THE 14th APRIL 2025 
 
28.1 
MOTION PROPOSED UNDER SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS AT 
THE MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE HELD ON THE 14th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development and Operations, dated 12th May 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
“That Cork City Council, in it's capacity as guardians of the city and animal welfare, 
effectively deal with the issue of wild goats in the Ballyvolane area, to the extent of 
taking responsibility for the welfare of said goats and bring them into the care of the 
city via a trusted and reputable welfare agency and thus ensuring not only the safety 
and welfare of the goats but also the broader community.” 
 
(Cllr. J. Maher) 
 
28.2 
URGENT ACTION ON AUTISM ASSESSMENT WAITING TIMES IN CORK 
CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘This Council recognises with deep concern the 30 month waiting times for autism 
assessments for children within the Cork City area, and calls on the Minister for 
Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth to take urgent and immediate 
action to address these unacceptable waiting times; to include a timeline and strategy 
to reduce the backlog, including measures to: 
 
•     Recruit and retain appropriate clinical staff 
•     Expand partnerships with private providers 
•     Ensure equity of access across both Primary Care and Disability Services.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/183) 
 
28.3 
TENANT IN SITU SCHEME 
 
In the absence of Comhairleoir K. Collins, An Chomhairle agreed to defer the 
following motion to the next Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 9th June 
2025:- 
 
‘Cork City Council notes that the Tenant in Situ Scheme was an essential tool in 
preventing homelessness. 
 
It allowed local authorities to buy properties from landlords who otherwise would 
have carried out no-fault evictions.  
 
Last year, hundreds of families in Dublin were prevented from becoming homeless 
because of this effective scheme. 
 

Cork City Council is deeply concerned that the Minister for Housing James Browne 
has cut funding to this scheme and introduced criteria that will result in more people 
becoming homeless. 
 
Cork City Council urges the Minister for Housing to immediately reverse his decision 
and to reinstate the scheme in full.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/186) 
 
28.4 
REOPENING OF THE OLD GLEN PRISON 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would write to the Minister for Justice to oppose the 
reopening of the old Glen prison. In 2016, when the new prison opened in the Glen, 
commitments were given by the Government and the Irish Prison Service that the old 
prison would be transformed for the community. This proposal by the Minister for 
Justice reneges on the commitments given.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/215) 
 
29. 
MOTIONS 
 
29.1 
HOUSEHOLD MEANS POLICY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Housing requesting a change to the 
Department of Housing's Household Means Policy (2021), so as to exclude child 
maintenance payments as calculable means for the purposes of assessing applications 
for social housing support.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/256) 
 
29.2 
BAN ISRAEL FROM THE EUROVISION SONG CONTEST 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council joins our voice to the many artists, journalists and former 
Eurovision contestants who are calling on the EBU to ban Israel from participating in 
the Eurovision Song Contest 2025. The Apartheid State of Israel cannot be allowed 
any opportunity to bolster their reputation on the international stage or minimise the 
war crimes they are committing on a daily basis. If the EBU do not ban Israel, we call 
on all artists to boycott the contest until such a time as they do.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/264) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, a proposed amendment to the motion 
was tabled to read as follows:- 
 

‘That this Council joins our voice to the many artists, journalists and former 
Eurovision contestants who are calling on the EBU to ban Israel from participating in 
the Eurovision Song Contest 2025. The Apartheid State of Israel cannot be allowed 
any opportunity to bolster their reputation on the international stage or minimise the 
war crimes they are committing on a daily basis.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/264) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the amendment where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, 
G. O’Brien. (12) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, D. Boylan, M. Gould, B. McCarthy, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, 
C. O’Connor. (13) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir O. Moran. (1) 
 
As those voting for the amendment were less than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote and the amendment defeated. 
 
An Chomhairle approved the motion without amendment.  
 
29.3 
CAMOGIE PLAYERS’ RIGHT FOR CHOICE OF ATTIRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would write to the Camogie Association to outline their 
support for the Cork Camogie team and all camogie players and their right for choice 
of attire on the playing field whether it’s skorts or shorts and look to amend this rule 
to take immediate effect.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. M. Gould, Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/274) 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
