MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 14th JULY 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. 
O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, 
D. Boyle, N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, A/Chief Executive. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Mr. N. Murtagh, A/Director of Services, Local Area 
Development & Operations. 
Ms. E. Roberts, A/Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. J. Hayes, A/Director of Services, City Centre Development 
& Operations. 
Mr. N. Carroll, A/Director of Services, Housing. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Mr. B. Fitzgerald, Cork Docklands Office Programme Manager, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
Mr. K. O’Connor, Senior Planner, Planning & Integrated 
Development. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Canty family on the death of Noreen Canty. 
• The Gannon family on the death of Martin Gannon. 
• The Fitzgerald family on the death of Marie Fitzgerald. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Margaret (Bobbie) O’Sullivan. 
• The Greally family on the death of Terry Greally. 
• The Ryan family on the death of Kathleen (Kay) Ryan. 
• The Foreman family on the death of Mary Foreman. 

• The Dunlea family on the death of Kathleen Dunlea. 
• The O’Connor family on the death of Carol O’Connor. 
• The Ward family on the death of Pat Ward. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Joan O’Donovan. 
• The Scully family on the death of Maureen Scully. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Estelle O’Donovan. 
• The Cunneen family on the death of John Cunneen. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Derry O’Sullivan. 
• The Connolly family on the death of Kathleen Connolly. 
• The O’Brien family on the death of Helen O’Brien. 
• The Cotter family on the death of Sylvester Cotter. 
• The Brothers family on the death of Michael Brothers. 
• The O’Callaghan family on the death of Richard O’Callaghan. 
• The Reidy family on the death of James (Jimmy) Reidy. 
• The Riordan family on the death of Frank Riordan. 
• The O’Callaghan family on the death of Ciara O’Callaghan. 
• The Devane family on the death of Francis Devane. 
• The Ronan family on the death of Margaret Ronan. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Noel and Ann O’Sullivan. 
• The Shanahan family on the death of Peggy Shanahan. 
• The Ó Súilleabháin family on the death of Cionnaith Ó Súilleabháin. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Mayfield CDP on the magnificent organisation of the events called ‘Non-Fire 
Night’ at Iona Park in Mayfield on Monday 23rd June 2025. 
• Eddie O’Hare on 46 years’ service as a photographer with the Irish Examiner 
and The Echo. 
• Cork Senior Hurling Team on reaching the All-Ireland Hurling Final. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
MEMBERSHIP OF COMMITTEES 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir D. Boyle to the 
following committees, following the resignation of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy as 
required by Standing Orders:- 
 
• 
Environment, Water & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee / Coiste Beartais 
Straitéisigh - Comhshaol, Uisce & Áiseanna  
• 
Strategic, Economic Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy 
Committee / Coiste Beartais Straitéisigh - Straitéiseacht, Forbairt Eacnamaíoch, 
Fiontar & Pleanáil 
• 
Consumption of Intoxicating Liquor (Drinking on the Street Bye Laws) 
Committee 
• 
Dog Fouling Committee 
 

3.2 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CORK OPERA HOUSE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Cork 
Opera House on celebrating 170 years. 
 
3.3 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR APPLE INC. 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for Apple 
Inc. on 40 years in Cork. 
 
3.4 
ALL-IRELAND HURLING FINAL 
 
 
An tArdmhéara wished the best of luck to the Cork Senior Hurling Team in the All-
Ireland Final on Sunday 20th July 2025. 
 
3.5 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Tynan, 
a vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to discuss motion 57 on 
Appendix 1, Conditions at Coppingers Acre, at the end of the meeting, where there 
appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, 
M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, 
J. Lynch, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (22) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, 
T. Coleman. (6) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, and the vote was 
carried by a 2/3 majority as prescribed in standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared 
the vote carried and the proposal to suspend standing orders approved. 
 
3.6 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss motion 49 on Appendix 1, 
Late Night Transportation, at the end of the meeting. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
REBELS’ FANZONE  
 
 
The Chief Executive advised An Chomhairle that the Rebels’ Fanzone for the All-
Ireland Hurling Final will take place on Sunday 20th July 2025 at Páirc Uí Chaoimh. 
 
 

4.2 
CORPORATE PLAN 2024 – 2029 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
An Chomhairle considered and adopted the Cork City Council Corporate Plan 2024 – 
2029. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Sheehan, An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 9th June 2025. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Annual Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 20th June 2025. 
 
6. 
MOTION SUBMITTED UNDER SECTION 140 OF THE LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT ACT (2001) 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion submitted under Section 140 of the 
Local Government Act (2001):- 
 
‘That as part of the redevelopment of Bishop Lucey Park, the Chief Executive shall 
undertake a process to explore the renaming of the park.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. T. Tynan, Cllr. O. Moran, Cllr. N. O’ Connor) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Tynan, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, D. Boylan, M. Gould, K. Collins, 
B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, 
N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (17) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, S. Martin, P. Dineen, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. 
(11) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. (1) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
7.1 
BUS CONNECTS PROJECT 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please provide an update on the current status of the city wide Bus 
Connects Project and when is it likely to proceed as proposed? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The BusConnects Cork programme is a strategic intervention led by the NTA aimed 
at enhancing sustainable transport. It includes the following measures: sustainable 
transport corridors (STCs), a redesigned bus network, cashless payment, new bus 
livery, new bus stops and shelters, zero emissions fleet and a simpler fare structure. 
Two of these elements are currently being actively progressed for Cork City; a 
redesigned Bus Network and the delivery of the STCs. 
 
New Bus Network 
 
The NTA have confirmed that the redesigned Bus Network is due to be rolled out in 
phases from mid-2026 and involves the creation of new bus routes and improved bus 
frequencies. The NTA has procured a contractor for construction works providing bus 
stops, bus layover, turnabouts etc and has commenced works across the city which are 
expected to be complete in Q1 2026. Design of the construction works for the rollout 
of the final phases of the network and work on timetables/ scheduling etc is ongoing. 
 
Subject to PSO funding availability, it is intended that the new network will be 
implemented on a phased basis beginning in 2026 and running into 2027. 
 
Sustainable Transport Corridors 
 
The Sustainable Transport Corridors involve the implementation of continuous bus 
priority and cycle facilities along 11 key bus corridors around Cork City. The 11 
Sustainable Transport Corridors are designed with the aim of making the bus system 
operate more efficiently in addition to providing safe cycling along key routes. 
 
The National Transport Authority (NTA) carried out three rounds of non-statutory 
public consultation on the Sustainable Transport Corridors through 2022 and 2023. 
 
It is anticipated that Statutory Consent Application (SCA) and Compulsory Purchase 
Order (CPO) packs will be prepared during 2025 for submission to An Coimisiún 
Pleanála on a phased basis commencing Q4 2025. 
 
The 11 STCs that have been the subject of non-statutory public consultation will be 
bundled into a number of standalone Proposed Schemes. 
 
Members will be updated on progress on BusConnects Cork as the project progresses. 
 

Edith Roberts, 
A/Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
7.2 
ROBOT TREES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
In light of the recent removal of the CityTrees (Also referred to as “robot trees”) from 
Cork city centre, can the Chief Executive provide a comprehensive report including 
the following: 
 
A full breakdown of costs associated with the project from start to finish, including: 
 
-Initial purchase and installation costs 
-Ongoing maintenance and servicing costs 
-Any consultancy or third-party evaluation fees 
-Costs associated with removal, repurposing, or storage 
 
REPLY 
 
The following table is a breakdown of the costs associated with the project: 
 
Date 
Supplier 
Amount 
Details 
22/10/2020 
Green City Solutions 
€213,063.60 
Purchase cost 
06/11/2020  
Green City Solutions 
€28,763.59  
Purchase cost 
27/11/2020 
Green City Solutions  
€124,287.10 
Purchase cost  
27/11/2020  
Green City Solutions  
€16,778.76  
Annual Maintenance  
01/02/2021  
Green City Solutions  
€17,755.30  
Annual Maintenance  
05/02/2021  
Green City Solutions 
€2,396.97 
Repairs  
09/12/2022  
Green City Solutions  
€17,880.00 
Annual Maintenance 
24/07/2024 
Green City Solutions 
€8,940.00 
Annual Maintenance  
19/07/2024  
Green City Solutions 
€14,497.70  
Annual Maintenance  
18/05/2025 
JD Haulage 
€2,214.00 
Transportation 
Total 
 
€446,577.02 
 
 
 
The above expenditure covers the purchase of the Moss Walls as well as annual 
maintenance costs and repairs costs.  
 
Cork City Council received NTA Grants (NTA Stimulus Funding) totalling 
€409,744.94 for this project. 
 
David Joyce  
 
 
 
Noel Murtagh 
Director of Services   
 
 
A/Director of Services 
Emergency Management &  
 
Local Area Development and Operations. 
Climate Action Directorate. 
 
 
 

7.3 
CONNOLLY ROAD SITE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I wish to highlight the current condition of the council site on Connolly Road, adjacent 
to the council property at 2 Connolly Road. 
 
This site was previously within the curtilage of 2 Connolly Road as a side garden. The 
entire site was purchased by the council circa 2020 and subdivided into two distinct 
sites. The existing house was allocated to a family and the erstwhile side garden was 
allowed to stand fallow. This has engendered the entirely predictable situation of the 
unsightly overgrowth of vegetation and a slow, but steady, accumulation of detritus 
so much so that the green area is now a blight on the area. 
 
Can the CEO confirm that area of land at 2 Connolly Road/Derrynane Road is indeed 
within the ownership of Cork City Council and that it is a stand alone piece of green 
area under the Council's remit? 
 
Can the CEO further confirm that if the answer to the first question above is yes, that 
a commitment be given that the area will be dealt with accordingly so as to remove 
the overgrowth and return the area to more aesthetic look for the residential area? 
 
REPLY 
 
The Housing Directorate can confirm the site adjacent to 2 Connolly Road/Derrynane 
Road is within the ownership of Cork City Council and that it is a standalone piece of 
green area under the Council's remit 
 
Clearance of this site including removal of overgrowth will be prioritised by the 
Housing Directorate. 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
7.4 
GREENWAY BETWEEN CHETWYND VIADUCT AND KINSALE ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive Officer what progress is being made on the provision of a 
greenway between the Chetwynd Viaduct and the Kinsale Road, and whether on 
completion measures will be put in place to put in pedestrian access for the South City 
Link Road entrance of Tramore Valley Park? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Infrastructure Development Directorate is progressing the detailed design and 
land acquisition phase of the Viaduct to Kinsale Rd Greenway Scheme. The scheme 

stretches from Chetwynd Reservoir to the Kinsale Road Roundabout inclusive of 
access links to adjoining areas.  
 
Cork City Councils land valuation agent is currently engaging with affected 
landowners along the route for the acquisition of the required land as per the approved 
scheme.  
 
Pending continued NTA funding support and completion of land acquisitions, Cork 
City Council aims to procure a Contractor for the approved works in Q1 2026 with 
construction to follow thereafter in mid to late 2026. Construction is anticipated to be 
in the order of ten months. 
 
The next phase of the plan (Kinsale Roundabout to Tramore Valley Park) is at an early 
stage in the design process. The Design Team for this phase of the plan is scheduled 
to be appointed in Q1 2026 subject to funding and other necessary consents, with 
design, planning and construction to follow thereafter.  
 
Edith Roberts, 
A/Director of Services. 
Infrastructure Development Directorate. 
 
7.5 
BISHOP LUCEY PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE for an update on the Bishop Lucey Park revamp? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Works on the redesigned Bishop Lucey Park are progressing on schedule. Current 
activities include: 
 
• Service installation 
• Paving works 
• Construction of the new Pavilion  
• Conservation of the medieval city wall etc 
 
The final stage of the work includes landscaping, park lighting installation and 
finishing touches. The anticipated completion date remains November 2025. 
 
Edith Roberts, 
A/Director of Services 
Infrastructure Development Directorate 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7.6 
VACANT LOCAL AUTHORITY UNITS IN SOUTH EAST WARD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Shannon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the City Manager to report to City Council on the number of vacant Local 
Authority units in the Southeast Ward. 
 
Please be specific in terms of their address, how long have they been vacant for, for 
what reason are they vacant, what works if any are planned to bring these units up to 
standard for allocation, please list the necessary works per unit and who will carry out 
this work.  
 
What is the consequential loss of income to City Council due to loss of rental income 
on these units, the total cost to City Council of the necessary works to bring them up 
to standard for allocation, and the time frame per unit to achieve this. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council currently has 33 vacant properties in the Southeast Local Electoral 
Area.   For the security of each of the properties and for data protection of prospective 
future tenants, the individual addresses of the properties are being withheld. 
  
• 
15 properties are awaiting tenancy  
• 
18 properties are currently under repair 
  
The times these properties have been vacant is as follows: 
 
Area 
0-6 Months 
6-12 Months 
12-24 Months 
>24 Months 
SE 
15 
7 
5 
6 
 
 
The average re-letting cost in 2024 was €18,082. Work to the vacant properties under 
repair is presently being progressed through a mix of direct labour and contract with 
direct labour responsible for those properties with the least work.   The degree of work 
required can vary greatly between properties. It is important to note that the reletting 
time varies across programme, and includes the time taken to both repair and upgrade 
vacated properties to an acceptable letting standard and to relet those properties in line 
with the City Council's scheme of lettings.   As such, the time taken to relet a property 
is dependent on the condition of a property at the time of return and how long it takes 
to relet a particular property depending on uptake and acceptance by applicants on the 
social housing list. 
 
Based on the average rent across the City, the loss of rental income to date on these 
properties is in the order of €145,250. 
  
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
 

7.7 
RIVER LEE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the consequences for river navigation in the city 
subsequent to the Port of Cork ending operations at the City Docks; such as in relation 
to the provision of pilotage, maintenance dredging of navigation channels, berthing 
and mooring facilities, and how these will impact vessels of different sizes. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Port of Cork Company have agreed in principle to transfer the City Quays to Cork 
City Council over a number of phases and in accordance with Cork City Council’s 
programme for delivery of enabling infrastructure for the North and South Docklands 
regeneration. 
 
No rights or obligations with respect to the management of the marine operational 
element of the river Lee would transfer to Cork City Council as part of the sale. The 
Port’s functions, powers, and duties as the statutory harbour authority as defined under 
the Harbours Act shall continue, including but not limited to emergency planning, 
dredging, vessel traffic management, pilotage, provision of aids to navigation, and so 
on. 
 
As the Harbour Authority, the Port of Cork Company’s current area of jurisdiction 
extends to the Michael Collins and the Eamon De Valera bridges in the City Centre. 
Any change to the Port’s current area of jurisdiction would require an amendment to 
the Harbours Act and ministerial approval.  
 
After transfer of any individual section of the City Quays to Cork City Council, the 
Port will still have the option to use the selected quays for Layby Berthing and vessel 
logistical support, however the agreement excludes any ongoing cargo operations. To 
manage the use of the quays, it is envisaged that Cork City Council and the Port of 
Cork will enter into an agreement on Berth use (“Berthing Policy Agreement"), which 
will be consistent with the development objectives for the Cork City Docklands and 
the provisions of the Harbours Act, 1996.  The terms of the proposed agreement are 
under discussion and have yet to be agreed but will address all items raised in the 
Councillor’s query.  
 
With respect to dredging, if at some point in the future, the Port of Cork Company no 
longer requires the use of the city quays for lay-by berthing, then the Port of Cork will 
have no further obligation to dredge the berth slots and associated navigation channel 
to support shipping. At this juncture, any required dredging of the river channel and 
berths will be completed under a separate commercial agreement between the Cork 
City Council and the Port of Cork Company.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development.  
 

7.8 
LUAS CORK PROJECT 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the estimated total cost of the LUAS Cork project, 
the approximate date (based on current projections) that work on the project is likely 
to be fully complete and the approximate date (based on current projections) that 
LUAS Cork will be open for use by the public. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork Luas is a proposed light rail line running from Ballincollig to Mahon Point, 
connecting key destinations including MTU, Cork University Hospital, UCC, Cork 
city centre, Kent Station, Cork Docklands, Blackrock and Mahon. The project is being 
delivered by Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) in collaboration with the National 
Transport Authority (NTA). 
 
The project is a critical component of the Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy 
(CMATS) and has been the subject of strong policy support by Cork City Council 
over many years. CMATS envisaged that work on the route assessment and alignment 
with bus services would be completed in the period to 2026 with the planning, detailed 
design and delivery to progress thereafter. It also envisaged that, in the interim period, 
bus service routing and frequencies would be revised and significantly increased so as 
to facilitate a smooth transition to light rail services.  
 
The Cork Luas route will be circa 18km in length with 25 stops and high frequency 
and reliable services, facilitating balanced regional development and compact growth 
for Cork. The estimated forecasted cost of the project is in the €2bn – €3bn range and 
more precise cost estimates will be calculable as the scheme design is progressed and 
subjected to a comprehensive Business Case. The emerging preferred route for the 
project has been published and it is anticipated that the route will be confirmed in 
early 2026 ahead of the preliminary design and planning stages.  
 
Cork Luas in conjunction with the other strategic public transport projects being 
progressed in the city (Cork Bus Connects and Cork Commuter Rail) will radically 
transform access and movement opportunities for generations to come. Members will 
be kept appraised on the ongoing progress of these schemes. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
 
 
 
Edith Roberts 
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
A/Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
     
Infrastructure Development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7.9 
PHASE 2C NWQR 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the total sum paid to the original contractor for Phase 2C of the NWQR, 
the percentage amount of work complete that will require demolition and the cost of 
this demolition. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The total sum paid to the original contractor for Phase 2C of the CNWQR is 
€2,452,317.18 (Ex VAT). Cork City Council concluded its contractual arrangement 
with the building contractor in May 2024.  
0% of the work complete will require demolition.  
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
7.10 
CORK PUBLIC LIGHTING SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the chief executive how much government funding is secured for the North 
West ward relating to The Cork City Public Lighting Scheme and what is the projected 
completion date for the areas below.  
 
Site no  Site Name  
LEA  
26  
Riverview Estate, Tower, Blarney  
North West  
27  
Glenwood Drive Onslow Gardens  
North West  
28  
Castle Close, Blarney  
North West  
29  
Hollywood Estate, Knocknaheeny  
North West  
30  
Hollyville Estate, Holly Hill  
North West  
31  
Bride Valley Park, Fairhill  
North West  
32  
Ardcullen, Hollyhill  
North West  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
No Government funding has been secured for the Cork City Public Lighting Upgrade 
project. All funding is currently direct from Cork City Council Revenue. 
 
Part of Phase 1 of the project is currently being executed under a single-party 
framework to the value of €14 million with €5million currently allocated in the 
budgets in 2025 for works. 
  

Each site presents unique challenges and circumstances so costs and project timelines 
can vary significantly from one estate to another. Factors such as the size and 
complexity of the site, existing infrastructure etc all play a role. 
 
Please find the draft programme for the seven identified sites in the schedule below. 
We want to stress that the completion of these seven sites hinges entirely on ESB's 
scheduling, particularly when it comes to the handover following civil and 
commissioning works. This means any programme delays will be solely attributable 
to ESB's capacity to integrate their work within the project timeline. 
 
 
 
 
 
Noel Murtagh  
A/Director of Services 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
7.11 
INSURANCE CLAIMS 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan was withdrawn:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of insurance claims received for the council 
as a whole for the years 2024 and 2025 year to date, broken down into category of 
claim (roads, footpath etc) and amount paid out in total for each category, in tabular 
form, per year and what impact financially that is having on insurance premiums taken 
out by Cork City Council. 
 
7.12 
CORK CITY FIRE COVER REVIEW 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE when a funding application will be submitted to the National 
Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management to provide for the implementation 
of the Phase 1 recommendations of the recently published Cork City Fire Cover 
Review; and if she will set out the anticipated timeline for the delivery of a new fire 
station for the south-west of the city. 

 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Following the publication of the Fire Cover Review recently, work has commenced 
on the identification of a suitable site for the new Southwest Fire Station.  Once a 
location has been assessed as suitable, a formal funding application will be made to 
the National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management.  As per the dates 
contained within the Crowe Fire Cover Review, the timeline for the implementation 
of phase 1 recommendations is 1-3 years with these timelines being dependent of the 
required funding being secured.  Councillors will be updated on progress with regards 
to the delivery of this new infrastructure as this project progresses. 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Emergency Management & Climate Action Directorate. 
 
7.13 
EPLANNING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive why Cork is the only place in Ireland (except for 
Wexford) to have paper-only planning applications, and when will Cork City Council 
switch to ePlanning, joining everywhere else in Ireland in offering a convenient, 
efficient, paperless planning applications process? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The LGMA is working with all local authorities across Ireland, on a phased basis, to 
introduce an ePlanning facility.  Cork City Council is amongst the local authorities in 
the final phase of this project.  In the case of Cork City Council, the planning system 
which was in use was not compatible with the ePlanning software.  In order to proceed 
with ePlanning, Cork City Council had to tender for a new integrated planning system.  
Cork City Council is currently working on the configuration and implementation of a 
new integrated planning system which will allow the public to submit planning 
applications online.  The introduction of this new system is a significant undertaking 
which is incorporating numerous existing systems into one fully integrated planning 
system.  The new planning system is due to go live in Quarter 4 of 2025, after which 
the ePlanning functionality can be activated.  It is anticipated that the ePlanning portal 
will go live in Quarter 1 2026. 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin  
Director of Services 
Planning & Integrated Development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

7.14 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING SCHEME AT GLENMORE HEIGHTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
How many applications were made to the recent Affordable Housing Scheme at 
Lehenaghmore?  
 
How many of these applicants met the criteria of the scheme. 
 
Provide breakdown for demand for 
 
1. 2 Bed property 
  
2. 3 Bed property  
 
How many applicants subsequently withdrew from the process when offered a 
property?  
 
REPLY 
 
How many applications were made to the recent Affordable Housing Scheme at 
Lehenaghmore?  
 
• 
317 applications received for the scheme, of which 293 could be considered for 
assessment    
 
How many of these applicants met the criteria of the scheme? 
 
• 
167 met the criteria for the scheme 
• 
66 applications were too incomplete to assess / did not respond to requests to 
complete their application  
• 
60 applications were ineligible / could not be considered under the Scheme of 
Priority  
 
Provide breakdown for demand for: 
 
1. 2 Bed property - 118   (37% of all applications).  
2. 3 Bed property - 199   (63% of all applications)  
 
How many applicants subsequently withdrew from the process when offered a 
property?  
 
• 
7 applicants have declined their formal offer to date 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
 

7.15 
RIVER USE MANAGEMENT PLAN/STUDY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE confirm whether Cork City Council received a request or requests for the 
commissioning 
of 
a 
River 
Use 
Management 
Plan/Study 
during 
the 
Consultation/Submission process prior to the adoption of the 2022-2028 Cork City 
Development Plan, and if so, what was the rationale for the decision not to proceed 
with the Plan/Study as part of the 2022-2028 City Development Plan? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Objective 6.21 of the City Development Plan relates to the commissioning of a River 
Use and Management Study/Plan. No specific request was received from the public 
for the inclusion of this objective in the City Development Plan but rather the wording 
and objective was included by the Executive at the Draft Plan Stage of the Cork City 
Development Plan 2022-2028 and the wording remained unchanged through the 
public consultation process until final adoption of the Plan by Cork City Council 
Members. Cork City Council is fully committed to undertaking the Study within the 
lifetime of the City Development Plan and has confirmed to Members that the study 
and relevant stakeholder consultation will be commence upon the adoption of the Cork 
City Docklands Framework Plan and Variation No. 2. 
Niall Ó Donnabháin 
Director of Services  
Planning & Integrated Development.  
 
7.16 
ROAD REPAIRS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on: 
 
• 
Has the council engaged in discussions with central government regarding 
additional funding for road repairs in Cork. 
• 
What is the council’s current strategy to tackle the pothole issue effectively. 
• 
What, if any, oversight measures in place to ensure roads reinstated by utility 
companies meet durable, high-quality standards. 
 
REPLY 
 
Has the council engaged in discussions with central government regarding 
additional funding for road repairs in Cork. 
 
Cork City Council maintains an ongoing relationship with the Department of 
Transport inspector in relation to funding for the Regional and Local Roads 
resurfacing and with the TII inspector relating to National Roads. Additional funding 
was received in 2024 for Regional and Local Roads resurfacing. Funding for localised 

repairs to National Roads was also secured. Funding was also received for drainage 
works on the regional and local roads. 
 
What is the council’s current strategy to tackle the pothole issue effectively. 
 
Cork City Council operates a CRM system to log any complaints relating to potholes. 
These complaints are assigned to relevant engineering areas, who carry out localised 
repairs as necessary by direct labour and contract.  
 
 
Cork City Council operates a national system of PSCI (Pavement surface condition 
index) surveys. This data forms the basis for developing our roads resurfacing 
programmes, which are funded by the Department of Transport and own resources.   
 
What, if any, oversight measures in place to ensure roads reinstated by utility 
companies meet durable, high-quality standards. 
 
The various utility/providers must have a valid Road Opening Licence in order to 
carry out an excavation in a Public Road. MapRoad Licensing is the national system 
for the management and processing of roadworks licence applications.  
 
The licensing system is set up so that all works relating to the licence are recorded and 
managed through a unique licence number. 
 
All excavations must comply to the ‘Guidelines for the Opening, Backfilling and 
Reinstatement of Trenches in Public Roads’ published by the Department of Transport 
and with the Road Opening Licence conditions.  
 
This publication sets out the specifications for road opening reinstatement for regional 
and local roads throughout the country.  
 
All persons carrying out road excavation and reinstatement works must be 
appropriately trained to ensure they have the necessary skills and competencies for 
such activities and works.  
 
The Applicants Approved Certifier must certify that reinstatement works have been 
inspected, monitored and certify that the works meet the required standard. The 
Certifier then submits the works for sign off to Cork City Council.  
 
Cork City Council`s Roads Inspectorate carry out pre-works visits, on-site monitoring 
during the works and further inspections at the T5 completion stage, thus ensuring that 
all reinstatements comply to the conditions relating to the licence and to the 
specifications. 
 
If defects are encountered, a defects notification is issued to the Applicant to rectify 
these. 
 
At T5 Sign Off Stage (completion of works on site) all openings are inspected for 
compliance. When all works are in order, the licence is moved into the 2-year 
minimum guarantee period. This is the period of time, after which works have been 
completed, that the Licence Holder is responsible for the maintenance of the 

reinstatement. At the end of the guarantee period a final inspection is carried out to 
ensure there are no defects, thereafter the reinstatement works are closed out. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
7.17 
EMERGENCY ACCOMMODATION 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of children and families respectively in Cork city who have 
entered emergency accommodation in each of the last 5 years and the duration that 
each child and family spent in emergency accommodation during this period. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Please see below the number of families and children placed in Emergency 
Accommodation in the last 5 years. 
 
 
 
Given the amount of data corresponding to each record held by each family, it is not 
possible to run a specific report in relation to each placement.  However, the following 
is a record for each year as at 31st December of that given year.  
 
31/12/2021 
  
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
29 
69 
6-12 months 
6 
6 
12-18 months 
0 
0 
18-24 months 
0 
0 
24+ months 
0 
0 
31/12/2022 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
34 
59 
6-12 months 
5 
13 
12-18 months 
3 
8 
18-24 months 
1 
1 
24+ months 
0 
0 
 
31/12/2023 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
33 
56 
 Year Families 
Children 
2021 
110 
224 
2022 
127 
235 
2023 
147 
275 
2024 
179 
332 
2025 
149 
292 

6-12 months 
17 
43 
12-18 months 
6 
10 
18-24 months 
1 
3 
24+ months 
2 
3 
 
 
31/12/2024 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
38 
84 
6-12 months 
26 
46 
12-18 months 
10 
15 
18-24 months 
6 
15 
24+ months 
3 
7 
  
30/06/2025 
Families 
Children 
0-6 months 
44 
89 
6-12 months 
19 
49 
12-18 months 
15 
27 
18-24 months 
4 
5 
24+ months 
5 
14 
 
Nicky Carroll, 
A/Director of Service, 
Housing. 
 
7.18 
GOATS RESCUE OPERATION 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Manager for an update on the goats rescue operation in the Ballyvolane 
area. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
A number of goats that were causing a public nuisance were seized in the Ballyvolane 
area on the 10th July.  These animals will be rehomed.   
 
Noel Murtagh 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development and Operations. 
 
8. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
8.1 
VACANCIES ON BOARDS AND COMMITTEES 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir D. Boyle to the 
Audit Committee following the resignation of Comhairleoir O. Moran.  
 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir D. Boyle to the 
Arts Committee following the resignation of Comhairleoir O. Moran.   
 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir D. Boyle to the 
Climate Action Committee following the resignation of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boylan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir G. O’Brien to 
the Local Community Development Committee following the resignation of 
Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir S. O'Callaghan 
to An Grúpa Forbartha Gaeilge following the resignation of Comhairleoir G. O’Brien. 
 
8.2 
REGIONAL HEALTH FORUM SOUTH WEST 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir M. 
McDonnell, An Chomhairle considered and approved the appointment of 
Comhairleoir C. Kelleher to the Regional Health Forum South West. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the appointment of Comhairleoir G. O’Brien to 
the Regional Health Forum South West. 
 
8.3 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Deputy Chief Executive, 
dated 3rd July 2025 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal by way of lease of property situated at 103-105 Knockfree Avenue, 
Churchfield, Cork to Churchfield Community Trust CLG c/o Patrick Casey & Co. 
Solicitors, 30-31 Washington Street, Cork for a term of 4 years and 9 months 
subject to a rent of €700.00 per annum.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of the freehold interest in a plot of ground (85.49 m² approximately) 
situated adjacent to 38, Hollyville, Hollyhill, Knocknaheeny, Cork to Joanna & 
Michael Sederowski, c/o Taylor Solicitors, Unit 3A River House, Blackpool 
Retail Park, Cork for the nominal sum of €1.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir M. 
Gould, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 

3. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (23.5 m² approximately) 
situated to the rear of No. 66, High Street, Cork to Tim McDonnell, c/o Breen 
Walsh Solicitors, 78-80 South Mall, Cork for the nominal sum of €1.00. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir C. 
O’Connor, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
  
4. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (18.9 m² approximately) 
situated to the rear of No. 67, High Street, Cork to Paul Cantillon, c/o Babington 
Clarke & Mooney Solicitors, 48, South Mall, Cork for the nominal sum of €1.00. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir P. 
Dineen, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
5. Disposal of the superior leasehold interest in the property situated and known as 
No. 25, Gillabbey Street, Cork, to Patrick O’Shea & Sasha Gosling, c/o Hickey 
Dorney Solicitors, The Square, Passage West, Cork for the sum of €20,500.00 plus 
costs of €1,500.00, plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
Martin, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
6. Disposal of any right, interest, estate or title in an area of land (22 m² 
approximately) situated at the entrance to 15, Meadow Gardens, The Meadows, 
Hollyhill, Cork to Robert and Livia Klaniecki, c/o Murphy & Condon Solicitors, 
69, Shandon Street, Cork for a nominal sum of €1.00. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7. Disposal of the freehold interest in area of ground (5.72 m² approximately), 
together with a wayleave on land situated at Willsfort Meadows, Greenvalley, 
Donnybrook, Cork to ESB Networks, Sarsfield Road, Wilton, Cork, for the sum 
of €1.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
Martin, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
8. Disposal by way of lease of Café premises at Fitzgerald’s Park, Cork, together 
with a licence for the patio area, to Back to Front Hospitality Ltd. t/a Tria Cafe, 
c/o Regan Wall LLP, One South Mall, Cork, for a term of 10 years, subject to a 
rent of €24,000.00 per annum.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
9. Disposal by way of lease of Stall No.8, Princes Street Market, Cork to Tab Sales 
Ltd t/a Tom Bradley c/o Murphy Lynham, Solicitors, Courthouse Chambers, 27-
29 Washington Street, Cork, for a term of 21 years from the 1st January 2024.  
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir G. O’Brien, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
10. Disposal by way of lease of Stall No. 4B, Grand Parade Market, Cork to Café 
Marius Ltd. c/o Joyce & Co. Solicitors, 9, Washington Street West, Cork, for a 
term of 21 years from the 1st January 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
11. Disposal by way of lease of Stall No. 14, Grand Parade Market, Cork to Jump 
Juice Bars Ltd t/a Jump Juice, c/o Kearns Heffernan Foskin LLP, Solicitors, 
Otteran House, South Parade, Waterford, for a term of 21 years from the 1st 
January 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir C. 
O’Connor, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
12. Disposal by way of lease of Stall No. 15, Grand Parade Market, Cork to Maki 
Sushi Rolls Ltd c/o Comyn Kelleher Tobin, 2, George’s Quay, Cork, for a term of 
21 years from the 1st January 2024.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
13. Disposal by way of lease of Stalls No. 28 & 29, Grand Parade Market, Cork to 
Marc O’Mahony t/a The Good Food Shop c/o R. Neville & Co., Solicitors, Old 
Bank House, South Main Street, Bandon, Cork, for a term of 21 years from the 1st 
January 2024.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
Martin, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
14. Disposal by way of lease of Stall No. 31, Grand Parade Market, Cork to Paul 
Murphy t/a Coughlan Meats c/o Dominic Creedon & Co., Solicitors, 15/16 
Washington St, Cork, for a term of 21 years from the 1st January 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
15. Disposal by way of lease of Stall No. 2, Grand Parade Market, Cork, to On The 
Hoof Limited, t/a On The Hoof c/o Murphy Lynam Solicitors, Courthouse 
Chambers, No. 29, Washington Street, Cork, for a term of 21 years from the 1st 
January 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir P. 
Horgan, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
 

8.4 
PROPOSED VARIATION NO. 2 (CORK DOCKLANDS) TO THE CORK 
CITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2022 – 2028 (AS VARIED) 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the report of the Chief Executive, dated June 2025 on the 
Proposed Variation No. 2 (Cork Docklands) to the Cork City Development Plan 2022 
– 2028 (as varied).  
 
 
Comhairleoir D. Cahill proposed the following amendment to be included:- 
 
 
“That any and all references/mapping of the proposed Rail Bridge (Kent Station to 
Kennedy Quay) be removed from the proposed variation.” 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, 
a vote was called for on the proposed amendment, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí D. Boylan, K. McCarthy, D. Cahill, S. O’Callaghan, P. Dineen, 
A. Deasy, G. O’Brien. (7) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. 
O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, T. Shannon, M.R. 
Desmond, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. 
Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, C. O’Connor. (22) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir B. McCarthy. (1) 
 
 
As those voting against the proposed amendment were greater than those voting for, 
An Chomhairle declared the vote failed and the proposed amendment defeated. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the Proposed Variation No. 2 (Cork Docklands) 
to the Cork City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 (as varied), where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, 
M.R. Desmond, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. 
Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. 
Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (28) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir D. Cahill. (1) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir T. Tynan. (1) 
 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the Proposed Variation No. 2 (Cork Docklands) 
approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Shannon, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 

“Resolve under Section 13 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 as amended 
to make Proposed Variation No. 2 (Cork Docklands) to the Cork City Development 
Plan 2022 – 2028 (as varied) with the Chief Executive’s recommendations.” 
 
8.5 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: DE PAUL HOSTEL SITE, DEERPARK, 
FRIARS WALK, CORK - FREDERIC OZANAM TRUST (SOCIETY OF 
SAINT VINCENT DE PAUL) 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 12th June 2025 in relation to a loan facility for Frederic Ozanam Trust 
in respect of the provision of 8 semi-detached bungalows of accommodation at the De 
Paul Hostel Site, Deerpark, Friars Walk, Cork.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €2,043,348.35 (previously 
€2,150,893) be granted to the Frederic Ozanam Trust (Society of Saint Vincent de 
Paul), subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for the provision of 8 one 
bed units of accommodation at the De Paul Hostel Site, Deerpark, Friars Walk, Cork.” 
 
8.6 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: EDEL HOUSE, GRATTAN STREET, 
CORK - GOOD SHEPHERD CORK CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th June 2025 in relation to a loan facility for Good Shepherd Cork 
CLG in respect of the provision of 37 no. unit of accommodation at Edel House, 
Grattan Street, Cork.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Fitzgerald, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €8,349,127.44 (previously 
€7,537,428.70) be granted to Good Shepherd Cork CLG, subject to the terms of the 
Capital Assistance Scheme for the provision of 37 units of accommodation at Edel 
House, Grattan Street, Cork.” 
 
8.7 
PROPOSED 
RESIDENTIAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
AT 
MAIN 
STREET, 
BALLINCOLLIG 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed development at Main Street, 
Ballincollig, in the City of Cork and the report of the Deputy Chief Executive thereon 
as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, dated 10th July 2025. 
 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the proposed development at Main Street, 
Ballincollig, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. 
Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, 
N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. 
O’Connor. (26) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, K. McCarthy, A. Deasy. (3) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed development at Main Street, Ballincollig 
approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir G. O’Brien, seconded by Comhairleoir C. 
Kelleher, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Main Street, Ballincollig, in the City of Cork and the report of the 
Deputy Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to 
the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Main Street, Ballincollig, in the City of Cork be 
carried out as recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City 
Council, which was put before Council on the 14th July 2025.” 
 
8.8 
PROPOSED 
RESIDENTIAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
AT 
GLYNTOWN, 
GLANMIRE 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed development at Glyntown, 
Glanmire, in the City of Cork and the report of the Deputy Chief Executive thereon as 
required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, dated 10th July 2025.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the proposed development at Glyntown, 
Glanmire, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, D. 
Boylan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. 
Desmond, H. Kamegni, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. 
Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (24) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 

 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed development at Glyntown, Glanmire 
approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir P. 
Dineen, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Glyntown, Glanmire, in the City of Cork and the report of the Deputy 
Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Glyntown, Glanmire, in the City of Cork be carried 
out as recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, 
which was put before Council on the 14th July 2025.” 
 
8.9 
PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT WORKS TO BUS STOP 243101 ON R849 
GLASHEEN ROAD 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Acting Director 
of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 19th June 2025, following 
public consultation, on the Proposed Improvement Works to Bus Stop 243101 on 
R849 Glasheen Road pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act 1994, as amended 
by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act 2009. 
 
8.10 
PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT WORKS TO BUS STOP 242691 AND NEW 
PEDESTRIAN CROSSING ON R849 GLASHEEN ROAD 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Lynch, seconded by Comhairleoir G. O’Brien, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Acting Director of 
Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 19th June 2025, following 
public consultation, on the Proposed Improvement Works to Bus Stop 242691 and 
new Pedestrian Crossing on R849 Glasheen Road at Tara Lawn pursuant to Section 
38 of the Road Traffic Act 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport 
Regulation Act 2009. 
 
8.10.1 
PROPOSED PEDESTRIAN CROSSING SAFETY SCHEME 2025 POST 
SECTION 38 CONSULTATION 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Shannon, An Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Acting 
Director of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 13th June 2025, 
following public consultation, on the Proposed Pedestrian Crossing Safety Schemes 
at L2465 Church Street, Douglas,  pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act 
1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act 2009. 
 
8.11 
PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT WORKS TO BUS STOPS ON THE L2471 
ROAD “CLARKE’S HILL” 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir H. 
Kamegni, An Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Acting 
Director of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 17th June 2025, 

following public consultation, on the proposed improvement works to bus stops on 
the L2471 Road “Clarke’s Hill” in the Townlands of Monfieldstown and Mounthovel, 
pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the 
Public Transport Regulation Act 2009. 
 
8.12 
PROPOSED PEDESTRIAN CROSSING SAFETY SCHEME 2025 POST 
SECTION 38 CONSULTATION 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Acting Director of 
Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 19th June 2025, following 
public consultation, on the Proposed Pedestrian Crossing Safety Schemes at L1010 
Pearse Road at Scoil Maria Assumpta,  pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act 
1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act 2009. 
 
8.13 
PROPOSED PEDESTRIAN CROSSING SAFETY SCHEMES 2025 POST 
SECTION 38 CONSULTATION                
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Acting Director of 
Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 19th June 2025, following 
public consultation, on the proposed Pedestrian Crossing Safety Schemes at R617 
Tower to Blarney Road at Shournagh Drive and R617 Tower to Blarney Road at 
Primrose Hill Estate, pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act 1994, as amended 
by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation Act 2009. 
 
8.14 
PROPOSED PEDESTRIAN CROSSING SAFETY SCHEMES 2025 POST 
SECTION 38 CONSULTATION 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir M. McDonnell, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the recommendation of the Acting Director 
of Services, Local Area Development and Operations, dated 19th June 2025, following 
public consultation, on the proposed Pedestrian Crossing Safety Schemes at R639 
Riverstown Road at Glanmire Community Centre, R639 Riverstown Road at 
Glanmire GAA, and Riverstown Road at the Hermitage Estate, pursuant to Section 38 
of the Road Traffic Act 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport 
Regulation Act 2009. 
 
8.15 
SECTION 85 AGREEMENT WITH CORK COUNTY COUNCIL – CORK TO 
KINSALE GREENWAY 
 
 
In accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act 2001 and the Roads 
Act 1993, An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of 
Services, Infrastructure Development, dated 16th June 2025 and the proposed Section 
85 Agreement to facilitate the delivery of the Cork To Kinsale Greenway.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
Martin, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 

“That Cork City Council agrees to the entering into an Agreement, as presented to it 
under Section 85 of the Local Government Act, 2001 with Cork County Council, for 
the carrying out by Cork County Council of all the relevant statutory procedures, 
procuring the necessary design work, acquiring the land and carrying out of the 
construction work and any other powers, functions and duties necessary for the design, 
construction and completion of the Cork to Kinsale Greenway Project.  
 
The making of an agreement by a local authority under Section 85 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 is a reserved function. 
 
Accordingly, Cork City Council hereby resolves to entering into an Agreement with 
Cork County Council pursuant to the provisions of Section 85 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 and Section 14 of the Roads Act 1993.” 
 
9. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 7th JULY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 7th July 2025. 
 
9.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/05/2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/05/2025. 
 
9.2 
ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
 
9.2.1 
ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT (UNAUDITED) 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the (Unaudited) Annual Financial Statement to 
31/05/2025. 
 
9.2.2 
RESOLUTION 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
‘The Council resolves that The Annual Financial Statement for 2024 and, pursuant to 
Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001, the under / over expenditure as 
outlined in note 16 are thereby approved.’ 
 
9.3 
MOTIONS 
 
9.3.1 
ADVISE COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS OF THE BDS CAMPAIGN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 3rd July 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That, in keeping with its policy of support for the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions 
(BDS) campaign to pressure Israel to withdraw from its illegal occupation of Palestine 
and to ensure full equality for its Arab-Palestinian citizens, Cork City Council will 
advise community organisations in receiving ward funds to be mindful of this policy 

in their use of funds received from Cork City Council; and that organisations will be 
advised of this in written communications from Cork City Council when receiving 
ward funds.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/319) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Ward Funds are issued to community 
groups on the completion of a Ward Funds Payment Request Form by Members of 
Cork City Council. These applications forms will include information regard the 
Council policy of support for the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) campaign 
and future payees will be informed of as part of their letter of payment. 
 
9.3.2 
EUROPE DAY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 30th May 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
              ‘To mark Europe Day - a day celebrating peace and unity in Europe, to mark that this 
is Europe, and to be consistent with other cities, including Dublin, Limerick and 
Waterford, that Cork City Council will fly the European flag on City Hall on a 
permanent basis.’ 
 
    
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/242) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Hall currently has two flag 
poles available on the building. In accordance with our own and national flag 
protocols, the National Flag is flown permanently. The House Flag (City Flag), is 
generally flown alongside the National Flag. On certain occasions, other flags are 
flown alongside the National Flag, for example on the occasion of a visit by another 
Head of State the flag of that state is flown. Europe Day is celebrated on 9th May 
annually. It is possible to fly the European Flag on the building to mark that day. In 
order to fly the European Flag permanently an additional flag pole will be required. 
Further investigations of the feasibility of this and costs will be carried out. 
 
10. 
PARTY WHIPS – 23rd JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 23rd June 2025. 
 
11. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – 16th 
JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 16th June 2025. 
 
 
 
 

11.1 
MOTIONS 
 
11.1.1 
SCHOOL TRANSPORT SYSTEM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek for the school transport system to be expanded and 
enhanced to take as many cars off the road as possible, a school transport for all, 
focusing on the South East Ward as a pilot project and will seek funding and 
engagement from the Department of Education and Bus Éireann for same.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/165) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the School Transport scheme is 
operated by Bus Eireann on behalf of the Department of Education who funds the 
scheme to provide transport for children who are 3.2km or more from their local 
primary school and 4.8km or more from their nearest secondary school. 
 
Local Authorities have no role in the establishment or operation of the scheme.  The 
Department of Education determines what the nearest suitable school is. Bus Eireann 
decides if a child qualifies by checking the distance from the nearest school to a child’s 
ome. 
 
A review of the school transport scheme has recommended changes to how the scheme 
works, so that more students can use buses by 2030. 
 
It recommends: 
Removing the ‘nearest school' requirement, where there are existing bus routes or 
where there is enough demand for a new route (at least 10 pupils) 
Reducing the distance required for pupils to qualify for the school transport scheme. 
 
A link to the summary review of the scheme is  available online via the following link 
- review-of-the-school-transport-scheme-summary-report.pdf 
 
11.1.2 
DUNKETTLE TRAFFIC APP 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek the costings to adopt the operation of the Dunkettle traffic 
app to ensure the camera feeds on the app are restarted and maintained in our own 
roads CCTV ecosystem with funding streams from the Department of Transport, 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland and the National Transport Authority, to offset the 
cost to the Local Authority.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/167) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that An Garda Síochána have got an 
independent CCTV system located around the city centre to monitor and react to 
incidents, events and anti-social behaviour. 
 
On-duty Gardaí monitor CCTV feeds as well as emergency calls and all information 
being fed into their network which allows a more efficient deployment of resources 
on the ground. 
 
This CCTV is separate and not a shared system with Cork City Council for GDPR 
reasons. The Gardaí carry out speed monitoring using static and mobile speed 
cameras, to detect and issue penalty points for speeding and other driving offences. 
Any expansion of the current Garda CCTV system in public spaces would require 
permission under section 27 of the Garda Síochána (Recording Devices) Act 2023. 
This involves the Garda Commissioner authorising the installation and operation of 
CCTV for a) the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal 
offences, b) safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security, 
including securing public safety and public order, c) the protection of the security of 
the state. 
 
Any specific request for additional CCTV coverage should be discussed at the Joint 
Policing Committee (JPC) who would have a remit in this area and dependent on the 
CCTV monitoring purpose and the identification of specific sites for consideration, 
either the Gardaí or Local Authority must apply in writing to the Garda Commissioner 
for authorisation for the installation/operation of any new cameras for the purposes of 
the detection of criminal offences and commence compliance to the aforementioned 
act. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration. 
 
11.1.3 
NEW BRIDGE CONNECTING THE SOUTH DOCKS AND PENROSE QUAY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development and the Director of Services, Planning and Integrated 
Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘The impact of another bridge on the use of the River Lee needs to be examined in 
detail before further designs/ location of any such bridge proceeds any further. 
 
Waterford city has embraced maritime activity in their city harbour and Cork City 
should follow their lead and develop a thriving city harbour. 
 
What are the long term ( permanent ) consequences of constructing a rail / pedestrian 
bridge which cannot be opened?  
 
Have the following considerations been considered? 
 
At this early stage, key considerations should include: 
 

• The significant loss or disruption of what should be regarded as a vital city 
facility—Cork Harbour Cruises. 
• The removal of waterway access for visiting leisure vessels. 
• The ongoing reduction of sea traffic over the years due to existing bridges, 
further restricting maritime movement—this proposed bridge could be the 
final nail in the coffin. 
• The diminishing recognition and respect for the city’s maritime heritage, with 
increasing restrictions on marine traffic. 
• Aside from the bridge, the privatisation of the city pontoon, leaves the city 
without any control over a facility which could be closed at a moment’s notice 
• The impact on the future use of River Taxies which is in our development plan. 
  
Can the existing Parnell Bridge and the Michael Collins Bridge be modified, if indeed 
there is any need for further access. Does the end point for Cork’s light rail need to be 
at the South Docks? 
 
Cork will be hosting International Maritime day in May, a great honour for the city, 
we need as a city to protect and harness our great natural resource which is the River 
Lee.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Cahill 25/169) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the proposed bridge over the River 
Lee connecting the South Docks and Penrose Quay is an integral component of the 
emerging preferred route for the LUAS Cork light rail system for Cork City proposed 
by Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII), which is currently on public consultation. A 
key element of this part of the emerging route is the connection of the LUAS Cork 
with Kent Station to create a strategic public transport interchange with integrated 
multi-modal public and active transport across the city. The current proposals do not 
consider the specifics of the bridge design, including whether it will be fixed or 
opening, this will be decided under a future stage of the design process. This bridge 
will be a public transport and active travel (walking and cycling) bridge. The 
requirement for a public transport link with Kent Station via a bridge connection over 
the River Lee has been included as a mapped objective in Cork City Council policy 
since the publication of the South Docks Local Area Plan in 2008, and it was 
subsequently included in the 2009, 2015 and 2022 Cork City Development Plans. The 
current Proposed Variation No 2 to the Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 
proposes no adjustments or modifications to either the location or the functionality of 
the Kent Station Bridge. 
 
The City Council has no proposals to alter Michael Collins Bridge. This bridge forms 
part of the N27 national road network and carries significant vehicular movements as 
a key route to and through the Cork City. 
 
The end points of LUAS Cork as currently proposed are in Ballincollig in the West 
and Mahon in the East. While the South Docks is not an end point for the light rail 
network, it is an essential part of the route providing public transport access across the 
city through what will be an important future city neighbourhood and community of 
around 25,000 people and 25,000 workers. The current Cork City Development Plan 
includes an objective to carry out a river use and management plan, which will address 

the key considerations identified in the motion above and inform the design of any 
future bridges. It is intended that this process will commence once the Proposed 
Variation process has concluded.  
 
11.1.4 
CONDITION OF ROADS FOLLOWING WORKS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council report on the process to ensure that roads are returned to an 
excellent condition following works by Uisce Éireann and the various utility 
providers.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/235) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Uisce Éireann and the various utility 
providers must have a valid Road Opening Licence in order to carry out an excavation 
in a Public Road. MapRoad Licensing is the national system for the management and 
processing of roadworks licence applications. 
 
The licensing system is set up so that all works relating to the licence are recorded and 
managed through a unique licence number. 
 
All excavations must comply to the ‘Guidelines for the Opening, Backfilling and 
Reinstatement of Trenches in Public Roads’ published by the Department of Transport 
and with the Road Opening Licence conditions.  
 
This publication sets out the specifications for road opening reinstatement for regional 
and local roads throughout the country. 
 
All persons carrying out road excavation and reinstatement works must be 
appropriately trained to ensure they have the necessary skills and competencies for 
such activities and works. 
 
The Applicants Approved Certifier must certify that reinstatement works have been 
inspected, monitored and certify that the works meet the required standard. The 
Certifier then submits the works for sign off to Cork City Council. 
 
Cork City Council`s Roads Inspectorate carry out pre-works visits, on-site monitoring 
during the works and further inspections at the T5 completion stage, thus ensuring that 
all reinstatements comply to the conditions relating to the licence and to the 
specifications. 
 
If defects are encountered, a defects notification is issued to the Applicant to rectify 
these. 
 
There can be a significant time delay before the permanent reinstatement is carried 
out on watermain rehab works, because the full main and connections have to be tested 
in advance. 
 

At T5 Sign Off Stage (completion of works on site) all openings are inspected for 
compliance. When all works are in order, the licence is moved into the 2-year 
minimum guarantee period. This is the period, after which works have been 
completed, that the Licence Holder is responsible for the maintenance of the 
reinstatement. At the end of the guarantee period a final inspection is carried out to 
ensure there are no defects, thereafter the reinstatement works are closed out. 
 
11.1.5 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CORK CYCLE NETWORK PLAN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘To mark Bike Week and to demonstrate progress since the record budget for active 
travel since 2020, that Cork City Council will report on the implementation of the 
Cork Cycle Network Plan, and make specific reference to indicate a timeline for the 
development of a contraflow cycle lane on Sullivan’s Quay and George’s Quay to 
connect Nano Nagle Bridge to Union Quay (Route Code: CCC-U19), and make 
specific reference to indicate a timeline for the development of Rochestown Road 
(Route Codes: CSE-U20 & CSE-U21).’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/243) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that: 
Cork Cycle Network Plan 2020 to date 
 
 
As part of the implementation of the Cork Cycle Network Plan, since 2020 there has 
been over 40km of dedicated cycle lanes and shared active travel/greenway facilities 
completed/under construction.  These included schemes at: 
 
Marina Promenade  
Passage to City Centre G/way Ph 1 
South Mall Cycle Lane  
Glasheen Rd. to Magazine Rd. 
Donovans Rd. 
Melbourne Rd. & Rossa Avenue 
Victoria Rd. to McSwiney Quay  
Monahan Rd.  
Centre Park Rd. 
Tramore Valley Park Footway and Cycleway 
Glanmire to City Ph 1 
Mahon Area Cycle/Pesdestrian Scheme 
Skehard Rd. Ph2  
Stage 
Cycle Lane/Track 
(KM) 
Shared A.T. 
Facility/Greenway (KM) 
Mixed Traffic 
(Quiet St.) (KM) 
Design/Planning Stage 
35.380 
15.935 
4.350 
Under Construction 
3.604 
2.565 
.315 
Completed 
19.043 
15.750 
1.485 
Total 
58.027 
34.250 
6.150 

Horgans Quay  
Lower Glanmire Rd. to Water St. 
Curraheen & Carrigrohane off Road Pedestrian and Cycleway upgrade,  
Skehard Rd. Ph3  
MacCurtain St. PTI Scheme  
Curragh Rd Junction Upgrade  
Ballybrack Valley Ped and Cycle Track Ph 4A  
Glanmire Improvement Schemes Phs 1, 3 & 9A  
Tramore Valley Park to Grange Road Cycleway (incl N40 Bridge) 
Dunkettle Rd. Ph 1 
Calderwood Rd.  
Harbour View Rd. between Blarney Rd. & Harbour View Rd.  
South Douglas Rd. Junction upgrade  
Half Moon Lane Improvement Scheme  
Mary Elmes Bridge  
Bishop Lucey Park & Beamish & Crawford Public Realm,  
Ballyvolane Sustainable Transport Corridor,  
Blarney Business Pk Linkage Scheme 
Glanmire Improvement Scheme Ph.4 
Etc. 
 
The Council also has over 51km of dedicated cycle lanes and shared active 
travel/greenway facilities at Planning or design stage.  These include schemes at: 
 
Leo Murphy Rd. 
Frankfield Rd. 
Passage to City Centre Ph.2 
Monahan Rd Extension  
Glanmire to City Ph 2 
Lehenaghmore 
Cork City to Viaduct Greenway Ph.1 
Curraheen Rd.  
Blarney Village  
Knockpogue & Knockfree Avenue  
Maryborough Woods 
Nash Boreen 
Colmcille Avenue 
Glanmire Greenway 
Dunkettle Rd. Ph.2 
Airport Rd. 
Northern Distributor Rd. 
Rochestown Rd. 
Sarsfield Rd. to MTU 
Sarsfield Rd. to Clashduv 
 
In addition, the NTA under their Bus Connects programme have published proposals 
for a further 53kms of Cycle facilities in Cork City. 
 
A proposed scheme on Sullivan’s and George’s quay (Route Code CCC-U19) will be 
raised with the NTA and the Committee will be advised of its timeline as it progresses. 

 
The Rochestown to Douglas Active Travel Scheme is at preliminary design & options 
assessment stage. The project received a funding allocation of €150,000 for this year 
to facilitate the progression of the preliminary design and related surveys. The project 
is scheduled to progress to statutory planning later this year subject to the usual 
consents from the funding authority. 
 
The project requires significant land acquisition and as such it is not possible to 
confirm the precise delivery timelines until planning, funding and CPO consents are 
secured. The earliest delivery programme would see construction commencing in 
2027 subject to all required consents being promptly secured. The estimated 
construction duration is likely to be 16 months. 
 
11.1.6 
COMPLIMENTARY PARKING PERMIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council acknowledges the fact that so many young adults are forced 
to remain living in the family home far longer than would normally be expected 
because of the impossibility of achieving a home of their own, either by renting, 
buying or social housing. In acknowledgement of this crisis, and the financial and 
social burden it places on mostly older people, this Motion proposes that a 
complimentary parking permit be issued to each head of household, on request.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/272) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the pricing structure for Residential 
Parking Permits is set out in the Parking Permit Scheme 2022. The annual cost of a 
permit is €30 for the first applicant, €60 for the second applicant and €120 each for 
the third and fourth qualifying applicants. The monetary value of each permit 
represents up to €3,500 in parking costs in 2-hour parking zones and up to €7,000 in 
1 hour parking zones. Each applicant is assessed according to the terms of the scheme, 
and this ensures that all applicants, regardless of household/family status, are treated 
fairly. 
 
11.1.7 
STEEL OR CONCRETE MARKERS TO DELINEATE CYCLE LANES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘In an effort to reach sustainability goals, improve the aesthetic of our streetscapes and 
save money in the long term (existing plastic markers need to be replaced regularly) 
the Council will endeavour to use steel or concrete to delineate cycle lanes instead of 
plastic going forward’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/096) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that cycle lane bollards are unfortunately 
frequently impacted by vehicles.  The bollards used by Cork City Council are flexible 

in accordance with Section 4.2.5.4 of the Department Of Transport’s Cycle Design 
Manual which means that they are designed to return to a vertical position after 
impact. Impacts on steel or concrete bollards commonly result in broken or bent 
bollards which then become a hazard for both cyclists, pedestrians and vehicular 
traffic. Experience has shown that flexible bollards need replacement far less 
frequently that steel or concrete bollards for the previously mentioned reasons and this 
makes flexible bollards more cost effective in the long run. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration. 
 
11.1.8 
BUS INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council produce a report outlining all actions taken by Council to 
increase compliance with bus lanes and other road infrastructure for buses, reduce 
congestion and support Gardaí and Bus Éireann in reducing anti-social behaviour on 
the No. 203 and other bus routes’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/102) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that BusConnects is the medium to long 
term plan to enhance bus routes and provide better and more connected infrastructure 
for public transport and active travel which will support better compliance with bus 
lanes and other bus infrastructure. Cork City Council have no specific enforcement 
powers in relation to compliance with bus lanes but will work with An Garda Síochána 
and Bus Éireann if there are interim measures within our remit that support 
compliance. Anti-social behaviour on buses is a matter for An Garda Síochána and 
Bus Éireann. 
 
11.1.9 
SHARED MICRO-MOBILITY STRATEGY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 11th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will report on progress of the city's Shared Micro-Mobility 
Strategy; in particular progress towards tendering for a shared electric bicycle scheme 
outside of the City Centre’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/133) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council are working with 
the Department of Transport to inform policy with respect to shared micro-mobility 
as identified in the Government’s Climate Action Plan (CAP 23/24). Cork City 
Council are actively engaged in this process which will ultimately inform a shared 
micromobility strategy for Cork City. 
 
 

11.1.10 BUS STOP ENHANCEMENT PROGRAMME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations Directorate, dated 11th June 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes the funding received under the Bus Stop Enhancement 
Programme and agrees to: 
 
- 
publish a report with an update on all completed and intended bus stop upgrades 
and the number of bus stops in the Cork city administrative area 
 
- 
⁠prioritise bus stops at the Dominican Centre and in Blarney 
 
- 
⁠explore the installation of bus stops at St. Brendan’s Church in the Glen and 
Kilmore Road Lower’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/140) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the funding provided under this 
programme is intended to enable each local authority, in collaboration with the NTA, 
to enhance bus stop facilities at bus stopping locations within its administrative area, 
including the provision of bus shelters where appropriate.  
 
The NTA will, through a central supply contract, provide any required bus shelters to 
the local authority and will also make available the NTA’s bus shelter contractor to 
the Council to undertake their installation (following the Council’s preparatory works 
by separate contract).  In addition, the NTA will also arrange for its contractor to 
maintain the bus shelters subsequently. 
 
Currently the NTA is retendering the current bus shelter contract as it expired at the 
end of March 2025. The ongoing procurement process is nearing conclusion where a 
new contract will be put in place and executed, and an effective date agreed. There 
will be a need for a mobilisation period once the new contract commences.  
 
Traffic Operations received funding from the NTA for the last number of years for 
Bus Shelter Enabling Works where over 30 bus shelters have been installed or 
upgraded across the city.  
 
In relation to bus stops, The NTA’s Cork Network Redesign contractor is undertaking 
surveys and producing construction drawings ahead of the installation of new bus 
stops that will facilitate the new bus network. It is their intention to issue a 
communication to local communities and public representatives ahead of the works 
taking place.  
 
Following the introduction of the new bus network please note the new routes that 
will service the following locations: 
 

• 
Existing stops at Dominican Centre (Mulgrave Road) will be serviced by Routes 
3A (Carrigaline PCC to Apple via Ferney Rd/Maryborough Hill) and 3B (Carrigaline 
PCC to Apple via Fuchsia Ave/Ballinrea Rd). 
 
• 
Existing Blarney Stops will be serviced by Routes 16 (Ballincollig to Kent 
Station via Blarney) and 53 (Blarney Business Park to Cork Bus Station via Kerry 
Pike). 
 
• 
Existing stops (Stop ID # 243581 and 243631) at St. Brendan’s Church in the 
Glen will be serviced by Route 23 (Black Ash P&R to Blackpool) as part of the new 
bus network.  
 
• 
The Cork Network Redesign does not include a service to run along Kilmore 
Road Lower, however, the new Route 5 (CUH Loop to Blackpool via Apple, 
Knocknaheeny) will service the following existing stops: 
 
o 
On Kilmore Road (western side of Kilmore Road Lower); and 
 
o 
On Mt Agnes Road (eastern side of Kilmore Road Lower). 
 
The 
proposed 
network 
of 
routes 
are 
available 
to 
view 
on 
https://busconnects.ie/cities/cork/cork-bus-network-redesign/ 
 
Cork City Council supports enhancing the ferry connectivity from the UK, France and 
Spain to Cork.  The Council will engage with Port of Cork to ascertain what proposals 
are under consideration in relation to such services and revert to Members. 
 
12. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH 
- 
STRAITÉISEACHT, 
FORBAIRT 
EACNAMAÍOCH, 
FIONTAR 
& 
PLEANÁIL – 16th JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 16th June 2025. 
 
12.1 
DERELICTION UPDATE – STATUS OF SITES ON THE DERELICT SITES 
REGISTER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentation on residential dereliction and 
vacancy in Cork City. 
 
12.2 
UPDATE ON CORK CITY NEIGHBOURHOOD PROFILE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentation on the Cork City Neighbour 
Profile. 
 
 
 

12.3 
PROPOSED VARIATION NO. 2 TO THE CORK CITY DEVELOPMENT 
PLAN 2022-2028 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentation on proposed variation No. 2 of 
the Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 regarding Docklands. 
 
12.4 
MOTIONS  
 
12.4.1 
PLANNING REQUIREMENTS FOR ADVERTISING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will amend planning requirements for advertising hoardings and 
shop fronts promoting the use or purchase of items that run contrary to public health 
guidelines specifically in relation to e-cigarettes and the purchase of e-liquid and will 
compile a review of existing shop fronts in the administrative jurisdiction that 
planning is required for same.’ 
      
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/230) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that in Ireland, planning authorities do 
not have the power to restrict the sale of e-cigarettes (and related products) through 
the planning system. The sale and regulation of tobacco and nicotine inhaling products 
such as e-cigarettes is regulated under national legislation including the Public Health 
(Tobacco Products and Nicotine Inhaling Products) Act 2023. A new licensing system 
for the retail sale of tobacco and nicotine inhaling products such as e-cigarettes will 
take effect from 2 February 2026 under Part 2 of the above Act. Section 30 of the 
above Act currently prohibits the advertising of nicotine inhaling product in or at 
schools, on buses, trains and at bus and train stations. There are also restrictions in 
relation to advertising such products in cinemas. The Health Service Executive (HSE) 
is the responsible authority for enforcing this legislation.  
 
12.4.2 
MASS CPO OF DERELICT BUILDINGS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will seek the advice of our Law Agent and the Attorney General on 
all supports that can be levied to ensure a mass CPO of derelict buildings in the city 
administrative area where efforts have been made to bring those buildings back into 
use by the Council but have been ignored by owners for whatever reason for longer 
than a year.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/231) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that addressing dereliction & vacancy is 
a priority for Cork City Council and a dedicated team of six staff work exclusively in 
this area. In addition, a significant number of Cork City Council staff, across a variety 
of Directorates, contribute a significant portion of their time working on dereliction 

and vacancy. This includes inputs from Planning, Conservation, Building Control, 
Property, Housing, Law, etc.  
 
Dereliction is addressed in a variety of ways including engagement with property 
owners, providing grants to stimulate investment and return to use, promoting the 
options & supports available to property owners, placement on the derelict sites 
register, collection of levies, acquiring properties, addressing properties through the 
URDF funding.  
 
This priority is reflected in an increased number of properties being addressed (to end 
2024) -  the number of sites on the Derelict Site Register has increased from 95 in 
2021 to 175 in 2024; an additional 240 properties are being investigated and 
progressed under the Derelict Sites Act, bringing the total number of properties being 
actively advanced to over 400, double the number of properties being investigated in 
2022; a further 300 properties are on Cork City Council’s vacant homes register, while 
an additional 419 properties are availing of the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant 
which brings long term vacant and derelict properties back into use. This brings the 
total number of properties being progressed for a removal of vacancy or dereliction 
by Cork City Council’s Derelict Sites team to over 1000, a fivefold increase on the 
2020 total. 
 
Currently the number of properties on the Derelict Sites Register is 166, of which 
approximately 77% are undertaking an action likely to lead to a removal of dereliction. 
This can include but is not limited to ongoing works, live grant applications, live 
Planning Permissions and similar actions. A further 5% of sites are on the register less 
than 12 months, accounting for 82%. 
 
Where no action resulting in a removal of dereliction has commenced, acquisition is 
considered. This applies to 18% of the current register where no action to remove 
dereliction is underway, approximately 30 sites. Of these 30 sites, 14 are part of Cork 
City Council’s approved URDF funding list, a revolving fund which Cork City 
Council can use the fund the purchase of these properties to facilitate a return to use. 
Cork City Council’s Derelict Sites Team works closely with Property and Housing to 
progress acquisition of these properties, following negotiations and pending appeals.  
 
Despite the forementioned actions, there are a number of sites on the Derelict Site 
Register that present challenges regarding acquisition and other methods of return to 
use. These can include commercial sites, sites of considerable scale, high loss / high 
risk sites, sites of architectural value and other considerations. These are monitored 
and reviewed monthly for progression. 
 
The preferred approach is to work with owners, where possible, to identify and 
encourage the fastest return to use, before a property is placed on the register or when 
the property is on the register and Cork City Council will continue to do so. Where 
sites remain derelict without any meaningful owner engagement the Council will, and 
are, undertaking compulsory acquisition of these properties.  
 
Given the positive uptake from the public in government vacant and derelict grant 
supports available, the Council is focusing its compulsory acquisition efforts in 2025 
on derelict houses across the city. In these cases, compulsory acquisition and onward 

sale to new owners and occupiers who can avail of existing vacant grants or Living 
Cities Initiative funding can help bring about the speeder removal of dereliction and 
address housing shortages and provide much needed housing opportunities for 
interested persons. This can be achieved with the ongoing support of Council through 
the Section 183 disposal process.      
 
A presentation on dereliction addressing some of the matters raised in this motion is 
planned for the PID SPC Monday 16th June. 
 
12.4.3 
DERELICTION IN CORK 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will report on dereliction in Cork, including how many 
properties it has added to the derelict sites register, an estimate of how complete the 
register is and plans to complete it, an outline of the actions it has taken for each 
property, including engagement with the owners, application of the derelict sites levy, 
compulsory purchase, restoration and return to active use, to detail this information 
for each ward, to compare and contrast our approach and results with those of 
Limerick City and County Council and Waterford City and County Council, and to 
propose priority intervention to resolve the prominent row of derelict properties on 
North Main Street across from Castle Street to Paradise Place.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/321) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that at the end of May 2025, Cork City 
Council is working on a Derelict Site Register of 166 properties. An additional 220 
properties are under investigation. A further 446 properties are availing of the Vacant 
Property Refurbishment Grant through the Derelict Sites team, bringing the total 
number being progressed to 832.  
 
In 2025, 3 sites have been added to the Register, 11 sites have been removed from the 
Register, while 46 sites have been closed (prior to placement on the register) through 
engagement & activity of the Derelict Sites Team.  
 
Of 166 sites on the Derelict Sites Register, approx. 77% are undertaking an action 
likely to lead to a removal of dereliction and a further 5% are on the register less than 
1 year. The remaining 18%, or 30 properties, are being considered for acquisition, 14 
of which have been identified as potential acquisitions under the Department of 
Housing URDF funding scheme, subject to approval. 
 
Of the 220 sites under investigation for placement on the register, 37% have been 
identified as actively pursuing a removal of dereliction, 42% are at early stages of 
investigation so undetermined, leaving 21% or 46 properties which may proceed to 
the Derelict Sites Register should owners fail to remove dereliction following Cork 
City Council engagement.   
 

Cork City Council technicians regularly review city areas for instances of dereliction 
and files are opened accordingly, in addition to files opened through elected member, 
public complaint and/or contact.  
 
Cork City Council liaises with Limerick City Council and Waterford City Council a 
number of times a year where information and best practice is shared and utilised. 
 
Regarding comparisons to other Local Authorities, each year varies, and exact 
calculations can fluctuate. Cork City Council collected the same amount of Derelict 
and Vacant site levies as Limerick in 2024 at approx. €525k. Waterford City Council 
collected no levies from approximately 89 sites in 2024. 
 
Cork City Council returned 238 properties to use in 2024, of which approximately 173 
returns to use through grant funding (primarily the Vacant Property Grant) and the 
remainder were sites returned to use through activity related to the Derelict Sites 
Register and Act. This compares to approx. 292 properties returned to use in Limerick. 
The figure for Waterford is unknown. 
 
Cork City Council began CPO proceedings against 9 sites in 2024, more than 
Waterford and less than Limerick who commenced approximately 21 sites. Each 
Local Authority takes varying approaches to tackling dereliction depending on its 
urban/rural make up, push and pull factors and other considerations. Cork City 
Council works with owners to ensure the timeliest removal of dereliction with over 
81% of the Derelict Site Register engaged in an active return to use, a higher 
engagement rate than any other local authority.  
 
Regarding the properties 62 – 65 North Main Street, Cork City Council, through the 
new City Centre Directorate, is currently undertaking viability assessments and the 
preparation of a conceptual design for consideration and approval by the Executive. 
On conclusion of the viability assessment process it is envisaged a formal 
development proposal will be advanced through the Part VIII process for Council 
approval and ultimately commencement of redevelopment. 
 
12.4.4 
PLANNING POLICY FOR RURAL AREAS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would review its planning policy to take into account the 
rural aspect of the extended city where there is already a settlement in order to 
facilitate people to live in their communities.’ 
 
     
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 25/261) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that lands within the hinterland 
settlements of Kerry Pike, Killeens and Upper Glanmire are zoned in the Cork City 
Development Plan 2022-2028. Lands on the periphery of the City are also zoned 
around established communities including Kilcully, Moneygurney and Douglas. A 
review of established settlements will be undertaken as part of the preparation of the 
next City Development Plan. 

 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm. 
 
12.4.5 
RESTRICTIONS ON FOREIGN INVESTORS BULK BUYING HOUSING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will ensure that restrictions on foreign investors bulk buying 
housing units are implemented as a condition as a planning requirement and provide 
a report to elected members on the powers that currently exist for such a protection, 
for the common good.’ 
 
          
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/287) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the “Regulation of Commercial 
Institutional Investment in Housing Guidelines for Planning Authorities, July 2023” 
issued under section 28 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, sets 
out that local authorities and An Bord Pleanála put conditions on planning permissions 
for houses and duplexes with own door access in lower density housing developments 
restricting occupation to individual owners and not bulk-purchasing commercial 
institutional investors for market rental purposes in a manner that causes the 
displacement of individual purchasers and/or social and affordable housing including 
cost rental housing. Cork City Council currently puts such conditions on all relevant 
grants of planning permission.  
 
These provisions do not currently apply to apartments due to the requirement for 
flexibility in the delivery of apartments. The “Sustainable Urban Housing: Design 
Standards for New Apartments Guidelines for Planning Authorities issued under 
Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended), July 2023” 
references build-to-rent apartment developments and states that ‘they can provide a 
viable long-term housing solution to households where homeownership may not be a 
priority’. The current “Cork City and County Joint Housing Strategy and Housing 
Need Demand Assessment” notes that the build-to-rent sector is currently under-
delivering in Cork and that the rental market suffers from a lack of supply and rising 
rents in recent years. Build-to-rent developments are subject to applications for 
general housing development, which allows for maximum flexibility and can facilitate 
both build-to-rent and build-to-sell type developments. From a planning perspective 
this flexibility is considered necessary to facilitate broad investment in the delivery of 
increased housing supply, which remains critical.  
 
There are also several measures being delivered in Cork to accelerate the delivery of 
affordable housing, including the Government’s “Croí Cónaithe (Cities)” scheme to 
support the building of apartments for sale to owner-occupiers by bridging the current 
viability gap in delivery, and the Land Development Agency’s “Project Tosaigh” 
initiative to unlock land with full planning permission. “Croí Cónaithe (Cities)” is 

focused on delivery of apartments for owner-occupiers, while “Project Tosaigh” is 
cost-rental with certain income thresholds.  
 
Cork City Council will continue to keep the matter under review and apply any 
amendments enacted to primary planning legislation in terms of appropriate policy 
changes. 
 
12.4.6 
SHORTAGE OF ACCESSIBLE CHILDCARE PLACES 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognizes the chronic shortage of accessible childcare places 
and the increasing delays in operationalising purpose-built crèche units within new 
housing developments, this Council commits to actively engaging with relevant 
stakeholders—including developers, planning authorities, and childcare providers—
to identify and implement local solutions to bring such units into use. 
 
These may include: 
 
• 
Exploring the feasibility of a Cork-specific scheme whereby the Council or State 
bodies acquire or lease childcare units in new developments and sub-lease them 
to providers at affordable rates. 
 
• 
Reviewing and strengthening the application of existing planning conditions to 
ensure timely delivery and operation of childcare facilities. 
 
• 
Liaising with the Department of Housing and the Department of Children to input 
into the forthcoming National Planning Statement on childcare provision; 
 
• 
Advocating for new planning guidelines that reflect current family and housing 
realities—including the need for childcare facilities even in developments with 
smaller unit sizes. 
 
• 
Promoting the integration of early years facilities in the planning of new primary 
schools, in line with best practice for sustainable community development. 
 
• 
Establishing a local monitoring framework to ensure that planning conditions for 
childcare provision are not only met in design but delivered in practice, with a 
clear timeline and accountability mechanisms.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/325) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Cork City Development Plan 
2022-2028 has specific requirements in relation to childcare, requiring purpose-built 
childcare facilities as part of new proposals for housing of more than 75 units (in line 
with current national planning guidelines) and for large employers with more than 500 
staff. The Plan also encourages home-based childcare facilities, and drop-in childcare 

facilities in large-scale retail, leisure and tourism developments. Schools and childcare 
facilities are support across a broad suite of land-use zonings in the City Development 
Plan, as they are integral parts of a 15-minute city.  
 
The requirements of the City Development Plan are applied to each relevant planning 
applicant and enshrined in planning conditions, which are enforced through the 
Planning and Integrated Development Directorate. 
 
Cork City Council, through the Community Team within the Corporate, Community 
and Cultural Affairs Directorate continues to collaborate and work with a variety of 
Government Departments including the Department of Children, Disability and 
Equality who take a lead on childcare provision in Ireland. The Corporate, Community 
and Cultural Affairs Directorate will continue to be a collaborative partner with other 
relevant stakeholders in the expansion of any new public childcare facilities done by 
the department. 
 
12.4.7 
‘CORK CITY IS OPEN FOR BUSINESS AND IS A SAFE CITY’ CAMPAIGN 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will introduce a ‘Cork City is open for business and is a safe 
city’ campaign with a focus on affordable and incentivized parking mid-week, 
activities that cater for our older community and for families from all over our city to 
enjoy and enhance the community spirit of our city centre.’ 
               
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/327) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a dedicated Directorate for the City 
Centre has been established and a number of initiatives are underway aimed at making 
positive differences such as those referenced in the Notice of Motion. 
 
The Cork Futures Group has been established by the Chief Executive to shape a City 
Strategy and Delivery Programme.  Matters raised in this Notice of Motion will be 
considered within that programme and as part of the budgetary process for 2026.  
 
12.4.8 
LARGE EMPLOYER ON-SITE STAFF ACCOMMODATION   
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 16th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council establishes a dedicated working group to liaise with all Cork 
City hospitals, and other large employers in the city, with a view to establishing a 
precedent whereby such employers provide staff accommodation on-site or near-to-
site, by repurposing existing buildings or by constructing purpose-built 
accommodation blocks. Such measures would have an immediate effect on the 
overwhelmed housing and rental market in our city.’ 
  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 25/331) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s planning policy 
framework facilitates mixed-use development in many areas of the city, enabling the 
principle of providing on-site accommodation on some larger employment campuses. 
There are many site-specific planning considerations that must be considered when 
co-locating housing with employment uses however, and these would be worked 
through the pre planning and planning assessment processes. Cork City Council will 
actively work with any employer, where possible, who seeks to develop housing for 
their employees in the appropriate context.  
 
12.4.9 
ADVERTISING SAILS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 13th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘To establish additional advertising sails at all entrance points into the City similar to 
those on Lower Glanmire Road.’  
     
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/552)  
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there are currently 19 spaces for 
Tribunes/Banners in the city; 3 at Dunkettle, 4 at Water Street and 12 at Carrigrohane. 
In addition, banners were installed at Patrick Street and Grand Parade at the time of 
the redevelopment of those areas, although some of these are no longer usable due to 
interference with traffic enforcement, CCTV and health and safety issues. The 
tribunes/banners are utilised by various groups to animate the city in conjunction with 
major events, for e.g. the Guiness Cork Jazz Festival and Cork Midsummer. However, 
the cost of erecting the banners, in addition to the cost of producing the banners is 
prohibitive and has resulted in a reduction in use in recent years. In the absence of 
demand, therefore there are no current plans to add to the number of poles. It may be 
possible to consider the installation of additional poles as part of major infrastructure 
development but this would need careful cost and feasibility appraisal. 
 
The updated response of the Director of Services, June 2025, stated that:  
 
The cost of printing would be for individual hirers to arrange so I can’t give a 
definitive figure, but I know from talking to one hirer recently the cost for design and 
print of just 10 large and 3 small tribunes was €3,000 + VAT. 
 
The fee that Cork City Council charge to rent out (which covers the cost of erecting 
the banners/tribunes) is –  
Patrick Street and Grand parade €12,500. 
Carrigrohane, Water Street and Dunkettle €3,800. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12.4.10 CORK CITY CENTRE STRATEGY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic and Economic Development, dated 18th October 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That the CE notes that the City Centre Strategy symposium held in early July, 2024, 
included an IPSOS Behaviour and Attitudes survey on what people would like to see 
in Cork City Centre. The findings gave the impression that Cork City Centre is a safe 
and secure place in which to live, shop, visit and do business. The survey, taken in 5 
locations in the City Centre, is unrepresentative of the views of the citizens of the five 
electoral areas, many of whom avoid the City Centre because of drug-taking, anti-
social behaviour, violent disorder, rough sleeping and a general air of threat and 
menace. These views are consistent with what is being reported through various media 
channels. 
 
This motion calls on the CE to ask IPSOS to repeat the survey, this time taking into 
account the views of citizens located in each of the five electoral areas, to determine 
whether or not they regularly visit the City Centre, and if not, why not. The findings 
of such a survey should be highly relevant to the formulation of the City Council 
Corporate Plan.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 24/448) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that it is the intention of Cork City 
Council to undertake city centre perception surveys regarding Cork city centre on a 
periodic basis.  The survey methodology will be informed by good practice, and 
consideration will be given to identifying locations in the broader city to conduct the 
survey if appropriate.  The survey should be read in conjunction with the residents 
survey that was conducted on the basis of the local area committee areas. 
 
12.4.11 REPAIRS AND ENHANCEMENT IN THE ENGLISH MARKET 
 
  
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic and Economic Development, dated 18th October 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
  
‘That this Council will establish a specific ringfenced fund for investment of repairs 
and enhancement in the English Market as requested by traders to ensure sustainability 
of the market as a market, not just a tourist destination, and that counters will be 
provided at all entrances to monitor the flow through the market.’ 
 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/347) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council has initiated an 
options appraisal on the development of the English Market.  The tenants of the market 
have been consulted in relation to an operational model.  This will be reviewed on a 
continuous basis. 
 
 

12.4.12 FARMER'S MARKET ON THE NORTHSIDE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council work with the various stakeholders and investigate the 
possibility of providing a farmer's market on the Northside of the city.’ 
  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/046) 
 
The request will be referred to the Director of Services, Corporate & Community 
Affairs, as the relevant directorate, to consider and investigate options available to 
Cork City Council in advance of engagement with interested stakeholders. 
 
13. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS 
STRAITÉISIGH - TITHÍOCHT – 17th JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 17th June 2025. 
 
13.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Housing Progress report for April 2025. 
 
13.2 
MOTIONS 
 
13.2.1 
KNOCKNAHEENY REGENERATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th April 2025 on the following motion referred back to the 
Committee:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would apply to the Government for funding to include 
Courtown Drive, Courtown Park, Kilkieran Close and Coolmaine Crescent in the 
Knocknaheeny Regeneration with regards the installation of new windows and doors 
and where relevant porches along with the installation of solar panels and updated 
heating systems similar to the retrofitting of the houses that took place on Harbour 
View Road.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 24/615) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Council is currently engaged 
in the delivery of the Cork City Northwest Regeneration Masterplan & 
Implementation Report (‘Masterplan’), which was adopted by Council, with funding 
being made available for the delivery of the contents of the Masterplan only by the 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, Cork City Council is committed to reducing the carbon 
footprint of its existing housing stock. To that end it has embarked on a thirty year 
program to ensure that all of its housing stock has an energy rating of B2 or better by 
2050.  

 
The program known as the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Program (EERP) phase two 
commenced in 2021 and has two milestones: 
 
a. 25% completion by 2030 
b. 100% completion by 2050 
 
The program is funded by the DHLGH, Cork City Council and the Energy Efficiency 
Obligation Scheme. The measures funded or part funded by the DHLGH include roof 
Insulation, wall insulation, windows and doors, heat pump installation, LED lighting, 
project management and building energy rating certificates (BER).  
 
The report further stated that in 2024 the Council was allocated funding to complete 
one hundred and sixteen houses. The Council exceeded this target by completing one 
hundred and twenty three houses. The Council has a current pipeline of two hundred 
and ninety houses which will be progressed in 2025.  
 
Courtown Drive, Courtown Park, Kilkieran Close and Coolmaine Crescent are not 
included in the present pipeline but will be considered for future years of the 
programme. 
 
13.2.2 
RIGHTSIZING SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 12th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council acknowledges the importance of the rightsizing scheme and 
will report on the amount of funding received in each of the last 5 years, the number 
of homes rightsized under the scheme and the target for rightsizing for 2025 and 2026 
respectively.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/187) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that, by way of background, it is important 
to note that Cork City Council has been actively implementing a Rightsizing 
Programme to acquire larger second-hand properties from applicants wishing to 
downsize to more suitable accommodation. These purchases were delivered through 
the Acquisition Programme subject to Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage (DHLGH) funding.  
 
 
Year  
 
   Amount 
 
 
No. of Units 
2021  
 
€   497,003 
 
 
 
3 
2022  
 
      Nil  
 
 
 
0 
 
 
  
2023  
 
€2,900,758 
 
 
 
16 
2024  
 
€3,682,428 
 
 
 
17 
2025  
 
€   206,250 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
Limited funding for the Acquisitions Progamme is available for 2025 with funds being 
focused towards the Tenant in Situ Scheme as a method of Homeless prevention thus 
no further Rightsizing acquisitions are expected to be completed in 2025. Any future 

rightsizing acquisitions would be subject to funding from DHLGH and no projected 
funding amount for 2026 has been given thus far. 
 
13.2.3 
COST RENTAL HOMES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 12th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will report on the number of cost rental homes to be brought 
on stream, as notified by the AHB sector, in each of the next 5 years.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/188) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that, having consulted with the Approved 
Housing Bodies currently engaged in the delivery of Cost Rental Schemes in Cork 
City, the following are indicative figures of what is planned in their pipeline for 
delivery in Cork City over the next five years: 
  
• 2025 -   79 Units 
• 2026 - 170 Units 
• 2027 - 313 Units 
• 2028 - 357 Units 
 
13.2.4 
NOMINATION PROCESS FOR AHB ACCOMMODATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 12th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
  
‘That Cork City Council will outline the average time to nominate persons for AHB 
accommodation and will put in place a plan to expedite this process.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/189) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there is a County and City 
Management Association (CCMA) Code of Practice in place for the AHB Allocation 
Process. The timeline for processing an allocation to an AHB will vary depending on 
whether the unit is part of a new development, or if it is a casual vacancy.  
 
The Allocations Section endeavours to advertise available properties in new 
developments as soon as we have sufficient information available to us and we have 
been advised of the expected date the units will be ready for letting. The Section aims 
to provide nominations to the AHB six weeks in advance of that expected date. A file 
review including background checks must be completed for each nominee selected 
prior to their submission to the AHB for interview, viewing and, hopefully, allocation. 
 
As with any new development, delays can occur on the construction or legal side so 
while nominations may be with the AHB, they may not be in a position to procced to 
signing up a tenancy at that time.  For casual vacancies which occur when an existing 
tenancy ends, the property is advertised on CBL as soon as the Allocations Section is 
notified and receives the necessary information pertaining to the property. Again, the 

successful applicant’s file has to be reviewed and the necessary checks completed 
before the nomination is sent to the AHB. 
 
The Allocations Section receives regular reports from the AHBs on allocations and 
vacancies to ensure there are no unnecessary delays in allocating units.  
 
13.2.5 
VACANT COUNCIL OWNED PROPERTIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That going forward Cork City Council will furnish to all Councillors a monthly report 
on the current number of vacant council owned properties.’ 
  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/207) 
 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that this information in relation to 
vacant Council owned housing stock is included in the Chief Executive’s Monthly 
Management Report that is circulated to all members. 
 
13.2.6 
RENOVATION OF VACANT PROPERTIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will review their policy in relation to how the renovation of 
vacant properties are prioritised to take into account the fact that long term vacancy 
causes further deterioration of assets and long term vacant properties are a blight on 
the communities in which those properties are situate. Taking this into account the 
Council will set aside funding to return long term vacant properties to the housing 
stock as a priority.’ 
  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/208) 
 
       
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s Housing 
Directorate has a dedicated team managing the repair of vacant properties.   The work 
of this team has led to significant reduction in the number of vacant properties between 
2023 and 2025.  
  
       
Cork City Council prioritises the return of properties with the least work required with 
the aim of returning the maximum number of houses each year. This can lead to 
properties that require extensive repairs, such as fire damaged houses, having longer 
return times. The priority is to return as many properties as soon as possible for 
allocation.   
  
       
Several operational changes have been implemented recently to enhance prioritisation 
of long-term vacant properties in a dedicated programme.   
 
 
 

14. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 10th JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 10th June 2025. 
 
15. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 7th JULY 2025  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 7th July 2025. 
 
15.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
15.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF MAY 2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of May 
2025. 
 
16. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd June 2025. 
 
16.1 
MOTIONS 
 
16.1.1 
PEDESTRIANISE SECTION OF LAPP’S QUAY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development, dated 19th June 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will pedestrianise the section of Lapp’s Quay between Connell 
Street junction and Parnell Place with a focus to prove a community space on a 
permanent basis as well as a permanent Let’s Play Cork storage space to assist with 
the play functionality of the city.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/330) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team continues to fund and support the implementation of Let’s Play 
Cork.  A dedicated Directorate for the City Centre has been established and this 
initiative has potential as a joint initiative with the Community Section within the 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs Directorate.   It will be considered in line 
with the strategic prioritisation of the city centre as a place to live, work and visit.   
 
17. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd June 2025. 
 
 
 

18. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th June 2025. 
 
19. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 23rd JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 23rd June 2025. 
 
20. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th JUNE 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th June 2025. 
 
An Chomhairle noted that it was agreed at the meeting of the South East Local Area 
Committee that motion 25/288 ‘Temporary Toilets on the Marina’ be referred to Full 
Council for discussion. In the absence of the proposer, An Chomhairle further noted 
that this motion would be referred back to the Local Area Committee.  
 
21. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
22. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir C. O’Connor at the Thomas Francis Meagher Foundation 
National Flag Day, held at Leinster House, Co. Dublin, 9th May 2025. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the AILG Module 4 Training, Planning 2025, 
held at Radisson Blu Hotel, Co. Cork, 19th June 2025. 
 
23. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir T. Shannon – LAMA – 2024.  
 
24. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
24.1 
KENNEDY SUMMER SCHOOL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attendance of Comhairleoirí D. Boyle, 
T. Fitzgerald and T. Shannon at Kennedy Summer School in New Ross from 28th to 
30th August 2025. 
 
 
 

24.2 
MACGILL SUMMER SCHOOL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attendance of Comhairleoir T. Shannon 
at MacGill Summer School in Glenties, Co. Donegal from 17th to 19th July 2025. 
 
25. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
26. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for May 2025. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
An Chomhairle noted that motion 57, Conditions at Coppingers Acre, and motion 49, 
Late Night Transportation, would be discussed under suspension of standing orders. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir B. McCarthy to address the meeting on the 
following motion, after which a discussion took place. On the proposal of 
Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, An Chomhairle 
approved the motion:- 
 
CONDITIONS AT COPPINGERS ACRE 
 
‘That Cork City Council engage with residents of Coppingers Acre as they have had 
no response to their letters/emails/phone calls and have not replied to political 
representatives and other communicators.  
 
They need to address the following:  
- 
to urgently address the ongoing long-term leaks which have caused mould and 
damp in neighbouring properties.  
- 
to ensure property managers of Tuath Housing Association and Absolute 
Property Management behave and engage with all residents appropriately and 
accordingly.  
- 
to answer and follow up with all residents as to why Coppingers Acre estate 
has been left go to ruination.  
- 
to urgently remedy and action the issues.  
- 
that Cork City Council employ their own workers rather than contractors when 
addressing the damages and repairs to Coppingers Acre.   
- 
to reimburse residents for any damages, including wear and tear of buildings 
and contractor works.  

- 
as a gesture of goodwill to power wash and clean the back gardens, including 
paths, walls and windows for residents who cooperated with Cork City 
Council and Tuath Housing to allow access to their gardens. All back gardens 
were left in poor condition after contractors.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/401) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir J. Maher to address the meeting on the following 
motion, after which a discussion took place. On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. 
Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, An Chomhairle approved the motion:- 
 
LATE NIGHT TRANSPORTATION 
 
‘That Cork City Council make representations to Bus Éireann / Irish Rail and the NTA 
to ensure that late night transportation is provided for the Jazz Weekend and Christmas 
2025 build up.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/392) 
 
28. 
MOTIONS 
 
28.1 
GARDA NUMBERS IN THE CORK CITY DIVISION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council writes to the Minster for Justice and express disappointment that at 
the 6 June 2025 graduation from the Garda College in Templemore only three garda 
graduates — known as "probationers" — were assigned to Cork city, while two other 
gardaí were transferred to the division. 
 
However, the Garda association has noted that in the Cork city division three frontline 
gardaí retired and two received promotions, ultimately cancelling out the five new 
arrivals.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/348) 
 
28.2 
STUDENT FEES INCREASE  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Further and Higher Education, 
Research, Innovation and Science to record its serious concern at plans to increase 
student fees by €1,000 for the 2025/26 academic year, noting the significant impact 
this will have on students, and their families, in the midst of a cost-of-living crisis.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/361) 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, An Chomhairle approved the motion 
revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Further and Higher Education, 
Research, Innovation and Science and the Minister for Finance to record its serious 
concern at plans to increase student fees by €1,000 for the 2025/26 academic year, 
noting the significant impact this will have on students, and their families, in the midst 
of a cost-of-living crisis.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/361) 
 
28.3 
OWNERSHIP OF DUBLIN’S GPO 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council: 
- 
recognises the historical importance of Dublin's GPO to the Irish nation's noble 
fight for freedom. 
- 
Calls on the Government to scrap its plan to turn the GPO into retail units and 
office space. 
- 
Further calls on the Government to ensure that this iconic building is kept in full 
public ownership and redevelops the surrounding areas as a cultural and 
historical quarter to preserve the heritage of the Easter Rising 
- 
⁠and commits to protect any buildings of similar heritage and cultural value in 
Cork from commercialisation or similar plans.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. M. Gould, Cllr. K. Collins, Cllr. F. Kerins 25/365) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, M. Gould, K. McCarthy, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, 
P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, G. O’Brien. (10) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, S. Martin, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman. (9) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, B. McCarthy, F. Dennehy, C. 
O’Connor. (5) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
28.4 
STEP DOWN HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council express its concern, and seek a reversal, of the government decision 
to reduce funding for step down housing developments, recognising that it fails to 
build on the success of the programme.’ 

 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/387) 
 
28.5 
CARAVAN LOAN SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
 
‘As it currently stands, the Caravan Loan Scheme is not fit for purpose. Traveller 
families who are on housing waiting lists are being asked to take out a €40,000 loan 
for temporary accommodation while they wait for long term accommodation. No one 
else is being asked to take out a loan to be provided with social housing but on top of 
that if they do avail of the scheme, they’re taken off the housing list and lose whatever 
time they’ve built up. In addition, many trailers are second hand, not energy efficient 
and the loans provided are inadequate. 
 
 
This Council calls for the scheme to be scrapped. The Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage need to go back to the drawing board and work with 
Traveller Representative groups to come up with a replacement that will provide 
Travellers with a realistic option for culturally appropriate accommodation without 
their social housing application being affected.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/400) 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
