MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 14th APRIL  2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, 
N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, 
G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate and 
Community Affairs. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Ms. A. O’ Rourke, Director of Services, Housing. 
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate & Community 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Connell family on the death of Dermot O’Connell. 
• The O’Shea family on the death of Liam O’Shea. 
• The Goulding family on the death of Kathleen Goulding. 
• The McGrath family on the death of Martin McGrath. 
• The Lehane family on the death of Gretta Lehane. 
• The Nash family on the death of Maria Nash. 
• The Mullins family on the death of John Mullins. 
• The Cooke family on the death of Ann Cooke. 

• The Bennett and Power family on the death of Carol Bennett. 
• The O’Donoghue family on the death of Tim O’Donoghue. 
• The Burke family on the death of Kathleen Burke. 
• The Leahy family on the death of Timothy Leahy. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Blue Demons Basketball Club on winning the Men’s Super League Title. 
• Joe Kelly on ending his tenure as President of the Cork Council of Trade 
Unions. 
• Dino Cregan on being named Business Champion of Cork at the CBA Cork 
Business of the Year Awards. 
• Aaron Mansworth on the end of his term as President of the Cork Business 
Association. 
• Cork Senior Camogie Team on winning the National Camogie League. 
• Cork Senior Hurling Team on winning the National Hurling League. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
LORD MAYOR’S CIVIC, CULTURE, COMMUNITY & VOLUNTARY 
AWARDS, 2025 
 
An tArdmhéara advised that the Lord Mayor’s Civic, Culture, Community & 
Voluntary Awards, 2025 will take place on 7th May 2025 in the Concert Hall, and 
encourage elected members to attend. 
 
3.2 
LORD MAYOR’S CIVIC AWARDS 2024 
 
An tArdmhéara advised, and An Chomhairle approved, the Lord Mayor’s nominations 
for Civic Awards 2025 as follows:- 
 
- 
Siobhan O’Dowd - In recognition of her long-term contributions on community      
development, inclusion, life long learning and LGBTI+ activism in Cork.  
 
- 
Maria Young - In recognition of her dedication to environmental sustainability 
by encouraging working and interacting with nature. 
 
- 
Joanna Dukkipati - In recognition of her commitment to supporting and 
empowering migrant communities through encouraging cultural expression. 
 
- 
Nora O’ Donovan - In recognition of her advocacy and efforts in championing 
the rights of older people in Cork. 
 
- 
Jimmy Crowley - In recognition of his outstanding contribution to the musical 
landscape of Cork, as a collector and performer of the city’s cultural heritage. 
 
- 
Graham Clifford - In recognition of his work with Sanctuary Runners, 
promoting solidarity and inclusion through sport. 
 

3.3 
CULTURE AWARD WINNER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Lord Mayor’s nomination of John 
Spillane for the 2025 Culture Award. 
 
3.4 
WHO 
ANNUAL 
HEALTHY 
CITIES 
BUSINESS 
MEETING 
AND 
TECHNICAL CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald to 
Bursa, Türkiye from 16th to 20th June 2025 for the 2025 WHO Annual Healthy Cities 
Business Meeting and Technical Conference. 
 
3.5 
SHANGHAI INTERNATIONAL FRIENDSHIP CITIES COOPERATION 
FORUM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara Comhairleoir 
D. Boyle to China from 26th to 31st May to attend the 2025 Shanghai International 
Friendship Cities Cooperation Forum at which the 20th anniversary of the twinning 
between Cork and Shanghai will be marked. 
 
3.6 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR UCC DEMONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for UCC 
Demons on winning the Superleague Final. 
 
3.7 
UPCOMING CIVIC RECEPTIONS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle of upcoming Civic Receptions including a 
Civic Reception for CIE workers on Wednesday 16th April 2025 at 6.30pm and a Civic 
Reception for Ann Doherty on Wednesday 30th April 2025 at 6.30pm. 
 
3.8 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to limit speaking time to 2 minutes 
for Agenda items 30 and 31 and 3 minutes for all other Agenda items. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
PROPOSED HOLDING OF AN EVENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 14th 
April 2025 on the proposed holding of European Maritime Day Events from 23rd to 
24th May in Cork City. 
 
4.2 
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Draft Annual Report 2024. 
 
 
 

5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 10th March 2025. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
CORK WATERWORKS EXPERIENCE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE on the progress of reinstating the playground at the Old Cork 
Waterworks Experience and the fixing of the roof within the visitor experience 
building ? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council continue to progress both of these matters.  With regards to the 
reinstatement of the Playground we continue to engage with Uisce Eireann and hope 
to be in a position in the coming months to finalise a programme of works.  With 
regards to the roof in the visitor experience I can confirm that a report has been 
commissioned to review this matter, quantify the extent of the issue and to design a 
solution that is sensitive to the cultural and historical nature of the building. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Emergency Management & Climate Action Directorate. 
 
6.2 
EVENTS CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the Chair of the Project Development Board of the Event 
Centre will include the office of Lord Mayor as a member of the Board to ensure 
elected members representation on it in a non party political manner and as part of the 
oversight brief of this project. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
As the PDB is already the oversight body overseeing the overall project delivery of 
the Cork Events Centre, it would not be normal or effective for board members to be 
elected members changing annually. However, as Chairperson of the PDB, I am and 
will give regular updates & briefings to Council as the project progresses. 
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 

 
6.3 
EVENTS CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the total level of expenditure incurred by Cork 
City Council on the Cork Events Centre project for the period commencing on the 1st 
January 2014 and concluding at the end of October 2024 (the point at which the 
government determined that the project had to re-tendered). Please ensure that the 
details of said expenditure incurred includes: 
 
- 
a list of the organisations, companies, partnerships and service providers who 
were engaged by Cork City Council to work on the Cork Events Centre project 
during that period; 
 
- 
the amount of funding provided by Cork City Council to each individual 
organisation, company, partnership and service provider for work on the Cork 
Events Centre project during that period; 
 
- 
a detailed description of the work done and services rendered by each individual 
organisation, company, partnership and service provider on the Cork Events 
Centre project during that period. 
 
REPLY 
 
Details of the total level of expenditure incurred by Cork City Council on the Cork 
Events Centre project for the period commencing January 1st 2014 to the end of 
October 2024 are as follows: 
 
Date 
Organisation / Company 
Service Provided 
Amount 
30/09/2024 SAVILLES 
Property Valuation 
2,460.00 
07/10/2015 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
22,154.02 
12/08/2016 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
10,342.33 
06/09/2017 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
8,882.45 
17/04/2019 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
15,447.20 
17/04/2019 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
8,698.93 
25/03/2020 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
54,231.32 
25/03/2020 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
21,199.05 
09/04/2020 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Gleneagle Hotel V CCC - VEAT 
challenge 
5,000.00 
28/04/2020 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Gleneagle Hotel V CCC - VEAT 
challenge 
77,324.05 

  17/06/2021 
RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
87,330.00 
27/04/2022 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
74,619.18 
23/12/2022 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
20,000.00 
08/05/2023 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
31,320.11 
26/05/2023 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
12,063.23 
15/05/2024 RONAN DALY JERMYN & CO 
Legal Services Events Centre 
12,010.34 
29/04/2014 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
59,421.30 
29/04/2014 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
77,600.70 
19/05/2014 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Events Centre  JWOD Fees 
10,270.50 
26/08/2014 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
60,908.43 
23/02/2015 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
170,327.33 
23/02/2015 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
49,418.29 
23/12/2016 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
10,762.50 
13/06/2017 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
39,709.32 
02/10/2017 PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS 
Services - Funding Competition 
4,612.50 
21/10/2014 PIMAC LTD 
Events Centre Legal Fees 
3,590.70 
27/01/2015 PIMAC LTD 
Events Centre - Chair of Evaluation 
Team 
5,033.72 
18/09/2020 
PAUL GALLAGHER SENIOR 
COUNSEL 
Legal Fees re Events Centre 
70,417.50 
11/11/2014 MILLS PUBLIC RELATIONS 
Professional Services PR 
738 
05/08/2014 MAURICE G COLLINS SC 
Legal Fees re Events Centre 
9,618.60 
18/09/2014 MAURICE G COLLINS SC 
Legal Fees re Events Centre 
1,414.50 
01/11/2017 MAURICE G COLLINS SC 
Legal Fees re Events Centre 
9,335.70 
14/12/2018 MAURICE G COLLINS SC 
Legal Fees re Events Centre 
5,658.00 
15/12/2023 KERRIGAN SHEANON NEWMAN  Assessment of Cost of Construction 
60,885.00 
17/11/2014 JAMES DORGAN 
Professional Services Business Case 
3,997.50 
27/01/2015 JAMES DORGAN 
Professional Services Business Case 
3,997.50 
06/04/2017 JAMES DORGAN 
Professional Services Business Case 
9,225.00 
28/02/2018 JAMES DORGAN 
Professional Services Business Case 
4,797.00 
27/08/2018 JAMES DORGAN 
Professional Services Business Case 
8,302.25 

26/08/2014 J.W. O DONOVAN SOLS 
Events Centre Legal Fees 
76,260.00 
27/01/2015 J.W. O DONOVAN SOLS 
Events Centre Legal Fees 
9,594.00 
28/01/2015 J.W. O DONOVAN SOLS 
Events Centre Legal Fees 
60,472.00 
11/10/2019 IMD GROUP 
Market Assessment for Events Centre 
11,489.46 
27/03/2020 IMD GROUP 
Market Assessment for Events Centre 
6,720.15 
12/06/2020 IMD GROUP 
Market Assessment for Events Centre 
1,430.45 
11/10/2019 
FEXCO CORPORATE PAYMENTS 
LIMIT 
FX payment costs 
5.7 
06/05/2020 DELOITTE 
Events Centre Consultancy 
6,150.00 
19/11/2019 COLLECTOR GENERAL (VAT) 
VAT RET SEP OCT 19/ MAR APR 20/ 
MJ 20 
4,554.71 
15/12/2023 CHL CONSULTING CO. LTD 
Industry Expert consulting fees 
25,000.00 
27/01/2023 CATHERINE DONNELLY BL 
Legal Fees re Events Centre 
82,091.41 
21/12/2016 BAM BUILDING LTD 
Contribution to Live Nations prelim 
design 
100,000.00 
  
 
 
Total   
 
   
1,604,551.00  
John Hallahan, 
Chief Financial Officer. 
 
6.4 
VICARS ROAD COUNCIL WORK SITE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
In relation to the now redundant Council works yard on Vicars Road. There are many 
local community groups in the area that would benefit immensely if given the 
opportunity to set up base at this location. In particular the Togher Men's Shed who 
will very soon find themselves without a Shed as their current premises is subject to 
sale. 
 
I ask the CEO to provide the following: 
 
An update on the plans for this site ? 
If the site will be used for Singler use or multi use so as to cater for a number of 
groups? 
 
 
 
 

REPLY 
 
The Community Team has been working closely with the Togher Men’s Shed since 
their inception in early 2023. The Team is aware that the group have been given notice 
to vacate their temporary home in early 2025, and as an anticipatory measure have 
been working with colleagues in Property and Parks to identify potential buildings and 
site for accommodating the work of the group. 
 
The site at Vicars Road is currently being assessed for its future use as a community 
space, subject to funding availability.  The feasibility assessment is also reliant on the 
rectification of title to the entire site, which is an ongoing process which the Council 
hopes to conclude in the coming months.  Pending the site’s future regeneration as a 
community space, the Council would propose to consider it for ‘meanwhile uses’ to 
activate the site. 
 
Rebecca Loughry 
Director of Services 
Corporate and Community Affairs Directorate. 
 
6.5 
TENANT IN SITU SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE if any Departmental circulars have been received re the suspension of 
the Tenant-in-Situ Scheme and if so the consequences for the City Councils housing 
strategy. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Circular Housing 11/2025 issued by the Department of Housing Local Government 
and Heritage (DHLGH) to Cork City Council on 31st March 2025, which sets out the 
arrangements for the Social Housing Second Hand Acquisitions Programme for local 
authorities for 2025, together with the capital funding allocation for Cork City Council 
of €20,000,000 for 2025.   
 
This funding allocation relates to the programme of acquisitions in 2025 for the 
following priority categories of need only: 
 
1. Tenancy Sustainment - Tenant in Situ (TiS); 
2. Exits from homeless services; 
3. People with a disability and older persons requiring urgent housing responses; and 
4. Buy and Renew (B&R) acquisitions which tackle vacancy. 
 
The capital funding allocation available to each local authority for 2025 includes for 
acquisitions completed by AHBs within the LAs functional area, as funded within the 
Capital Assistance Scheme.  
 

All properties acquired in the calendar year 2025 will be required to fully comply with 
the eligibility criteria under the 2025 second hand acquisitions programme as set out 
in the Circular, with revised parameters applicable to this funding stream. 
 
Properties acquired (sale closed) in the calendar year 2024 which were not recouped 
in 2024 can be recouped in 2025 under the eligibility criteria applicable to 2024 
acquisitions. Such recoupments will be funded from the capital funding allocation 
notified to the Council for 2025. 
 
The Council’s initial review of the Circular, the programme parameters, conditions, 
and the allocation, indicates that the funding received will be insufficient to adequately 
cover current commitments from 2024, into 2025, across the local authority and AHB 
programme.   
 
A total of 135 no. homes were acquired by Cork City Council in 2024: 
 
Delivery Stream  
No. of 
Homes 
Tenant in Situ Acquisitions 
79 
Other Acquisitions* 
47 
CAS Acquisitions 
9 
Total 
135 
*Homeless exits, Disability/Special Need/Older Persons 
 
A further 33 no.  homes were at sale agreed stage in Q4 of 2024, within the limits of 
the target and guidelines set by the DHLGH, and now carry forward to the 2025 
programme.  The 2024 programme also has an active refurbishment programme and 
associated financial commitments carrying forward to 2025. 
 
The impact of funding on the Council’s 2025 acquisition programme and housing 
strategy will unfortunately mean that the 2025 Acquisition Programme is now ceased.   
After reviewing the current programme and financial commitments carried over from 
2024, we have determined that the allocated funding has been exhausted. The 
refurbishment programme for Tenant-in-Situ properties to bring them up to lettable 
standards will be required to be reduced or terminated.  The Council’s private 
Rightsizing initiative will not progress any further in 2025.   A financial contribution 
scheme will be considered as an alternative to support Rightsizing applicants but this 
will take some time to establish.  Any new acquisition of second-hand properties for 
special needs, such as Housing First, homeless prevention, or accommodation for 
persons with a disability, will not therefore proceed within the acquisitions 
programme in 2025, including progression of acquisitions under the Capital 
Assistance Scheme by Approved Housing Bodies for the accommodation of homeless 
persons or those with disabilities. A review will be conducted with each AHB to 
determine the funding gap and explore available alternatives.   
 

As a further effect on our housing strategy, the cessation of the Tenant in Situ 
programme will be expected to have a significant effect on homeless preventions.  In 
2024 Tenant in Situ accounted for 37.7% of homeless preventions in Cork City, this 
included 37 single households and 51 families (comprising 87 adults and 100 
children).  In 2024, there were 257 compliant Notices of Termination issued where 
the landlord had intention to sell, and in Q1 of 2025 a further 104 Notice of 
Terminations have issued (this data is provided by Threshold).  This sees a 47% 
increase on average per quarter already in 2025.  To date in Q1 of 2025, 39 new 
households have been placed in emergency accommodation due to receipt of 
compliant Notices to Quit, this includes 23 single households and 16 families 
(comprising 25 adults and 35 children).  The Council’s Accommodation Placement 
Service has had engagement from 33 households with compliant Notices to Quit 
which are imminent (28 of which are families).  The Council will pursue all avenues 
open to it, to assist with homeless prevention in such circumstances, however the 
availability of suitable and immediately available property for such large numbers will 
be limited.   
 
In conclusion, the funding allocation received by Cork City Council is inadequate to 
fulfil its existing commitments and the projected programme for 2025. The Council is 
discussing the matter with the Department of Housing Local Government and 
Heritage and we envisage that commitments will be honoured. However, the 
progression of any additional purchases under the Acquisitions Programme for 2025 
is ceased with immediate effect. 
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.6 
FINANCIAL RESOURCES ALLOCATED TO HOUSING INITIATIVES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
Ask the chief executive for clarification on a few important points concerning the 
financial resources allocated to housing initiatives by the Government 
 
1. Could you confirm the total amount of funding that has been made available to the 
Tenant-in-Situ scheme by the government for 2025 the current budget period? 
 
2. In relation to our obligations under the scheme , can you outline the financial 
provisions that are necessary to fulfil our commitments for the year 2024 and 2025 
 
3. How many additional obligations do we anticipate undertaking for the year 2025, 
and what funding will be required to support these new commitments? 
 
Your response on these matters will be invaluable as we aim to address housing 
challenges in Cork City effectively. 
 
 
 

REPLY 
 
1. Circular Housing 11/2025 has been issued by the Department of Housing 
Local Government and Heritage to Cork City Council on 31st March 2025, 
which sets out the arrangements for the Social Housing Second Hand 
Acquisitions Programme for local authorities for 2025, together with the 
capital funding allocation for Cork City Council of €20,000,000 for 2025.  This 
funding allocation relates to the programme of acquisitions in 2025 for the 
following priority categories of need only: 
 
a) Tenancy Sustainment - Tenant in Situ (TiS); 
b) Exits from homeless services; 
c) People with a disability and older persons requiring urgent housing responses; 
and 
d) Buy and Renew (B&R) acquisitions which tackle vacancy. 
 
2. A financial review of the Council’s current commitments is currently 
underway, but the current estimate to close out 2024 unpaid claims, and any 
carry-over commitments from 2024 is approximately €33,000,000. 
 
The Council has not yet engaged in an acquisitions programme for 2025.  
There is a projected commitment of over €4million for Capital Assistance 
Scheme acquisitions for 2025, related to delivery of homes for homeless 
prevention and housing of persons with a disability.  In Quarter 1 of 2025, the 
Council had been considering the purchase of 7 no. properties for Tenant in 
Situ, as well as older persons housing, comprising approximately €2.5million, 
these cannot now proceed. 
 
3. No further acquisitions can be undertaken in 2025, with the acquisitions 
programme across all streams, now required to cease.  
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.7 
CAR PARKING SPACES – URSULINES ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
1 - To ask the Chief Executive to detail how and why the car-parking spaces on the 
western side of Ursuline's Road at Scoil Ursula Primary School in Black rock were 
removed and replaced with double yellow lines, and to outline the solutions available 
to Cork City Council to restore them for the benefit of local residents. 
 
2 - Who can the local residents contact, if not the City Council. 
 
 
 
 

REPLY 
 
The issue of car-parking on the Ursuline lands has been the subject of a report and 
discussions at the Local Area Committee.  
 
The lands in question are in private ownership. As part of the Blackrock Village 
Renewal project the owners agreed to Council works that included a new road and 
new parking spaces. These Council works were carried out as part of the arrangement 
for the new public park and playground transferring to Council ownership.  
 
What was then the existing road and associated parking were considered substandard 
and have now been reorganised to provide a safer, more accessible and appropriate 
road layout for the benefit of the wider public using the new amenities as well as the 
school and houses constructed in the locality. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.8 
SHANDON BUTTER EXCHANGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on progress on Shandon’s historic Butter 
Exchange and the Recreate CLG project? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council has submitted a competitive funding application under Strand 2 of 
the “THRIVE – Town Centre First Heritage Revival Scheme” for the redevelopment 
of the Butter Exchange Complex. Successful applications are expected to be 
announced in Q3 2025. The project is known as the “Shandon Exchange” and was 
locally selected as a priority through the recently published “Shandon Integrated 
Urban Strategy 2025” which was delivered under Strand 1 of the THRIVE Scheme. 
The project comprises the restoration and adaptive reuse of the Butter Exchange 
building and Weighmaster’s House (a protected structure) as a state-of-the-art 
integrated enterprise and community facility to serve the local community in Shandon 
and support enterprise and innovation in Cork, focusing on the educational technology 
sector. Cork City Council is the project lead with the full support of Recreate Shandon 
CLG who are proposed as operational partners. (THRIVE is co-funded by the 
Government of Ireland and the European Union through the Southern Eastern and 
Midland Regional Programme 2021-2027.) 
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
 
 

6.9 
VACATED DWELLING IN 2023, 2024 AND 2025 (THUS FAR) 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of Council dwellings vacated in 2025 (thus far), and in 
2024 and 2023 (full years), by way of (i) surrender of a tenancy by the tenant(s), and 
(ii) eviction by Cork City Council. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
There were 80 no. Surrenders of Tenancy in 2023, 48 no. in 2024 and 8 no. to date 
this year.   
 
There were two evictions carried out in 2024 and one household surrendered their 
tenancy prior to eviction in 2023.  
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.10 
NUMBER OF VACANT COMMERICAL UNITS AND RESIDENTIAL 
PROPERTIES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of vacant commercial units and residential 
properties recorded by Cork City Council in each of the electoral wards, in tabular 
form and if these figures correlate to the recently published Geodirectory report on 
commercial units. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council does not collect specific data on vacant commercial units across 
the city on a local electoral area basis. With respect to vacant residential properties, 
Cork City Council conducted its own survey in 2023 of the city centre island which 
found a 5% residential vacancy rate in the survey area, which generally compares to 
Census 2022 findings. However, this data is not aligned to Local Electoral Areas or 
correlated to Geodirectory data. 
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.11 
SMART CYCLIST COUNTY DEVICES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a plan to roll out smart cyclist counting devices 
in strategic locations across the city and if so; 
 
Is there funding in place, what is the timeline and where are the locations being 
considered. If it is the case that there is no plan to roll out the devices please advise 
whether the matter was considered at any stage and how the decision not to proceed 
was reached. 
 
REPLY 
 
The NTA have funded the installation of cycle detection and cycle counters at various 
junctions throughout the city through an Active Travel Project.  Cycle counters were 
installed at 8 no locations around the city including: 
 
1. UCC Gates 
2. Lower Glanmire Rd at Ship St 
3. Anglesea St/ Railway St 
4. Infirmary Rd / South Terrance 
5. Penrose Quay / Michael Collins Bridge 
6. Dyke Parade / Mardyke St 
7. Washington St / Grattan St / Courthouse St 
8. Parnell Pl / South Mall 
 
The count data is collected and displayed on a mobility dashboard currently in 
development. The data is analysed by the Traffic Section (ITS) to check for any 
anomalies.  Accuracy can be variable depending on equipment used, location and 
weather conditions however the data can be used to recognise trends in cyclist 
numbers at these locations over hourly/daily/weekly/monthly time periods.  Further 
calibration of the units is ongoing by our traffic signal maintenance contractor prior 
to the release of trending data. In addition, two cycle trending displays have been 
purchased and are due to installed on the quays in the coming months. These will 
provide live feedback to commutators as promotional tools for recently installed 
cycling infrastructure. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.12 
NUMBER OF CREDIT/DEBIT/STORE/TRAVEL/FUEL CARDS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
If such items are in use, can the CE confirm the number of Credit/Debit cards, Store 
Cards, Travel and Fuel cards that are currently issued by Cork City Council to its 

personnel, and to confirm the maximum card limits in respect of each card type and 
to confirm what mechanisms exist to ensure accountability and transparency by 
personnel in the use of such cards, as well as the total expenditure under all such 
headings, if in existence, in the year ending 31st Dec. 2024. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The number of Cards in use are as follows: 
 
- 
 2 Credit Cards in names of the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer 
- 
 1 Credit Card for Irish Rail 
- 
 125 LVP Cards (Low Value Purchase cards) 
- 
 238 Fuel Cards 
 
The maximum card limits are as follows  
 
- 
€20,000 in relation to Credit Cards 
 
- 
€7,000 in relation to Irish Rail Credit Card 
 
- 
LVP Cards have a transaction limit of €400 and a monthly transaction limit of 
€4,000. One LVP card used for corporate travel bookings has a daily 
transaction limit of €5,000 and a monthly transaction limit of €20,000. 
 
- 
Fuel Cards have a maximum daily limit of €500 for vehicles and €50 for small 
tools (generators, mowers etc.) The weekly limit is €1,000 for vehicles and 
€350 for small tools. 
 
In respect of booking rail tickets, a form must be completed by staff member and be 
authorised by Administrative Officer or higher grade. Monthly reconciliation 
undertaken between monthly credit card bill and application forms/ticket reservations. 
 
Regarding LVP Cards, the granting of an LVP card must be approved in advance by 
the Director of Services. Each Cardholder must sign the cardholder conditions. All 
transactions made by Cardholder are monitored and approved by their line manager. 
Also, Finance monitors all transactions made by authorised users of the cards. 
 
Fuel cards are for the purchase of business fuel only and at designated suppliers filling 
stations. A card is issued to a specific council vehicle and can only be used for that 
vehicle. The registration number of the vehicle and mileage must be given at the point 
of sale. Heads of Department receive details of all fuel purchased by staff in their 
department monthly. 
 
The total expenditure in the year ending 31st December 2024 under the different 
headings is as follows: 
 
- 
Credit Cards €57,021 – Hotel bookings (€39,941) 
 
- 
Rail Card €16,072 
 

- 
LVP Cards €663,862 
 
- 
Fuel Cards €595,307 
 
John Hallahan 
Chief Financial Officer. 
 
6.13 
DANCE CORK FIRKIN CRANE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I am asking the Chiefs Executive on behalf of Dance Cork Firkin Crane (DCFC) to 
urgently seek Cork City Council's financial support for the reroofing of The Firkin 
Crane building in Shandon. This project is not just a repair; it is a crucial investment 
in preserving one of Cork’s most cherished cultural and historic landmarks. 
 
Without immediate intervention, there is a genuine risk of closure for health and safety 
reasons during the upcoming winter months. This would have a profound impact on 
the many schools, artists, and community groups that rely on this space. Furthermore, 
such a closure could lead to substantial lost income, which could jeopardise the future 
of the organisation itself. 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council Arts Office is aware of the issue relating to the need to repair the 
roof at Dance Cork Firkin Crane and has met with members of the staff and the Board 
of DCFC re same. The Arts Officer has advised DCFC on various approaches to 
fundraising for roof repairs that the organisation might consider, including signposting 
arts capital grant schemes operated by central Government. 
 
The importance of Dance Cork Firkin Crane, in particular to contemporary dance 
practice in the city, and also as a home for community arts activity, is acknowledged 
by Cork City Council via annual grant-aid, as well as matched-funding of small capital 
projects to upgrade equipment in recent years. 
 
A formal request for financial support towards roof repair has been received by the 
Executive and will be reviewed. The request will be considered in the context of very 
limited funds and in the context that the Firkin Crane building is in the private 
ownership of Dance Cork Firkin Crane. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.14 
TRAFFIC LIGHTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if it is a requirement to locate a traffic light across a 
junction from an motorist, in addition to the traffic light on the motorist's side of the 
junction; and if removing (or not providing) this traffic light would discourage 
motorists from "creeping" over the stop line, since they would be unable to see the 
traffic signal if they did? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The purpose of the red traffic light signal as provided in the Roads Act clearly defines 
that a driver facing a traffic light lamp (which shows a red light) shall not proceed 
beyond the stop line at that light or, if there is no such stop line, beyond that light. It 
is therefore an infringement to cross a stop line/ primary red light pole, once the light 
has turned red.  
 
The Traffic control room has observed a decline of driver behaviour since the return 
after Covid with an observed rise in the number of red light violations. It is imperative 
that these offences are enforced by the Gardaí as part of an increased emphasis on 
road safety in the city. The Traffic signs manual under section 9.4.2 outlines the main 
considerations for traffic signal installation placement are visibility and clarity. 
Drivers approaching a signalised junction should be given a clear and unmistakable 
indication of which directions they can take at that junction. It outlines that there 
should be at least one primary and one secondary signal provided for each approach. 
This practice is an essential redundancy in signaling in the event of failure a red light 
facing a movement. (In the event of either the primary or secondary red light failing, 
there is still a traffic signal head providing clear indication of red for drivers.) 
 
The elimination of the secondary signal will not eliminate the current epidemic of 
poor red light compliance, yellow box incursion and incorrect bus lane use in the city. 
Effective enforcement utilising the penalty point system is the sole means of ensuring 
that driver behaviour changes which will ensure that the mobility network is safer for 
all modes of transport. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss the following motion:- 
 
“That Cork City Council, in it's capacity as guardians of the city and animal welfare, 
effectively deal with the issue of wild goats in the Ballyvolane area, to the extent of 
taking responsibility for the welfare of said goats and bring them into the care of the 

city via a trusted and reputable welfare agency and thus ensuring not only the safety 
and welfare of the goats but also the broader community.” 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT SCAIRT CROSS, 
DOUGLAS 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed residential development at Scairt 
Cross, Douglas, in the City of Cork and the report of the Deputy Chief Executive 
thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, 
as amended, dated 10th April 2025. 
  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the proposed residential development at Scairt 
Cross, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. 
O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, T. Shannon, 
M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. 
Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. 
Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (28) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir K. McCarthy. (1) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed residential development at Scairt Cross 
approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir P. 
Horgan, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Scairt Cross, Douglas, in the City of Cork and the report of the Deputy 
Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 179 (3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Scairt Cross, Douglas, in the City of Cork be carried 
out as recommended in the said report of the Deputy Chief Executive, Cork City 
Council, which was put before Council on the 14th April 2025.” 
 
7.2 
CORK 
DOCKLANDS 
TO 
CITY 
CENTRE 
ROAD 
NETWORK 
IMPROVEMENT SCHEME - PART 8 PLANNING  
 
 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 179 (4) (a) of Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed Cork 
Docklands to City Centre Road Network Improvement Scheme and the report of the 
Director of Infrastructure Development thereon, dated 9th April 2025, as required 
under Section 179 (3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended). 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development viz. the Cork Docklands to City Centre Road Network Improvement 
Scheme and the report of the Director of Services, Infrastructure Development 
Directorate, Cork City Council, dated 9th April 2025, it is hereby resolved pursuant to 
the provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the Cork Docklands to City Centre Road Network Improvement 
Scheme be carried out as recommended in the said report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development Directorate, Cork City Council.” 
 
7.3 
LOAN FOR CITY RENEWAL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive, dated 4th 
April 2025 regarding a Loan for City Renewal. 
 
An Chomhairle further considered the following Resolution:- 
 
 
“Resolve that, in accordance with Section 106 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended, Cork City Council is to borrow a sum of €20,000,000 to be used for the 
purpose of renewing footpaths and public realm works in the administrative area of 
Cork City Council and for the revitalisation of the City Centre.” 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle agreed to adopt the Resolution amended to read as follows:- 
 
 
“Resolve that, in accordance with Section 106 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended, Cork City Council is to borrow a sum of €20,000,000 to be used for the 
purpose of renewing footpaths and public realm works in the administrative area of 
Cork City Council and for the revitalisation of the City Centre. Spending to be 
approved by this Council.” 
 
 
An Chomhairle further noted Comhairleoir M. Gould’s dissent. 
  
7.4 
AGE FRIENDLY CITY STRATEGY 2025 – 2029 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the Age Friendly City Strategy 2025 – 2029. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a 
vote was called for on returning the Age Friendly City Strategy 2025 – 2029 to the 
Community, Culture & Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee for further 
consideration, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, P. Dineen, A. Deasy. (3) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. 
Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, 
M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, P. Horgan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, 
J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (22) 

 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí H. Kamegni, S. O’Callaghan. (2) 
 
 
As those voting against returning the strategy to the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee were greater than those voting for, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote failed. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle approved the Age Friendly City Strategy 2025 – 2029. 
 
7.5 
2025 
TWINNING 
GRANT 
APPLICATIONS 
– 
RECOMMENDED 
ALLOCATIONS  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, on twinning grant applications received for 2025 
and recommendations for allocations. 
 
8. 
CORK CITY COUNCIL’S WOMEN’S CAUCUS 
 
An Chomhairle received an update report from Comhairleoir F. Kerins, chair of Cork 
City Council’s Women’s Caucus. 
 
9. 
VACANCIES ON COMMITTEES 
 
9.1 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh to 
the Southern Regional Assembly following the resignation of Comhairleoir G. 
O’Brien. 
 
9.2 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir S. 
O’Callaghan to the Association of Irish Local Government following the resignation 
of Comhairleoir G. O’Brien. 
 
9.3  
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir C. O’Connor to 
the Climate Action Committee following the resignation of Comhairleoir P. Horgan. 
 
9.4 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Comhairleoir P. Horgan 
to An Grúpa Forbartha Gaeilge following the resignation of Comhairleoir C. 
O’Connor. 
 
10. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 8th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 8th April 2025. 
 
 

10.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 28/02/2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 28/02/2025. 
 
10.2 
MOTIONS 
 
10.2.1 
ANNUAL ETHICS DECLARATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 4th April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council shall publish the annual ethics declarations made by 
Councillors on its website no later than one month following the deadline for their 
submission (i.e. on or before 31st March annually).’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/125) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Part 15 of the Local Government Act 
2001 sets out the ethical framework for all those involved in the Local Government 
service, both members and employees. This framework imposes a statutory duty on 
all in the service to maintain proper standards of integrity, conduct and concern for 
the public interest.  
 
 
Section 171 obliges elected members and relevant employees to furnish to the Ethics 
Registrar an annual written declaration of “declarable interests” within the meaning 
of the Act no later than the last day of February and failure to do so is an offence under 
the Act. The ethics registrar must keep on behalf of the local authority concerned a 
public register which comprises of 2 parts, one containing members' interests and the 
other the interests of employees and other relevant persons.  
 
 
Cork City Council published on its website, as soon as practical after the last day of 
February, a schedule listing the date on which the Annual Declaration of each elected 
members was submitted to the ethics registrar. A hard copy of the full register is also 
made available for public inspection during normal office hours and any person may 
apply for a copy of the register or any entry in the register. The annual declaration 
form is prescribed in circular LG 01/2025. The form is not designed as an electronic 
form and therefore would be cumbersome for use electronically. In the current format, 
it would only be possible to scan a copy of each paper form to the website and that 
wouldn’t add significantly to the accessibility of the information.  
 
 
For 2025, Cork City Council will investigate the potential of creating an electronic 
version of the form which would allow a public register to be created. This would also 
make the submission of declaration more efficient for members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.2.2 
PUBLIC EVENT TO ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO REGISTER TO VOTE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs Directorate, dated 4th April 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Following on from the recent symposium held in Cork City Hall to mark 125 years 
of Local Government that this Council in conjunction with the Electoral Commission, 
elected members and other stakeholders hold a public event with the aim to encourage 
people to register to vote and take part in the electoral process.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. F. Kerins 25/129) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that with the introduction of the online 
voter registration option (www.CheckTheRegister.ie) in Oct 2022 the Cork City 
register has increased from a total of 147,300 to 160,000 electors. A large volume of 
online updates for the Cork City area were received during this period totalling 47,000 
(change of address, new registrations, DOB/PPSN updates). This unprecedented 
amount of voter engagement was achieved by local and national advertising 
campaigns consisting of radio adverts, citywide leaflet drops and direct 
correspondence.  
 
Funding was provided in 2023 and 2024 by the Dept of Housing, Local Government 
& Heritage to supplement local Franchise budgets and help facilitate this work 
(campaign costs, additional staffing and overtime costs). Voter interest and 
applications tend to surge around elections/referenda with the three electoral events in 
2024 leading to approximately 34,500 online updates. The Electoral Commission also 
organised national advertising campaigns and members of the commission were active 
in the media. As part of the lead-in to electoral events, Cork City Council at a local 
level and the Electoral Commission at a national level, will be engaging in further 
awareness campaigns in advance of the Presidential Election later this year.  
 
While staff in the Franchise Section have and do attend some in-person electoral 
registration events, these initiatives can have relatively low levels of engagement as 
against the other methods referenced which have a broader reach. Care also needs to 
be taken when handling paper applications at in-person events as more sensitive 
personal data is now being collected (PPSN, contact details). Generally, the more local 
and targeted these initiatives are the better. Providing colleges, businesses and 
community groups with voter registration awareness materials for internal distribution 
was found to be particularly effective. There is a national voter registration day 
organised annually and this will take place on 30th April this year.  
 
The Franchise Team, in cooperation with colleagues in Community will support some 
targeted voter registration initiatives on that day. The Franchise team are currently 
engaged in a large amount of data cleansing work ahead of the expected move to 
voter.ie after the Presidential Election. Approximately 7,000 register edits have been 
requested by the project coordinators, Dublin City Council, in advance of the move to 
a shared national database. This work needs to be completed by September 2025. 
Given all of the above, it is recommended that the team continue to focus on targeted 
and local initiatives rather than organising one large public event. 

 
10.2.3 
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer, 
dated 4th April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes: 
- The excessive cost of the Fireman’s Hut structure 
- The need for constructive relationships between elected members and the Executive  
- That while the executive have control of spending, there is a role for elected members 
in accountability and scrutiny that must be respected 
 
 And calls for: 
 A report to be laid before Council ahead of any capital expenditure, not specified by   
 line item in the budget book, exceeding €100,000 specifying any Value for Money 
 process undertaken and the indicative cost of such a project.’ 
 
 (Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/137) 
 
The report of the Chief Financial Officer stated that Cork City Council’s annual capital 
spend is approximately €280m, predominantly relating to a very significant number 
of housing and transportation projects. Most of the projects are fully funded by the 
various central government departments and national agencies. The allocation of such 
funding is subject to due diligence and approvals by the approving department / 
agency. It would not be necessary nor practicable to bring the detailed budgets for 
approval by Council but established arrangements provide for programme reporting 
through the Council’s committee structures. Members will continue to be advised of 
Capital projects that will be undertaken by council. 
 
10.2.4 
TAKING IN CHARGE OF RESIDENTIAL ESTATES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 4th April 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will propose to the Minister for Housing and Cork County 
Council a scheme to assist in the taking in charge of residential estates that entered the 
city boundary in 2019, but for which insufficient bond was received by City Council, 
through a reduction in the annual boundary compensation paid by City Council.’ 
 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/093) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that as advised on 3rd March 2025, Cork 
City Council Estates Taking in Charge Team received, as part of the Transition 
Package from Cork County Council, on the 31st May 2019, 57 no. estates which were 
at some stage of the TIC process. The report also advised that Cork City Council 
Estates Taking in Charge Team are in receipt of TIC application/plebiscite for 67 no. 
estates within the Transition area. The updated number of such estates as of April 
2025 is 62 estates.  
 

As requested at the meeting on 3rd March 2025, below is the list of these estates with 
the following categorisation: 
 
  1. Estates within the Transition Area in receipt of a TIC application or plebiscite 
irrespective of the date the case became active  
 
2. Estates within the Transition Area in receipt of a TIC application or plebiscite pre 
May 2019 
 
• Pre-May 2019 cases with bond less than €100,000 but the developer is engaged 
• Pre-May 2019 cases with bond less than €100,000 and developer is not engaged  
• Pre-May 2019 cases with bond less than €100,000 and there is no developer  
 
The overall number of estates and the categorisation of same varies over time 
following consultation with other sections within Cork City Council and third parties. 
 
11. 
PARTY WHIPS – 24th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 24th March 2025. 
 
12. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - CAIDREAMH 
IDIRNÁISIÚNTA & TURASÓIREACHT – SPECIAL MEETING 26th 
FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its special meeting held, 26th February 
2025. 
 
13. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - CAIDREAMH 
IDIRNÁISIÚNTA & TURASÓIREACHT – 18th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 18th March 2025. 
 
13.1 
MOTIONS 
 
13.1.1 
TWINNING WITH BATACK VILLAGE IN CAMEROON 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate and Community Affairs, dated 10th January 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
“That Cork City Council will pursue the twinning of Cork City and Batack Village in 
Cameroon, and fly the flags of all twin sisters cities on Cork City Hall Building.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/575) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated the following: 

 
Cork City Council Africa Links:  
Pursuant to a motion pertaining to developing links with a city in Africa, then-Chair 
of the International Relations and Tourism SPC, Derry Canty and Cllr. Garrett 
Kelleher, met with the Ambassador of Ireland to Malawi at the time, Seamus O’Grady, 
who agreed to support a programme of exchange. A trial programme of digital 
exchange took place between the Cork Educate Together School and a school in 
Lilongwe, Malawi in May 2024. Taking place over four sessions, the workshops were 
facilitated by the Cork Migrant Centre. While there was a lot of enthusiasm from 
partners for the project, the programme was complicated by the poor level of internet 
connectivity on the part of the school in Lilongwe. 
 
In August 2024, in partnership with Cork City F.C. and funded by the Embassy, City 
Hall’s Sports and International Relations sections organised a blitz in Turner’s Cross 
Stadium for a team of Malawian kids and local youth teams. The Malawian players 
are aspiring professional footballers and were brought to Cork by Rory Murphy, Head 
of the Soccer Academy, Ascent Soccer. The charity scouts out the best football talent 
in Malawi and brings them on annual European tours to broaden horizons and even to 
get them signed to clubs. The Embassy noted at the time that many of the players 
come from backgrounds of complete poverty. Further development of the engagement 
with Malawi in the first instance would require renewed outreach to the new 
Ambassador in Lilongwe. Ireland established diplomatic relations with Cameroon in 
2007 through the Permanent Mission in New York. Ireland does not have an Embassy 
in this country; however, the Embassy of Ireland in Abuja, Nigeria, provides consular 
assistance to Irish citizens in Cameroon. Based on the experience of Cork’s 
engagement with Malawi, it is considered that the lack of a resident Irish Embassy in 
Yaoundé would present an obstacle in terms of developing meaningful ties with 
Batack Village. The current approach of Council is to develop timebound programmes 
of mutual benefit with prospective partners before entering into formal twinning 
arrangements, and subject to the views of the SPC, it is considered that more 
information on Batack Village and what thematic areas of co-operation are proposed, 
would be sought in the first instance.  
 
Flags of Twin Cities: 
There is limited space available on the building for the permanent display of flags, 
and the priority is to display the National Flag and City Coat of Arms. The permanent 
display of the flags of Cork’s twin cities would also impede our ability to consider 
requests for the display of other flags, coinciding with national days etc. Council will 
continue to consider requests to display flags for specific occasions, considering the 
merits and impact on a case-by-case basis.  
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting 1 hour past 
8pm. 
 
 
 
 

13.1.2 
TOURIST TYPE ATTRACTION SIGN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development and Operations, dated 7th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
“That Cork City Council carry out a report detailing design options and costings of a 
tourist type attraction sign like “I  
 Cork” or “Cork City” like signs seen all over 
the world, that would be placed in the City Centre.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/524). 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a desk top review of “City” signs 
present in a number of international cities has been conducted. City signs are intended 
to promote a city as a destination by encouraging visitors to interact with them and 
take photos to share on social media.  
 
The format adopted by most cities is similar, an interactive 3-dimensional sign bearing 
the name of the city. In some cases the signs also incorporate the city logo, e.g. I 
Amsterdam. Signs are generally large with the Toronto sign, by way of example, being 
22m wide and 3m high. The individual letters tend to be solid and robust to enable the 
public to interact with them and to withstand vandalism. The designs vary in 
complexity from letters only to those incorporating changeable lighting elements, 
other city imagery, changeable vinyl skins etc.  
 
The Toronto sign is located in front of City Hall and is lit by LED lights which 
facilitate colour changes for a range of events in the city. The sides are covered in a 
changeable vinyl wrap, so the letters can be re-skinned with different designs. The 
letters are constructed with a steel frame, aluminium cladding and a translucent 
polycarbonate front and back.  
 
The costs associated with the manufacture and installation of such signs will vary 
significantly depending on the design specification, materials used, anticipated 
lifespan, location, ongoing maintenance requirements etc. Thus, it is premature to 
prepare a cost estimate at this stage ahead of a design specification. However, to 
provide context, in the case of Toronto the initial sign installed began to deteriorate 
after 5 years and thus a more durable one was commissioned in 2020 at a cost of 
$760,000, including installation and 3 years maintenance.  
 
13.1.3 
PROVISIONS FOR MOTORHOMES/CAMPERVANS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 7th March 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
“That Cork City Council report on provisions that can be made for 
motorhomes/campervans in the city area including in the ongoing development of the 
Marina.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/038) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is committed to 
exploring opportunities for the provision of high-quality, short-term stay motorhome 
infrastructure in appropriate locations, providing greater choice and encouraging 
visitors to Cork City. Cork City Council is currently procuring consultant services to 
prepare a feasibility study to establish the criteria required to develop a motorhome 
stopover site, identify suitable Cork City Council-owned sites to be considered for 
development and identify related opportunities and requirements. It is expected that 
this will be completed by Q3, which will inform next steps in the delivery of a suitable 
facility.  
 
This matter will be brought to the International Relations and Tourism Strategic Policy 
Committee at that time for consideration 
 
13.2 
EUROPEAN OPPORTUNITIES FOR CORK CITY COUNCIL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Emergency Management and Climate Action, on Cork City Council’s approach to 
engaging with EU opportunities and related activities. 
 
14. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - COMHSHAOL, 
UISCE & ÁISEANNA – 19th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 19th March 2025. 
 
14.1 
MOTIONS  
 
14.1.1 
NOTIFICATION OF BROKEN OR DAMAGED UTILITY COVER APRONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 14th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will create a one stop shop email for the public, separate to the 
service centre system, for the notification of broken or damaged utility cover aprons 
that can then be directly sent to the utility provider in question.’ 
 
    
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/373) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Members were informed in a previous 
report dated 19th November 2024 that a one stop shop already exists for the submission 
of all service requests to Cork City Council.  Service request can be submitted via any 
of the following channels: 
 
1) By ringing the Customer Service Unit (CSU) on 021 492 4000 
2) By emailing the CSU – servicecentre@corkcity.ie 
3) Via our website – Service Requests tab on the homepage 
 
All submissions received are logged on our Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) ICT System.  All received requests are assigned to the relevant staff member, 

who will investigate and take action as appropriate, including contacting the relevant 
service provider. 
 
The creation of duplicated separate and individual systems for different types of 
service requests, which would require both human and financial resources to support, 
manage and operate on an ongoing basis, cannot be justified and could be significant.  
There is no evidence that the existing systems are not providing a high level of service 
or that a new separate system would in any way improve service levels.  
 
Thus, the best level of service to the public is provided via a unified single service 
request ICT system.  
 
Further to the above, Cork City Council has prepared an update for the Cork City 
Council website relating to Reporting a Damaged Utility Cover/Apron. This will give 
a list of utility companies and contact details and advise customers to contact them 
directly if they are aware who owns the cover. If the owner is not known, it will direct 
customers to the Councils Customer Service Unit to log calls, where they will be 
assigned to the relevant person in Cork City Council for follow-up.  
 
14.1.2 
DOG BIN PROGRAMME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 14th March 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council put additional funding into this year’s budget to allow for the 
roll out of a more extensive dog bin programme in our various parks, recreational 
walking areas and school runs.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/342) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Parks Department does not 
provide specific bins for dog waste but encourages all dog owners to deposit waste in 
any of its litter bins in Parks or on Walkways. The number of bins is considered 
adequate at present but is kept under review in the context of footfall at any particular 
location. The Cleansing Department also do not install specific dog poo bins and it is 
the Council’s policy that any public litter bin can be used for the disposal of dog waste. 
The number of on street public bins is continuously reviewed and any request from 
schools for the installation of additional bins will be considered on a case-by-case 
basis. 
 
14.1.3 
ATMOSPHERIC CHECK IN CORK CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 14th March 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That this Council will request through the Climate Action Committee that Google 
conducts a similar atmospheric check street by street in Cork city centre and suburbs 
that was conducted in Dublin before Christmas in order to enhance climate mitigation 
measures and works at local level.’ 

  
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/015) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Google Project Air View Data 
was carried out in Dublin City from May 2021 to August 2022; Monday–Friday 
between the hours of 9:00 am and 5:00 pm. 
 
This data was collected by Google and Dublin City Council as part of Project Air 
View Dublin. Google's electric Street View car, equipped with mobile air sensors, 
drove through the roads of Dublin City measuring street by street air quality, 
specifically Carbon Monoxide (CO), Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Nitrogen Dioxide 
(NO2), Nitric Oxide (NO), Ozone (O3), and Particulate Matter PM2.5.  Cork City 
Council maintains an existing air quality sensor network which measures pollutants 
from traffic and residential solid fuel burning across Cork City. The data is available 
at www.corkairquality.ie. These stationary sensors record data 24/7, allowing them to 
detect pollution patterns such as rush hour traffic and instances of high particulate 
emissions from the burning of solid fuels in stoves and household fireplaces.  
 
In the city centre, the Council owns and operates a further network of 5 sensors that 
measure Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2), Nitric Oxide (NO), Ozone 
(O3), and Particulate Matter (PM2.5). In addition, the Environmental Protection 
Agency, in co-operation with Cork City Council, operates 6 number high level air 
quality sensors in the Council’s functional area. This network measures a range of air 
quality parameters. Combined, the existing air quality monitoring network in the Cork 
City area consists of 26 sensors which the Council deems sufficient for monitoring 
purposes. The air quality section can contact Google and Dublin City Council to 
enquire about costs and the availability of the Google Street car to carry out such a 
survey in Cork, and report back through the Climate Action Committee. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion to the Climate Action Committee 
for consideration. 
 
14.1.4 
POLLUTION AND DEGRADATION OF THE GLASHEEN RIVER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 14th March 2025 on the following motion:-  
             
‘This Council notes the recent report: 'Freshwater Ecology Survey of the Glasheen 
Stream in Cork City' by Litizia Cocchiglia. This report highlights the pollution and 
degradation of the Glasheen River and its impact on biodiversity and flooding. This 
Council will write to Maria Young of the Cork River Alliance to deliver a presentation 
to Councillors on the report and the potential solutions.’  
 
            (Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 25/042) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Council is aware of the recent 
report: 'Freshwater Ecology Survey of the Glasheen Stream in Cork City' by Litizia 
Cocchiglia. Contact will be made with Ms. Maria Young of the Cork River Alliance 
to ascertain her availability to deliver a presentation on the report at the next meeting 

of the Environment, Water and Amenity Strategic Policy Committee on 20th May, 
2025. 
 
14.1.5 
PHASEOUT OF FOSSIL FUELS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 14th March 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council will outline its strategy to support the phaseout of fossil fuels 
in Cork by 2040, which is “absolutely imperative”, according to the Climate Change 
Advisory Council.’ 
 
             (Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/023) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council published its Local 
Authority Climate Action Plan (LACAP) in February 20024. This sets out the city’s 
vision of achieving a climate neutral, resilient, just and thriving community. The 
LACAP is evidence based and informed by a series of engagements with the city 
stakeholders.  Cork City Council plays a variety of roles in delivering its climate 
action objectives – ranging from actions under its direct control to others where it has 
an influencing or co-ordinating role. 
 
In terms of areas under its direct control, the main focus is on the decarbonisation of 
high energy use buildings and the decarbonisation of its fleet. Two of the standout 
achievements to date are the replacement of 70% of our street lighting with energy 
saving LEDs and recent work caried out in Bishopstown leisure centre which has led 
to a 50% reduction in energy use there.  Five of Cork City Councils’ building are 
responsible for 75% of its energy use and so are a key focus for decarbonisation. 
 
Cork City Council’s current fleet comprises of 291 no. vehicles, approximately 23% 
of which are electric vehicles.  The City Council is currently running a trial using 
hydrotreated vegetable oil (HVO) on a limited number of vehicles over a 3-month 
period. HVO fuel has a premium over regular diesel but offers up to 90% reduced 
CO2 emissions without the cost of changing hardware or upgrading engines and is 
carbon -neutral.  In its procurement process this year for a new fleet, the City Council 
is seeking to ensure that all vehicles are either electric, or HVO compatible. Currently, 
the electric option is not suitable for some larger vehicles and so the Council would 
intend to switch to HVO on larger vehicles on a phased basis, subject to HVO 
compatibility.   
 
Regarding the wider City, Cork City is participating in the EU Climate-Neutral & 
Smart Cities Mission, along with Dublin City. This aims to significantly accelerate 
our advancement to climate neutrality.  It has submitted its Climate-Neutral Contract 
to the European Union which is comprised of an action plan, an investment plan and 
a series of commitments from a wide variety of public, private and community 
stakeholders. 
 
 
 
 

14.1.6 
“CLEAN IT UP YOU DIRTY PUP” CAMPAIGN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 14th March 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘Cork City Council acknowledges that dog fouling is a blight affecting all areas of the 
city, that it is a public health risk, affects those with mobility issues and visual 
impairments most acutely and stands in the way of the Council’s stated aim of 
encouraging active travel. An evidence based solution to this issue is required and to 
that end the Council will engage with Galway City Council in relation to their 
successful “Clean it up you dirty pup” campaign with a view to rolling out a similar 
campaign in Cork City in the short term.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/094) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council takes the issue 
of dog fouling very seriously and in 2016 established a Dog Fouling Committee to 
help tackle the issue by promoting responsible dog ownership through educational 
and awareness campaigns. 
The Dog Fouling Committee has undertaken cinema, radio, social media, bus and bus 
shelter information and awareness campaigns and has organised a number of road 
show events in shopping centres around the city  to help bring about a change in 
behaviour and mindset in relation to dog fouling and to promote both a sense of 
personal responsibility and community pride in relation to dog owners picking up after 
their pets. 
 
The Committee also runs an annual primary school poster competition to engage with 
the  next generation of dog owners and to impress upon them the negative impact dog 
fouling has on all sectors of society particularly those with mobility and visual 
impairment issues. 
 
The Dog Fouling Committee is aware of the initiative  run by Galway City Council 
and as part of the 2025 programme of work The Dog Fouling Committee agreed to 
consider piloting  a similar type of initiative to highlight and report on the instances 
and level of dog fouling  around the city and the Dog Fouling Committee will engage 
with Galway City Council on their initiative as part of the awareness campaigns being 
run.      
 
15. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - POBAL, CULTÚR & 
COMHFHORBAIRT ÁITE – 20th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 20th March 2025. 
 
15.1 
MINUTES OF THE ARTS COMMITTEE DECEMBER 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Minutes of the Art Committee December 
2024. 
 

15.2 
MINUTES OF AN GRÚPA FORBARTHA GAEILGE MEETINGS – 
OCTOBER 2024, JANUARY & FEBRUARY 2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Minutes of An Grúpa Forbartha Gaeilge 
Meetings – October 2024, January and February 2025.  
 
15.3 
MOTIONS 
 
15.3.1 
CORK PAST AND PRESENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That continued work be pursued to keep rebuilding the Cork Past and Present website 
hosted by the City Library.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/070) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork Past and Present website is a 
valued and much used resource for researchers and for those interested in the history 
of Cork City and County and beyond. In recent years there were technical issues and 
an attempted hacking of the site which forced it offline. Thankfully it was not off for 
too long as the demand for its reinstatement grew. City Council made funds available 
to secure the services of an outside contractor to reconstruct and relaunch the site by 
placing the top ten items of interest online, using best practice and working in close 
cooperation with the e library section and other staff of the City Library. This work is 
intensive and continues to this day. As resources allow items are reinstated and the 
long-term aim is to grow the site with existing and new material. Nothing has been 
lost, and all files are available should they be required. The online presence will grow 
steadily, placing it on a firm footing for the future. 
 
15.3.2 
VIDEO GAMES LIBRARY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Libraries will provide a library of video games to borrow, similar to 
some other local authorities in Ireland.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/075) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Library does not have any 
plans to establish a video games collection in its libraries. Having undertaken an 
evaluation of a proposal to do so it was established that there were difficulties in other 
library authorities who do have such collections, around the theft of physical copies 
of games, or the non-return of items. When allied with the high licenced price of any 
online subscriptions there was no incentive to establish a collection. It should be noted 
that video game loans can be made through the library system from other authorities, 
using the catalogue and they are then delivered like any other item reserved on the 
national Library Management System. 

 
15.3.3 
AUTISM FRIENDLY CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council provides an update on the current status of Cork as an 
Autism-Friendly City, outlining the progress made to date in ensuring inclusivity and 
accessibility for autistic individuals. 
 
Furthermore, that the Council sets out a clear plan for additional measures to establish 
Cork as a leader in autism-friendly initiatives, including but not limited to: 
 
1. Sensory-Friendly Infrastructure: Expansion of sensory-friendly spaces in public 
areas, including parks, public transport hubs, and civic buildings. 
 
2. Trader Incentives for Autism-Friendly Shopping Hours: Development of a scheme 
to encourage local businesses and retailers to introduce autism-friendly shopping 
hours, with support and recognition from the Council. 
 
3. Public Awareness Campaign: A city-wide awareness campaign to educate 
businesses, public service workers, and the wider community on autism inclusion, 
aiming to promote Cork as an autism-friendly destination. 
 
4. Training and Supports: Collaboration with autism advocacy groups to provide 
training for city staff, businesses, and frontline workers to improve engagement and 
communication with autistic individuals. 
 
Would the Chief Executive agree that such measures are necessary to ensure Cork not 
only maintains but enhances its status as an Autism-Friendly City, setting a national 
example for inclusivity and accessibility? 
 
This motion requests a progress update while also pushing for concrete actions to 
make Cork a leader in autism inclusion. It balances accountability with forward-
thinking proposals.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Flynn 25/103) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team met with the CEO, Deputy CEO and the Autism Friendly Towns 
Manager with AsIAm to look at the feasibility of Cork becoming an autism friendly 
city.  
 
The group detailed the Autism Friendly Community Framework, specifically the need 
for the establishment of a voluntary committee, the development and implementation 
of a 3-year city plan, an awareness and understanding of the main barriers to inclusion 
for autistic people, including communication, predictability and control, sensory 
processing and judgement and attitudes. This plan should be drafted through direct 
engagement with Autistic people, family members and the wider community.  
 

AsIAm have developed a central framework to assist and guide applicants throughout 
this process. In terms of implementation, AsIAm recommended the employment of an 
Autism-Friendly City Officer, employed by AsIAm and funded and hosted by local 
government. This has been undertaken by Dublin City Council at a cost of €50,000 
per annum. AsIAm note this role will play a key role in achieving the Award.  
 
The Community Team are currently reviewing this matter with a view to developing 
a funding bid around implementation. 
 
15.3.4 
SUPERVISED INJECTION CENTRE IN CORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘Further to its agreement that there should be one, that Cork City Council will identify 
and report on preferred sites for a supervised injection centre in Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/078) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is one of the 
number of partners that has been supporting the HSE in the development of a 
supervised injection facility for Cork city. In 2023 Cork City Council participated in 
a site visit to a number of facilities in Lisbon. The development of a integrated support 
services is also a key action in the Cork City LECP. Current legislation allows for the 
development of one pilot facility in Dublin and legislative change is required for the 
development of a similar facility in Cork city. The HSE and Cork City Council jointly 
commissioned a piece of research from UCC to scope the scale of the type of service 
needed which was published in March 2025. It proposed that a consumption centre 
“might provide a connection point in the problem drug use harm reduction system for 
individuals who are not in treatment”. Joint work is underway between the HSE and 
Cork City Council to examine a number of options in relation to supporting this very 
vulnerable cohort. 
 
15.3.5 
STRÁITÉIS GHAEILGE NUA 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘Go n-aithníonn Comhairle Cathrach Chorcaí an méid a chuireann Seachtain na 
Gaeilge le cur cun chinn ár dteanga náisiúnta; go n-aithníonn sí an obair riachtanach 
a dhéanann oibrithe earnáil na Gaeilge ar mhaithe le forbairt na teanga fud fad 
Chathair Chorcaí, go háirithe inár nGaelscoileanna agus Gaelcholáistí; agus go bhfuil 
sí ag súil le forbairt Stráitéis Ghaeilge nua don chathair, chun gur féidir léi a cuid 
dualgas a chomhlíonadh mar Bhaile Seirbhíse Gaeltachta. 
 
That Cork City Council recognizes the contribution of Seachtain na Gaeilge to the 
development of our national language; that it recognizes the essential work done by 
workers in the Irish language sector for the benefit of the development of the language 
throughout Cork City, especially in our Gaelscoileanna and Gaelcholáistí; and that it 

looks forward to the development of a new Irish Language Strategy for the city, so 
that it can fulfil its duties as a Gaeltacht Service Town.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/127) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s Grupa Forbartha 
Gaeilge is proactive in fulfilling its statutory responsibilities in relation to the Irish 
language while also supporting the delivery of public initiatives promoting the greater 
use of Irish in the public realm.  
 
In 2025 it will be supporting or delivering:  
  
• 35 events across its network of 10 libraries during Seachtain na Gaeilge  
• Lá na Gaeilge on Friday 14th March with the full support of the business 
community through the Cork Business Association (CBA), Cork Chamber and 
the Local Enterprise Offices (LEO).  
• A total of 1000 laminated cards with seanfhocail (proverbs), greetings, 
workplace phrases etc through its library network and public offices and online 
through websites and social media outlets of these organisations and its own. 
• A relaunch of Gradaim Padraig Ui Chuanacháin (Irish in Business Awards) 
promoting greater use of Irish in Cork companies  
• An Céilí Mór in the Millennium Hall on March 15th 
• A bilingual quiz in the Clayton Hotel on March 16th 
• A grant aid to Irish language initiatives throughout the year  
 
It is also working closely with Gaelscoileanna and Gaelcholáistí on the provision of 
Cuntóirí Teanga (language assistants) in cork schools and on the development of an 
Irish language strategy for the city as a Baile Seirbhíse Gaeltachta (Gaeltacht Support 
Town). 
 
15.3.6 
HORSE PROJECT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council update on efforts to establish a Horse Project and outline if 
other educational programs are in place in the interim.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/138) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council in collaboration 
with the Traveller Interagency Group continue to examine a programme in relation to 
horses in the travelling community. In 2025, the Community team will facilitate the 
Horse Project Sub Group of the Traveller Interagency Group and liaise with Traveller 
Community representatives, An Garda Síochána, the CSPCA and others to develop 
an Equine Skills programme for young people in the community. This will take a 
community development and education approach, and build on constructive work in 
the horse welfare space in the last two years. 
 
 

15.3.7 
DISABILITY ACCESS AND ISSUES SUBCOMMITTEE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th March 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council would establish a disability access and issues subcommittee that 
would include external stakeholders in the disability advocacy area to engage on how 
our city and suburbs can be better adapted for those with disabilities and families with 
disabilities with the plan to produce a report on actions needed to this Council within 
6 months of establishment.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/593) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Corporate & Community Affairs met 
with colleagues in Operations, Infrastructure and ICT Services to consider this 
proposal and possible next steps.  
 
Cork City Council have worked in collaboration with disability groups for a number 
of years in a variety of areas across a number of Directorates.  
 
1. In 2021 the Community Team were awarded a ‘Disability Participation 
Awareness Fund’. As part of this fund it completed an access audit of six 
council owned properties, including Leisureworld, St Peters Church, Glanmire 
Library and the city centre Library.  
2. Cork City Council has worked with the Cork City Access Group for over 10 
years. This is a group of volunteers. Cork City Council Operations Directorate, 
specifically Roads Operations, meet the Cork City Access group to take 
feedback from them on issues arising with regards to access in the city. This 
includes staff from Traffic Operations and Infrastructure Development and 
focus on accessibility of the Roads infrastructure for use by people with 
disabilities in and around Cork city. The aim is to accommodate requirements 
to improve the quality of life and access of these users of the public asset by 
improving existing facilities, considering requests for new facilities and 
consultation on planned works around the city.  
3. The Community Team within Corporate & Community Affairs attend the Cork 
Access Group including for the organisation of Make Way Day in Cork City.  
 
The current group are meeting and will examine the scope of work required in this 
area. 
 
16. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 11th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 11th March 2025. 
 
17. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 7th APRIL 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 7th April 2025. 
 

17.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
17.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF FEBRUARY 2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
February 2025. 
 
17.2 
MOTIONS 
 
17.2.1 
ABATEMENT OF RATES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer on 
the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will develop a policy requiring on-going and regularly 
updated evidence from liable persons claiming abatement of rates for reason of being 
unable to obtain a suitable tenant at a reasonable rent, including showing to Cork City 
Council a regularly-updated business plan; and that Cork City Council will advise the 
liable person of rates waivers when properties are used for meanwhile use by non-
profit organisations, community groups and charities, and of the exemption for 
premises occupied by artists and other categories of uses.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/602) 
 
The report of the Chief Financial Officer stated that the policy sought in the motion is 
effectively in place through the Vacancy Abatement Scheme as outlined in my earlier 
report. The scheme is inherently focused to encourage the return of vacant ratable 
properties to active use and thus it is in the interests of the occupier to establish a 
viable business for a property and avoid having to pay monies for having a vacant 
non-income generating property.  
 
The Council’s Vacancy Abatement Scheme complies with the relevant legislative 
requirements which do not require the submission of regularly updated business plans. 
It would not be appropriate for the City Council to involve itself in the determination 
of what would constitute a viable business plan for vacant ratable properties and to do 
so would require a level of resources and expertise currently not available to the 
Council. 
 
17.2.2 
CESSATION OF FUNDING FROM UISCE ÉIREANN 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer on 
the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would apply for national funding to ensure that there are 
adequate funds to increase staffing levels to maintain the city’s drains and crews to 
prevent future flooding due to the cessation of funding from Uisce Éireann on 19th 
July 2025.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/097) 
 

The report of the Chief Financial Officer stated that members will be aware that the 
full transfer of water and foul drainage functions to Uisce Eireann will take place at 
the end of 2026. Budget 2025 provided funding for the establishment of a City Council 
team to begin the work associated with the functions of storm drainage and rural water.  
 
The process of the transfer of functions is ongoing and the resourcing requirements 
for the City Council’s functions post-2026 will remain under review in the context of 
that process.  
 
It is acknowledged that issues will arise with the transfer of water and foul drainage 
functions to Irish Water. These issues are on a national basis and mechanisms have 
been put in place nationally to deal with them. Pending finalisation of arrangements 
that will apply to all local authorities, it is not considered appropriate to apply for 
national funding at this time. 
 
17.2.3 
OLD VERSUS NEW CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer on 
the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That in the upcoming budget all references to new and old city be dispensed with and 
we accept that there is only one city when it comes to allocating budgets.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/371) 
 
The report of the Chief Financial Officer stated that all 2026 budget references will 
refer to the new city. There will be no reference to the old city in budget 2026. 
 
18. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th March 2025. 
 
19. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th March 2025. 
 
20. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th March 2025. 
 
21. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th March 2025. 
 
 
 

22. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th March 2025. 
 
23. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
24. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the AILG Module 2 Training, Embracing Equality 
– cultivating inclusive local communities, held at the Falls Hotel, Ennistymon, 
Co. Clare, 20th March 2025. 
• Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle at the International Arts Award for Conal 
Creedon, held at Chicago, USA, 14th - 17th November 2024. 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran at the Intelligent Cities Challenge Conference, held at 
Brussels, Belgium, 4th - 8th March 2025. 
• Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh and S. Martin at the 2025 AILG Annual Training 
Conference, held at Strand Hotel, Co. Limerick, 2nd - 3rd April 2025.  
 
25. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
26. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
None received. 
 
27. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
28. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for February 2025. 
 
29. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 49, 
Report on Vacant Council Owned Properties, and motion 50, Renovation of Vacant 
Properties, be referred to the Strategic, Economic Development, Enterprise & 
Planning Strategic Policy Committee. 

 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir J. Maher to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
“That Cork City Council, in it's capacity as guardians of the city and animal welfare, 
effectively deal with the issue of wild goats in the Ballyvolane area, to the extent of 
taking responsibility for the welfare of said goats and bring them into the care of the 
city via a trusted and reputable welfare agency and thus ensuring not only the safety 
and welfare of the goats but also the broader community.” 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Shannon, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to continue the meeting to the 
end of the discussion on Comhairleoir J. Maher’s motion, where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, 
K. Collins, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, T. 
Coleman. (12) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, O. Moran, D. Boylan, K. 
McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, G. 
O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (12) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí D. Boyle. (1) 
 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded by Comhairleoir O. 
Moran, a vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to continue the 
meeting to 9.30pm, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, D. 
Boylan, K. Collins, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, 
D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (17) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, 
M.R. Desmond, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman. (9) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 

 
Items 30.1, 30.2, 31.1, 31.2 31.3 were deferred to the next Ordinary Meeting of An 
Chomhairle to be held, 12th May 2025. 
 
30. 
MOTIONS DEFERRED FROM MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE HELD 
ON THE 10th MARCH 2025 
 
30.1 
DEVOLVE 
ACTIVE TRAVEL BUDGET TO TARGET EXISTING 
FOOTPATHS 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council call on Government to devolve at least 10% of the Active 
Travel Budget to target old and existing footpaths and bring them up to a safe and 
healthy standard. The practice of insisting on the inclusion of a cycle lane or nothing 
happens needs to stop. Walking is the most popular and efficient means of active travel 
and needs to be encouraged and facilitated more.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/344) 
 
30.2 
LICENCING OF QUADRICYCLE DRIVERS 
 
 
‘This Council calls on the Government to: 
1. Introduce legislation to allow individuals aged 16 and over to drive light 
quadricycles (such as the Citroën Ami) on Irish roads, following the example 
of several European countries. 
2. Establish a clear framework for driver training and safety requirements to 
ensure young drivers are adequately prepared, potentially through a modified 
version of the Essential Driver Training (EDT) scheme. 
3. Recognise light quadricycles as a safer and more environmentally friendly 
alternative to scooters and motorcycles, offering increased protection and zero 
emissions for young drivers. 
 
Rationale: 
Ireland is one of the few European countries that does not permit teenagers to drive 
light quadricycles, despite their availability and affordability. Countries such as 
France, Spain, and Italy allow 14 to 16-year-olds to operate these vehicles under 
specific training and licensing schemes. Introducing similar legislation here would 
promote safe, sustainable mobility options for younger people and reduce reliance on 
higher-risk two-wheeled vehicles. 
 
This motion calls for modernisation of road traffic laws to reflect advancements in 
light vehicle technology and provide practical transport solutions for young people 
across Ireland.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/107) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31. 
MOTIONS 
 
31.1 
URGENT ACTION ON AUTISM ASSESSMENT WAITING TIMES IN CORK 
CITY 
 
 
‘This Council recognises with deep concern the 30 month waiting times for autism 
assessments for children within the Cork City area, and calls on the Minister for 
Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth to take urgent and immediate 
action to address these unacceptable waiting times; to include a timeline and strategy 
to reduce the backlog, including measures to: 
 
•     Recruit and retain appropriate clinical staff 
•     Expand partnerships with private providers 
•     Ensure equity of access across both Primary Care and Disability Services.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/183) 
 
 
31.2 
TENANT IN SITU SCHEME 
 
 
‘Cork City Council notes that the Tenant in Situ Scheme was an essential tool in 
preventing homelessness. 
 
It allowed local authorities to buy properties from landlords who otherwise would 
have carried out no-fault evictions.  
 
Last year, hundreds of families in Dublin were prevented from becoming homeless 
because of this effective scheme. 
 
Cork City Council is deeply concerned that the Minister for Housing James Browne 
has cut funding to this scheme and introduced criteria that will result in more people 
becoming homeless. 
 
Cork City Council urges the Minister for Housing to immediately reverse his decision 
and to reinstate the scheme in full.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/186) 
 
31.3 
REOPENING OF THE OLD GLEN PRISON 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would write to the Minister for Justice to oppose the 
reopening of the old Glen prison. In 2016, when the new prison opened in the Glen, 
commitments were given by the Government and the Irish Prison Service that the old 
prison would be transformed for the community. This proposal by the Minister for 
Justice reneges on the commitments given.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/215) 
 
 
 
 

This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
