 
Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 21st June 2018 
Room G12, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
Lawrence Owens 
Cllr. Chris O’Leary 
Dan Boyle 
Priscilla Lynch 
Adrienne Rodgers 
Joe Curtin 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
 
Apologies: 
Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, Ann Doherty, Paul Moynihan, David Ronayne, Eddie 
Mullins, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, Mick O’Connell, Fiona Finn, Cllr PJ Hourican, 
Nora O’Donovan, Ger Canning, Bernie Connolly 
 
 
 
1. Welcome 
The Vice Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted. The Vice 
Chairperson introduced and welcomed Joe Curtin, Youth Work Ireland to the LCDC who will 
be representing the Youth Sector. 
 
 
2. Minutes 
The minutes of 17th May, 2018 were considered and on proposal of Lawrence Owens, 
seconded by Adrienne Rodgers were approved with no matters arising. 
  
 
3. Funding Streams Update: 
a) Healthy Ireland Fund Application 2018 
T. Power confirmed that the LCDC submitted a Healthy Ireland Fund Round 2 application on 
25th May, 2018. A total of 8 actions were submitted totalling €75,000.  T. Power gave a 
summary the actions and noted that the Department sought a number of clarifications 
around the application which had been replied to. The Department will grant 15% of funding 
initially and an official decision on the application will issued in August/September 2018. T. 
Power to circulate the HIF application and a summary document of the actions.  
 
b) Community Enhancement Programme 2018 
R. Loughry gave a summary of the Community Enhancement Programme (CEP) which 
replaces the Community Facilities Scheme and RAPID Programme of 2017. Cork City LCDC 
was been allocated €149,241 under the CEP for 2018.  
 
The CEP Guidelines require the LCDC to give out 30% of the allocated monies through small 
grant schemes. R. Loughry recommended that the LCDC allocate €50,000 to this element of 
the CEP and recommended that the LCDC raise the maximum grant available from €1,000 to 
€5,000 as there are numerous other small grant schemes available.  
 

R. Loughry recommended that the remaining €99,000 be allocated to the 4 RAPID areas and 
to non RAPID areas in the City that are disadvantaged such as Noonan’s Road and 
Curraheen. It was suggested that the LCDC also prioritise non-geographical marginalised 
groups including New Communities, LGBT, Youth, Older People etc. 
 
Closing date for CEP applications is 30th July, 2018. R. Loughry suggested that CEP 
applications would be signed off in the August LCDC meeting and recommended that in the 
interim that the SICAP sub group meet to help process applications and revert to LCDC with 
recommendations.  
 
The above proposed implementation of the CEP was formally agreed by the LCDC. 
 
Current membership of the SICAP sub group includes Fergal Dennehy, Paul Moynihan, Dan 
Boyle and Fiona Finn. T. Power noted that there is a vacancy on the sub group and invited 
new LCDC members to join. Following a discussion regarding sub group membership, T. 
Power confirmed that a formal review of the group would take place in July/August.   
 
 
4. RAPID ABC Presentation 
The RAPID ABC presentation was rescheduled to the July LCDC meeting. 
 
 
5. Children and Young People’s Services Committee (CYPSC) Presentation  
Tracey Holt gave a presentation on CYPSC. T. Holt discussed how the LCDC and CYPSC could 
support each other’s work and build links with each other to improve coordination and 
communication and to avoid overlap/duplication. It was noted that CYPSE is linked to the 
LECP. T. Holt noted that CYPSC sub group membership is open and that she can be contacted 
on tracey.holt@tusla.ie for further information.  
 
 
6. SICAP Timelines 
T. Power noted that the SICAP Mid Year Review is due and confirmed the timelines for the 
2018 Performance Review and 2019 Annual Planning Process. T. Power confirmed that Cork 
City Partnership had submitted the Fin and Mon Report by the required deadline of 15th 
June, 2018. The LCDC have until 31st July, 2018 to carry out the Mid Year Review and 
formally approve same. T. Power to circulate SICAP timeline information to the LCDC.  
 
T. Power noted that there is SICAP training on 25th July for LCDC members and suggested 
that members of the SICAP sub group attend. T. Power to circulate information to the LCDC. 
 
T. Power confirmed that the SICAP Q3 payment of €309,016 is due on 1st July, 2018 to Cork 
City Partnership for July, August and September but this payment is only to be processed on 
completion of the Mid Year Review. Subject to LCDC approval, the Department permits 1 
month of this payment to be made upfront if requested by the LDC due to cash flow with 2 
months to be paid following the Mid Year Review process. The LCDC formally approved 1 
month’s upfront payment for Q3 to Cork City Partnership.  
 
 
7. A.O.B. 
National Review of the LCDC Process 
 
T. Power confirmed that he attended the National Review of the LCDC Process and that a 
number of issues were raised at the Review including: 
 
Quorum requirement and private/public ratio 
 
Standing orders  
 
Conflict of interest 
 
Guidelines of LECP – Managing and Monitoring 

 
Lack of control – reallocation of budgets 
 
Recommendation re Economic SPC – have a representative on the LCDC  
 
Effectiveness of PPN and reporting (interaction and engagement) 
 
A draft report on the Review is due shortly. 
 
It was agreed by the LCDC that the PPN would become a permanent item on the agenda 
going forward. 
 
It was noted that the LECP is due for review next year in line with RSES and is being 
considered by the Department. A draft report will be circulated for comment when 
completed.  
 
LCDC member attendance at meetings was also discussed. It was agreed that an attendance 
record of attendance at meetings will be circulated at each meeting going forward.  
 
 
 
 
 
Yellow Flag Programme 
The Yellow Flag Programme for schools was discussed and it was agreed that the LCDC 
would support 2 schools under this programme for 2018/2019.  
 
 
It was noted that Traveller Culture Awareness Training was also available.  
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting and the next meeting scheduled Thursday, 12th July, 
2018 at 4pm.  
 
Aaron O’Connell, 
Vice Chairperson 
 
 
 
 
 
