Minutes of the L.C.D.C meeting on Thursday, 19th April 2018 
Multi-Media Room, New Civic Offices, Cork. 
 
In attendance: 
Aaron O’Connell 
Vice Chairperson 
Nora O’Donovan 
Dan Boyle 
Bernie Connolly 
Fiona Finn 
Ger Canning 
Cllr PJ Hourican 
 
 
Also in attendance:  
Rebecca Loughry, Tony Power, Susan McCarthy 
Apologies: 
 
Ann Doherty, Paul Moynihan, Cllr. Fergal Dennehy, Priscilla Lynch,  
David Ronayne, Eddie Mullins, Chief Supt. B. McPolin, Cllr. Chris O’Leary, 
Adrienne Rodgers, Laurence Owens, Mick O’Connell  
 
 
Welcome 
The Vice Chairperson welcomed the members and apologies were noted.  
 
 
1. Minutes 
The minutes of 15th March, 2018 were considered and on proposal of Nora O’Donovan, 
seconded by Aaron O’Connell were approved with no matters arising. 
  
 
2. Funding Stream Updates 
 
a) Healthy Ireland Funding Stream Update 
R. Loughry confirmed that the LCDC applied for and were granted a 1 month 
extension to the end of April, 2018 for completion of actions under Round 1. 
 
T. Power noted that there was a slight underspend in some of the Actions and that 
formal approval was being sought to reallocate funds between staff / programme 
costs within Actions. On the proposal by Cllr PJ Hourican, seconded by Fiona Finn 
this reallocation of funds was approved. 
b) Communities Facilities Scheme 
No details are available yet in relation to the Communities Facilities Scheme for 
2018.  
 
 
 
 
3. Regional Spatial Economic Strategy (RSES) Update 
T. Power noted that a number of LCDC members attended the RSES workshops that were 
held in Waterford at the start of the week. It was felt that there was a focus on a Rural 
Agenda and no mention of an Urban Agenda. Feedback from these workshops will be 
circulated once available. The next sessions will allow for further input. 

4. Presentation – Sailing into Wellness 
Colin Healy and James Lyons gave a presentation on Sailing into Wellness. The primary aim 
of Sailing into Wellness is to use the unique setting of the sea and sail training to promote, 
develop and maintain sustainable positive mental health and wellbeing. C. Healy and J. 
Lyons are hoping to build a working relationship with the LCDC and engage with community 
groups in Cork City. T. Power to circulate their contact information to committee. 
 
5. Review of Membership 
T. Power noted that the review of membership is in progress at present. There are 3 strands 
to the review: 
 
1. Organisational membership 
 
2. Expanding LCDC members by 2, from 17 to 19 members 
 
3. PPN members – rotate PPN members every 3 years 
 
The review will be finalised following a report to the CPG on 21st May, 2018. 
 
 
6. A.O.B. 
R. Loughry confirmed that two new staff will be commencing in Community and Enterprise 
and will provide support for the LCDC and the LECP. The Development Worker role will be 
filled by Stephen Murphy, who will commence towards the end of May, 2018. Interviews for 
the Grade 7 role will be held on 8th May, 2018.  
F. Finn noted that there could be a better flow of information from the LCDC to the PPN 
members. It was noted that LCDC minutes, once adopted can be circulated to PPN members.  
T. Power noted that Cork City Council is currently redeveloping its website and that the LCDC 
will have a greater presence on this new site. Each LCDC member will be asked to provide a 
brief bio and a photograph for publishing on this site. Members will be emailed regarding 
same in due course. 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting and the next meeting scheduled Thursday, 17th May, 
2018 at 4pm.  
 
 
 
Aaron O’Connell, 
Vice Chairperson 
