MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 8th SEPTEMBER 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, 
N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Ms. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. N. Murtagh, A/Director of Services, Local Area 
Development & Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Mr. N. Carroll, A/Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development.  
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action. 
Mr. C. Ó Súilleabháin, Director of Services, City Centre 
Development & Operations. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Rourke family on the death of Norman O’Rourke. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Frank McCarthy. 
• The Twomey family on the death of Finola Twomey. 
• The Kelleher family on the death of Denis Kelleher. 
• The Gibbons family on the death of Paul Gibbons. 
• The Love family on the death of Ellen Love. 

• The Ó Sé family on the death of Eileen Ó Sé. 
• The Mullery family on the death of Melissa Mullery. 
• The Black family on the death of Kay Black. 
• The Daly family on the death of Sean Daly. 
• The Forde family on the death of Kevin Forde. 
• The Spillane family on the death of Michael Spillane. 
• The Buckley family on the death of Elizabeth (Betty) Buckley. 
• The Walsh O’Regan family on the death of Marie Walsh O’Regan. 
• The O’Connell family on the death of Mary O’Connell. 
• The Dorney family on the death of Philip (Phil) Dorney. 
• The Healy family on the death of Tim Healy. 
• The O’Keeffe family on the death of Gladys O’Keeffe. 
• The Brennan family on the death of Sean Brennan. 
• The McGrath family on the death of Brendan McGrath. 
• The Cleary family on the death of Jim Cleary. 
• The Donaghy family on the death of Malachy Donaghy. 
• The McCarthy family on the death of Tom McCarthy. 
• The Murphy family on the death of David Murphy. 
• The Shellard family on the death of Ronnie Shellard. 
• The Keohane family on the death of Gerard F. Keohane. 
• The Walsh family on the death of Dominick Walsh. 
• The Humphreys family on the death of Eoin Humphreys. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• St. Michael’s GAA on the inaugural Frank Barry Memorial Tournament. 
• Douglas Golf Club on their double All-Ireland, winning the AIG Women’s 
and Men’s Senior Cups. 
• Fórsa Trade Union on mobilising school secretaries and caretakers for pay 
equity.  
• The Everyman Theatre on the appointment of their new co-CEO team.  
• Allan Russell, Mark Russell, Damien Delea, Emmet Leahy on raising urgent 
funds for Palestine by completing four peaks in under 48 hours. 
• Ballinlough Summer Festival on the holding of a very successful festival. 
• Blackrock Village Festival on the holding of a very successful festival. 
• Avondale United on the holding of the Annual Memorial Charity Match. 
• Ringmahon Rangers on their first game under lights. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
SCHOOL VISITS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that the annual school visits had been 
postponed in light of industrial action but had now recommenced. 
 
 
 
 

3.2 
SPECIAL MEETING  
 
 
An tArdmhéara informed An Chomhairle of the arrangements for the Special Meeting 
of An Chomhairle to be held on 15th September 2025. 
 
3.3 
INTIMIDATION OF PUBLIC REPRESENTATIVES  
 
 
An tArdmhéara condemned the recent online intimidation of public representatives 
and emphasised the importance of civility and respect in public discourse. 
 
3.4 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR ST. FINBARR’S NATIONAL HURLING & 
FOOTBALL CLUB 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for St. 
Finbarr’s National Hurling & Football Club on its 150th Anniversary. 
 
3.5 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CITIZEN’S INFORMATION NETWORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for 
Citizen’s Information Network on its 50th Anniversary. 
 
3.6 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR CHERNOBYL CHILDREN INTERNATIONAL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the holding of a Civic Reception for 
Chernobyl Children International on its 40th Anniversary. 
 
3.7 
COVENTRY IRISH SOCIETY’S ANNUAL DINNER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara Comhairleoir 
F. Dennehy to Coventry from 6th to 7th October 2025 for the Coventry Irish Society’s 
Annual Dinner. 
 
3.8 
2025 UN FORUM OF MAYORS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara Comhairleoir 
F. Dennehy to Geneva from 25th to 28th September 2025 for the 2025 UN Forum of 
Mayors. 
 
3.9 
CORK TRADE MISSION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, Chair 
of the International Relations & Tourism Strategic Policy Committee, to Canada from 
28th September to 3rd October 2025 to lead the Cork City Council representation on a 
Cork Trade Mission, organised by Visit Cork, with the support of the Irish Embassy 
in Canada. 
 
 
 
 
 

3.10 
LORD MAYOR LED DELEGATION TO SHANGHAI 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that a Lord Mayor led delegation to Shanghai 
will take place from 15th to 22nd November 2025 and invited members to nominate 
themselves to participate in the visit. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss motion 60 on Appendix 
1, School Wardens in the New City Areas, at the end of the meeting. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY CENTRE DIRECTORATE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Chief Executive on the 
establishment of the City Centre Directorate, dated 4th September 2025. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
Martin, An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 14th July 2025. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
INSURANCE CLAIMS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of insurance claims received for the council 
as a whole for the years 2024 and 2025 year to date, broken down into category of 
claim (roads, footpath etc) and amount paid out in total for each category, in tabular 
form, per year and what impact financially that is having on insurance premiums taken 
out by Cork City Council. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The number of insurance claims received in relation to the year 2024 per category is 
as follows: 
 
Category 
Number 
 
 
 
 
Council Buildings 
4 
 
Drains, Gulleys & Chamber 
covers 
23 
 
Footpaths & Walkways 
65 

 
Housing & Estates 
24 
 
Parks & Playgrounds 
1 
 
Roads (incl. Potholes) 
111 
228 
 
The number of insurance claims received in relation to the year 2025 per category is 
as follows: 
 
 
Category 
Number 
 
 
 
 
Drains, Gulleys & Chamber 
covers 
12 
 
Footpaths & Walkways 
25 
 
Housing & Estates 
12 
 
Parks & Playgrounds 
1 
 
Roads (incl. Potholes) 
71 
 
Signage 
1 
122 
 
It should be noted that not all of these claims remain open.  Some have been settled 
(and included in payments below) 
 
Others are in progress or liability has been denied or a 3rd party liability has been 
identified. 
 
The payments made in 2024 and 2025 are irrespective of the year to which the claims 
refer. 
 
The payments are as follows: 
 
2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Category   
Number Paid 
 
Council Buildings 
1  €      1,376.98  
 
Drains, Gulleys & Chamber 
covers 
12  €    59,060.64  
 
Footpaths & Walkways 
66 €1,540,675.70  
 
Housing & Estates 
20  €  151,763.80  
 
Parks & Playgrounds 
3  €    29,000.00  
 
Roads (incl. Potholes) 
98  €  315,211.00  
200 €2,197,088.12  

2025 
 
Cork City Council is self-insured for public liability. 
The public liability premium is not dependent on the level of claims received 
 
Barry O’Hare, 
A/Chief Financial Officer. 
 
6.2 
ACTIVE TRAVEL PROJECTS BY WARD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive please provide, in tabular form, a breakdown of how many 
Active Travel projects have been delivered in each municipal ward of Cork City over 
the past five years? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The following projects have been completed or are currently under construction: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Number Paid 
 
Drains, Gulleys & Chamber covers 
8  €  243,471.12  
 
Footpaths & Walkways 
28  €  677,777.68  
 
Housing & Estates 
8  €    29,533.00  
 
Parks & Playgrounds 
1  €      7,250.00  
 
Roads (incl. Potholes) 
54  €  161,644.88  
99 €1,119,676.68  
 
 
 
 
Northeast Ward 
Ballyvolane Sustainable Transport Corridor Improvement Scheme 
Dunkettle Road Phases 1 and 2 
Hazelwood Rd Junction Upgrade 
Riverstown Junction Upgrade 
Glanmire Roads – Church Hill/R639, l0310/East Cliffe Rd, Dooleys 
Lane/New Link Road (L3010 – Hazelwood Road) etc 
Glanmire to City Phase 1 (Glanmire to  Dunkettle) 
Glanmire Road Improvement Scheme – (R639 @ Churchill Road 
Junction,  Glanmire Bridge/ Village and Dunkettle Rd Phase 1) 
MacCurtain Street Public Transport Improvement Scheme (MacCurtain 
St, St Patricks Quay, Wellington Rd, Hardwick St, St Patricks Hill, 
Leitrim St (part), Bridge St (part), and Coburg St (part) etc 
Upper Glanmire and Kilcully Pedestrian Safety Scheme Ph 1 
Horgans Quay/ Lower Glanmire Rd. Improvements 
Mary Elmes Bridge 
Pedestrian crossings (Assumption Road,  Scoil Cara Junior School) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Northwest Ward 
John F Connolly Road/ Churchfield Road Pedestrian Improvements 
Pedestrian Improvements at  Fairfield,  Monacnappa etc 
Blarney Business Pk Linkage scheme 
Blarney Pedestrian Improvement Works 
Knapp’s Square and Lower John’s Street Area Pedestrian and Cycle 
Measures 
MacCurtain Street Public Transport Improvement Scheme (Camden 
Quay, Pine St, Devonshire St,  Leitrim St (part), Bridge St (part), and 
Coburg St (part)) etc 
Harbour View Rd. - North/South section between Blarney Rd. & Harbour 
View Rd. 
Footpath, gateway signage, Driver Feedback Signs, Killard  
Pedestrian crossings (Kerry Pike and St. Colmcille’s Road) 
Southwest Ward 
Lehenaghmore Road Improvement Scheme    
 
Active Travel Improvement Works Innishmore Ballincollig 
Pedestrian Improvement Works South West (Muskerry Estate to Castle 
Road, Churchview,  Glendale Rd to Clashduv,  Hillside Avenue to 
Glendale Drive,  Westgate Road to Fremont Estate - Western Entrance,  
Hazel Road to Elm Road,  Halldene Avenue  to Waterfall Rd,  The Rise, 
Eastern Entrance, The Rise Western Entrance,  Donscourt to Woodbrook 
Grove,  Kenley Close,  Leesdale 1 – North,  Leesdale 2 – South and  Lee 
Fields Path Upgrade) 
Schoolboy lane (Glasheen Road to Magazine Road AT Link)  
Melbourne Rd + Rossa Avenue Cycle Improvements  
Togher Flood Protection and Public Realm Works 
Pedestrian crossing Inniscarra Rd/Coolroe Rd 
Southeast Ward 
Marina Promenade 
Marina Park - Phase 2 and 3 
Mahon Area Pedestrian and Cycle Improvement Scheme 
Donnybrook Hill Pedestrian Enhancement Scheme 
Ballybrack Valley Pedestrian and Cycle Track, Phase 4A 
Calderwood Road Pedestrian Improvement Works 
Passage to City Centre Greenway - Phase1 (N40 to Docklands) 
Skehard Road Improvements Phase 2 
Skehard Road Improvements Phase 3 
Douglas Flood Relief Scheme Public Realm Works  
Victoria Rd to McSwiney Quay Cycle Lane 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition, the following projects are at the feasibility, preliminary design, 
planning or detailed design stages: 
Monahan Road and  Centre Park Road Cycle Lanes 
Junction upgrade including pedestrian crossings Park Avenue/Blackrock 
Rd  
Junction upgrade & pedestrian crossing Our Lady of Lourdes School 
Ballinlough Rd/Belair  
Pedestrian improvements Linden Avenue/Rosegreen  
South Central Ward 
Morrison’s Island Public Realm and Flood Defence Project 
Bishop Lucey Park and Surrounding Streets (South Main St, Tuckey St, 
Crosses Green etc) 
Beamish & Crawford Public Realm & 2 No Bridges 
Grange to Tramore Valley Park AT Route (incl new N4O Bridge)  
Pedestrian Wayfinding Scheme   
City Centre Crossing Renewals   
Half Moon Lane Improvement Scheme 
Tramore Valley Park Footway and Cycleway Improvements 
South Douglas Road Junction Upgrade 
MacCurtain Street Public Transport Improvement Scheme (Merchants 
Quay, Andersons Quay, Lavitts Qauy etc ) 
Curragh Road Junction Upgrade 
South Mall Cycle Lane 
Donovans Rd cycle lane scheme 
Victoria Rd to McSwiney Quay Cycle Lane 
Pedestrian crossing upgrades (Grattan St and  Bellevue Rd) 
Northeast Ward 
Banduff Road Improvement Scheme 
Upper Glanmire and Kilcully Pedestrian Safety Scheme Ph 2 
Glanmire Greenway 
Glanmire to City Phase 2 (Dunkettle to North Docks) 
Mayfield to Glen AT Scheme 
North Docks/New Horgans Rd 
Cork Northern Distributor Rd 
Hazelwood Linkage 
Colmcille Ave Active Travel Improvements 
SRTS - St. Luke’s NS, O’Mahony’s Avenue  
SRTS - Glanmire Community College  
SRTS - St Josephs NS Riverstown  
Pedestrian Crossings Riverstown Road (Glanmire GAA, Hermitage 
Estate,  Glanmire Community Centre) 
Pedestrian Crossing Upgrade, Scoil Oilibheir 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pedestrian Crossing feasibility for Ballyhooly Road (Gordons Hill / 
Glen River Car Park)  
Pedestrian Crossing feasibility for R615 Old Youghal Road / Church 
Hill  
Northwest Ward 
Blarney Village Pedestrian and Cycle Infrastructure  
Knockpogue Avenue Active Travel Improvement Works  
Kerry Pike Pedestrian Improvement Scheme 
Cork Northern Distributor Multimodal Route 
AT Improvements at Cattle Market Avenue and Glen Ryan Road 
Nash’s Boreen Active Travel Scheme 
Shanakiel to Strawberry Hill AT Route 
Pedestrian Crossing Tower to Blarney Road at Shournagh Drive 
Pedestrian Crossing Tower to Blarney Road at Primrose Hill Estate 
SRTS - North Monastery Campus 
Pedestrian Crossing feasibility for Kerry Road (Tower Playground near 
junction with R617)  
Pedestrian Crossing feasibility for L2779 Model Quarter/Glenview 
Terrace Junction, Tower  
Fair Street (Traffic /AT Feasibility Assessment) 
Blarney St (Traffic /AT Feasibility Assessment) 
Southwest Ward 
 
Leo Murphy Road Improvements Scheme 
Cork City to Viaduct Greenway (Phase 1 - Kinsale Rd. Roundabout to 
Eagle Valley) 
Carrigrohane Bridge Multi-Modal Upgrade and Road Realignment 
Scheme 
Curraheen Pedestrian and Cycleway Scheme 
Sarsfield Rd to Clashduv at Scheme 
Sarsfield Rd to CIT at Scheme 
Rossa Ave /Allendale /Foxford Ave Pedestrian Improvements 
SRTS - Bishopstown Community School 
SRTS - St. Catherine’s NS, Bishopstown 
Junction improvements Magazine Rd/Coolgarten Park/Glasheen Rd 
Pedestrian Crossing Glasheen Rd/Tara Lawn 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Southeast Ward 
 
Monahan Road Extension 
Docklands to City Centre Route Improvement Scheme 
Passage to City Centre Greenway - Phase2 (N40 to City 
 boundary) 
Active Travel Improvement Works 
Maryborough Woods 
South Docks Infrastructure 
Rochestown Rd to Douglas AT Scheme 
Bessboro to Mahon Cylce link 
Clarkes Hill/ Coach Hill Improvements 
Pedestrian Crossing Upgrade Church Street, Douglas 
Pedestrian Crossing & junction improvementsEglantine Park/Ardfallen 
at Scoil Bhride  
Junction improvements Blackrock Rd/Barringtons Avenue 
South Central Ward 
Frankfield Road Improvement 
Cork City to Viaduct Greenway (Phase 1 - Kinsale Rd. Roundabout to 
Eagle Valley) Scheme 
Cooneys Lane Pedestrian Improvement Scheme 
Emmet Place Enhancement Scheme 
Anglesea St Sustainable Travel Upgrade 
Mary Street, Douglas Street & White Street Public Realm Enhancement 
Scheme 
City Centre Street Renewals (Cook St, Princess St, Marlboro St, 
Grafton St) 
N27-Airport Road Improvements Ph 2 
Clontarf Bridge Refurbishment 
Tramore Rd to Tramore Valley Park Link 
Pedestrian Crossing Pearse Road at Scoil Maria Assumpta 
Junction improvements Tower St/Friars Walk/Greenmount 
Junction improvements Shear St/Dyke Parade  
Pedestrian Crossing Grange Road at Tramore Valley Walkway 
Pedestrian Crossing Upgrade Donovans Rd 
SRTS - Gaelscoil na Duglaise 
SRTS - Cork Educate Together (Grattan Street) 
SRTS - Gaelscoil an Teaglaigh Naofa 
Lower Friars Walk Active Travel Improvements 
Pedestrian Crossing feasibility for South Douglas Road (Greenhills 
Estate)  
Pedestrian Crossing feasibility for South Douglas Road (Palaceanne 
Lawn)  
SRTS - Gaelscoil na Duglaise 

 
G O Beirne,  
 
 
          Noel Murtagh, 
Director of Services,                                  A/ Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development.                       Roads & Environment Operations.                              
 
6.3 
TAKING N CHARGE OR IN CHARGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I write to ask the CEO who has responsibility over an area of ground/pathway at Nuns 
Walk, Cork. 
 
The pathway in question is located on the North East corner and is shared by numbers 
21,23 and 25 Nuns Walk. It is accepted that the said pathway would have a right of 
way for the residents concerned but questions have recently been expressed as to who 
exactly has ownership of and or has responsibility for the said pathway. 
 
REPLY 
 
This pathway is taken in charge by Cork City Council. It is not in the ownership of 
Cork City Council.  Responsibility for maintenance of the path would rest with Cork 
City Council.  
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations Directorate. 
 
6.4 
SPRING LANE/ELLIS’ YARD HOUSING DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on delivery of the Spring Lane/Ellis' Yard 
housing development; if a 'third site' has been identified as part of the re-development 
plan; and if it is possible to proceed without the 'third site' or to identify another? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The third site is currently being considered under a competitive dialogue public 
procurement process.  Dialogue is ongoing between the City Council and the Bidder 
on the proposed housing solution for the site and if successful at this stage will then 
be subject to a Part 8 planning process.  
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
 
 

6.5 
VERNON MOUNT HOUSE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE on the current planning status of Vernon Mount House and the work to 
unlock its dereliction. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Vernon Mount House was placed on the Derelict Sites Register in 2021 and has been 
accruing levies since that time. Cork City Council is actively engaging with the 
owners to offer its assistance with any redevelopment plans in order to secure a 
positive outcome for this important and challenging site. 
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
6.6 
NWQR Phases 3B & 4A 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE to account for the delays in the NWQR Phases 3B and 4A, whether the 
current timeline provided by the Department will be met, the overall cost of these 
delays when compared to original projected costs and how a home in Ard na Rí, 
Pouladuff costing almost €500,000 was included in the regeneration funding provided 
by the Minister. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
CNWQR Phase 3B and Phase 4A 
 
The City Northwest Quarter Regeneration (CNWQR) is a multi-annual multi-
disciplinary programme of projects delivering housing led regeneration in 
Knocknaheeny.  
 
The regeneration is delivered on a phased basis. The overall CNWQR programme is 
linear and interdependent. Regeneration project programmes by their nature are 
flexible owing to the risks associated with brownfield sites, existing topography, 
infrastructure and public realm requirements, phased delivery and the specific housing 
needs of existing residents requiring relocation.  
 
Programmes for individual phases provided pre-construction contract award are 
estimates and subject to change. The phased programmes are updated once the 
construction contract has been awarded. Typically schemes of this nature have an 18-
24 month construction programme.  
 

The “original projected costs” reflect the initial outline cost estimate based on 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage (DHLGH) at the time of the 
initial individual submission.  
 
The current budget estimate reflects the last DHLGH approval correct to 29 July 2025. 
A direct comparison between the two figures does not reflect the nature of the City 
Northwest Quarter Regeneration (CNWQR) programme or funding structure. 
 
Each phase of delivery is subject to the DHLGH 4 stage approval process which aligns 
with the Public Spending Code. Each phase of delivery is procured in line with the 
Capital Works Management Framework (CWMF) via e-tenders advertisement.  The 
current estimated timeline for substantial completion of the phases is, which is subject 
to change, Phase 3B – 2027 and Phase 4A – 2028. 
 
 
Ard na Rí Pouladuff 
 
As part of City Northwest Quarter Regeneration (CNWQR), Cork City Council has a 
requirement to demolish the existing housing units in Knocknaheeny. In advance of 
the demolition works existing residents are relocated.   
 
Residents from the CNWQR are relocated on a case-by-case basis informed by their 
housing need. From time-to-time residents are relocated to other areas of the City. 
Cork City Council does not comment on individual relocations. 
 
This was a derelict site acquired by Cork City Council.  The Stage 4 Project Budget 
approval granted by the DHLGH was €486,129. The project cost included the cost of 
the site, design costs, site investigations, the refurbishment, extension and adaption of 
a 3 bed detached derelict house.  The project delivered a refurbished 3 bed semi-
detached house and a 1 bed semi-detached single storey universally designed unit.  
 
The development was the subject of a Part 8 Planning process.  The project was 
subject to the DHLGH four stage approval process which aligns with the Public 
Spending Code. The Works were procured in line with the CWMF via advertisement. 
The units are complete and occupied. 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.7 
TRADESPEOPLE EMPLOYED IN HOUSING MAINTENANCE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of tradespeople employed in Cork City Council's Housing 
Maintenance section; to set out the number employed by trade; to set out the number 
of apprentices employed by trade; and to set out the sum spent on hiring external 
contactors to provide housing maintenance services in 2024 and the projected cost for 
same in 2025. 

 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council’s Housing Assets Section currently employs the following 
tradespeople: 
 
Carpenter 
21 
Plumber 
17 
Plasterer 
7 
Painter 
6 
Mason 
4 
Fitter 
2 
 
Total: 
 
57 
 
 
There are no apprentices presently employed by the Housing Assets Section. 
 
The cost of external contractors for maintenance services in 2024 was €10,144,031. 
 
The cost of external contractors in 2025 is expected to be approximately €10,000,000. 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.8 
PUBLIC LIGHTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive:  
- 
to outline how many public lights in Cork, which require the assistance of the 
ESB to either install or repair, are currently inoperative;  
 
- 
to detail approximately how many inoperative public lights in Cork, which 
require the assistance of the ESB to either install or repair, are being installed 
or repaired per month;  
 
- 
whether the provision of more resources and assistance by the ESB in the 
installation and repair of public lights would result in more inoperative public 
lights being installed and repaired in Cork each month. 
REPLY 
 
to outline how many public lights in Cork, which require the assistance of the ESB to 
either install or repair, are currently inoperative;  

 
As of the 2nd of September 2025 the total number of lights requiring ESB 
assistance is 155 
This breaks down to the below number per each LEA 
o NW LEA - 42 
o NE LEA - 34 
o SW LEA - 24 
o SC LEA - 25 
o SE LEA – 30 
 
to detail approximately how many inoperative public lights in Cork, which require the 
assistance of the ESB to either install or repair, are being installed or repaired per 
month;  
 
62 job tickets which required ESB attendance/assistance on site have been 
rectified during a period of 01.01.2025-02.09.2025. 
 
whether the provision of more resources and assistance by the ESB in the installation 
and repair of public lights would result in more inoperative public lights being 
installed and repaired in Cork each month. 
 
Increased ESB attendance / assistance of ESB Networks technicians will lead to 
the reduction of faulty public lighting lanterns across the city. It will also lead to 
the reduced lead time in the energisation of new public lighting customer service 
pillar associated with the public lighting capital project which stands at 2months 
from submittal of the electrical cert. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development and Operations. 
 
6.9 
CORK LIDO 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what Cork City Council has done in support of progressing 
the Cork Lido, how advanced it is now, to detail how we can support its progress and 
to address how it would fit with our policies and objectives and distinguishing Cork’s 
offer? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council has engaged extensively on the potential for a Lido. We received 
over 450 submissions supporting the provision of a Lido on the riverbank or within 
the River Lee and / or the provision of a 50m swimming pool in response to the Public 
Consultation for the variation to City Development Plan to adopt the Cork Docklands 
Framework Plan. A variety of benefits associated with swimming were raised in the 
submissions including: 
 

• 
a lido can act as a community building asset, 
• 
swimming contributes to positive health, 
• 
swimming is an inclusive active recreation activity for people of all ages and 
abilities, 
• 
a lido can act as a tourism destination, 
a lido can provide opportunities for other compatible uses, such as saunas and 
hydrotherapy pools,  
• 
both a 50m lido and/or a 50m indoor swimming pool can provide space for 
competitive swimmers in Cork where there is an acknowledged deficit, and 
• 
a lido can contribute to sustainable travel by providing a local outdoor 
swimming resource which is currently only possible to access via car or bus at 
beaches outside the City. 
 
The Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 includes ‘Objective 6.21, River Use and 
Management Plan’ which sets out Cork City Council’s intention to commission a river 
use and management study to examine the commercial and recreational potential of 
the River Lee and Upper Harbour area for all users and identify essential infrastructure 
and appropriate locations for the delivery of this infrastructure in partnership with key 
stakeholders. As confirmed to Councillors during the City Development Plan 
‘Variation No. 2 (Cork Docklands)’ process in July 2025, Cork City Council intends 
to prioritise this study, which will consider tourism, marine recreation and wider river 
use, including a potential lido.  
 
It is intended to have extensive engagement with key stakeholders such as The Cork 
Lido CLG group to inform the preparation of the study.   
 
The river use and management study is the appropriate mechanism to consider the 
matters raised in relation to access to the River Lee, swim access, potential for LIDO 
and other river uses (both commercial and recreational). 
 
The brief and tender for the study is currently being finalised and engagement with 
key stakeholders such as The Cork Lido CLG group will commence in Q4, 2025. 
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
6.10 
MAINTENANCE REQUESTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the number of maintenance requests received for homes in Killala 
Gardens, Dunmore Gardens and Kilmore Road in each of the last 3 years, the number 
currently marked as open or active and the average amount spent per maintenance 
request in each of the last 3 years. 
 
 
 
 

 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council received a total of 1,201 job requests for Killala Gardens, Dunmore 
Gardens and Kilmore Road in the last three years. The current number of active jobs 
is 145. 
The breakdown of job request by year is as follows: 
 
Year 
Job requests 
for Killala 
Gardens 
Job requests  
for Dunmore  
Gardens 
Job requests for 
Kilmore Road 
Total Job 
Requests by  
Year 
2024 
149 
67 
70 
286 
2023 
226 
87 
115 
428 
2022 
253 
102 
132 
487 
Total Job requests 
by area 
628 
256 
317 
1201 
 
 
 
The current number of active jobs are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While it is not possible to provide the average amount spent per maintenance request 
specific to the estates mentioned, the following are the details in regard to the overall 
number of jobs received and overall spend across Cork City  Council’s  housing stock. 
The spend figures includes response maintenance, planned maintenance and energy 
efficiency works. Jobs resolved can vary from minor works to major refurbishments. 
Year 
Total no. of job 
requests resolved 
Total Housing 
Maintenance Spend 
2024 
14,857 
*€22,426,606 
2023 
13,745 
  €15,657,950 
2022 
14,034 
  €15,057,631 
 
*It should be noted that EERP spend heavily skews the overall figure for expenditure 
in 2024 as much of the expenditure for this programme related to works in both 2023 
and 2024 was expended in 2024. If EERP spend is removed the total expenditure for 
2024 is €15,786,977 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
 
Area 
Active Jobs 
Killala Gardens 
31 
Dunmore Gardens 
53 
Kilmore Road 
61 
Total   
145 
 
 

6.11 
CYCLE LANES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the amount of money allocated and spent on the upkeep 
of cycle lanes across the city in 2024; and if this spending can be broken down in 
categories such surfaces, barriers or signage. 
 
 
REPLY 
Cork City Council carries out daily maintenance of the cycle lanes from Monday to 
Friday the associated costs are outlined below, there are also indirect costs which are 
not quantified below such as supervision, plant maintenance, etc   
• Two mini sweepers dedicated full time these were purchased in 2020 at a cost 
of 180k 
• The maintenance of the cycle lanes collects an estimated 100 tonnes p/a of 
waste mainly leaves and debris. 
• There are 2 men dedicated to the vehicles at a cost of approx. 40k each p/a 
Roads Operations undertakes the replacement of Cycle Lane Bollards where 
necessary. In 2024, €61,000 was spent on the maintenance of bollards.  
Roads Operations also undertake gully cleaning on cycle lanes as part of it’s planned 
maintenance works. This is part of the overall gully maintenance programme and is 
not budgeted separately.   
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development and Operations. 
 
6.12 
ILLEGAL DUMPING ALONG GLEN RIVER 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to carry out a commitment made back in 2022 to clean the 
illegal dumping along the Glen River on the Ballyvolane/ Riverview entrance to the 
park?  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Given the topography of this location it is extremely difficult and expensive to remove 
the illegal dumping of rubbish from this site.  Efforts were made previously to carry 
out a clean-up of this area, with a contractor engaged with specialised equipment. 
Unfortunately, the contractor was subsequently unable to carry out this work.  
Parks & Recreation will commit to removing accessible litter in the coming month. A 
review of appointing a contractor will also be undertaken. Litter wardens will also 

inspect and monitor this area and if evidence is found litter fines will issue in order to 
deter future illegal dumping.  
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development and Operations. 
 
6.13 
GLASHEEN RIVER – REMOVAL OF TRASH SCREEN GUARD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if Cork City Council can confirm when the trash screen 
guard, recently removed from the Glasheen River at Glendale Road Bridge, will be 
replaced and provide an update on measures the Council is taking to address 
prevention of debris build up to mitigate the risk of future flooding in the area. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The trash screen was temporarily removed to replace the damaged wall to which it 
was attached. The wall has now been replaced, and the trash screen is being modified 
to fit the new wall. The trash screen will be reinstalled shortly. Works are also 
scheduled to clear under the bridge while the trash screen is temporarily removed. 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development and Operations. 
 
6.14 
HOUSING ADAPTATIONS / OLDER PERSON GRANTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir G. O’Brien, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown of housing adaptation applications /older 
person grant in 2024 and 2025 to date, how many applications were received, how 
many were granted /refused(rational for refusal).  How much is currently available for 
the remainder of 2025? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Adaptation Grants: 
Year 
Valid 
Applications 
Received 
Approved 
Cancelled 
2024 
306 
215 
129 
2025 (to date) 
238 
163 
15 
 
 
 

Reasons for cancelling included:  
 
- 
ineligibility for the scheme,  
- 
failure to submit the requisite documentation within a reasonable timeframe, 
- 
failure to complete approved adaptation works within the 6-month deadline or 
extended deadline,  
- 
Complying with a request from the applicant to cancel their application and start 
afresh under the new scheme.   It is important to note that a large volume of files 
were cancelled at the end of the year to facilitate such requests which enabled 
applicants to apply for increased grant amounts. 
- 
Death of applicant, 
- 
Occupational Therapist not recommending any works to be done.  
 
Housing Aid for Older People Grant: 
 
Year 
Valid  
Applications 
Received 
Approved 
Cancelled 
2024 
479 
383 
114 
2025 (to date) 391 
288 
11 
 
Reasons for cancelling included:  
 
- 
Ineligibility for the scheme, 
- 
failure to submit the requisite documentation within a reasonable timeframe, 
- 
failure to complete approved works within the 6-month deadline or extended 
deadline, 
- 
Death of applicant 
- 
Building Inspector did not recommend any works to be done.  
 
The Budget for 2025 is €4,719,779 and €3,595,832 has been expended to date in the 
current year.   
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.15 
PART 8 DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE confirm that future Reports presented to Elected Members of Cork City 
Council in respect of "Part 8" developments under the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001, shall identify each and every submission / observation received by 
the name of the author; provide an individual summary specific to each and every 
submission / observation, and provide an individual response specific to each and 
every submission / observation. 
 
 

 
REPLY 
 
 
Legislative Basis and Reporting Procedures 
 
Section 179(3)(b) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) governs 
the preparation of Chief Executive Reports on ‘Part 8’ planning applications. This 
section (quoted hereunder) requires that the Chief Executive’s Report to elected 
members must: 
• List all persons or bodies who made submissions or observations regarding the 
proposed development pursuant to the relevant regulations. 
• Summarise the planning and sustainable development issues raised in those 
submissions or observations; and 
• Provide the Chief Executive’s response to those issues. 
 
In accordance with this requirement, the established practice at Cork City Council 
(CCC), and other local authorities, is to group and address submissions or 
observations that raise similar issues collectively. This approach facilitates efficient 
and coherent reporting, particularly in cases where a large volume of submissions 
relates to similar subject matter. Requiring individual responses to each submission 
would be both unnecessary and inefficient, given the legislative intent and the nature 
of issues typically raised. 
 
Accordingly, Cork City Council will continue, in line with longstanding custom and 
legislative practice, to summarise and address submissions on Part 8 developments by 
grouping related matters. This practice ensures clarity, efficiency, and transparency in 
communicating with elected members and stakeholders.  
 
However, at the July 2025 meeting of the City Council, a formal commitment was 
made to conduct a comprehensive review of the ‘Part 8’ process later this year. In the 
interest of transparency and active engagement with all stakeholders, the methods for 
reporting on submissions and observations may be evaluated and / or enhanced as part 
of that review. 
 
Section 179(3)(b): 
  
“……………………..(iii) list the persons or bodies who made submissions or 
observations with respect to the proposed development in accordance with the 
regulations under subsection (2), 
 
   
(iv) summarise the issues, with respect to the proper planning and sustainable 
development of the area in which the proposed development would be situated, raised 
in any such submissions or observations, and give the response of the chief 
executive thereto,”  
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
 

7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 28th 
August 2025 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of the freehold interest in land (1,617.14 m² approximately), situated at 
Pearse Road, Ballyphehane, Cork subject to retention of an easement for the 
benefit of access to an electricity substation, to Denis Kelleher, Michael Goggin, 
Brian Nolan, Maurice Keller and Ronnie McDowell the Trustees of the Munster 
Branch IRFU, their successors & assigns, c/o Ronan Daly Jermyn LLP, 85 South 
Mall, Cork, for the sum of €1.00 (plus costs of €1,500.00 plus VAT.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of site at “Wyndern” Popes Road, Cork to Louise Cunningham, c/o P.J. 
O Driscoll & Sons Solicitors, 73 South Mall, Cork, for the sum of €15,000.00 plus 
legal costs. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir C. 
Kelleher, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal of Stall No. 3 Princes Street Market, Cork to Tom Durcan Meats Limited, 
t/a Tom Durcan The Market c/o Michael Powell Solicitors LLP, 5 Lapps Quay, 
Cork, by way of lease for a term of 21 years from 1st January 2024 subject to an 
annual rent of €2,040.88, plus rates and service charges. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
4. Disposal of Stall No. 11 Princes Street Market, Cork to Tom Durcan Meats 
Limited, t/a Tom Durcan The Market c/o Michael Powell Solicitors LLP, 5 Lapps 
Quay, Cork, by way of lease for a term of 21 years from 1st January 2024 subject 
to an annual rent of €5,824.99 plus rates and service charges.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Sheehan, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
5. Disposal of Stall No. 9 Grand Parade Market, Cork to Fiona Breen c/o Michael 
Powell Solicitors LLP, 5 Lapp's Quay, Cork by way of lease, for a term of 21 years 
from 1st January 2024 subject to an annual rent of €1,105.53, plus rates and service 
charges. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
6. Disposal of Stall No. 22 Grand Parade Market, Cork to Natural Breads Limited t/a 
Alternative Bread Company, c/o Eamonn Murray Solicitors, 6/7 Sheares St, Cork 

by way of lease for a term of 21 years from 1st January 2024 subject to an annual 
rent of €4,761.96 plus rates and service charges.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir S. 
Martin, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7. Disposal of Stall No. 3 Grand Parade Market, Cork to Ivo Duarte t/a SAUER, c/o 
Katherina White Solicitors, 32 Oliver Plunkett Street, Cork, by way of lease for a 
term of 4 years and 9 months from 1st April 2025 subject to an annual rent of 
€2,891.24 plus rates and service charges.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
8. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of ground (20.9 m² approximately), 
together with a wayleave, on land located at Glenmore Heights, Lehenaghmore, 
Togher, Cork, to ESB Networks, Sarsfield Road, Wilton, Cork, for the sum of 
€1.00, plus costs of €750.00 plus VAT.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, seconded by Comhairleoir D. 
Boylan, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
9. Disposal of the freehold and leasehold interest in 17 O’Connell Crescent, Turners 
Cross, Cork, to Fergal O’Sullivan, c/o NMS Solicitors LLP, Station House, Main 
Street, Ballincollig, Cork for the sum of €25,000, plus costs of €1,500 plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
PROPOSED DEMOLITION AT NOONAN ROAD, CORK 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed demolition at 
Noonan Road, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive thereon as 
required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, dated 4th September 2025.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed demolition 
at Noonan Road, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive, Cork City 
Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions of Section 179 (4) of 
the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the demolition at Noonan 
Road, in the City of Cork be carried out as recommended in the said report of the 
Executive, Cork City Council, which was put before Council on the 8th September 
2025.” 
 
 

7.3 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT COONEY’S LANE, 
GRANGE, CORK 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed development at 
Cooney’s Lane, Grange, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive 
thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, 
as amended, dated 4th September 2025.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Cooney’s Lane, Grange, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Cooney’s Lane, Grange, in the City of Cork be carried out as 
recommended in the said report of the Executive, Cork City Council, which was put 
before Council on the 8th September 2025.” 
 
Please note that the Chief Executive report dated the 4th September, 2025 and    
Appendix 1 of said report has been amended to correct an error whereby the figure for 
submissions received within the prescribed period was incorrectly stated as 48 rather 
than 61 which is the correct figure.  It is noted that this administrative error did not 
have any impact on the remainder of the documentation put before Council in relation 
to this Part 8 as the issues arising from all 61 submissions were included within the 
submissions summary within the Report.   
 
7.4 
CORK CITY LOCAL COMMUNITY SAFETY PARTNERSHIP 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the appointment of seven members to the Cork City Local 
Community Safety Partnership. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
Comhairleoir T. Shannon was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
Comhairleoir M. McDonnell was nominated to the Cork City Local Community 
Safety Partnership. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
Comhairleoir C. O’Connor was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
Comhairleoir D. Boyle was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
Comhairleoir D. Boylan was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, 
Comhairleoir P. Dineen was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
Comhairleoir K. Collins was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
Comhairleoir F. Kerins was nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership. 
 
 
As the numbers of Comhairleoirí nominated exceeded the number of vacancies a vote 
was called for on the nomination to the Cork City Local Community Safety 
Partnership where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
Comhairleoir T. Shannon 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, 
F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (9) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, 
F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (9) 
 

 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
Comhairleoir M. McDonnell 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, 
F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (9) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
Comhairleoir C. O’Connor 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, 
C. Kelleher, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (22) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, 
F. Kerins, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (8) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
Comhairleoir D. Boyle 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, 
C. Kelleher, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (22) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, 
F. Kerins, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (8) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, 
F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (9) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 

 
Comhairleoir D. Boylan 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, 
D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, 
F. Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (9) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
Comhairleoir P. Dineen 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, K. McCarthy, F. Kerins, J. 
Lynch, A. Deasy. (7) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. 
Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, M.R. 
Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, N. 
O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (23) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
Comhairleoir K. Collins 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, K. McCarthy, F. 
Kerins, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (9) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (20) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir B. McCarthy. (1) 
 
 
Comhairleoir F. Kerins 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, K. McCarthy, F. Kerins, N. 
O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy. (8) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. 
Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. 
Kelleher, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir B. McCarthy. (1) 
 
 
As the majority of members present and voting in favour of Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, 
T. Fitzgerald, M. McDonnell, C. O’Connor, D. Boyle, J. Kavanagh and D. Boylan 

were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara declared Comhairleoirí T. 
Shannon, T. Fitzgerald, M. McDonnell, C. O’Connor, D. Boyle, J. Kavanagh and D. 
Boylan nominated to the Cork City Local Community Safety Partnership. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 1st SEPTEMBER 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 1st September 2025. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/07/2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/07/2025. 
 
8.2 
MOTIONS 
 
8.2.1 
ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW IRELAND FORUM 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council supports the call by former Taoiseach Leo Varadkar for the 
establishment of a New Ireland Forum to plan the journey to Irish unity by exploring 
what a proposal on Irish unity would look like and by studying how best to merge the 
two existing jurisdictions into a united Ireland.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/358) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Tynan, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, 
T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, T. Shannon, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, 
C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (24) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, B. McCarthy, A. Deasy. (3) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí K. McCarthy, F. Dennehy. (2) 
 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
8.2.2 
REVIEW OF CASUAL TRADING BYE-LAWS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 28th August 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council shall undertake a review of its Casual Trading Bye-Laws to 
identify if the provision of additional pitches is feasible - particularly at Marina Park 

and Ballincollig Regional Park - and to assess if fees accurately reflect trading 
conditions.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 25/362) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council undertook review 
of Casual Trading Bye Laws, in 2021, with draft Bye-Laws published on the 10th 
February 2022. Those draft Bye-Laws were subsequently appealed to the District 
Court on the 11th April 2022, with appeal heard on the 29th May 2023, with minor 
amendments agreed and approved by the District Court. 
 
A report was submitted to the Corporate Policy Group meeting of 3rd July 2023 
confirming the outcome of the District Court proceedings and setting out the agreed 
amendments to the amended Bye-Laws. An Chomhairle subsequently approved this 
report at its meeting held on 10th July 2023. 
 
An Chomhairle having considered and approved the various reports of ‘Directors of 
Service’ adopted the following resolution to give effect to the amended Bye-Laws in 
accordance with the provisions of the Casual Trading Act, 1995: Resolution: “It is 
hereby resolved to make the proposed Cork City Casual Trading Byelaws, 2023 in 
accordance with Section 6 (9) of the Casual Trading Act, 1995 and that these Bye-
Laws shall come into operation on the 1st day of March 2024. The new Bye-Laws 
shall come into force and effect on the 1st day of March, 2024, being not less than 30 
days after the Council meeting adopting and making these Bye-Laws, in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 200(5)(a) of the Local Government Act, 2001.” Cork 
City Council currently provides for casual trading across 9 fixed city locations, 
complimented with special licenses for ad-hoc events, with standard casual trading 
license fees ranging from €600 - €1800 per annum and Special Event licenses to 
account for 2 categories ranging from €25 - €220. 
 
 
Cork City: Casual Trading 
Locations 2025 
No. of 
Pitches 
Cornmarket Street, Cork 
36 
Blackrock Market, Cork 
20 
Harty’s 
Quay 
Car 
Park, 
Rochestown, Cork 
1 
Fitzgeralds Park, Cork 
1 
Clogheenmilcon 
walkway, 
Blarney, Cork 
1 
Harley’s Street, Cork 
3 
Murphys Farm, Curraheen, Cork 
1 
Ballincollig Regional Park, Cork 
2 
Douglas Park, Cork 
1 
 
Details in respect of each of those fixed locations can be provided, as required, for the 
benefit of An Chomhairle. There is no immediate intention by Cork City Council to 
provide additional casual trading locations or pitches. 
 

8.2.3 
PILOT PROGRAMME TO BECOME AN ENDOMETRIOSIS INCLUSIVE 
WORKPLACE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, People 
& Organisation Development, dated 28th August 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes that: 
 
- 
1 in 10 women suffer with endometriosis  
- 
⁠this is a debilitating condition that can have profound impacts and is often 
worsened by lack of care 
- 
⁠if 50% of Council staff are women, Cork City Council employs approximately 
75 women with the condition  
 
And agrees to 
- 
develop a pilot programme to become an endometriosis inclusive workplace 
- 
⁠open consultation with staff and the public on how best to support women with 
endometriosis in the workplace 
- 
⁠publish a proposed pilot programme within the next 12 months.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/366) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is committed to 
fostering an inclusive and supportive environment for staff and this is reflected in the 
objectives of our People Strategy. The People and Organisation Development 
Directorate will undertake research to investigate how best to support Council staff 
with endometriosis and bring forward recommendations for implementing an action 
plan in the workplace. 
 
8.2.4 
RESOURCES IN THE COMMUNITY GARDAÍ 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 28th August 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘To ask that the Joint Policing Committee would report on the level of resources in 
the community Gardaí and the impact that the policing of protests is having on the 
level of service to the community.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/399) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council, through the 
Community Team, is establishing the Cork City Local Community Safety Partnership 
(LCSP). This new structure replaces the Joint Policing Committee. A briefing related 
to the Local Community Safety Partnership was delivered to Elected Members on 
Monday 25th August. The first Cork City Council LCSP meeting is scheduled to be 
held on Tuesday 4th November at 4.30pm in the Council Chamber. This structure aims 
to: 
• 
prioritise issues identified by the community as safety concerns; 
• 
ensure community engagement and representation on Safety Partnerships; 

• 
develop a Local Community Safety Plan which will reflect priorities identified 
by the community; 
• 
improve multi-agency collaboration in the Safety Partnership area; 
• 
increase community confidence in service providers; and 
• 
service providers will be accountable to the community in fulfilling the agreed 
actions identified in the Local Community Safety Plan. This query can be brought to 
the Local Community Safety Partnership once established. 
 
8.2.5 
LAND AT BESSBOROUGH 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations, dated 3rd October 2024, and the report of 
the Director of Services, Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 6th May 
2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will seek to begin a process with the relevant Government 
Departments to CPO the entire land at Bessborough in order to make it a new public 
park and memorial to the history of the site.’ 
 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/414) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services, dated 3rd October 2024, stated that there is a 
mix of zoning objectives in the Cork City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 in the 
demesne at Bessborough, with a portion zoned Open Space and remaining land zoned 
for Housing.  A number of planning applications have been refused on the lands.  
 
The compulsory purchase of the lands and their development as a public park would 
require a significant level of expenditure by the City Council and at this time there is 
no central funding mechanism that can be called upon to cover this expenditure, either 
fully or in part.  
 
The City Council has been engaging with survivor representatives in relation to 
appropriate ways to commemorate and respect the history of this and other 
institutions. Members will be briefed appropriately when proposals are developed in 
this regard. 
 
The report of the Director of Services, dated 6th May 2025, stated that the development 
of the lands at Bessborough were given significant consideration during the 
preparation and consultation processes of the statutory Cork City Development Plan 
2022 – 2028. The specific zoning regime for the site and site specific development 
objectives are outlined in the Plan and acknowledge the special character, history and 
intrinsic landscape value of the site. The Plan seeks to facilitate the appropriate 
development of the site these lands including the development of housing and the use 
of part of the grounds as a Neighbourhood Park. A number of planning applications 
have been refused on the parts of these lands and another application still rests with 
An Bord Plenala for decision.  Should Council wish to proceed to Compulsorily 
Purchase the entirety of the lands at Bessborough for a public park the governing 
zoning regime and stated objectives of the City Development Plan would need to be 
appropriately amended and justified through the statutory review process of the next 
City Development Plan. 

 
The compulsory purchase of the lands and their development as a public park would 
require a significant level of expenditure by the City Council and at this time there is 
no central funding mechanism that can be called upon to cover this expenditure, either 
fully or in part.  
 
The City Council will engage with survivor representatives in relation to appropriate 
ways to commemorate and respect the history of this and other institutions. Members 
will be briefed appropriately when proposals are developed in this regard.  
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – SPECIAL MEETING 28th JULY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its special 
meeting held, 28th July 2025. 
 
10. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 15th JULY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 15th July 2025. 
 
11. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 1st SEPTEMBER 2025  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 1st September 2025. 
 
11.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
11.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF JULY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of July 
2025. 
 
12. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
13. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald at the WHO EU Healthy Cities Annual Business 
Meeting 2025, held at Bursa, Turkey, 15th - 19th June 2025. 
• Comhairleoir D. Boyle at the Kennedy Summer School 2025, held at New 
Ross, Co. Wexford, 28th - 30th August 2025. 
 
14. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir P. Horgan – HSE Regional Forum – Q1 and Q2 2025. 

• Comhairleoir P. Horgan – Visit Cork – Q1 and Q2 2025. 
• Comhairleoir P. Horgan – Everyman Palace Theatre – Q1 and Q2 2025. 
• Comhairleoir F. Dennehy – Leisureworld – Q4 and Q4 2024 and Q1 and Q2 
2025. 
 
15. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
None received. 
 
16. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
17. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
An Chomhairle noted that motion 60, School Wardens in the New City Areas, would 
be discussed under suspension of standing orders. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir B. McCarthy to address the meeting on the 
following motion, after which a discussion took place. On the proposal of 
Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, An Chomhairle 
approved the motion:- 
 
SCHOOL WARDENS IN THE NEW CITY AREAS 
 
‘Last December I raised the scandal of school wardens in the new city areas being 
paid 42% less a week than school wardens in the old city areas. In that motion I called 
for four things. An explanation to be provided as to how and why this decision was 
made, for their pay to be brought up to the level it should be, for it be backdated to 
when the workers first moved over to the city, and for Cork City Council to issue an 
apology to the workers affected. 
 
That motion was passed with unanimous support but to date, only one of those things 
is being offered. For their pay going forward to be brought up to the level of the other 
wardens. No explanation, no apology and they’ve been told they’re not getting the 
back pay. This is not what the Council voted for last December. This motion calls for 
the pay to be backdated to when they first moved over to the City Council, an 
explanation for why their pay wasn’t immediately brought up to this level and an 
apology from Cork City Council for treating these vital workers so shamefully.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/476) 
 
 
 

18. 
MOTIONS 
 
18.1 
REDUCED VAT RATE FOR SPF PRODUCTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to the College of European Commissioners and European 
VAT Committee to specifically seek the inclusion of SPF products in the reduced rate 
for Member States and to utilise Ireland as a pilot example of same.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/417) 
 
18.2 
INVESTMENT IN THE POST OFFICE NETWORK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls on the Government to commit to investing €15 million 
annually in the Irish Post Office Network, recognising the essential role Post Offices 
play in sustaining communities, promoting local economic development, and 
providing access to key Government, financial, and social services. 
 
Council acknowledges that: 
 
• 
The Irish Post Office Network processes over 84 million transactions annually, 
to a total value of €14 billion, including €7 billion in welfare payments. 
 
• 
Post Offices provide essential financial services to micro and small businesses, 
particularly in areas abandoned by traditional banks, with 540 Post Offices 
nationwide operating in communities where no bank exists within a 5km 
radius. 
 
• 
Post Offices are critical to combating social exclusion and ensuring access to 
face-to-face services for individuals and families who cannot rely on digital 
alternatives. 
 
Council further notes that the closure of Post Offices has a damaging effect on 
communities, particularly for vulnerable individuals and local businesses, and 
therefore calls on the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications and 
the Government to secure the future of the Post Office Network through an annual 
investment of €15 million.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/424) 
 
18.3 
BASIC INCOME FOR THE ARTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls on the Minister for Culture, Communications and Sport 
and the Minister for Public Expenditure to acknowledge the many societal benefits of 
the Basic Income for the Arts and to retain it in the upcoming budget.’ 

 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/432) 
 
18.4 
INDUSTRIAL ACTION BY SCHOOL SECRETARIES AND CARETAKERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council notes: 
 
- 
The vital work undertaken by school secretaries and caretakers, which ensures 
the safe, orderly running of the city's schools; 
 
- 
The current, discriminatory practice of excluding school secretaries and 
caretakers from employment rights and entitlements enjoyed by other school 
staff such as teachers and Special Needs Assistants, including their exclusion 
from the public service pension scheme; 
 
- 
The industrial action being undertaken by school secretaries and caretakers who 
are members of the Fórsa trade union. 
 
Agrees to: 
 
- 
Write to the Taoiseach, the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform and the 
Minister for Education calling on them to immediately commence a meaningful 
engagement with school secretaries and caretakers, and their trade union 
representatives; which must set out a pathway to providing them with equitable 
working conditions, including access to the public service pension scheme; 
 
- 
Extend the solidarity of Cork City Council to the workers on strike, and to 
communicate the contents of this motion to workers via their trade union Fórsa.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. J. Lynch, Cllr. K. Collins, Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/435) 
 
18.5 
RAISE THE ROOF RALLY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises that:  
 
- 
The housing crisis remains the biggest barrier to stability, security, happiness 
and independence for far too many families, workers and individuals in Cork 
city  
- 
The cost of living, coupled with unaffordable housing and rental costs, has 
negatively impacted on people’s ability to enjoy Cork city as a place to live, 
work, study and play  
- 
Workers and families in Cork deserve emergency action on housing to deliver a 
better future  
- 
Everybody who calls Cork home deserves a home of their own 
 
And agrees to:  

 
- 
Formally endorse the Raise the Roof rally on 4th October assembling at Grand 
Parade at 2.30pm  
- 
Encourage all communities, families and individuals to attend the rally.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. M. Gould, Cllr. D. Boyle, Cllr. N. O’Connor, Cllr. B. McCarthy 
25/456) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, T. Tynan, O. Moran, D. Boylan, M. 
Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. 
O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, 
T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (21) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
