MINUTES OF ANNUAL MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON FRIDAY, 21st JUNE 2024 
 
PRESENT 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir K. McCarthy in the chair and 
subsequently an tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle in the chair. 
 
NORTH EAST  
Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. 
Tynan, O. Moran. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. 
Collins. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. 
Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL  Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, P. Rice, F. Kerins, P. Dineen. 
 
 
SOUTH WEST  
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, L. 
Harmon, T. Coleman, A. Deasy. 
 
ALSO PRESENT 
Ms. A. Doherty, Chief Executive.  
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Roads & Environment Operations. 
Ms. M. Gallagher, Head of Legal Affairs. 
Ms. R. Loughrey, Director of Services, Community, Culture & 
Placemaking. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Administrative Officer, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate Affairs & International 
Relations.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1.  
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An Chomhairle unanimously agreed to suspend standing orders to allow media 
cameras into the Council Chamber for the handover of the Lord Mayor’s chain, and 
to allow the meeting to be streamed and recorded. 
An Chomhairle further unanimously agreed to defer Agenda items 4 – 50 to the next 
meeting of An Chomhairle of 24th June 2024.  
 
2.  
AN tARDMHÉARA’S ADDRESS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir K. McCarthy addressed the meeting as follows:- 
 
 
Dear colleagues, dear Chief Executive, 
 

 
As outgoing Lord Mayor of Cork, a very warm welcome to the historic 1936 Council 
Chamber. A very warm welcome to those who have been re-elected and to those who 
this is your first time being an elected member of Cork City Council.  
 
 
We also remember those who retired and those who didn’t make it back through the 
recent gruelling local elections. And of course, one of the core parts of our AGM is to 
appoint our Council chair or the Lord Mayor. And it will fall to me very shortly to take 
names of candidates interested in becoming Lord Mayor of Cork for the following year 
and to pass this eighteenth century chain of history to its next guardian so to speak. I 
have but three very short reflections before we proceed. 
 
 
Firstly, dear colleagues let us rejoice that the democratic process is very much alive in 
Cork. My dear colleagues you have not only walked 1000s of kilometres in your quest 
or pilgrimage to take one of the 31 seats. You have gone to suburbia and into the inner 
city, and knocked on 1,000s of doors. You have sacrificed your personal lives in a 
quest to be in the service of the people of Cork in local government. It is also important 
to reflect on that pilgrimage that the process is not as easy as just walking and knocking 
on doors. You must have belief in your message. It is a leap of faith. You have been 
tested. You had to be fit physically and more importantly emotionally. You met people 
who befriended you straight away. You met people who closed the door in your face. 
You met people who had their own message.  
 
 
You met people who are happy, who are sad, who are very angry, who shout in your 
face, who don’t want to talk, who are struggling in life, who seek a listener, who seek 
a chance, who are soaring in life, who buried a loved one, an hour before you called, 
a mother who just put their child to sleep, people who will ask you in for tea. You 
encountered opinionated people and people who have no opinion, people who are the 
salt of the earth, people who are guardian angels, people who you perhaps wept for in 
your private moments, people who you laughed with, people who invited you into their 
house to chat about this and that. You have met survivors. You have met people who 
have given up on life. You met people who are lighthouses. Plus many more.You are 
a pilgrim of sorts. 
 
 
All of the conversations, debates and empathy with 1,000s of constituents or citizens 
and that personal connection piece makes Irish democracy one that is very important. 
You have not only rang doorbells and physically pressed the flesh so to speak but deep 
dived down into citizen life listening to their concerns and now being able through 
your election as an elected member to bring these concerns into the historic Council 
Chamber here and to the wider City Hall. We should never take democracy for granted 
especially in the world we live in today and that in some parts of the world there is no 
democracy. A sincere thanks to all those who voted two weeks ago. 
 
 
We as local politicians saw another part of the democratic process close up when it 
comes to counting the votes on ballot papers. The solid count process we have in 
Ireland and what we have witnessed in Cork is one to be heralded, be proud of and one 
where great credit is due to the Office of Corporate Affairs and the Office of Franchise 
in Cork. And so my first message this evening is a nod on the importance of the canvass 
pilgrimage of sorts, the democratic process and one of thanks to you, our Council staff 
and especially to the citizens of our historic city who came out to support our recent 
local election and its democratic processes. 

 
 
My second message to you concerns my year as Lord Mayor. Fifty-two weeks ago, the 
elected Council of the last Council term entrusted me with leadership of the Council.  
 
That has been a really deep honour and it is one thing writing about Cork history, it is 
another being a part of it. Indeed, it is very difficult to sum up my experiences in a few 
sentences.  
 
 
Looking at the diary since the last Cork City Council AGM in late June last year I have 
been engaged with over 1,600 events. On average there have been about 30-40 events 
a week depending on the season.  
 
 
The days have been long and the diary has been very demanding but to get to explore 
Cork and many of its stories has been very fulfilling. One day can feel like three days 
when there are so many diary events to juggle! 
 
 
One hour one could be at a presentation of cheques, or the presentation of certs, and 
the next you journey on and could be praising someone for their sporting achievement 
or helping open a new business, meeting an ambassador or giving a talk at one of 
Cork’s 118 schools or giving a tour of the Lord Mayor’s Office to various community 
groups. 
 
 
All of these events look forward and build a sense of identity for Cork’s future. Some 
events have been varied ranging from a one person engagement to thousands of people. 
And of course, many of you popped up in the story boards as well to offer support. 
 
 
However, across all of the events the common denominator has always been Cork. 
There are thousands of people in Cork engaged in not only its life and its story but 
enhancing its life and story. Every hour of everyday someone is doing something great 
for Cork and its communities.  
 
 
Much of it goes without being seen but the office of Lord Mayor’s gets to what I call 
“deep dive” down into many stories and moments. In our city such stories matter or 
indeed such moments need to be cherished.  
 
 
The sense of togetherness, stories and moments in Cork I have promoted and spoken 
at length about all year. In particular I have harnessed the city’s coat of arms as a 
message – the two towers and the ship in between and the Latin inscription – Statio 
Bene Fida Carinis – or translated “a safe harbour for ships”. Whereas the element of 
shipping has almost moved from the city’s quays, the inscription could also be re-
interpreted as a connection to people – that the city is also a safe harbour for people 
and community life. This is its greatest story and one the City needs to mind, keep 
vibrant, and for all of us in this historic and innovative city to keep working on.  
 
 
But during this second message of the importance of stories and togetherness it also 
falls to me to sincerely thank the Deputy Lord Mayor Cllr Colette Finn for her 
expertise, support, positiveness and I would like to wish her well for the future, the 
Lady Mayoress Marcelline for her patience, support and love, and for her charity work, 
singing and dancing and all round community building with different groups,and to 
my parents, and siblings and wider family members for their support and love. 
 

 
A sincere thanks to Finbarr Archer, Nicola O’Sullivan, Rose Fahy and Caroline Martin 
in the Lord Mayor’s office as well as the team in Corporate Affairs ably led by Paul 
Moynihan with support by Alma Murnane and Nuala Stewart – without such a team 
the office would not run effectively as it does but it is filled with people – a team – that 
really cares about the role of the office in our city and all the nuances attached to such 
a role and also a sincere thanks to you Chief Executive Anne [Doherty], for your 
friendship, partnership, curation of activities, story board creation, support and advice 
over the past year. And I am very conscious that this is your last AGM, so many thanks 
for all your work. 
 
 
My dear friends, let me conclude with my third message and if I am going to go down 
as the singing Lord Mayor let me end my Mayoralty where I started with a verse by 
Rogers and Hammerstein, which in its own way became a different kind of anthem 
during the year, 
 
Oh, what a beautiful morning,  
 
oh, what a beautiful day, 
 
I got a beautiful feeling everything’s going Cork’s way,  
 
eh, Oh what a beautiful Day. 
 
Go raibh míle maith agaibh. 
 
3.  
ELECTED MEMBERS ADDRESS  
 
 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, D. Cahill, D. Boyle, F. Kerins, K.O’ Flynn, T. Tynan, and 
J. Maher addressed the meeting on behalf of their respective groups.  
 
4.            CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ADDRESS   
 
 
The Chief Executive, Ann Doherty addressed the meeting. 
 
5.            ELECTION OF AN tARDMHÉARA 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir K. McCarthy requested nominations for the office of 
Ardmhéara for the coming year. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran and seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
Comhairleoir D. Boyle was nominated for the office of Ardmhéara for the coming 
year.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Lynch and seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
Comhairleoir F. Kerins was nominated for the office of Ardmhéara for the coming 
year.  
 
A vote was called for where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR D. BOYLE 
 
Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. 
Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, 
P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, P. Rice, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, G. Kelleher, C. 
Kelleher, L. Harmon, T. Coleman. (22) 

 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR F. KERINS 
 
Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, T. Tynan, M. Gould, K. Collins, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, J. 
Lynch. (7) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
As those voting for Comhairleoir D. Boyle were greater than those voting for 
Comhairleoir F. Kerins, An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir K. McCarthy declared 
Comhairleoir D. Boyle elected to the office of Ardmhéara for the coming year. 
 
6.           AN tARDMHÉARA’S ADDRESS 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle addressed An Chomhairle as follows:- 
 
Comhairleorí, Príomhoifigeach, Foireann catharach, Daoine uaisle agus cairde go leir. 
 
Is mór an anóir domsa an ról seo a glacadh. 33 years ago I first came into this chamber 
honoured to be representing the people of this city, but also apprehensive of what was 
expected of me. I share those feelings again this evening. 
 
The Council to which I was first elected operated under a different name; job titles of 
officials and councillors also differed. I was Green in every sense of the word, new 
and inexperienced on a Council which then also contained several TDs and Senators. 
The Council, then as now, showed differing opinions within the city. Several of the 
councillors represented political parties that now no longer exist. But they did exist 
and their contributions were important and vital in how our city has progressed. 
 
Debate and argument have been healthy. Considering and being presented with 
differing visions has helped define what potential our city can have. What the Council, 
then and now, share among all councillors, is that the intent among all to create a city 
that is a better place to be, and a better place to live. 
 
We are a city acutely aware of having a special culture and history that informs us of 
who we are and leads us to defining for ourselves a positive and enthusiastic future.  
We see ourselves as a healthy city, a learning city, a city of welcomes. In reality we 
are a Leading City, a city unafraid to do things differently or to learn from where things 
have been done differently. 
 
Cork is an international city, very much a European city, influenced by a World 
outside, reacting against expectations that we should limit what we can be. 
 
For over 50 years this city has adopted a planned led approach to reaching the potential 
of what that is. From the LUTS plan of the 1970s, through CASP, to the Cork 
Metropolitan Area Transportation Strategy of recent years, this has been a city that has 
dreamed of what can be, while seeking resources to realise the bringing that about. 
 
It has only been in recent years that we have been able to put in place the more 
integrated proposals of these plans. A balanced city that relies less on car dependence, 

that can offer more for those who can walk, cycle or take public transport. We have 
only started the process that signals that change. The coming years will see the wider, 
and necessary, infrastructure being put in place – Bus Connects, a connected cycle 
network, enhanced suburban rail, and ultimately a light rail system interconnected with 
each other. 
 
The most affecting moment for me in the recent local election campaign was when I 
met a wheelchair user in Greenmount. A fiercely independent person, she described a 
one kilometer journey for her, every meter of which represented an unnecessary 
obstacle. Recently a renewal programme has started for our City Centre. This ambition 
needs to extend across the entire city. 
 
The same is true of our building stock. There are too many vacant and neglected 
buildings in our city, buildings that have potential to house people, to give new life to 
communities, to provide customers for businesses particularly in the city centre. 
 
Poet Colm Scully, in his poem ‘What News, Centurion’ describes the built fabric of 
the city in both loving ways, and in ways that remind us how we can be doing things 
better. 
Only the mossy green pavements and the tired slabs 
The gullies wandering into iron grates whose imprints solemnly betray their age 
Cast in Bristol or in Harrowgate 
Only the uncouth housing on narrow streets 
The shambled skylines with hint of grey 
The topsy turvy rooves and gable ends 
Crawling up hills in ever varying lines 
Even the new and clean edifice confounds the eye 
The glass constructs in blue metal frames 
Tarpaulin green copper domes and plates vie with exotic timbers in paneled walls 
None of them know their place amid the red and white sand and limestone structures 
of the past 
 
The potential outlined in the Green and Blue Infrastructure chapter of our City 
Development Plan must be realised. The Tree Strategy agreed with the last Council 
can help us do this. We need more open space. We more Green space. The more we 
can provide the more this city can breathe. 
 
One of the great strengths of our city has been the commitment of those to provide 
vital social services voluntarily. However, we have come to expect too much from too 
few for too long. So many of have given of their time in ways that lessen their 
enjoyment of life. We need to give greater support to those who have supported the 
needs of this city so readily. We need to encourage others to take up the slack. We 
need to bring about a new generation of volunteers to make this city tick more fairly 
and better. 
 
When I began my public service, my motivation was to work towards achieving a 
better and safer World for my daughter and her generation. Now that ambition is also 
for my grandchildren and theirs. I am glad of the support of my wider family tonight. 
My daughter, her husband, and their children. My sisters and their families. My 
parent’s siblings and their families. My parents cannot be with me tonight. They have 

gone to eternal reward, but I will always have the memory of the jig we danced together 
in our house, when we learned I would become a member of this Council 33 years ago. 
Is í an uauillmhian atá agam ná an Cathar bródúil seo a leiriú. Cathar atá ag dul chun 
tosaigh sna laethanta atá le teacht. 
 
Corcaigh bródúil. Corcaigh níos fearr. Corcaigh nua, agus lean ar agaidh, Corcaigh 
abú. 
 
Go raith maith agaibh go leir. 
 
7.           ELECTED MEMBERS ADDRESS 
 
              Comhairleoirí S. O’ Callaghan, T. Fitzgerald, J. Maher, J. Lynch, P. Dineen, K. O’ 
Flynn and P. Rice addressed the meeting on behalf of their respective groups.  
 
8.           CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ADDRESS   
 
 
The Chief Executive, Ann Doherty addressed the meeting. 
 
9.  
ELECTION OF LEAS ARDMHÉARA 
 
An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle requested nominations for the office of Leas 
Ardmhéara for the coming year. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran and seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
Comhairleoir H. Kamegni was nominated for the office of Leas Ardmhéara for the 
coming year. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Gould proposed and seconded by Comhairleoir 
F. Kerins, Comhairleoir K. Collins was nominated for the office of Leas Ardmhéara 
for the coming year. 
 
A vote was called for where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR H. KAMEGNI 
 
Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. Fitzgerald, D. 
Boylan, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. 
Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, P. Rice, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, G. 
Kelleher, C. Kelleher, L. Harmon, T. Coleman, A. Deasy. (23) 
 
FOR COMHAIRLEOIR K. COLLINS 
 
Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, T. Tynan, M. Gould, K. Collins, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, J. 
Lynch. (7) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 

As those voting for Comhairleoir H. Kamegni were greater than those voting for 
Comhairleoir K. Collins, An tArdmhéara, Comhairleoir D. Boyle declared 
Comhairleoir H. Kamegni elected to the office of Leas Ardmhéara for the coming year. 
 
 
An Leas Ardmhéara, Comhairleoir H. Kamegni addressed the meeting. 
 
 
10.         ANY OTHER BUSINESS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that in the year ahead his daughter Saoirse 
will assist him in carrying out his duties.  
 
An Chomhairle unanimously approved the deferral of all business of the Ordinary 
Meeting of June 24th to the following Ordinary Meeting of July 8th, except nomination 
of members to committees, boards, and bodies.  
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
