MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 13th JANUARY 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. 
O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. Martin, F. Kerins, N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, L. Harmon, A. Deasy, T. 
Coleman.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development.  
Mr. D. O’Brien, A/Director of Services, Corporate & 
Community Affairs. 
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Ms. A. Murnane, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate & Community Affairs.  
 
APOLOGIES  
 
Comhairleoir M. McDonnell. 
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
An tArdmhéara and the Chief Executive extended their sympathy to Comhairleoir T. 
Shannon and his family on the passing of Ursula Shannon, former Lady Mayoress of 
Cork. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Grady family on the death of Des O’Grady.  
• The Scannell family on the death of Anita Scannell. 
• The McGarry family on the death of Breeda McGarry. 
• The White family on the death of Michael White. 
• The Devereaux family on the death of Mary Devereaux. 
• The Singleton family on the death of Tom Singleton. 
• The Green family on the death of Arthur Green. 
• The O’Brien family on the death of Sally O’Brien. 

• The Wolfe family on the death of Gerard Wolfe.  
• The Keane family on the death of Wahmay Lin Keane. 
• The O’Keeffe family on the death of Teresa O’Keeffe. 
• The Johnson family on the death of Ann Johnson. 
• The Dineen family on the death of Maureen Dineen. 
• The Cunningham family on the death of Laurence Cunningham. 
• The Deevy family on the death of Mary Deevy. 
• The Hurley family on the death of Sinéad Hurley. 
• The Dillon family on the death of Ann Dillon. 
• The Shannon family on the death of Ursula Shannon. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• St. Michael’s GFC on their St. Stephen’s Day fundraiser for Bone Marrow 
Trust. 
• Douglas Comhaltas on their St. Stephen’s Day and Wren Day fundraiser for 
Simon Community. 
• SIPTU on celebrating 35 years in existence. 
• Watergrasshill GAA on becoming All-Ireland Intermediate Hurling 
Champions. 
• Eoin Callanan on being appointed Chief Scout of Scouting Ireland. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
NEW MEMBERS OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
 
 
An t-Ardmhéara invited the two new members of Cork City Council, Comhairleoirí 
N. O’Connor and N. O’Flynn, to address An Chomhairle. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
NEW COUNCILLORS  
 
 
The Chief Executive formally welcomed the two new members of Cork City Council, 
Comhairleoirí N. O’Connor and N. O’Flynn. 
 
4.2 
DIRECTOR OF SERVICES FOR CITY CENTRE DEVELOPMENT AND 
OPERATIONS 
 
 
The Chief Executive informed An Chomhairle that the new Director of Services for 
City Centre Development and Operations would commence the role on 4th February 
2025.  
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Budget Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 4th December 2024. 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 9th December 2024. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M.R. Desmond, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Special Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 17th December 2024. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
EV CHARGING STRATEGY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for progress in implementing the Cork City EV Charging 
Strategy and that the cost to users will align as closely as possible to home EV 
charging costs.  
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
Cork City Council are actively engaging with Zero Emission Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI) 
with respect to the implementation of the Cork City Council Electric Vehicle Charging 
Strategy. Cork City Council recently received confirmation from the Department of 
Transport with respect to our staffing allocation to assist with the implementation of 
the electric vehicle charging strategy. Cork City Council’s allocation is: 
 
• 1 Senior Executive Engineer or analogous 
 
Cork City Council will now seek sanction for this post through the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 
 
The Cork City Council Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy has allowed for the 
delivery of both fast and normal speed charging options, this approach allows for the 
application of different user costs depending on the speed of the EV charger. 
Generally, fast charging options are priced at a higher unit cost compared to the 
normal speed charging options which will be closer to domestic prices. 
 
 
Gerry O’Beirne,                                                        Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services,                                                 Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development.                                     Local Area Development &  
                                                                                                Operations. 
 
 
 
 
 

6.2 
KERRY PIKE PEDESTRIAN SCHEME   
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
Can the CE confirm the timeframe for the commencement of the Kerry Pike 
Pedestrian Scheme works which are due to start on Quarter Q1 2025.  
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
The City Council has prepared detailed proposals for the improvement of pedestrian 
facilities at Kerry Pike. These proposals have also been the subject of public 
consultation under Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act 1994 and were approved by 
Council in 2024. It is anticipated that the detailed designs and tender documents for 
the scheme will be completed by mid 2025 thereby enabling tendering and 
construction commencement subject to continued funding. The proposals have been 
developed with funding support from the National Transport Authority under the 
Active Travel Programme. Allocations under this programme are made annually 
(usually late Jan/early Feb) and Members will be further updated on the 
works/projects to be progressed in 2025 following receipt of same. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.3 
EVENT CENTRE – PROJECT DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if it has been communicated to her and Cork City Council 
who the members and chair of the Project Development Board for the Event Centre 
are, if the Board has met since September 2024, and if minutes are being taken of any 
such and future meetings and will a briefing of elected members take place with the 
Project Development Board in the next month. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Government decided on 22nd October 2024 to re-affirm its commitment to and 
ongoing Exchequer funding support for an Events Centre in Cork City, because of its 
strategic alignment with the growth ambition for Cork, as set out in the National 
Planning Framework and the National Development Plan. The decision included a 
requirement that an entirely new procurement process should be put in place and that 
a project development board, led by Cork City Council be established to provide 
oversight for the process. 
 
The Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage communicated with the 
City Council outlining the details of the Government decision and the steps required 
to begin formation of the Project Development Board (PDB), including identification 
of potential board members and preparation of the terms of reference for the Board.  

 
The PDB is now in place and the Terms of Reference are in place. It is to be chaired 
by the Assistant Chief Executive, Cork City Council with representation from a 
number of State Agencies / Government departments and local stakeholders. The first 
meeting of the PDB is scheduled to take place on the 24th January.  
 
As responsibility for oversight of the procurement process will rest with the PDB, the 
governance arrangements and any briefings of locally elected members can be 
considered by the Board once it formally meets. 
 
Brian Geaney, 
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
6.4 
SCHOOL WARDENS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive when the city boundary was expanded in 2019 why was it 
decided that the school wardens moving into the new city area would be paid 42% a 
week less than the ones in the old city area even though they don't work any less hours 
and in some cases work more? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The matters referred to have been the subject of ongoing discussions and negotiations 
between the Council and SIPTU which is the trade union that represents the School 
Warden grade. 
 
This is the appropriate forum for these matters to be resolved and the Council is 
confident that these discussions will yield a satisfactory outcome in the near future. 
 
Mike Larkin, 
Director of Services, 
People & Organisation Development. 
 
6.5 
TRAMORE ROAD CYCLE LANE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE confirm if a traffic survey has taken place on Tramore Road to address 
the ongoing issues there since installation of the cycle lane bollards? 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
The installation of active travel measures can often involve the removal of parking 
and narrowing of the carriageway that restricts traffic flow in order to prioritise 
sustainable transport measures, and this is the case on Tramore Road.  
 

A traffic survey has not taken place on Tramore Road. At this location, the traffic 
restrictions are often caused by cars parked legally on the northern side of the road 
and traffic having to give way. Traffic operations can investigate the removal of part 
or all of this parking to facilitate better traffic flow. Any issues with illegal parking on 
the double yellow lines at the entrance to Coláiste Stiofáin Naofa can be addressed by 
the parking team through appropriate monitoring and enforcement as required. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.6 
YORK HILL 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise if my motion/ proposal can be expedited as a matter of 
urgency and public safety in the Summerhill area.  
 
My request is, that York Hill, which connects the lower part of Summerhill to 
Wellington Road be made a ONE-WAY traffic Flow system only, running from 
Summerhill upwards to Wellington Road only. 
 
I’m asking for the immediate introduction of this measure (even on a short term trial 
basis, if necessary), which would certainly contribute positively in some way to easing 
the considerably congested traffic flow, which is currently  being experienced by so 
many frustrated commuters travelling on the Ballyhooly Road, through Dillons Cross, 
through St Lukes Cross and down Summerhill North into the City at all times of every 
day.  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
In the medium to long term, the BusConnects proposal will be to install filtered 
permeability on York Hill along with other wider traffic measures in the area based 
on the traffic modelling carried out for that project.  
 
Cork City Council in conjunction with the NTA Bus Connects Team will bring 
forward an intervention for filtered permeability on York Hill in advance of the overall 
BusConnects plan for consideration.  The mechanism for same is to be agreed between 
the relevant parties for consideration through the Section 38 process, including public 
consultation.  
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
 
 
 
 

6.7 
FLOODING AT RIVERVIEW ESTATE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
What action has been taken by Cork City Council to alleviate ongoing flooding in 
Riverview Estate? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Riverview Estate is subject to frequent flooding from the Glasheen River. The 
Glasheen River is a component part of a designated Drainage District under the 
Arterial Drainage Act, 1945(no.3 of 1945) – Section 30. These Drainage Districts 
were formed for the purpose of draining adjacent lands to improve land for agriculture 
and to mitigate flooding.  
 
Cork City Council has a responsibility to maintain the drainage district for the purpose 
of flood mitigation. As part of its operational duties, Cork City Council Drainage 
Department carry out planned maintenance works of the City’s rivers under our River 
Maintenance Programme. This programme of works includes the clearing of 
vegetation, lowering water levels through the removal of silt, and removing debris 
which may cause an obstruction to culverts and trash screens. Access to the river 
channel also needs to be maintained for plant and equipment which may necessitate 
the removal of additional vegetation. This programme of works take place outside the 
bird nesting period (March 1st – August 31st) is subject to ecological assessment, and 
is dependent on funding and resources. 
 
Following a flood event in August 2023, Cork City Council carried out emergency 
flood prevention works to the Glasheen River during the months of 
September/October 2023. These works were in response to concerns expressed about 
the river’s condition and it’s potential to flood, potentially damaging nearby 
properties. The works in the Glasheen River commenced on Monday 18th September 
and ceased on Thursday 5th October. The works were carried out to improve 
conveyance and reduce the risk of flooding. The works involved the clearing and 
removal of debris and vegetation that may give rise to blockages. The conveyance of 
the river had reduced due to the buildup of silt in the channel. Flood events also 
occurred in the area on October 16th 2023 (Storm Babet) and October 5th 2024 both of 
which were Met Eireann Orange Level Rain warning events.   
 
During 2024 further inspections and maintenance at key locations were carried out 
including the removal of debris from culverts, bridges and trash screens. 
 
Cork City Council Drainage Engineers met with the Residents of Riverview Estate, 
Southbury Road, Clashduv Estate & Glendale Avenue (October 24th 2024), to discuss 
residents’ concerns and the issues involved.  Cork City Council would advise anyone 
living in a location which may experience flooding that the installation of Individual 
Property Protection (e.g. metal flood barriers as installed by many residents and 
business across the City), can be very effective in reducing risk and damage to 
individual homes and properties. 
 

Cork City Council Parks Department are at an early stage of designing a nature based 
solution pilot project for Clashduv Park. The conceptual design contains a number of 
measures to convey surface water runoff in the park land area, to provide rainwater 
storage during large rainfall events and to improve water quality. This pilot project 
primary focus is to demonstrate how Cork City Council may be able to utilise existing 
park lands to manage parks surface water run off using nature based solutions and 
does not contain flood infrastructure prevention measures. If this project proves 
viable, Cork City Council will seek funding to carry the project. Timelines will not be 
known until project has been approved and funding is in place. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.8 
PUBLIC PARKING IN BLACKROCK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE why public parking has been removed on the avenue to the Ursuline 
Convent Avenue in Blackrock? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The parking spaces (34 spaces approx.) constructed along the new public access road 
leading to the Ursuline Convent remain in place and are as provided by the City 
Council.  It is understood, however, that works have recently been undertaken on the 
parallel Old Convent Access Road.  This works have been carried out by the property 
owner in an area which is private property and not a public road.  The matter can be 
further examined and Members will be updated accordingly. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.9 
DERELICT SITES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir L. Harmon, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
What percentage of the available derelict sites levy was collected in 2024, including 
a breakdown of the amount collected and the number of properties in question?  Please 
include a comparison for 2023 figures also for the above. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
In 2024, Cork City Council collected 24% of the total invoiced figure of €2m in 
Derelict Sites (DS) Levies and related Interest Charges. 
 
This represented €477,604 in DS Levies collected in 2024. 

 
An additional figure was collected for Vacant Sites bringing the total levies collected 
in 2024 to €517,500. 
 
This comprises payments for 24 Derelict Sites. 
 
92 sites were levied in total, of which approx. 68 did not engage or pay levies. As a 
result of this non-engagement, Cork City Council is escalating efforts to recoup levies 
to the next stage. 
 
In 2023, €1.1m was invoiced in Derelict Sites Levies and Interest Charges. 
 
€148,656 in DS Levies was collected in 2023, meaning an approximate collection rate 
of 13% 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin 
Director of Services 
Planning and Integrated Development. 
 
6.10 
NORTHERN DISTRIBUTOR ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a comprehensive update (start dates/ completion dates/ 
costings/ money pledged) on the progress of the Northern Distributor Road and the 
Ballyvolane Strategic Transport Corridor projects?  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork Northern Distributor Multi-Modal Road Scheme 
The proposed Cork Northern Distributor Multi-Modal Road (CNDMR) is a critical 
enabler for the planned growth of Cork City and the wider Cork Metropolitan Area. 
The proposed new transport corridor will provide access to key residential lands in the 
northern part of Cork City, support and encourage greater use of sustainable transport 
(via bus lanes, cycle lanes and pedestrian infrastructure), facilitate orbital movements 
and reduce traffic flows on existing routes, create high-quality public realm zones and 
enhance access for both existing and new communities as well as local employment 
centres. The proposed new transport corridor will prioritise sustainable transport 
movement and will comprise of 2 footpaths, 2 cycle lanes, 2 bus lanes, 2 traffic lanes 
and planting/landscaping areas. 
 
With support from the National Transport Authority, the City Council appointed a 
dedicated design team for the project 2021. The strategic assessment process for the 
scheme was then undertaken and approved by the National Transport Authority in 
December 2023. This included an assessment of the rationale for investment of public 
funds in the project. It also established the schemes objectives and confirmed its 
alignment with government policy, in particular the National Planning Framework, 
the National Development Plan, the Climate Action Plan and the National Investment 
Framework for Transport in Ireland. The route options assessment process was then 

progressed and the related approval was issued by the National Transport Authority 
in December 2024. This process included the identification of key constraints, feasible 
route options and the completion of a systematic assessment of each. Analysis of the 
best performing options led to the identification of an emerging preferred corridor and 
the most recent NTA approval enables the process of finalising the preferred route in 
advance of preliminary design and planning approval. 
 
The project team is currently finalising the relevant drawings and will be holding a 
detailed briefing for Elected Members in advance of a non statutory public 
consultation on the emerging preferred route. It is anticipated that this consultation 
process will commence next month and will be supported by a number of public open 
days, dedicated website, brochures/ drawings/image and other documents as well as 
presentations by and meetings with the project team with opportunities for questions 
and discussion. 
 
While the consultation process is non-statutory, it is an important step in the 
development of the scheme and will assist in securing insights/ knowledge/ expertise 
from individuals, communities and other stakeholders. This supports improved 
decision-making and the refinement of plans leading to the confirmation of the 
preferred route for the scheme. Following confirmation of the preferred route, the 
Council will procure a Design Team to prepare the preliminary designs and in due 
course a planning application for the scheme. This appointment is likely to occur in 
Q3 2025 and Members will be further updated on timelines at that stage. 
  
The initial cost estimate for the project will be confirmed following completion of the 
preliminary design process and further updated as detailed design are developed.  The 
project has been funded to date by the NTA and it anticipated that continued funding 
will be made available in 2025 for the preparation of preliminary designs. 
 
Ballyvolane Strategic Transport Corridor Scheme 
In 2022, Cork City Council approved plans for a major road improvement scheme for 
the Ballyhooley Rd/R614 under the Ballyvolane Strategic Transport Corridor Scheme. 
The overall length of the road network to be upgraded measures approximately 1.8km 
and consists of 1km of the Ballyhooly Road, 0.3km of the North Ring Road, 0.3km of 
the Ballyvolane Road, 0.1km of the Banduff Road and 0.1km of the Rathcooney Road. 
 
The aim of the the scheme is to deliver enhanced facilities for all road users but with 
particular benefits for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport users while also 
providing for more efficient movement of vehicular traffic. Once completed, it is 
hoped the scheme will facilitate more reliable bus journey times in addition to 
delivering enhanced accessibility for all users to local shops, amenities and other 
services. 
 
The lands required for the delivery of the scheme were the subject of a Compulsory 
Purchase Order which was issued in 2022 and approved in 2024. Tenders were 
subsequently invited for the construction works with a return date of 29 November 
2024. The tender assessment process is currently being finalised and the related 
assessment reports and recommendations have been submitted to the National 
Transport Authority for approval. Arrangements for the transfer of lands required for 
the construction works are also being closed out.  

 
Subject to NTA approval and continued funding a construction contract for the 
scheme will be awarded and the works commenced in the coming months. It is 
anticipated that the approved works will be completed over an 18 month period. 
Members will be further updated following receipt of the annual NTA funding 
allocations which are expected shortly. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.11 
COLD WEATHER STRATEGY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE provide an update on the cold weather strategy for homeless people in 
Cork city and does the strategy include providing places where homeless people can 
go during the days and in the evenings where they can be warm and safe during the 
cold weather.  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council activated its Cold Weather response from the 1st Oct 2024 to the 
31st of March 2025. This initiative includes routine fortnightly meetings with Cork 
Simon Outreach, Community Policing, Good Shepherd Services, De Paul Ireland and 
chaired by Cork City Council. Cork City Council monitor all weather alerts and once 
a weather alert is activated on Met Eireann, yellow, orange or red alerts, response 
meetings are set up almost immediately. Daily meetings are held depending on the 
severity of the alerts.  
  
For the duration of the Cold Weather Period Cork City Council has access to 
additional beds so that rough sleepers can be facilitated should they decide to come in 
and accept an offer of a bed. This approach was identified and agreed between the 
emergency homeless service providers and the statutory agencies as the most 
appropriate response to ensure that no one has to sleep out due to no bed available 
within services. Cork City Council can confirm it has sufficient beds for 
accommodation during the adverse weather period. 
 
Alison O’Rourke,  
Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.12 
PROTECTIVE WANDS FOR CYCLE LANES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a process in place to maintain and replace broken 
or missing protective wands for cycle lanes across the city? 

 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Broken bollards associated with Cycle Lane Infrastructure are generally notified via 
the CRM system or observed on inspection. These are recorded by Roads Operations. 
Any potential immediate hazard is made safe and where a replacement/new bollard is 
required, this will be added to the list of bollards and scheduled for replacement. A 
modest stock of bollards is retained in each depot and replenished as necessary. Due 
to the road layout at some locations, replacement often requires additional traffic 
management or out of hours work, so it is best practice to schedule replacement of a 
number of bollards at the same time.    
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.13 
SPEED DETECTORS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
The two speed detectors on Mathew have been missing since early 2024. One had the 
battery stolen and was sent for repair,  the other, I have no explanation as to why this 
was removed. Given that Marhew Hill is one of the most dangerous pedestrian roads 
in the city, hence the requirement for the impending road and footpaths upgrade, can 
the Chief Executive please explain why the signs were removed, what has caused the 
delay in replacing them and when can we expect them to be back in place? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Both Driver Feedback Signs located on Matthew Hill, Lehanaghmore were removed 
by the City Council for repair and maintenance. There is a high maintenance 
requirement on such signs and limited contractor availability to carry out the work. 
The repaired signs are now back in position. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.14 
BOOLE HOUSE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I would be obliged if the Chief Executive could furnish information regarding the 
development of the George Boole House at 5 Grenville Place. Specifically: 
 
How much money the City Council invested in the property to date,  
An update as to how the project is progressing in circumstances where UCC intended 
to put the project out to tender in 2023,  

And whether the Council has any mechanism by which it can ensure the project is 
completed.  
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Total monies spent on the initial refurbishment phase of the Boole House were 
approximately €960,000. Cork City Council’s contribution was approximately 
€157,000. The property is in the ownership of UCC having been subject to a deed of 
transfer from Cork City Council in 2017. UCC received planning permission for 
modifications to the internal layout of the building in 2023 to enable the completion 
of the fit out of the building and all indications are that UCC hope to finalise the 
development of the property in the near term. 
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
6.15 
LEHENAGHMORE ROAD IMPROVEMENT SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE if funding has been received from the National Transport Authority to 
progress the Lehenaghmore Road Improvement Scheme. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The NTA has yet to confirm Cork City Council’s 2025 funding allocations, including 
the allocation for Lehenaghmore. Members will be notified of the allocations as soon 
as they become available. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.16 
RAPID DEPLOYMENT PEDESTRIAN SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
That the CE present a progress report on the ‘Rapid Deployment Pedestrian Scheme’ 
for the North West LEA. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The tender process for the removal of concrete bollards/pipes along Churchfield Road 
and John F. Connolly Road is near completion with contractor appointment likely to 
occur in mid-February and works starting thereafter in March. The contract requires 
the removal of 395 large concrete bollards totalling approximately 1,000 tonnes of 

material. This material will be recycled in line with EU and national policies to 
minimise landfill and reduce the environmental impact of the proposed works. 
 
The tender process for the NW Rapid Deployment Scheme, covering three locations 
will also be complete in the coming weeks with contractor appointment etc. as per the 
timelines referenced above. The works include: 
 
• Monacnappa, Waterloo Road, Blarney:  Upgrade of entrance to Monacnappa 
estate with new uncontrolled crossing, provision of 100m of new footpath and 
new public lighting.  
• The Fair Field:  Installation of new public lighting around the perimeter of the 
Fair Field. 
• John F Connolly Road/Churchfield Road:  Provision of 1.5km of new and 
upgraded public footpaths with new and upgraded public lighting including 
two new pedestrian links; one between Churchfield Road and St Vincents 
GAA, and another between Mount Agnes Road and John F Connolly Road 
(new path adjacent to Lidl). 
 
The works programme is 7months therefore all measures are expected to be complete 
in October 2025. 
 
Gerry O’Beirne, 
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 2nd 
January 2025 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of the freehold interest in an area of land (83m² approximately) located 
at Tower, Blarney, Cork to Blarney United Football Club CLG c/o Patrick 
Buckley & Co., LLP, 5-6, Washington Street West, Cork for the sum of €500.00.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boylan, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal by way of exchange of the freehold interest in a plot of ground (29m² 
pproximately) situated adjacent to 48/48A, McGrath Park, Skehard Road, Cork to 
Bernadette Kennedy (Administratrix of the Estate of Ursula Power deceased), c/o 
Niall Colgan & Co. Solicitors, 20, South Mall, Cork, for the sum of €7,500.00. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
 
 
 

7.2 
CORK CITY ROAD TRAFFIC (SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS) BYE-LAWS 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 28th November 2024 in relation to the proposed 
Cork City Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Bye Laws 2024 No. 2 and approved 
the Cork City Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Bye Laws 2024 No. 2, in 
accordance with Section 9 of the Road Traffic Act 2004 as amended by Section 22 of 
the Road Traffic Act. 
  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
In the matter of the proposed Cork City Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Bye-Laws 
2024 No.2 Cork City Council having given notice to the elected Members of Cork City 
Council and the Garda Commissioner and having complied with the provisions of 
Section 9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004 as amended by Section 22 of the Road Traffic 
Act 2016 and having considered the proposed Bye-Laws, representations received 
following publication of notices and the Director of Services Report dated the 09th day 
of January 2025 and having considered the written submission with respect thereto, 
it is hereby resolved to make the proposed Cork City Road Traffic (Special Speed 
Limits) Bye-Laws 2024 No.2 in accordance with the draft attached hereto. 
 
7.3 
ARTS GRANTS 2025 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 11th December 2024 on the Arts Grants 2025. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 6th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 6th January 2025. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/11/2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/11/2024. 
 
9. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – 16th 
DECEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 16th December 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9.1 
MOTIONS  
 
9.1.1 
INSTALL CAMERAS AT ALL MAJOR JUNCTIONS IN THE CITY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 16th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council pursues the necessary steps to install cameras at all major 
junctions in the city in order to fine those who block these vital junctions, resulting in 
long delays for both private cars and public transport.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Cahill 24/492) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that currently, Road Traffic legislation 
provides only An Garda Síochána can enforce moving traffic violations and Traffic 
Wardens may only enforce parking offences. Enforcement using CCTV is not legally 
permitted currently. Local Authorities have no role in this regard and any change to 
this responsibility would require changes to national legislative, regulations etc. 
 
9.1.2 
INTRODUCE TOWING INTO THE CITY 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 16th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council introduce towing into the city to address the ongoing issues 
of illegal parking on our streets, footpaths and bus stops.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 24/522) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that, in approximately 2010/2011 the 
Elected Members of Cork City Council made the decision to terminate the City 
Council’s clamping and towing operation for a number of reasons including, the 
negative publicity/reaction to the service, the negative impact on shoppers and visitors 
to the city and the net annual negative cost. The combined service operated at a net 
cost to Cork City Council of €328,000 in 2011 (previous years showing similar net 
costs), with the clamping element of the contract subsidising the cost of the towing 
element. Cork City Councils experience demonstrated the very high cost of operating 
a towing service. These costs included plant, manpower, storage yard, administrative 
overheads etc. 
 
Based on the above, the reintroduction of towing would represent a retrograde step. It 
is imperative that alternative remedies e.g., physical infrastructure/impediments, 
increase in parking charges, reduction of permits etc. should be explored in response 
to specified and demonstrated issues at identified locations where there is evidence of 
sustained and illegal dangerous parking. 
 
 
 
 

9.1.3 
COMMITTEE TO REVIEW CURRENT TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEMS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 16th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘I ask that a sub committee of the relevant agencies i.e. Cork City Council, Taxi 
Federation, Bus Éireann, An Garda and others as deemed required plus one Councillor 
from each ward be set up with a remit to review our current traffic management 
systems and bring forward and introduce the changes required to alleviate the current 
traffic chaos in all areas and the chaos endured by motorists following an incident 
under the jurisdiction of Cork City Council. I would further ask that this committee if 
set up would discuss and implement a traffic management strategy for all areas should 
an incident occur whereby a road closure is necessary. 
 
This committee should meet every 3 months.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Dineen 24/545) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that it is national policy, supported by 
Cork City Council City Development Plan, to encourage active travel and sustainable 
transport and many projects to support same, costing millions or Euro, have been 
funded nationally and delivered by Cork City Council over the last number of years. 
The impact of such policy and schemes is to deliberately and actively reduce road 
space for cars and provide more road space for public transport, taxis, cycling and 
walking.  This national policy, supported by local implementation, will continue with 
the objective which is to encourage people to leave their car at home and avail of 
sustainable transport modes.  
 
There are dozens of traffic diversions or road closures implemented every week to 
facilitate emergencies and planned works. Such diversions and closures are managed 
to minimise disruption having regard to need, urgency, location of works etc. to the 
greatest extent possible given the current road network. It is not possible, practical or 
implementable to manage such works by a multi-agency committee.  
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee for further discussion. 
 
9.1.4 
SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 16th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will engage in a public relations campaign on the benefits of leaving 
the car at home for school commutes and encourage families and schools to apply and 
engage with safe routes to school to lessen school traffic jams and encourage active 
travel options where possible.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/551) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that the Sustainable Travel and Road 
Safety Promotions officer is already working with schools within the city promoting 
safer and more sustainable modes travel. The takes form of road safety lessons, 
supporting cycle buses, the cycle right scheme and other events. The Sustainable 
Travel & Road Safety Promotions officer will liaise with the relevant section to ensure 
targeting of the schools with the safe routes to school schemes in 2025. 
 
9.1.5 
PATRICK'S STREET BUS LANE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will extend the hours of operation of the Patrick's Street bus 
lane from 6:00am to 9:00pm each day in line with the short term mitigation measures 
identified by the Minister for Transport.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/569) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the bus lane on St Patrick’s Street 
was implemented in 2018 with the key objective to deliver a more reliable public 
transport service during the most congested time period on the street. The 
implementation of this measure formed part of a wider programme of traffic 
management changes, the City Centre Movement Strategy. The planning and delivery 
of this strategy was subject to significant consultation and agreement (part 8) 
particularly with respect to the hours of operation of the bus lanes on St Patrick’s 
Street, deliveries to businesses in the city centre, impact on wider traffic movement 
across the city. 
 
Any future changes to the hours of operation of the bus lanes on St Patrick’s Street 
will need to reflect on the delivery of enhanced bus services in the city which is under 
active consideration by the National Transport Authority through their BusConnects 
programme. Any proposed change to the hours of operation of the St Patrick’s Street 
bus lane is best achieved through the delivery of this programme of work allowing for 
good public consultation; reflecting on the other key demands along the street (i.e. 
loading/ unloading, business access, etc..) and addressing the required enforcement 
regime for any planned bus priority measures. 
 
9.1.6 
LEE TO SEA GREENWAY PROJECT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 16th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That the CE provide an update on the Lee to Sea Greenway project.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 24/582) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Lee to Sea Greenway is a proposal 
to provide a pedestrian and cycle route from Inniscarra, through Cork City and around 
Cork harbour to the coast, finishing at Crosshaven. Cork City Council has appointed 
Barry Transportation for the concept development and options selection phase of the 

Lee to Sea Greenway project from the city/county administrative boundary on the 
Inniscarra Road in Ballincollig, through the city and re-joining the existing Greenway 
parallel to the Rochestown Road in the east. The National Transport Authority (NTA) 
is the funding body for this project. The Lee to Sea Greenway is currently at Options 
Selection Stage. The route length within the city is approximately 21km. As such it 
has interactions with various other strategic projects that are at different stages of 
design and planning. These include the Lower Lee Flood Relief Scheme, Bus 
Connects, The Docklands Development and the Light Rail project. The Lee to Sea 
project needs to be compatible with these strategic projects in order to have a 
comprehensive integrated transport network for the city.  It is envisaged that the 
Options selection stage will be completed in the coming months with submission to 
the NTA for Approval shortly thereafter. A public consultation on the emerging 
preferred route will be held on NTA approval. It is envisaged that the Lee to sea will 
be constructed in sections with the various strategic projects mentioned above 
delivering various elements of the route.   
 
9.1.7 
ISSUES WITH RELIABILITY OF THE BUS SERVICE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, and the Director of Services, Infrastructure Development, dated 16th 
December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Minister for Transport and the NTA 
outlining: 
that Cork City Council recognises that: 
-  
issues with reliability of the bus service have become worse in recent months 
-  
many of these issues are caused by increased traffic congestion and illegal parking 
in the City Centre 
- 
people deserve reliable, efficient and accessible public transport 
-  
the great work bus drivers do to serve the people of Cork City under very difficult 
circumstances 
-  
bus drivers deserve to be able to do their work without the increased pressure of 
constant delays in their schedules or anti-social behaviour 
-  
the Council, the NTA and Bus Éireann all have a role to play in ensuring the 
City’s public transport is reliable, efficient, accessible and safe 
  
And resolves to: 
-  
fully review the impact of the MacCurtain Street Public Transport Improvement 
Scheme on bus reliability  
-  
publish details on the number of parking enforcement officers currently employed 
and the number considered a full cohort  
-  
meet with an Garda Síochána and bus drivers to identify and tackle existing 
‘pinch-points’ where illegal parking is causing delays to the buses  
-  
write to the NTA requesting an urgent review of timetables by the end of October 
and the credibility of delivering these timetables given the consistent delays.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/488) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that in the period since the Motion was 
received, Members met with Bus Eireann and the National Transport Authority at 

Council briefings and also at the Strategic Policy Committee. Bus Eireann provided 
updates on a range of matters in in particular short term/longer term network changes 
and driver recruitment. Members also met with the Minister for Transport on these 
and other matters. 
 
In relation to the MacCurtain Street Improvement Scheme, the primary objective for 
public transport was to increase the number of bus routes serving the area and also 
allow for the introduction of 2-way bus movements and new stops to ensure better 
legibility for service providers and passengers. A number of network restrictions were 
also removed across the area enabling improved flow for all road users and not just 
busses e.g. the right turn movement from N20 to Mulgrave Road. The broader scheme 
has been reported upon as per previous Council briefings. In addition, as requested, 
Council will continue to monitor and review the public transport facilities, traffic 
signals, junction timings etc to ensure optimum operation of the public transport 
facilities. 
 
9.1.8 
SOUND BARRIER ALONG THE NORTHBOUND CORRIDOR OF THE M8 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 16th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will work with Transport Infrastructure Ireland to install a 
sound barrier along the northbound corridor of the M8, including provision of a noise 
barrier at Chestnut Meadows.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/571) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the current Noise Action Plan is the 
Cork Agglomeration Noise Action Plan 2024-2028 which was adopted by Cork City 
Council on 04th June 2024 and is available on the Cork City Council website at Cork 
Agglomeration Noise Action Plan 2024-2028 - Cork City Council. The Noise Action 
Plan 2024 – 2028 was prepared in accordance with EU directive 2002/49/EC 
commonly referred to as the ‘END’ Directive which was transposed into Irish Law by 
the Environmental Noise Regulations 2006 (S.I. 140/2006) (the ‘Regulations’). The 
Regulations were revised by the European Communities (Environmental Noise) 
Regulations 2018 (S.I. 549/2018) and amended through the European Communities 
(Environmental Noise) (Amendment) Regulations 2021 (S.I. 663/2021) 
 
The Noise Action Plan is aimed at strategic long-term management of environmental 
noise from transport systems and is based on the results of the strategic noise maps 
which informed assessments of population exposure and harmful effects of noise. The 
results have been used to identify areas within the Agglomeration to be subject to 
noise management activities during the implementation of the Noise Action Plan 
should funding and resources be available. These areas are referred to as Priority 
Important Areas. In Cork, the main source of transport noise is from roads. There are 
many residential settlements close to major roads (many directly beside) in the Cork 
Agglomeration and the Noise Action Plan is a method of identifying and prioritising 
the worst affected areas at this time for mitigation.  
 

In the Agglomeration there are approximately 119,000 people exposed to noise levels 
above the 53dB Lden noise limit value in dwellings. In order to address areas identified 
as worst affected and identify Priority Important Areas, these locations are shortlisted 
into those areas where there are greater population densities in accordance with EPA 
Guidance. While Chestnut Meadows is shown on the Strategic Noise Mapping as an 
area with noise levels over the noise limit values, and is classified as an ‘Important 
Area’ it has not been identified as a Priority Important Area or Most Important Area 
in the 2024-2028 Noise Action Plan. There is currently very limited funding from the 
Department of the Environment to address road related noise issues and any funding 
provided will be assigned to the Priority Important Areas in the first instance. 
  
Noting that the M8 is a national route under the remit of TII, and TII are the Noise 
Mapping Body for Major Roads designated as National Roads, any detailed evaluation 
of future Priority Important Areas on National Routes would require consultation and 
collaboration with TII to agree the strategy for implementation of same.  
 
Noise is becoming more of a priority both here and across Europe. As its prominence 
as a health issue becomes more recognised then hopefully this will increase the 
funding dedicated to alleviating noise issues.  
 
The NTA have responsibility for selecting, installing and maintaining bus shelters. 
  
Since 2020, Cork City Council have been allocated funding from the NTA to carry 
out bus shelter enabling works in advance of the NTA’s contractor installing a bus 
shelter or replacing an existing bus shelter. Over 30 shelters have been installed or 
replaced across the city over the past number of years as part of this programme and 
there are an additional 8 shelters at various stages of design, planning and 
construction.  
 
This programme is subject to continued funding by the NTA. Other capital projects 
funded by the NTA and delivered by the Infrastructure Development Directorate also 
include the installation/replacement of bus shelters. 
  
If there are specific shelters that are of concern, these locations can be submitted to 
trafficrequests@corkcity.ie and will be referred to the NTA for consideration. 
 
9.1.9 
REPAIR AND RESTORE MAIN PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS IN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That the main pedestrian crossings in the city, including the ones at Finn's Corner and 
by Nano Nagle Bridge (which poses a major trip hazard) are repaired and restored as 
a matter of urgency.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 24/070) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the pedestrian crossings on St Patrick 
Street and Grand Parade were restored during the summer months under the City 
Centre Renewal Project. The work also included the replacement of timber decking 

around the trees on Grand Parade and the replacement of damaged street furniture, 
lining and signage. 
 
9.1.10 
DISC PARKING HOURS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that correction was required to the issued 
agenda for the Council Meeting and the minutes of the Transport & Mobility Strategic 
Policy Committee, and the motion which corresponds to this report should read as 
follows:- 
 
‘That the disc parking hours be increased to 20.30 from 18.30 to facilitate parking for 
the residents. Surrounding areas to be considered or monitored for any knock-on 
effects.’  
   
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/156) 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the motion. 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the request to extend the operating 
hours of pay parking on McCurtain Villas can be considered. However, given the 
haphazard arrangements of an 18.30 / 20.30 operation in various streets around UCC 
and the Bons Hospital, i.e., not contiguous area, the optimal approach would be to 
review the regime in the general area and agree a cordon within which the 20.30 hours 
operate.  
 
It has been noted that illegal ‘no parking’ signs have been erected on McCurtain 
Villas. Any such signs will be removed. It has also been recorded that large notices 
have been affixed to car windows. Such actions are illegal, creates risks for drivers 
and liabilities for the person affixing the signs. It is important to note that public roads 
cannot be reserved for specific users and public roads are available to all road users 
provided they are used in accordance with the lines and signs in place. 
  
We have also written to UCC regarding how they facilitate / provide parking facilities 
for their students and will engage again with UCC on this matter. 
 
A report of the proposed review and suggested outcomes will be brought to the next 
meeting of the Roads &Transportation SPC.  
 
9.1.11 
SAFE SCHOOL ZONES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council set a target of establishing Safe School Zones outside every school 
in this city, within the next five years.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/177) 
 

The report of the Director of Services stated that the NTA established a Safe to 
Schools Programme in 2022 and undertook a process with An Taisce in 2021 to invite 
all schools to participate in the programme. Out of 124 schools in the city, 24 made 
an application to participate in the programme. Of these 24, there are 11 schools at the 
various stages of review, design and statutory processes to deliver a Safe Routes to 
School scheme at those schools. The Safe Routes to Schools programme aims to 
improve walking and cycling routes to schools and the front of school environment 
including safe school zones and is funded annually by the NTA. Once the first 24 
schools have been addressed a further round of applications may be invited.  
 
9.1.12 
VALIDATED PARKING SCHEME  
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That given high costs of parking in and around the city centre, especially in facilities 
operated privately, Cork City Council investigates the possibility of a validated 
parking scheme in co-operation with private parking owners where goods receipts can 
be validated and used for discounted parking. This to be supported by the economic 
fund derived from rates and other incomes.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 24/167) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council currently provides 
over 1,000 public short term car parking spaces across two multi storey car parks (Paul 
Street Car Park & North Main Street Car Park). Both these car parks offer the lowest 
hourly charge in the city of €1.70 per hour in North Main Street Car Park and €2.70 
per hour in Paul Street Car Park. 
 
In addition, Cork City Council provides a further 900 spaces in the Black Ash Park & 
Ride.  
 
There are six other significant car parks in the city with approximately 2,400 car 
parking spaces that are privately operated. Some other smaller private car parks are 
also in operation. It would be logical to assume that charges in these car parks are set 
to reflect demand. 
 
Historically Cork City Council engaged unsuccessfully with the private car park 
operators to implement agreed initiatives across all parking facilities to maximise 
marketing opportunities and manage displacement. The motion can be referred to 
Strategic & Economic Development to explore current interest amongst private car 
park operators and businesses. In the meantime, we will continue to promote our own 
facilities including extended opening hours in the lead up to Christmas.   
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion to the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee for further 
discussion. 
 
 

9.1.13 
COMPREHENSIVE POLICY ON ACCESS AND PERMEABILITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic and Economic Development, dated 21st October 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That this Council instigate a comprehensive policy on access and permeability, 
stressing which walking routes are most encouraged and when.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/270) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Cork Walking Strategy was 
carried out a number of years ago which provided a vision and implementation plan 
for increasing walking for commuting within Cork City’s suburbs. This Strategy has 
guided investment in pedestrian infrastructure that has increased permeability across 
the city, and much of the focus of the Strategy has since been carried forward in the 
Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (CMATS). The Cork City Development 
Plan 2022-2028 and CMATS commit Cork City Council, within the City 
Development Plan period, to undertake a permeability study within existing built-up 
areas to identify opportunities for walking and cycling permeability. 
 
9.1.14 
REPAINTING OF ROAD MARKINGS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will undertake, in the immediate short-term - a repainting of road 
markings in at junctions of regular roads under Council control and also within estates 
across all Wards to help alleviate traffic issues and safety.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/346) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Lining & Signing services in 
Cork City Council are delivered as follows: 
- 
Former Transition Area: Delivered by Area Engineer via an annual tendered 
contract (as was the case, prior to transition). 
- 
Former City Area: Delivered by the direct labour Traffic Crew within Traffic 
Division. 
 
The Traffic Crew in the Traffic Division (currently a team of 9 persons), are 
responsible for the following services, and are prioritised as below: 
 
1. 
Emergency Call Outs 
2. 
Road Closures 
3. 
Delivery of lining & signing programme.  
 
Once Emergency Call Outs and Road Closures are addressed, the Traffic Crew 
allocate the remaining time to lining & signing work with lining work being subject 
to weather conditions.  
 

The requests for lining / signing work far exceeds the resources available to meet this 
demand.  
 
The order of programme delivery is set having regard to the following hierarchy: 
 
• 
Safety related issues,  
• 
Actions to support the city centre,  
• 
Mobility related issues, 
• 
Traffic issues,  
• 
Others. 
 
There are a small number of current vacancies within the above Traffic Crew and 
engagement with HR is ongoing to fill these vacancies as soon as possible. 
  
All road lining is reinstated on the resurfaced roads which form part of the annual 
resurfacing contract directly by the external contractors as part of their resurfacing 
works. 
  
Consideration is being given as to how to optimise the delivery of this service going 
forward, however if there are particular locations that require repainting, these can be 
submitted to trafficrequests@corkcity.ie for consideration. 
 
9.1.15 
PEDESTRIANS SIGNALS AT JUNCTIONS WITH ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will modify the sequencing of pedestrians signals at junctions 
with one-way streets (e.g. the junction of Bridge Street and Patrick's Quay) to allow a 
green signal for pedestrians on one side (e.g. the Patrick's Quay side when crossing 
from Bridge Street to Patrick's Bridge) when a red signal is shown to one-way motor 
traffic (e.g. on Patrick's Quay).’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/364) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the one-way streets identified have 
recently been redesigned as part of the NTA funding commitment to the public realm 
works on McCurtain St. The implementation of showing a green-man signal by default 
when there is stopped traffic on a one street (ie when with parallel traffic flowing) is 
referred to as "crossing with traffic" and was often previously implemented on roads 
with one-way movements where the geometric junction permitted the facility. 
 
The alternative service is called an “All-round pedestrian stage” (where all pedestrian 
crossings are serviced at the same time). 
 
However, as the junctions on this project have been redesigned in consideration of 
visually impaired needs, pushbutton audio crossing tones are installed on all crossings 
as standard to allow visually impaired pedestrians to navigate the crossing safely. 
 

This has required the redesign of the traffic signals to operate an All-round pedestrian 
stage only. As a “crossing with traffic” pushbutton crossing tone, could be 
misinterpreted on an adjacent crossing (which has with a red man showing) by visually 
impaired pedestrians. 
 
We will continue to monitor new technology developments and consult with the 
Accessibility Group to establish the possibility of re-introducing “Crossing with 
Traffic” safely on redesigned traffic junctions, but the design of the McCurtain St must 
currently remain as designed. 
 
9.1.16 
REVIEW OF BUS SHELTERS IN THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Council engage with the NTA, Bus Éireann and all relevant stakeholders to 
conduct a review of bus shelters in the city. Many have not been maintained properly; 
these should be repaired where possible and replaced where necessary. Modern 
signage should also be provided as at many bus shelters it is outdated, inadequate or 
not present at all.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/397) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the NTA have responsibility for 
selecting, installing and maintaining bus shelters. 
 
Since 2020, Cork City Council have been allocated funding from the NTA to carry 
out bus shelter enabling works in advance of the NTA’s contractor installing a bus 
shelter or replacing an existing bus shelter. Over 30 shelters have been installed or 
replaced across the city over the past number of years as part of this programme and 
there are an additional 8 shelters at various stages of design, planning and 
construction. 
 
This programme is subject to continued funding by the NTA. Other capital projects 
funded by the NTA and delivered by the Infrastructure Development Directorate also 
include the installation/replacement of bus shelters. 
 
If there are specific shelters that are of concern, these locations can be submitted to 
trafficrequests@corkcity.ie and will be referred to the NTA for consideration. 
 
9.1.17 
ACCESSIBILITY 
AUDIT 
OF 
FOOTPATHS 
AND 
PEDESTRIAN 
CROSSINGS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will fund an accessibility audit of the city’s footpaths and pedestrian 
crossings in the city centre and suburbs to show the extent of repairs needed to be 
carried out, the cost of same and the total amount of footpaths under the responsibility 
of this local authority.’ 

 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 24/415) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is responsible for 
the maintenance of the public footpaths in Cork City. Cork City Council has a record 
of all footpaths under the responsibility of this authority.  This footpath infrastructure 
is comprised of footpaths of very different materials (granite blocks, paving slabs, 
concrete and tar paths etc.) of very different ages.  As part of public realm, active 
travel projects and other developments, public footpaths are constantly upgraded and 
renewed. 
 
Cork City Council also has a record of footpath defects gathered from numerous 
sources, including the public through the CRM, our own engineering assessments, 
public liability claims and Councillors representations. All funding for footpath 
maintenance and repairs comes from the City Council’s own resources, as allocated 
by Members thought the annual budget process.  There is no funding available from 
the Department of Transport for footpath maintenance and any repairs must therefore 
be funded from very limited Council own resources. 
 
When allocating resources for the annual footpath renewal contract, the record of 
footpath defects is used to identify and locate and the worst sections of footpaths for 
inclusion in the contract. We are confident that this results in the worst condition 
footpaths, at a given time, being repaired first. In addition to the annual footpath 
contract, the Roads Operations Division deploys our outdoors crews to carry out 
localised repairs on an emergency basis, where and when needed. 
  
As well as the Council having limited financial resources, we also have limited human 
resources.  To carry out an audit of the more than 3 million square metres in area of 
footpath in the city is a mammoth task that would require substantial human resources 
to carry out. The benefits of expending such very significant resources on such an 
audit is also questionable.  I believe that this money would be better spent tacking the 
known issues that have been identified with footpaths across the city.  Also, the 
Council has neither the internal staff nor budget for substantial engineering 
consultancy inputs to carry out this city-wide audit task. Furthermore, the output of 
this task would not be immediately used as there is limited budget for very large-scale 
renewal of the footpaths.  The worst sections of footpath are already known and do 
not require such an audit to be identified. The simple fact of the matter is that if the 
Council wishes to significantly increase the quantum of footpaths renewed in any 
given year that the footpath renewal budget must increase multifold from what it is 
presently. 
 
It is also important to note that the Council operates one of the longest running stand-
alone road opening licensing units in the country and was instrumental in the 
development of the Guidelines for Managing Openings in Public Roads (the Purple 
Book) – the national standard for reinstatement of road openings. The Council has a 
dedicated team of roads inspectors ensuring that permanent reinstatements are carried 
out in accordance with the Purple Book. I am thus satisfied that the quality of footpath 
reinstatement across the city is to a high standard.  However, if any Councillor or 
member of the public is aware of a reinstatement of poor quality, this should be 
reported to the Customer Service Unit on 021-4924000 so that same may be 

investigated.  I would also like to advise Council that upon completion of works, in 
many cases, a temporary reinstatement may be put in place, and this may seem of poor 
quality.  The key point with these is that they are only temporary to allow the footpath 
to reopen to public use and are not the permanent finished reinstatement. Permanent 
reinstatement will follow in due course. 
 
9.1.18 
STREET FURNITURE POLICY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘Can the Council confirm that there will be no charge for street furniture in 2025 as 
has been the policy for the last number of years. In addition to this, a proper review of 
permissible furniture and wind breakers to reflect what is practical for use in Cork.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Cahill 24/422) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the waiver on street furniture fees is 
implemented at a national level by the Government through the enactment of 
Regulations.  For the past few years, since Covid in 2020, new ‘Planning and 
Development (Street Furniture Fees) Regulations” have been set each setting the fee 
per table to €0 for that given year.  It is usually late in Q1 or sometime in Q2 before 
the regulations are signed and Local Authorities are notified. I thus cannot confirm, at 
this point in time, what decision the Government will make in Q1 or Q2 2025 with 
regards to the fees to be levied for street furniture in 2025.   However, Cork City 
Council would consider the fee of €125 per table an important step in effectively 
managing the street furniture licences, in ensuring that premises comply with the 
licence conditions and do not impede accessibility for vulnerable road users or create 
unnecessary nuisance. Also, managing the street furniture is a significant cost to Cork 
City Council and involves technicians, administrative staff and engineers. 
  
Cork City Council regularly reviews the conditions attached to Street Furniture 
licenses to ensure they are appropriate for what is practical for use in Cork. It is 
essential that the street furniture creates a welcoming and inclusive environment for 
all citizens, while not impeding accessibility around the city. Permissible furniture and 
heights of windbreakers form part of said reviews.  Any conditions attached to street 
furniture licenses need to allow for equal and fair implementation across all businesses 
in the city. The existing conditions have served the city well over the years, but some 
minor changes may be appropriate, and any modifications deemed appropriate will be 
made once the latest review is complete. 
 
9.1.19 
FOOTPATH RENEWALS / REPAIRS AND ESTATE ROAD RESURFACING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 21st October 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That the CE confirm the additional level of funding required in Budget 2025 to make 
good all outstanding footpath renewals / repairs, and estate road resurfacing, across 
all five Local Electoral Areas.’  
 

(Proposer: Cllr. A. Deasy 24/449) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is responsible for 
the maintenance of the approx. 2.000km of public footpaths in Cork City, with an 
estimated square area of 3,000,000 square meters and an estimated cost to replace the 
entire network of €375m. It is not possible to survey and prepare renewal cost 
estimates for all footpaths across the city, however, estimating the portion of the 
network that is in good condition and in compliance with modern standards (given it’s 
age), an investment of €225m would be required to upgrade all remaining footpaths 
to modern standards.  It is important to note that footpaths built 80 years ago were 
built to the standards that were applicable at the time and not 2024 standards.  Also 
Cork City is a very old city with medieval streets and road structures.  In many 
locations this results in narrow footpaths, or footpaths on only one side of the road.  
In such locations it is simply not possible to upgrade such footpaths to be compliant 
with modern standards due to the physical constraints of buildings and other 
infrastructure. 
 
Every few years Cork City Council undertakes a road surface condition study and 
assigns a PSCI condition rating to same.  This rating scales from 10 (being excellent 
condition) to 1 (being very poor condition). Based on a short desktop study of all estate 
roads with a PSCI condition rating of 6 or less, we would estimate the approximate 
cost of making good all outstanding estate resurfacing to ensure that all roads achieve 
a PSCI condition rating of 7 or above to be in the region of €60 million. This does not 
account for the ongoing road surface deterioration which occurs constantly.  Roads 
have a limited lifespan and as such as soon as they are resurfaced, they immediately 
begin to deteriorate.  This is why in practice it is impossible to maintain all roads in a 
city at excellent condition 100% of the time.  Other insurmountable limitations (other 
than the lack of a €60m budget) include the availability of contractors and supply of 
materials to carry out such an extensive works programme in a 12-month period. 
 
It is important to note that to ensure the condition of both footpaths and carriageway 
surfaces are maintained to a high standard, the City Council is going to have to have 
to very significantly increase, by orders of magnitude, the revenue funding allocated 
annually as part of the Budget process to footpath and carriageway maintenance and 
upgrade.  Once off capital funding will help in the short term but will not resolve this 
matter.  Only significant annual revenue expenditure on a continual bases can improve 
and maintain public infrastructure to the required standards. 
 
10. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH 
- 
STRAITÉISEACHT, 
FORBAIRT 
EACNAMAÍOCH, 
FIONTAR 
& 
PLEANÁIL – 16th DECEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 16th December 2024. 
 
10.1 
UPDATE ON VACANCY AND DERELICTION 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the presentation on vacancy and dereliction. 

 
10.2 
MOTIONS  
 
10.2.1 
CORK CITY LIVING CITY INITIATIVE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 13th December 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council implement a review of the Living City Initiative Special 
Regeneration Areas (SRAs) boundaries in Cork City.  
 
There is a huge amount of pre-1915 housing stock in the St. Lukes area (including 
Gardiner’s Hill, Ballyhooley Road and Old Youghal Road) that would hugely benefit 
from being included in the St. Lukes SRA boundary. These pre-1915’s properties 
which are predominantly traditional construction, typically don't qualify for many 
SEAI grants (as the B2 BER target is too onerous), or indeed the vacant homes grant 
- but nonetheless these properties are extremely costly and complex to renovate.  
 
I believe the Living City Initiative is not being applied to anywhere near its full 
potential in Cork City. It is within Cork City Council's gift to extend the LCI Special 
Regeneration Areas (SRAs) to which the Tax Relief applies by updating the 
boundaries.  
 
This could be done with immediate effect.  
 
I would propose adding Gardiner’s Hill, Ballyhooley Road, Old Youghal Road, 
Middle Glanmire Road and Lovers Walk area (if not already included) to the St. Lukes 
SRA for maximum effectiveness.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 24/443) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Living City Initiative (LCI) Special 
Regeneration Area boundaries are established by the Minister for Finance by 
Ministerial Order under the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997. Cork City Council cannot 
alter those boundaries. The LCI has been discussed in Dáil Éireann since its 
introduction in 2015, including in 2023 and 2024 where the Minister for Finance noted 
that the LCI is kept under review and was reviewed as part of the Tax Strategy Group 
process in 2022, and that decisions regarding taxation measures are made in the 
context of the annual Budget and Finance Bill processes. The LCI period was however 
extended until 31 December 2027. 
 
10.2.2 
DERELICTION 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 13th December 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘Cork City Council recognises that dereliction is a serious problem for Cork City. The 
Council will, therefore, seek to use the Derelict Sites Act to its full effect. The Council 

will also write to the Minister for Housing to highlight operational issues with the 
Derelict Sites Act and provide recommendations for law reform in this area.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Rice 24/577) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that following a comprehensive review 
of Cork City Council’s Derelict Sites procedures in 2023, Cork City Council instituted 
a revised approach to derelict sites that increased identification and improved 
outcomes by better utilising the legislation available in the Derelict Sites Act, 1990. 
A city-wide survey increased identification and placement on the register, resulting in 
a doubling of sites formally on the Register to its current total of 174. There was a 
similar increase in the number of properties being investigated and progressed for a 
removal of dereliction and potential placement on the register, to 230 properties. 
  
As a consequence of these measures the current Cork City Council derelict and vacant 
site portfolio is in excess of 1,000 properties, comprising:  
 
• 400+ properties being investigated for a removal of dereliction,  
• 300 properties being progressed for a removal of vacancy, and  
• 380+ properties being returned to use through grants facilitated by Cork City 
Council’s derelict sites team. 
  
Process improvements were introduced with respect to the application of the Derelict 
Sites Act in 2023 which have resulted in the following improvements in the past 12 
months:  
 
• A tripling of the number of communications sent to the owners of derelict and 
vacant sites, with the intention of facilitating a return to use of these properties;  
• A tripling of Derelict Site Levy collection, from €150,000 in 2023 to €470,000 in 
2024;  
• A doubling of the number of properties where dereliction was successfully in 2024 
versus 2023;  
• Over 337 homes returning to use via €17 million of funding processed by Cork 
City Council through the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant;  
• 82 sites being progressed for legal charges with a combined outstanding levy total 
of €4.5 million Euro;  
• 7 sites being progressed through the courts for failure to pay derelict site levies;  
• 5 ‘In the Community’ dereliction and vacancy events held in 2024, up from 1 in 
2023, with 1 held in each of the city’s electoral areas to stimulate return to use;  
• 1 major ‘Urban Fabric’ city event attended by over 120 derelict site owners, 
property developers and industry experts; 
 
Cork City Council will continue to implement the Derelict Sites Act to its full effect 
with the aim of reducing dereliction and vacancy in Cork City.  
 
 
 
 
 

10.2.3 
REGENERATION OF CORK’S DOCKLANDS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning and Integrated Development, dated 13th December 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes with disappointment the consequences for the 
development of more than 1,300 homes in the regeneration of Cork’s docklands due 
to the recent decision of An Bord Pleanála to refuse permission for Goulding 
Chemicals to develop port facilities at Marino Point in Cork Harbour, and resolves to 
work constructively to support the development of housing and the regeneration of 
Cork’s docklands.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/606) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council will continue to 
work proactively with all stakeholders to progress the delivery of housing, enabling 
infrastructure and the regeneration of the Cork Docklands, underpinned by the 
significant State investment under the Urban Regeneration and Development Fund 
(URDF). This includes the forthcoming Cork Docklands Framework Masterplan 
which will be completed in 2025. 
 
10.2.4 
PROPERTY DERELICTION 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic and Economic Development, dated 18th October 2024 on the following 
motion:-  
 
‘The current laws and enforcement mechanisms may not be sufficient to address the 
entire scope of the dereliction problem. This motion seeks to formally urge Cork City 
Council draft and enact stronger laws aimed at effectively fighting against property 
dereliction and hold property owners accountable for neglect.’ 
 
              (Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/457) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council does not have 
power to change laws related to dereliction. In regard to existing laws, Cork City 
Council is applying the enforcement options available to the local authorities to 
stimulate a return to use. 
 
Cork City Council conducted a city wide survey in summer 2023.  The number of sites 
on the Derelict Site Register increased by over 50%, with a similar increase in the 
number of sites ‘under investigation’ for placement on the register. This has resulted 
in current figures of: 
 
- 
173 sites formally on the Derelict Sites Register  
- 
230 being considered for placement on the register (if found to be derelict) with 
active engagement with owners.   
- 
300 vacant or potentially vacant properties being communicated with to advise of 
grants, schemes and options available 

- 
320 properties have applied for the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant, all long 
term vacant or derelict.   
- 
Other schemes like repair and lease, are processed by Cork City Council’s 
Housing department, while Cork City Council’s administration of grants related 
to conservation and similar concerns also stimulate return to use. 
 
Cork City Council is proactively engaging with property owners on a one to one basis, 
and have hosted clinics and events to promote the supports available to remove 
dereliction.    
 
10.2.5 
TREE PRESERVATION ORDER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic and Economic Development, dated 18th October 2024 on the following 
motion, noting the dissention of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will apply a Tree Preservation Order to all areas zoned as a 
Landscape Preservation Zone for reason of tree canopy, to compliment the objectives 
of the Cork City Development Plan in preserving the amenity of these areas.’ 
               
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/363) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council’s first Tree 
Strategy, which was supported by an objective of the Cork City Development Plan 
2022-2028, was adopted by Members in April 2024. Action 15 of the Strategy seeks 
to pilot the making of additional Tree Preservation Orders where appropriate and to 
subsequently review their effectiveness. There are 64 Landscape Preservation Zones 
identified in the City Development Plan, 49 of which include “tree canopy” as a reason 
for their designation. In total, these 49 Landscape Preservation Zones contain over 
13,000 trees. Background work has been undertaken in relation to Action 15 and it is 
envisaged to commence scoping work for a pilot under Action 15 in early 2025, 
targeting a limited number of sites to evaluate the process and associated costs. 
Landscape Preservation Zones will be taken into account for site selection. 
 
10.2.6 
LIVING OVER THE SHOP SCHEME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic and Economic Development, dated 18th October 2024 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will develop and promote its own ‘Living Over the Shop’ 
scheme for businesses and property owners to make effective use of vacant 'over-the-
shop' spaces for housing; that this scheme will include providing advice and support 
in navigating regulations, grants and other finance options, and best practices to enable 
owners bring such spaces back into use.’ 
     
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/365) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council actively promotes 
living over the shop. The Cork City Development Plan 2022-2028 encourages living 

over the shop and the re-use of upper floors for residential use. The 2022 Census 
showed strong residential growth in the city centre which indicates demand for city 
centre and urban living. Cork City Council operates a range of supports for living over 
the shop, including tax incentives such as the Living City Initiative (previously Living 
over the Shop), and grants such as the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant (Croí 
Cónaithe (Towns) Scheme), Architectural Conservation Area Grants and the Built 
Heritage Investment Scheme. Cork City Council offers advice and support to 
prospective applicants in relation to planning applications, grants and best practice. 
There are also wider supports available, such as planning exemptions and financial 
supports to convert vacant units to residential use like the Repair and Leasing Scheme. 
Previous challenges to renovating or converting above the shop vacant units are also 
being addressed, such as the recent changes to national building and fire regulations 
that could facilitate easier residential use of upper floors. Cork City Council will 
continue to promote and support living over the shop through these pathways. 
 
11. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS 
STRAITÉISIGH - TITHÍOCHT – 17th DECEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 17th December 2024. 
 
11.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Housing Progress report for October 2024. 
 
11.2 
MOTIONS  
 
11.2.1 
INCLUDE ALL HOUSES IN CHURCHFIELD IN THE RETROFITTING 
PROGRAMME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Housing, 
dated 19th September 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would include all houses in Churchfield for retrofitting. It is 
extremely unfair on the residents who were excluded from the original retrofitting 
scheme, and I would ask that these houses would now be included in the retrofitting 
programme.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 24/478) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the energy efficiency retrofit 
programme phase two is a program that commenced in 2021 with a target completion 
date of 2050. The aim is to ensure that all of the existing social housing stock has a 
building energy rating of B2 or higher. Where the B2 standard is unachievable the 
housing unit should be brought to the cost optimal equivalent (COE) as defined in the 
Building Regulations Technical Guidance Document Part L (Conservation of 
Energy). This target is aligned with Cork City Councils Climate Action Plan, the 
National climate action plan and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.  
 

Cork City Council has approximately 9,000 social housing units that need to be 
improved to achieve the B2/COE standard. Properties built prior to 2009 are eligible 
for inclusion in the project. Properties built post 2009 should already meet the 
standard.  
 
The energy efficiency retrofit program phase one targeted properties with a cavity 
wall and with an attic. With this program over six thousand social housing units owned 
by Cork City Council had one or both measures installed. This program was 100% 
funded by central government.  
 
Phase two of the energy efficiency retrofit program is also funded by central 
government through the DHLGH. The funding model allows for an average payment 
of €34,000 per house, subject to a maximum of €42,850 for a mid terraced house and 
€48,350 for an end of terrace house and a detached house. The aim is for local 
authorities to select a mix of properties for inclusion in the project in any given year 
(e.g. those that require a minimal upgrade and those that require a significant upgrade). 
In general older properties any shortfall in funding must be financed by Cork City 
Council. 
 
The funding model means that the emphasis is on properties that require a small 
number of measures to achieve the B2 standard.  
 
The accumulation of “savings” lower than the average of €34,000 per house is used 
to fund expenditures greater than €34,000. Any expenditure in excess of the 
maximums for a mid terrace and end of terrace house is funded by the local authority.  
 
Currently sixty seven social houses in the North West electoral area are undergoing 
retrofits, including properties at Churchfield Green and Churchfield Avenue.  
 
Noting the funding constraints outlined above Cork City Council will be considering 
further properties in Churchfield for inclusion in the programme in 2025. 
 
11.2.2 
AUDIT OF COMMUNITY ROOMS / SPACES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 12th December 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council in conjunction with the Approved Housing Bodies conduct 
an audit of the multiple Community Rooms / Spaces with a view to developing a 
policy for enhanced usage of these spaces. 
 
While there have been many recent welcome housing developments that include 
Community Rooms, often these spaces are underused with no clear function and 
purpose.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 24/425) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council will commence a 
process of engagement with the Approved Housing Body sector and undertake an 
audit in 2025 of all completed social housing schemes managed by them which 

provide assigned space for Community use to ascertain the status of their current 
usage. 
 
On conclusion of that process, refinement of policy for use of such spaces will be 
undertaken to inform future projects where specific community space is provided for. 
 
12. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 10th DECEMBER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 10th December 2024. 
 
13. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 6th JANUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 6th January 2025. 
 
13.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
13.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF NOVEMBER 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
November 2024. 
 
14. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
15. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir F. Dennehy at the AILG Autumn Training Seminar, held at Co. 
Monaghan, 11th - 12th September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir F. Dennehy at the AILG Training Seminar, Overview of the 
Planning System, held at Bridge House Hotel, Tullamore, Co. Offaly, 28th 
September 2024. 
• Comhairleoir F. Dennehy at the LAMA Autumn Seminar, held at Newgrange 
Hotel, Navan, Co. Meath, 17th - 18th October 2024. 
 
16. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald – Cork Healthy Cities – National Healthy Cities – 
January to December 2024. 
• Comhairleoir P. Horgan – Pure Cork/Visit Cork – July to December 2024.  
• Comhairleoir P. Horgan – HSE Regional Forum – July to December 2024. 
• Comhairleoir P. Horgan – Everyman Palace Theatre – July to December 2024. 
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – CORE – November to December 2024.  
• Comhairleoir O. Moran – ETB – November to December 2024. 

• Comhairleoir O. Moran – Local Drugs Task Force – November to December 
2024. 
 
17. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
17.1 
CELTIC CONFERENCES: “CORPORATE GOVERNANCE” 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attendance of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh 
at Celtic Conferences: “Corporate Governance” in Clonakilty from 7th - 9th February 
2025.  
 
18. 
TRAINING 
 
18.1 
LAMA AND AILG CONFERENCES AND TRAINING  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved attendance by Elected Members at all 
LAMA and AILG conferences and training during 2025. 
 
19. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, An Chomhairle agreed that motion 28, 
PV Solar Car Park Canopies, be referred to the Transport & Mobility Strategic Policy 
Committee. 
 
20. 
MOTIONS 
 
20.1  
BUS SCHEDULE MONITOR AT ASHMOUNT ESTATE 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to Bus Éireann and request that a “real time” bus 
schedule monitor, which are currently in use on many bus shelters across the city, be 
erected on the recently installed bus shelter at the bottom of Ashmount Estate in 
Tivoli.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 25/006) 
 
20.2 
UNRWA 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council supports the work of UNRWA and condemns attempts by Israel to 
denigrate its work and condemns the normalisation of the killing of children that is 
happening in Palestinian Territories.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/018) 

 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the motion 
revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That this Council writes to the Taoiseach to note its support of the work of UNRWA 
and condemns attempts by Israel to denigrate its work and condemns the 
normalisation of the killing of children that is happening in Palestinian Territories.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/018) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, An 
Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting past 8pm.  
 
20.3 
COMMUNITY POLICING VAN INITIATIVE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council praises the initiative of the Anglesea Street Garda community 
policing van initiative prior to Christmas and that discussion would happen with the 
Garda Station on a similar roll-out of the van at busy times of the city’s events 
calendar.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/022) 
 
20.4 
CONNECTION TIMES OF BUS AND RAIL SERVICES AT KENT STATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the National Transport Authority to align the 
connection times of bus and rail services by Bus Éireann and Irish Rail at Kent 
Station.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/024) 
 
20.5 
RECANT CONDOLENCES ON THE DEATH OF HITLER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That, on the occasion of 80 years since the liberation of Auschwitz, remembering the 
genocide of the Jewish people of Europe and those called 'gypsies' (Roma and Sinti), 
and the persecution of homosexuals, disabled people, trade unionists, political 
activists and many others by the Nazi government, that the incoming Government of 
Ireland will recant condolences on the death of Hitler conveyed by President Douglas 
Hyde and Taoiseach Éamon de Valera; and that this motion will be forwarded to An 
Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Micheál Martin.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/032) 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, O. Moran, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. 
Collins, B. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, C. Kelleher, 
L. Harmon. (13) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, K. McCarthy, S. Martin, F. Dennehy, A. 
Deasy. (5) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, T. Fitzgerald, M.R. Desmond, P. 
Horgan, T. Coleman. (6) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
 
20.6 
POLLUTION AND DEGRADATION OF THE GLASHEEN RIVER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘This Council notes the recent report: 'Freshwater Ecology Survey of the Glasheen 
Stream in Cork City' by Litizia Cocchiglia. This report highlights the pollution and 
degradation of the Glasheen River and its impact on biodiversity and flooding. This 
Council will write to Maria Young of the Cork River Alliance to deliver a presentation 
to Councillors on the report and the potential solutions.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 25/042) 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to refer the motion to the Environment, Water & Amenity 
Strategic Policy Committee for consideration. 
 
20.7 
STATE CONSTRUCTION COMPANY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will write to the incoming Taoiseach and Housing Minister to 
recommend that a state construction company be set up to build public housing 
alongside local authorities. This state-led approach will act as a counterbalance to the 
for-profit model, providing stability and meeting the real housing needs in Cork City 
and across the country.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 25/043) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, F. Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, 
L. Harmon. (13) 
 

AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, M.R. Desmond, S. 
Martin, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman. (8) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
20.8 
PRIMARY CARE CENTRES FOR MAYFIELD, BALLYVOLANE AND 
GLANMIRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council writes to the new Minister of Health to get an update on 
progress on the proposed Primary Care Centres for Mayfield, Ballyvolane and 
Glanmire. I would ask that the Minister updates us on locations / funding allocated / 
start dates and expected completion dates for each centre.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/048) 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
