MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 8th APRIL 2024 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir K. McCarthy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí K. O’Flynn, J. Maher, T. Tynan, J. Kavanagh, O. 
Moran, G. Keohane. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, M. Nugent, J. Sheehan, K. Collins, 
B. McCarthy, D. Boylan. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí D. Cahill, L. Bogue, M. R. Desmond, T. Shannon, D. 
Forde. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí M. Finn, D. Boyle, S. Martin, S. O’Callaghan, P. 
Dineen, F. Kerins. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí F. Dennehy, D. Canty, C. Finn, C. Kelleher, G. Kelleher, T 
Moloney, O. O’Leary. 
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. A. Doherty, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Housing 
Operations.  
Ms. A. O’Rourke, Director of Services, Housing Delivery & 
Regeneration. 
Mr. D. O’Brien, Interim Director of Services, Community, 
Culture & Placemaking. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Roads & Environment  
Operations. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Chief Financial Officer. 
Ms. A. Murnane, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Administrative Officer, Corporate Affairs & 
International Relations. 
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Connor family on the death of Helena O’Connor. 
• The Porter family on the death of Terry Porter. 
• The Cummins family on the death of Donal Cummins. 
• The Dalton family on the death of Fergus Dalton. 
• The Nagle family on the death of Phyllis Nagle. 
• The Cleary family on the death of Sheila Cleary. 
• The Hourihan family on the death of Billy Hourihan. 
• The Cullen family on the death of Anna Philomena Cullen. 
• The Hanley family on the death of Bridget (Breda) Hanley.  
• The Štrok family on the death of Josip Štrok. 

• The Brereton family on the death of Patrick (Paddy) Brereton.  
• The Healy family on the death of Kelly Healy. 
• The O’Donnell family on the death of John and Gabrielle O’Donnell. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Peggy Murphy.                                     
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES   
 
• St. Vincent’s Hurling & Football Club on their St. Patrick’s Night fundraiser                     
in the Opera House. 
• Ann and Aidan Kelleher of Kelleher’s Newsagents on 45 years of business. 
• Clogheen/Kerry Pike Community Association on the opening of 
Ballycannon Memorial Garden in Ballycannon Park. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle that notification of intention to suspend 
standing orders has been received and called on Comhairleoir M. Nugent to read his 
and Comhairleoir K. Collins motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council write to Ministers Michael McGrath, Roderick O'Gorman, 
Pobal and the HSE to determine if funds are to be made available to assist Northside 
Community Enterprises (NCE) to re-open the Before 5 Family Centre in Churchfield.’ 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Nugent, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to take the motion. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Dineen, An Chomhairle agreed to suspend 
standing orders to discuss the following motion at the end of the meeting:- 
 
‘I ask that this Council calls on the Minister for Justice Miss. Helen McEntee and the 
Department of Justice to set in motion negotiations or the framework and funding 
required that will allow for the re-establishment of the Support After Crime Services 
in Cork City. The service which was widely used by the Victims of Crime was 
regrettably and unfortunately lost to our City in January of this year. The Support 
After Crime Service is an essential tool required by the victims of crime to deal with 
their trauma their loss and their ability to come to terms with what has happened to 
them following a crime been brought to bare upon them. 
 
Our current Justice System leans immensely in favour of the Perpetrator of Crime, and 
it is therefore creating a CRIME PAYS policy in Ireland and this needs to change with 
immediate effect. With that said and following the incoming Taoiseach's comments at 
the Fine Gael Ard Fheis on Saturday 6th April stating that he supports Law & Order 
and that he wants tougher sentences, he wants to increase Prison capacity and he wants 
to address knife crime and Anti Social Behaviour. His intentions are welcome and I 
know we all support this but he did mention in the same statement [Heinous 
Criminals]. But yet all too often it is the small time persistent criminal that effects the 
people the most therefore I further ask that this Council calls on the Minister for 
Justice Miss Helen McEntee TD, An Taoiseach Simon Harris TD, An Tánaiste 

Micheal Martin (TD for Cork South Central), the Minister for Finance Micheal 
McGrath (TD for Cork South Central), and the current Minister for Trade Enterprise 
and Employment Simon Coveney (TD for Cork South Central) to initiate an overall 
review of our Judicial approach to Criminality and the supports provided therein 
including the Free Legal Aid System that support criminals and to introduce a more 
robust structure that provides less supports for criminals and more supports for the 
Victims which should include advisory supports, compensation for the victims of 
crime and financial retribution from the Perpetrator for the Victims of Crime.’ 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss the motion at the end of 
the meeting. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
CULTURE AWARD WINNER 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Lord Mayor’s nomination of Marion 
Wyatt for the 2024 Culture Award. 
 
3.2 
LORD MAYOR’S CIVIC, COMMUNITY & VOLUNTARY & CULTURE 
AWARDS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that the Lord Mayor’s Civic, Community 
& Voluntary & Culture Awards would take place Wednesday 10th April at 7.30pm in 
the Concert Hall. 
 
3.3 
LORD MAYOR’S BALL 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that the Lord Mayor’s Ball would take place 
Friday 12th April in the Rochestown Park Hotel. 
 
3.4 
THE LORD MAYOR LED ANNUAL UNITED STATES VISIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the travel of Comhairleoir C. 
Kelleher to the United States in March as part of the Lord Mayor led annual United 
States Visit to celebrate the 40th Anniversary of the twinning with San Francisco. 
 
3.5 
INTERNATIONAL 
FORUM 
ON 
LEADERS 
OF 
REVOLUTIONS 
WORLDWIDE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara advised An Chomhairle of an invitation received from Jeongeup City 
Government to partake in an International Forum on Leaders of Revolutions 
Worldwide to be held in Korea from 5th – 12th May 2024. Under the auspices of Cork 
City Council, Cork Public Museum will sign a Memoranda of Understanding with 
their Korean counterpart to develop their programme of international exchange in the 
area of commemorations. 
 
 
An Chomhairle approved the attendance of An tArdmhéara at the forum. 
 
 

3.6 
ST. PATRICK’S DAY EVENTS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara noted the success of St. Patrick’s Day events and thanked all who took 
part. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT 2023 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Draft Annual Report 2023. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• 
Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 11th March 2024. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
NUMBER OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins was deferred to the 
next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 13th May 2024:- 
 
 
To ask the CE to report, by company, the current number of construction contracts 
open and the cumulative value of same over the last five years in tabular form by 
company. 
 
6.2 
CEOL TRADITIONAL MUSIC & CULTURE EXHIBITION 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn was deferred to 
the next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 13th May 2024:- 
 
 
Please update the Council on the prestigious Ceol traditional music and culture 
exhibition that was purchased by the Council under the 2006/2007. 
 
Could you please provide information on the current whereabouts of this collection 
and how it is being stored? Additionally, the state of preservation of this collection 
and what measures have been taken to ensure its pristine condition since the day of 
purchase. 
 
Furthermore, provide details on the total cost of acquiring this exhibition and the 
estimated storage costs incurred by the city. 
 
Finally, could you please outline any future plans regarding the exhibition's return to 
the public domain? 
 
 

6.3 
KILLOWEN ROAD RESURFACING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
The part of Killowen Road from the school to McPolins Avenue was resurfaced with 
drainage and gullies 2 years ago. These were the first two sections but Section 3 still 
hasn't been done. There is a heavy volume of traffic including HGV vehicles from 
Blarney Village to Courtbrack and when it rains the water flows down the hill and into 
the resident's entrance as there are no drains or gullies. When is the work on Section 
3 going to be completed? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
This is a rural location with significant ribbon development, where there has never 
been a piped surface water sewer system. The cost of installing such a system together 
with the resurfacing of the road, lining and signing is estimated at over €400,000. 
Funding needs to be identified to carry out these works. In the interim, Cork City 
Council will continue to carry out routine remedial maintenance as necessary.  
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Operations. 
 
6.4 
GLANMIRE GARDA STATION 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise why the Glanmire Garda Station is only open on a part 
time basis. With the ever increasing population of Glanmire and surrounding areas, 
this relatively recently opened Garda Station urgently needs to be opened on a Full 
time basis and adequately resourced in order to provide a much needed Garda service 
to this rapidly growing Community in our City. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Any enquiry relating to the operation of An Garda Siochana is a matter for the senior 
management of An Garda Siochana. This motion is better addressed to the Joint 
Policing Committee. Any such motions should be directed to the Garda District 
Management Committee or to the Chair of the JPC seeking inclusion on the agenda 
of the next meeting.  
David O’Brien 
Interim Director,  
Community Culture and Placemaking 
 
 
 
 

6.5 
DPG APPLICANTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE provide, in tabular form, the number of DPG applications currently 
approved  but not commenced for installation of a downstairs toilet and bedroom and 
ramp access, the average wait time for same in 2023, the number of transfers currently 
approved on medical grounds due to a requirement for a downstairs toilet and bedroom 
and ramp access and the longest any applicant currently eligible for such a transfer 
has been approved for same. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The Housing Delivery and Regeneration Directorate currently has 6 no. home 
extension projects not commenced, for Accommodation of Persons with a Disability, 
as per the following table, which notes the length of time of placement on the property 
extensions programme.  This is an annual programme and the Directorate has 
successfully completed 77 no. extensions for Accommodation of Persons with a 
Disability in the last five years. The procurement process is to commence shortly for 
the 2024 programme. 
 
 
 
 
The Housing Operations Directorate currently has 83 applicants (either Council 
tenants or tenants of an Approved Housing Body) who have transfer applications open 
with a Basis of Need recorded as “Disability Requirement – physical”.  It is not 
possible without a more detailed interrogation of the list to determine the number who 
specifically have a requirement for a downstairs bedroom and bathroom. Applicants 
would not be noted as having a requirement for a ramp but would instead be recorded 
as needing level access accommodation. 
 
It should be noted that the process of classifying medical or disability needs has 
become more streamlined with the introduction of the HMD-Form 1 in October 2021, 
No. 
Description of the Extension 
Placement on 
Extension 
Programme 
1 
Bedroom, shower room / kitchen extension 
6 months 
2 
Bathroom 
5 months 
3 
Bedroom / Shower Room 
5 months 
4 
Bedroom / Adaptations to existing house / level access 
4 months 
5 
Bathroom 
4 months 
6 
Bedroom 
2 months 

thus allowing for greater accuracy in identifying an applicant’s housing requirements. 
The Housing Welfare Officer also assess and provides welfare reports on the cases 
that are identified as the most severe or urgent. 
 
It is important to note that offers of alternative accommodation based on medical or 
disability needs are prioritised on the basis of the urgency of need not solely on the 
length of time an application has been open. For example, a tenant who cannot be 
discharged from hospital due to the unsuitability of their current accommodation 
would be considered an urgent case for re-housing. 
 
In addition to having specific accommodation requirements relating to their medical 
condition, applicants will also have identified specific areas in which they wish to live. 
Applicants can be considered for suitable properties they bid on through the CBL 
system and their disability requirement is highlighted on the bid list reviewed by the 
Allocations Officer. However, for specially adapted properties or bungalows allocated 
outside the CBL system, matching a suitable property with the applicant’s area of 
choice can significantly limit our ability to meet their needs in a timely manner. While 
an applicant’s transfer may remain open for a longer period, this is often due to offers 
of alternative accommodation being refused or where the household circumstances 
have changed since their original application was approved resulting in their 
requirements being revised over that period.  
 
 
Alison O’Rourke, 
 
 
 
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
Director of Services,  
Housing Delivery &  
 
 
 
Housing Operations Directorate. 
Regeneration Directorate. 
 
 
 
6.6 
ROSSA AVENUE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. O’Leary, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
With the increased footfall and traffic through Rossa Avenue in recent years, this has 
put considerable pressure on the road and also the drainage system. City Council staff 
have frequently carried out work on Rossa Avenue such as filling individual potholes 
or repairs to the drainage mains. Can the CE report on assessments that were 
undertaken and outline what long term measures the Council will take to address the 
issues to the road and the drainage system? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
I can confirm that in recent weeks maintenance works have been undertaken on the 
following public infrastructure on Rossa Avenue: 
1) A break in a foul pumping/rising main was repaired 
2) Potholes were filled along the road carriageway 
3) Road gullies which were blocked were cleaned out 
 
Cork City Council will continue to address general maintenance issues as they 
arise/are reported. 

 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services 
Roads & Environment Directorate 
 
6.7 
MODULAR/RAPID BUILD HOUSING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Nugent, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE report on the City Council's modular/rapid build housing element of its 
social housing programme, the number & type of units involved & if there are further 
developments proposed? 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
Cork City Council is currently progressing two pilot projects through Modern 
Methods of Construction, for apartment developments which have been particularly 
designed with a view to enable the use of 3D modular structural systems and elements, 
or alternatively 2D structural systems.  The projects will provide 133 new homes, and 
are located at Westside, Model Farm Road (43 homes) and Cloverhill Court, Bessboro 
Road (90 homes).  Both projects have received Part 8 planning approval and are at 
final tender stage, with construction projected to commence in Q2/Q3 of 2024, with 
completion in 2025.  
 
The Directorate is also currently considering other rapid build, modular housing 
solutions within the housing delivery programme, and we have identified a possible 
additional pilot project.  This is currently at feasibility stage but is proposed to be 
progressed as a rapid build modular project in 2024. 
 
Alison O’Rourke 
Director of Services 
Housing Delivery and Regeneration 
 
6.8 
CBL 
 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify if refusal of a bid property under CBL affects 
the reckonable period for the purposes of determining the relative priority of a 
household for social housing; and the relevant regulations or section of the allocations 
scheme that states this. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
When a property is advertised on the CBL system an applicant has a period of 1 week 
to place a bid. An applicant can withdraw their bid anytime during this period, but 
once the bid week is closed any bid made is deemed to be valid. The refusal of an 
offer made following a bid on CBL results in a deferral period of 1 year being applied. 

During this period an applicant cannot be considered for another property. The period 
of the deferral is also not counted towards the applicant’s credit time. The impact of a 
refusal is clearly stated on the CBL system when an applicant bids on a property and 
an applicant must confirm they wish to proceed with a bid following this warning. 
When the deferral period has ended, the applicant’s credit time prior to the deferral is 
restored to them and any prioritisation previously awarded to them is reinstated. 
 
It should be noted that there is an Appeals Process in place whereby an applicant can 
appeal a deferral applied following a refusal.  Applicants are advised on the letter 
which issues applying a deferral how to submit an appeal. The initial appeal is 
reviewed by the Senior Executive Officer, Housing Operations and following the 
outcome of this appeal, a further appeal can be submitted to the Director of Services, 
Housing Operations.  
 
S.I. No. 198/2011 – Social Housing Allocation Regulations 2011 is the relevant 
legislation. In particular Section 12(2) states “and the latter period shall not 
subsequently be reckonable in any way for the purposes of determining the relative 
priority of that household for a dwelling allocation”. 
 
Section 3.8 of the Allocation Scheme outlines the Refusal Policy & Section 3.10 refers 
to Choice Based Letting.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin, 
Director of Services   
 
 
 
 
  
Housing Operations Directorate. 
 
6.9 
COMPULSORY PURCHASE ORDERS ON PROPERTIES LISTED ON 
DERELICT SITES REGISTER 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of Compulsory Purchase Orders used, since 
June 2019, on properties listed on this Council's Derelict Sites Register? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
In the period from June 2019 to date, Cork City Council issued notices regarding the 
compulsory acquisition under the Derelict Sites Act 1990 on 17 properties.  Twelve 
are fully vested in Cork City Council and the remainder are at various stages of the 
process, one having recently commenced, one was subject to a court order and has 
since been sold and three are currently with An Bord Pleanála (ABP) on foot of 
objection to the compulsory acquisition and the ABP decision is awaited. 
 
Paul Moynihan, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate Affairs & International Relations Directorate. 
 
 
 

6.10 
DATA COLLECTION OF WALKING & CYCLE RATES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. Finn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE give an update on the data being collected of walking & cycle rates and if 
there are monitors in population growth areas eg Ballincollig. 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
Data in relation to pedestrian numbers is collected by the City Council on the City 
centre island at eleven sites (i.e., St. Patrick’s Street at the junction with Grand Parde 
x2, St. Patrick’s Street at the junction with Academy Street x2, St. Patrick’s Street at 
the junction with Merchants Quay x2, Caroline Street, Pembroke Street, Princes 
Street, Beasley Street and Union Quay). This data is compiled weekly, and monthly 
trends are recorded.  
 
Annually a traffic count, that includes cyclists, is also undertaken.  Inner/mid City and 
outer City cordon counts are undertaken on alternate years.  
 
The Council also undertakes regular turning surveys at major junctions across the 
City. The junction data collected (bus, car, taxi, LGV, HGV, motorcycle and cycle) is 
used to support the development of capital projects.  
 
Presently an NTA funded pilot project is underway to install cycle detection at 
locations in the city centre area that includes a facility to collect data. Verification of 
the information being collected is under way as part of the commissioning process.      
 
 
David Joyce,  
 
 
 
 
G O Beirne 
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
Director of Services, 
Roads & Environment Directorate 
Infrastructure Development 
Directorate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 28th 
March 2024 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of site situated at Newton Avenue, Newton Heights, Boherboy Road, 
Cork, to Lyonshall Ltd and Clancy Project Management Ltd in equal shares as 
tenants in common c/o, Niall Daly, BDM Boylan, Clarkes Bridge House, Hanover 
Street, Cork, for the sum of €110,700.00 (inclusive of VAT). 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Maher, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 

2. Disposal of three sites within the residential development of Newton Heights, 
Boherboy Road, Lotamore, Mayfield, Cork to Clúid Housing, c/o Byrne Wallace 
Solicitors, 88, Harcourt Street, Dublin D02 DK18, County Dublin, for the sum of 
€926,160.00 (inclusive of VAT).  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal of an area of ground (237.8 m² approximately) located to the rear of No. 
118, Uam Var Drive, Bishopstown, Cork to Nόirín Moynihan c/o, Babington, 
Clarke & Mooney Solicitors, 48, South Mall, Cork for the sum of €500.00 plus 
costs of €1,500.00, plus VAT. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. O’Leary, seconded by Comhairleoir G. 
Kelleher, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
4. Disposal of land (approximately 2.8387 hectares) situated at and known as “The 
Landing Field,” Ballincollig, Cork, by way of a Sporting Lease to Ballincollig 
AFC CLG, c/o Niall Murphy Solicitors, Joyce House, Barrack Square, 
Ballincollig, Cork, subject to a nominal rent of €10.00 per annum (if demanded). 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Canty, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
5. Disposal of property (approximately 7137m²) situated at Douglas Hall Lawn, 
Douglas, Cork, by way of a Sporting Lease to John McCarthy, Harry Ormond, & 
Rodger Barrett, current Trustees of Douglas Lawn Tennis Club, their successors 
and assigns, c/o McGuire O’Halloran Solicitors, No. 115 The Cube, Monaghan 
Road, Cork for a term of 99 years subject to a rent of €500.00 per annum. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir T. 
Shannon, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
7.2 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 
106 ARDKEALE, MOUNT OVAL 
VILLAGE, ROCHESTOWN, CORK - CORK SIMON COMMUNITY CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration dated 20th March, 2024 in relation to a loan facility 
for Cork Simon Community CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at 106 Ardkeale, Mount Oval Village, Rochestown, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Shannon, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €263,068.34 be granted to Cork 
Simon Community CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 one bed unit of accommodation at 106 Ardkeale, Mount Oval 
Village, Rochestown, Cork.”. 
 

7.3 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 
APARTMENT 8, TRINITY COURT, 
WHITE STREET, CORK - CORK SIMON COMMUNITY CLG 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing Delivery & Regeneration dated 20th March, 2024 in relation to a loan facility 
for Cork Simon Community CLG in respect of the provision of one unit of 
accommodation at Apartment 8, Trinity Court, White Street, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €233,278 be granted to Cork 
Simon Community CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for 
the provision of 1 one bed unit of accommodation at Apartment 8, Trinity Court, 
White Street, Cork”. 
 
7.4 
DRAFT 2024 STREET PERFORMER BYE-LAWS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Bye-Laws for adoption with amendment. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, An 
Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Now therefore it is hereby resolved that the Draft 2024 Street Performer  Bye-Laws  
made by Cork City Council for the control and regulation of street performers within 
the City of Cork are approved with the following amendments: 
 
1) 
The wording of Section 3 is changed from: 
 
‘A person may apply for and be granted a Street Performance Permit upon completion 
of the requisite application form for a Permit and payment of the fee.’ 
 
To: 
‘A person must apply for and may be granted a Street Performance Permit upon 
completion of the requisite application form for a Permit and payment of the fee. This 
fee is waived for those aged under 25 years. ‘ 
 
2) 
The term “Visitor Street Performance Permit” contained within Section 3(b) and 
Section 4(a) is changed to “Short-Term Street Performance Permit” 
 
The new Bye-Laws shall come into force and effect on the 20th day of May 2024, 
being not less than 30 days after the Council meeting adopting and making these bye-
laws, in accordance with the provisions of section 200(5)(a) of the Local Government 
Act, 2001. 
 
 
 
 

7.5 
PROPOSED PEDESRIANISATION OF TOWER STREET AT BARRACK 
STREET END (“CAT LANE” SECTION) - SECTION 38 APPROVAL 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir M. Finn, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the Director 
of Services, Housing Delivery & Regeneration, following public consultation, on the 
proposed Pedestrianisation of Tower Street at the Barrack Street end (“Cat Lane”), 
pursuant to Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of 
the Public Transport Regulation Act, 2009. 
 
8.  
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 2nd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 2nd April 2024. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 29/02/2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 29/02/2024. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 25th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 25th March 2024. 
 
9.1 
VACANCIES ON BOARDS/COMMITTEES 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of:- 
 
• 
Comhairleoir K. Collins to fill the vacancy on the Board of Firkin Crane 
Development. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Shannon, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of:- 
 
• 
Comhairleoir S. Martin to fill the vacancy on the Board of the National 
Sculpture Factory. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir G. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of:- 
 
• 
Comhairleoir C. Finn to fill the vacancy on the Board of the Heritage Forum. 
 
10. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 19th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 19th March 2024. 
 
 

10.1 
RECENT ACTIVITIES IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, on recent activities in International Relations. 
 
11. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & TOURISM STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – SPECIAL MEETING 20th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the International Relations & 
Tourism Strategic Policy Committee from its special meeting held, 20th March 2024. 
 
11.1 
2024 
TWINNING 
GRANT 
APPLICATIONS 
– 
RECOMMENDED 
ALLOCATIONS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Canty, seconded by Comhairleoir S. Martin, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
Affairs & International Relations, dated 19th March 2024 on twinning grant 
applications received for 2024 and recommendations for allocations. 
 
12.  
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE – SPECIAL MEETING 5th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its special meeting held, 5th March 2024. 
 
13.  
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 20th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 20th March 2024. 
 
13.1 
DRAFT TREE STRATEGY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Draft Tree Strategy. 
 
13.2 
MOTIONS 
 
13.2.1 
SHOW THE STRIPES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 13th March 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will Show the Stripes on 21st June 2024.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. Finn 23/339) 
 
The report of the Director of Service stated that Cork City Council Climate Action 
Unit will arrange for the stripes to be suitably displayed on June 21st and beyond – 
location to be determined. 
 

13.2.2 
GRAFFITI IN CORK CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 13th March 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council put in place a plan to clean up many areas of our City 
streetscape which is currently horribly defaced with various types of Graffiti. Tourists 
visiting our City as well as residents of our City are continually appalled at the 
growing levels of this disgraceful levels of horrendous Graffiti on public facades of 
buildings in the City. This is a form of littering which defaces the public streetscape 
in a very negative way. 
 
In order to prevent the growing levels of Graffiti in public places, maybe the 
implementation of CCTV monitoring and a policing strategy put in place could 
endeavour to get the scourge of Graffiti under control. This Graffiti is generally 
applied by individuals with little or no concern or pride for the beauty and general 
maintenance of our wonderful City.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. J. Kavanagh, Cllr. D. Cahill 24/043) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is aware of the 
graffiti which has occurred across the city. The Council acknowledges that this type 
of anti-social behaviour is very distressing and upsetting for both residents and 
business owners.  Graffiti is not a victimless crime as property owners are directly 
affected by this unacceptable behaviour.   Under the Litter Pollution Act 1997 it is the 
property owners who are responsible for the removal of the graffiti from their premises 
which can be both costly and time-consuming. 
 
Cork City Council, in conjunction with the Probation Service, operate a programme 
of graffiti removal, which either removed or painted over, on public premises and 
public infrastructure.  As the Probation Service has limited resources, this service is 
focused on public or problematic buildings.  The responsibility to clean graffiti off of 
privately owned buildings (residential or business) rests with the property owner. 
 
Defacement of property is a criminal act and the City Council has no role in the 
apprehension or prosecution of those involved in such activity. In such situations the 
use of CCTV is ineffective as defacement of property by graffiti is generally carried 
out in darkness and by individuals who wear head coverings such as hoodies so that 
their identities cannot be identified from CCTV images.  Cork City Council will bring 
the concerns raised in this Motion, regarding the request for a policing strategy to 
tackle graffiti, to the attention of the Gardai. 
 
13.2.3 
POLICY TO ENCOURAGE BUSINESSES TO REMOVE SINGLE USE CUPS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Interim Director of 
Services, Community, Culture & Placemaking, dated 13th March 2024 on the 
following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council adopt a policy to encourage businesses to remove take away 
single use cups i.e. tea, coffee and other beverages within the administrative area. 

 
In addition, Cork City Council set up a working group to connect with the 
environmental groups, hotels and businesses, to gather funding to make this project 
sustainable.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 24/048) 
 
The report of the Interim Director of Services stated that the Environmental 
Awareness Officer is available to promote any policies, or recommendations from 
working groups, decided upon by Cork City Council e.g. The Climate Action Office 
or the Local Enterprise Offices. 
 
13.2.4 
REINSTATEMENT BY UTILITY COMPANIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Roads 
& Environment Operations, dated 13th March 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council operate as policy that reinstatement made by utility companies in 
this City should not involve the covering over of any green area/space.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 24/089) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is not aware of 
any Utility Companies covering over green areas when carrying out reinstatements. If 
Councillors are aware of any such locations/issues theses should be notified to us and 
the matter will be raised with the Utility Company in question. 
 
14. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE – 21st MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 21st March 2024. 
 
14.1  
MOTIONS 
 
14.1.1 
AMBASSADORS IN CORK CITY CENTRE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Strategic & Economic Development, dated 21st March 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will report on the potential for City Centre Ambassadors in 
Cork City Centre, such as in Sheffield and Dundee in the UK.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/132) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that there are a variety of city centre 
ambassador models in operation in cities in the UK and elsewhere – some are focused 
on welcoming and supporting visitors whilst others have a broader mandate. Cork City 
Council will review a number of such programmes and report on their possible 
application in Cork City Centre. 

 
15.  
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 12th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 12th March 2024 
 
16.  
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 2nd APRIL 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 2nd April 2024. 
 
16.1 
FINANCE RELATED REPORTS 
 
16.1.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO END OF FEBRUARY 2024 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Financial Statements to the end of 
February 2024. 
 
16.2 
MOTIONS 
 
16.2.1 
LOAN FOR FOOTPATH RENEWAL PROGRAMME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Financial Officer on 
the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council draw down a loan of 10 million euros and put in place a 
programme of footpath renewal throughout the City. In time it would be self-financing 
helping to curtail the multitude of claims for falls.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/118) 
 
The report of the Chief Financial Officer stated that Departmental approval to draw 
down loans will be dependent on the City Council’s capacity to service the interest 
payments on such loans. There is no provision in the 2024 budget to service a loan of 
€10m for a footpath renewal programme. The City Council does not have an 
established income stream to finance a loan of €10m for a footpath renewal 
programme. During the 2025 budget process we will review the proposal but without 
a secure income stream to finance the loan, Departmental approval will not be granted. 
 
17. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th March 2024. 
 
18. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th March 2024. 
 
 

19. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th March 2024. 
 
20. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th March 2024. 
 
20.1  
MOTIONS 
 
20.1.1 
SPEEDING TRAFFIC ON BALLYHOOLY ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 26th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘On behalf of the residents of Ballyhooly Road, I wish to bring to the attention of the 
Council, the very grave issue of speeding traffic in the area. 
 
In particular, I highlight the following priorities to be addressed as a matter of urgency: 
 
1. A reduction of the speed limit to 30 km per hour. 
2. Signage to indicate this speed limit. 
3. Signage to indicate that this is a residential zone. 
4. Signage to indicate that there are children crossing. 
5. Signage to indicate that this is a school zone. 
6. Signage to urge drivers to reduce speed. 
7. Appropriate traffic calming measures. 
8. Solar powered speed monitors.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 24/063) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Ballyhooly Road will be added to the 
list of areas to be considered for inclusion in the next phase of 30kph speed limit 
byelaws to be brought forward to Members.  
 
In relation to signage, Cork City Council will assess the request for new signage. Any 
works deemed appropriate will be added to the roads programme and undertaken 
subject to priorities and available resources. 
 
In relation to traffic calming, requests for traffic calming are recorded by Traffic 
Operations and Ballyhooley Road has been added to the list of requests. Annually 
Roads Operations bring forward to the Members of the Area Committees all requests 
for traffic calming and locations are selected by the Members subject to funds being 
available. 
 
The quantum of infrastructure that is installed annually is directly proportional to the  
amount of funding provided to the Operations Directorate for such purposes. As such,  

should Members wish to increase the pace of delivery of Traffic Calming 
Infrastructure then options to achieve same are a) increase the revenue budget 
allocation in 2025 or b) assign some of the 2024 LAC Budget towards such works.  
 
It should be noted that Ballyhooley Road is listed on the BusConnects programme as 
a Strategic Transport Corridor which will by it’s nature provide many traffic calming 
features in the medium to long term. 
 
20.1.2 
30 KM PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT ON LOWER GLANMIRE ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, 
Operations, dated 26th February 2024 on the following motion:- 
 
‘I am calling on Cork City Council to impose a 30 km per hour speed limit on the 
Lower Glanmire Road, as a matter of urgency. 
 
The residents of the area have reported that they find it extremely difficult and 
dangerous to cross the road, even at crossings operated by pedestrian lights. The 
location is a residential area. 
 
A 30 km per hour speed limit would help make the road safer, calmer and reduce both 
air and noise pollution in the local area.’ 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Tynan 24/064) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the N8, Lower Glanmire Road is 
classified as a National Road. Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) are responsible 
for the operation and development of national roads in Ireland. TII are required to 
carry out a review of speed limits on National Roads on at least a five yearly basis. 
(Guidelines for setting and managing speed limits in Ireland) The current review will 
result in draft byelaws being published for consultation in 2024. Your request will be 
referred to TII for assessment in the next review. 
 
21. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th MARCH 2024 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th March 2024. 
 
22. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
23.  
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES  
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir D. Canty as part of the Cork City Council Delegation visit to the 
EU Commission and European Parliament, Brussels, Belgium, 6th - 8th 
December 2023. 

• Comhairleoirí D. Canty, J. Maher, T. Moloney and M. Finn as part of the Cork 
City Council Delegation visit to San Francisco, USA, 1st - 8th March 2024. 
• Comhairleoir D. Canty as part of the Cycling Study Visit to Utrecht, The 
Netherlands, 29th January - 1st February 2024. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the Suck Valley Way Annual Conference, held at 
Roscommon Town, 13th - 14th March 2024. 
• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the AILG Module 2 Training, Local Election 
Preparation, held at Kilkenny, 21st March 2024. 
 
24.  
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
25. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
25.1 
SUCK RIVER VALLEY WAY ANNUAL CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the attendance of 
Comhairleoirí S. Martin and T. Shannon at the Suck River Valley Way Annual 
Conference held in Roscommon Town, 13th to 14th March 2024. 
 
26.  
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
27. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORT  
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
report for February 2024. 
 
28.  
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES  
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1, that have been referred to the 
relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
29.  
MOTIONS 
 
29.1 
AMALGAMATION 
OF 
CHILDCARE 
FACILITIES 
INTO 
STATE 
EDUCATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘Mindful of the number of creche and childcare closures in Cork and the associated 
pressures on parents, that Cork City Council calls on Government to consider the 
amalgamation of such facilities into state education infrastructure and perhaps the 
devolution of responsibility and funding for same and designation of Local Authorities 
as the vehicles to deliver these services.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Finn 24/066) 

 
29.2 
EXPAND THE ACTIVE TRAVEL INVESTMENT PROGRAMME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council call on the Minister for Transport, Eamon Ryan to expand 
the Active Travel Investment Programme so as to include the allocation of funding to 
Local Authorities for the repair, maintenance, upgrade and resurfacing of existing 
footpaths (including estate footpaths).’ 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/161) 
 
29.3 
CAR PARKING SPACES AT KENT STATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council call on the Minister for Transport, Eamon Ryan, the 
Department of Transport and Iarnród Éireann to engage with Cork City Council with 
a view to increasing the number of car parking spaces available to passengers 
travelling on trains from Kent Station.’   
  
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/162) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, An Chomhairle approved the motion 
revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council call on the Minister for Transport, Eamon Ryan, the 
Department of Transport and Iarnród Éireann to engage with Cork City Council with 
a view to increasing the number of car parking spaces available to passengers 
travelling on trains from Kent Station. Also to conduct a review of the current parking 
practice.’   
  
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/162) 
 
29.4 
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘Given Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Darragh O’Brien’s 
recommendation that Cork City Council refer its concerns regarding the €15 million 
annual payment to Cork County Council to the Oversight Committee in accordance 
with section 24 of the Local Government Act 2019, I would ask that Cork City Council 
call on Minister O’Brien to furnish a detailed response to the letter from Cork City 
Council dated 15th March 2024 in which the Minister was asked for the following 
information: 
  
- 
the identities of the current chairperson and other two members of the Oversight 
Committee; 
 

- 
the date on which the current chairperson and other two members of the Oversight 
Committee were appointed to their positions; 
 
- 
the date on which the Oversight Committee last held a formal meeting; 
 
- 
the process by which the Minister proposes that Cork City Council should refer 
its concerns to the Oversight Committee, to include the address or email address 
to which the City Council should send any written submission and who said 
written submission should be addressed to.’ 
  
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/182) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Finn, 
An Chomhairle approved the motion revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘Given that the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Darragh 
O’Brien’s recommendation that Cork City Council refer its concerns regarding the 
€15 to €16 million annual payment to Cork County Council to the Oversight 
Committee in accordance with section 24 of the Local Government Act 2019 is not 
currently possible as there is no Oversight Committee currently in existence, I would 
ask that Cork City Council call on Minister O’Brien to direct that the Department 
make an annual payment of €2 million to Cork City Council for the next 5 years so as 
to alleviate the crippling inflation associated with the annual payment to Cork County 
Council.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 24/182) 
 
29.5 
BAN ISRAEL FROM THE EUROVISION SONG CONTEST 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘In light of the fact that the Israeli State uses any opportunity, including cultural events 
to generate good PR on the international stage this motion asks that this Council adds 
its voice to the numerous organisations and tens of thousands of people, including 
thousands of musical artists, that are calling on the European Broadcasting Union 
(EBU) to ban Israel from the Eurovision Song Contest. 
 
In 2022 Russia was banned due to the invasion of Ukraine with the EBU saying their 
participation would ‘bring the contest into disrepute’. Israel must now be banned for 
the same reason but if they are allowed to take part we call on all participants to 
boycott the event to show solidarity with Palestine and in opposition to genocide.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/184) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir O. Moran, a proposed amendment to the motion was 
tabled to read as follows:- 
 
‘In light of the fact that the Israeli State uses any opportunity, including cultural events 
to generate good PR on the international stage this motion asks that this Council adds 
its voice to the numerous organisations and tens of thousands of people, including 

thousands of musical artists, that are calling on the European Broadcasting Union 
(EBU) to ban Israel from the Eurovision Song Contest. 
 
In 2022 Russia was banned due to the invasion of Ukraine with the EBU saying their 
participation would ‘bring the contest into disrepute’.  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 24/184) 
 
A vote was called for on the approval of the amendment where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí O. Moran, J. Sheehan, D. Boylan, M.R. Desmond, K. McCarthy, 
D. Boyle, C. Finn, T. Moloney. (8) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, J. Kavanagh, G. Keohane, M. Nugent, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy, D. Cahill, T. Shannon, M. Finn, S. O’Callaghan, P. Dineen, 
F. Kerins, O. O’Leary. (14) 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting against the amendment were greater than those voting for, An 
tArdmhéara declared the amendment to the motion defeated. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, G. Keohane, M. Nugent, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, M. Finn, S. O’Callaghan, P. Dineen, F. Kerins, T. Moloney, O. O’Leary. 
(12)  
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, J. Sheehan, D. Boylan, D. Cahill, M.R. 
Desmond, K. McCarthy, T. Shannon, D. Boyle, C. Finn. (9) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir O. Moran. (1) 
 
As those voting in favour of the motion were greater than those voting against, An 
tArdmhéara declared the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
29.6 
INCLUDE FOOTPATH REPAIR IN ACTIVE TRAVEL FUNDING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the relevant Government department proposing that 
Active Travel Funding would also allow repairs to existing footpaths.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Nugent 24/186) 
 
An Chomhairle unanimously agreed the motion revised to read as follows:- 
 

‘That Cork City Council write to the relevant Government department proposing that 
Active Travel Funding would also allow repairs to existing footpaths and ensure 
they’re accessible.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Nugent 24/186) 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir P. Dineen to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:-  
 
‘I ask that this Council calls on the Minister for Justice Miss. Helen McEntee and the 
Department of Justice to set in motion negotiations or the framework and funding 
required that will allow for the re-establishment of the Support After Crime Services 
in Cork City. The service which was widely used by the Victims of Crime was 
regrettably and unfortunately lost to our City in January of this year. The Support 
After Crime Service is an essential tool required by the victims of crime to deal with 
their trauma their loss and their ability to come to terms with what has happened to 
them following a crime been brought to bare upon them. 
 
Our current Justice System leans immensely in favour of the Perpetrator of Crime, and 
it is therefore creating a CRIME PAYS policy in Ireland and this needs to change with 
immediate effect. With that said and following the incoming Taoiseach's comments at 
the Fine Gael Ard Fheis on Saturday 6th April stating that he supports Law & Order 
and that he wants tougher sentences, he wants to increase Prison capacity and he wants 
to address knife crime and Anti Social Behaviour. His intentions are welcome and I 
know we all support this but he did mention in the same statement [Heinous 
Criminals]. But yet all too often it is the small time persistent criminal that effects the 
people the most therefore I further ask that this Council calls on the Minister for 
Justice Miss Helen McEntee TD, An Taoiseach Simon Harris TD, An Tánaiste 
Micheal Martin (TD for Cork South Central), the Minister for Finance Micheal 
McGrath (TD for Cork South Central), and the current Minister for Trade Enterprise 
and Employment Simon Coveney (TD for Cork South Central) to initiate an overall 
review of our Judicial approach to Criminality and the supports provided therein 
including the Free Legal Aid System that support criminals and to introduce a more 
robust structure that provides less supports for criminals and more supports for the 
Victims which should include advisory supports, compensation for the victims of 
crime and financial retribution from the Perpetrator for the Victims of Crime.’ 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Dineen, seconded by Comhairleoir K. O’Flynn, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, G. Keohane, M. Nugent, K. Collins, D. 
Boylan, D. Cahill, M.R. Desmond, K. McCarthy, M. Finn, D. Boyle, P. Dineen, F. 
Kerins, T. Moloney, O. O’Leary. (15) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir B. McCarthy. (1) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí T. Tynan, O. Moran, J. Sheehan, T. Shannon. (4) 
 

As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, and the vote was 
carried by a 2/3 majority as prescribed in standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared 
the vote carried, and the motion approved. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
