MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 9th FEBRUARY 2026 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, 
N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, 
D. Boyle, N. O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Ms. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. R. Loughry, Director of Services, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development. 
Ms. N. Carroll, A/Director of Services, Housing.  
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Mr. C. Ó Súilleabháin, Director of Services, City Centre 
Development & Operations. 
Ms. E. Roberts, Senior Engineer, Capital Projects, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs. 
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate, Community & Cultural 
Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Donal (Don) O’Donovan. 
• The Traynor family on the death of Mary Traynor.  
• The Connolly family on the death of Margaret Connolly. 
• The O’Sullivan family on the death of Gerald (Ger) O’Sullivan. 
• The Daly family on the death of Deirdre Daly. 

• The O’Hea family on the death of Abina O’Hea. 
• The Falvey family on the death of Kathleen (Kitty) Falvey. 
• The Allen family on the death of Tom Allen. 
• The Bowen family on the death of Shay Bowen. 
• The Cooper family on the death of Martha Cooper. 
• The Harvey family on the death of Pearse Harvey. 
• The Whyte family on the death of Sean Whyte. 
• The Ho family on the death of Maureen Ho. 
• The Ó Sé family on the death of Seán Ó Sé.  
• The O’Brien family on the death of Michael O’Brien. 
• The Foley family on the death of Ger Foley. 
• The Deegan family on the death of Maura Deegan. 
• The Neville family on the death of Daniel (Dan) Neville. 
• The Crowley O’Mahony family on the death of Christine Crowley 
O’Mahony. 
• The Powell family on the death of Anne Powell. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Mary Elizabeth O’Donovan. 
• The Mackesy family on the death of Catherine (Kay) Mackesy. 
• The O’Connor family on the death of Ann O’Connor. 
• The Cronin family on the death of Eleanor Cronin. 
• The O’Brien family on the death of Brigid O’Brien. 
• The Barron family and the O.L.A. Sisters on the death of Sr. Mary Barron. 
• The Jeffery family on the death of Noreen Jeffery. 
• The Ring family on the death of Hillary Ring. 
• The Daly family on the death of John E. Daly. 
• The Buckley family on the death of Gerard Buckley. 
• The Walsh family on the death of James A. Walsh. 
• The Dennehy family on the death of Maurice Dennehy. 
• The Gabriel family on the death of Geraldine Gabriel. 
• The O’Donovan family on the death of Michael O’Donovan. 
• The White family on the death of Anne White. 
• The McGrath family and the Society of African Missions on the death of Rev 
Fr Michael McGrath.  
• The Donovan family and the O.L.A. Sisters on the death of Sr. Katherine 
Donovan. 
• The Higgins family on the death of Julie Higgins. 
• The Lee family on the death of Terence (Terry) Lee. 
• The Shalloe family on the death of Liam Shalloe.  
• The Kelly family on the death of Alice Rose Kelly. 
• The Carman family on the death of Edith Carman. 
• The Coppinger family on the death of Fergus Coppinger. 
• The McGinn family on the death of Ronnie McGinn. 
• The Murphy family on the death of Marie Murphy. 
• The Byrne Coughlan family on the death of Veronica Byrne Coughlan. 
• The O’Mahony family on the death of Joe O’Mahony. 
• The Lotti family on the death of Tom (Thomas) Lotti. 
• The Quirke family on the death of Thomas (Tommy) Quirke. 

• The Sheehan family on the death of Paul Sheehan. 
• The Dorgan family on the death of Michael Dorgan. 
• The Harrington family on the death of Mary Harrington. 
• The O’Shea family on the death of Brian O’Shea. 
• The Hitz family on the death of Catherine (Kay) Hitz. 
• The Pretti family on the death of Alex Pretti. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Iarlaith Long on qualifying for the Millrose Games in New York at 8 years 
of age and coming fifth place in the Fastest Kid in the World Boys’ 55m 
Final. 
• Father Mathews Premier Ladies team on winning the club’s first ever NICC 
National Cup title. 
• Rebel Wheelers on winning the IWA National Cup for the seventh year in a 
row. 
• Ballincollig Basketball Club on winning the club’s first ever MSL National 
Cup title. 
 
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
UCC CAMOGIE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara extended congratulations to Comhairleoir M. Gould and her 
management team who managed the UCC camogie team to win the Ashbourne Cup 
for the first time in 20 years. 
 
3.2 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR APPLE 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded members that a Civic Reception for Apple would be held 
on 19th February 2026 at 6pm. 
 
3.3 
LORD MAYOR LED DELEGATION TO SAN FRANCISCO 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An tArdmhéara Comhairleoir 
F. Dennehy; Chair of the International Relations & Tourism Strategic Policy 
Committee, Comhairleoir T. Shannon and Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn to San Francisco 
as part of a Lord Mayor led delegation from 2nd to 6th March 2026. 
 
As part of the delegation, An Chomhairle also considered and approved the travel of 
An tArdmhéara to New York from 7th to 9th March 2026. 
 
3.4 
CLIMATE NEUTRAL BLUE CITIES CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy to 
Limassol, Cyprus from 19th to 20th March 2026 to deputise for An tArdmhéara at the 
Climate Neutral Blue Cities Conference. 
 
 

3.5  
LORD MAYOR’S VISIT TO SHANGHAI  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and retrospectively approved the participation of An 
tArdmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy and Comhairleoirí C. Kelleher, D. Boyle and 
K. McCarthy in the Lord Mayor’s visit to Shanghai from 15th to 22nd November 2025. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir K. Collins to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
 
‘That 
Cork 
City 
Council 
notes 
the 
contentious 
elements 
of 
the 
Knockpogue/Knockfree Avenues Active Travel Scheme and agrees to engage with 
residents to appoint an agreed, qualified and independent mediator.’ 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss the motion at the end of 
the meeting. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by D. Boylan, the following 
motion was withdrawn:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council engage with the local residents of Knockpogue Avenue and 
Knockfree Avenue through the North West Local Area and Committee and other 
avenues to discuss:  
The legal status and process of the scheme as it now stands. 
The clarity, transparency and community engagement of the detailed plans with 
representations of the residents, business and service users so that all voices are heard. 
To consider improvements to the scheme that will ease the genuine concerns of the 
residents.’ 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss motion 22 on Appendix 
1, Works along Knockfree Avenue and Knockpogue Avenue, at the end of the 
meeting. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to discuss motion 23 on Appendix 
1, Knockfree and Knockpogue Avenues, at the end of the meeting. 
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
4.1 
PROPOSED HOLDING OF AN EVENT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Chief Executive on the 
proposed holding of the St. Patrick’s Day Parade on 17th March in Cork City centre. 
 

5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 12th January 2026. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
CAPITAL PROJECTS IN CORK CITY FROM 2019 TO DATE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of government capital projects delivered in Cork 
City from 2019 to present date, cost of each project and the names of such projects 
that applied for the 1% arts scheme & an inventory of artwork delivered, in tabular 
form? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
  
Project 
Per Cent for 
Art Budget 
Directorate 
Commission Status 
1 
Douglas (including Togher) Flood Relief 
Scheme 
(completed 2022) 
 
€125,000 
Infrastructure Development  
Phase One: The Story Swap, 
community engagement 
completed. Brief for commission in 
development. 
2 
Glashaboy (Glanmire/Sallybrook) Flood Relief 
Scheme (Close to completion) 
€125,000 
Infrastructure Development  
Liaising with OPW on establishing 
steering group and MOU  
3 
Morrisons Island Public Realm & Flood Relief 
Scheme (Close to completion) 
€ 125,000 
Infrastructure Development  
Liaising with OPW on establishing 
steering group and MOU  
5 
Deanrock 
(Completed 2019) 
€ 64,000 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development 
6 
Boyces St Phase 2 Cattle Market St Housing 
(Completed 2023)  
€ 36,824.23 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development  
7 
Shandon St John Philpott Curran St  
(Completed 2020) 
€ 24,121.30 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development  
8 
St John's Well  
(Completed 2019) 
€ 12,819.38 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development 
9 
Glanamoy Lawn 
(Completed 2023) 
€ 8,987.00 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development 
10 
Foyle Avenue  
(Completed 2023) 
€ 6,870.26 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development 

11 
Poulavone, Ballincollig 
(Completed 2024) 
€ 125,000 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development 
12 
Slí Gartan, Mayfield 
(Completed 2023)  
€ 2,770.00 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development 
13 
Madonna House Phase 2  
(Completed 2024) 
€14,466,54 
Housing + Regeneration  
Programme of commissioning in 
early development  
 
 
The national per cent for art scheme allows for the allocation of 1% of public capital 
project budgets to be allocated to the commissioning of public art, subject to 
thresholds and adherence to national guidelines. As per the table, significant per cent 
for art budgets have been secured against completed infrastructure and housing 
projects. The Arts Office is coordinating with the relevant budget holders to roll out a 
programme of commissioning with the available funds. In 2024 a Public Art Manager 
was appointed in order to capacitate this work as well as to implement urgent 
restoration and maintenance of existing public art works. A Cork City Council Public 
Arts Policy is under development to provide a local governance framework to guide 
public art commissioning. 
 
Not included in the above table is the per cent for art commission at the Dunkettle 
Interchange. This commission has a value of €370,000 + €70,000 for foundations and 
groundworks. The budget is managed by Cork County Council and the commission is 
a three-way collaboration between Cork City Council, Cork County Council and 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland. After an international open competition, the 
proposed artwork will be subject to a Part 8 planning process through Cork City 
Council. 
 
Also not included in the table is funding of the order of €80,000, which will be 
available to enable the delivery of a commemorative art project on foot of the 
regeneration works undertaken in the MacCurtain St and surrounding areas. 
 
The following artworks have been commissioned since 2019 from funding sources 
other than the per cent for art scheme: 
• Sentinels – Carey’s Lane (Commissioned 2022, completed June 2023) 
• Boom Nouveau – Cook Street (Commissioned 2022, completed July 2023) 
• The Face Cup – Princes Street (Commissioned 2022, completed October 2023) 
• Urban Mirror – Cornmarket Street (Commissioned 2022, completed October 
2023) 
• Tempus Futurum (Digital Artwork) – Triskel (Commissioned 2023, completed 
December 2023) 
• Winter Sun (Digital Artwork) – Triskel (Commissioned 2023, Completed 
October 2024) 
• Marina Promenade Pavilion Mural (Completed 2025) 
 
No commissioning was undertaken in 2020 and 2021 due to the restrictions imposed 
by the Covid-19 pandemic. 
 

In addition to the above commissions, the City Council worked with the Michael 
Collins 100 Committee, whom commissioned and gifted the commemorative 
sculpture now installed on the Grand Parade. 
 
Significant works already in the public realm have also been completely refurbished 
in this period. These include Kingfisher by John Burke at the Wilton Roundabout; 
Saurian by Jim Buckley at the Lee Fields; Reedpod by Eilis O’Connell on Lapp’s 
Quay and The Swan Fountain by John Behan at Bishop Lucey Park. 
 
Further per cent for art funded opportunities are expected in the coming years in step 
with development across Housing and Infrastructure (including major roads projects 
such as the M20, Northern Distributor Road etc.) and provision is also made in the 
Docklands programme of works. 
 
Rebecca Loughry,                                                                          
Director of Services,  
 
 
 
                   
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs.                                 
 
Gerry O’Beirne,  
Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development. 
 
Nicky Carroll, 
A/Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.2 
COMPLAINTS PROCEDURE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Would the CEO outline for council how the new complaints procedure developed by 
the county and city management association in conjunction with the ombudsman will 
be implemented by Cork City Council. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
In July 2025, Cork City Council Corporate Services put in place a new procedure for 
complaints and appeals. Subsequently, nationally, a new Complaint Handling 
Procedure document, was officially co-launched with the CCMA and the 
Ombudsman’s Office in January 2026.  In the coming weeks Cork City Council will 
undertake a complete review of this document and make any, if applicable, 
amendments to the Cork City Council Procedure for Complaints & Appeals recent 
(July 2025) procedure.  On an initial review of the new Complaint Handling Policy 
and Procedure provided by the CCMA and the Office of the Ombudsman, it is 
apparent that Cork City Council has already included the majority of the 
procedures outlined in this document.  
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 

Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.3 
FORMER TAX OFFICE SITE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE notify Council if BAM construction were paying the derelict site levy on 
the former Tax Office site that is due to be developed on Sullivans Quay? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The former Tax Office site on Sullivan’s Quay is not on the Derelict Sites Register 
and therefore is not incurring the derelict sites levy. The site however has been 
identified as a site qualifying for Residential Zoned Land Tax and Cork City Council 
progressed its placement on relevant maps. The Residential Zoned Land Tax scheme 
is administered and operated by the Revenue Commissioners.  
 
Niall O’Donnabhain, 
Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
6.4 
MUNICIPAL CHANGING AREAS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive in an effort to attract more families to the city centre will 
she review and suggest areas that would work as municipal changing areas for children 
and families that can be delivered before the Summer. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Municipal changing facilities are currently available at City Hall and the North Main 
Street carpark.  The Council will assess the feasibility of providing additional facilities 
in other locations within the city centre.    
 
Cormac Ó Súilleabháin,  
Director of Services, 
City Centre Development & Operations. 
 
6.5 
BREAKDOWN OF BUDGET ON HOMELESSNESS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir D. Boyle, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of this Council's budget on 
homelessness, detailing the distinction between capital and current expenditure, and 
what proportion is spent on administrative costs? 
 

 
REPLY 
 
The following is a breakdown of the budget for Homeless Services: 
 
Capital Expenditure 
€11,977,537 
Current Expenditure 
€38,641,319 
Administrative Costs 
€1,067,071 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.6 
BARRIER FOB 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I write to ask if a barrier fob can be sited at the Welcome Inn on Parnell Place so as to 
provide easier access to Oliver Plunkett Street by Bands/Musicians/Roadies who play 
gigs in the various Licenced Premises on Oliver Plunkett Street. Accessibility to these 
premises by large bands who bring large quantities of expensive sensitive equipment 
to the venues are having extreme difficulties in transporting the said equipment from 
other parts of the City Centre in some cases they drag the said equipment up to 1, 1.5 
and 2 kilometres away from the said venue/s. 
 
I accept that this can only happen with the permission of the owner of the Welcome 
Inn whom I know and have spoken too and he has confirmed to me that he is very 
willing to accept a fob, do his part and do it responsibly to address the issue to hand. 
 
I further understand that there is vehicular access to the said street up to 11am however 
we must keep in mind that these bands/musicians/roadies arrive in the late afternoon 
early evening to set up for the gig. 
 
REPLY 
 
Vehicular access to the wider Oliver Plunkett Street pedestrianised area for bands, 
musicians, and similar users during pedestrianised hours must be assessed in the 
broader context of how the space is used, with particular regard for the safety of 
pedestrians and other vulnerable road users. Permitting vehicles to enter the 
pedestrianised zone at times when people are not expecting traffic increases the risk 
of conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. The request can be reviewed as part of 
the wider City Centre strategy. 
 
Cormac Ó Súilleabháin, 
 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
Director of Services,  
 
 
A/Director of Services, 
City Centre Development & Operations. 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
 
 
 

6.7 
TRAVELLER SPECIFIC ACCOMMODATION SITES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for Cork City Council's policy with regards to day-to-day 
maintenance on Traveller-specific accommodation sites; if this is happening as normal 
at all sites; and, if not, what steps are being taken to ensure that day-to-day 
maintenance happens at Traveller-specific accommodation sites as with any other 
tenants of Cork City Council. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council responds to all maintenance requests that are logged through the 
Customer Service Unit (CSU) or directly from the Traveller Accommodation Unit 
that relate to Traveller Specific Accommodation. 
 
There is no specific policy around maintenance on Traveller Specific Schemes.  The 
Council responds to maintenance requests as per the Tenant Handbook that outlines 
the type of maintenance issue that would fall under the responsibility of the Council 
and those which fall under the remit of the Tenant or Resident on each of the Traveller 
Sites in the City.  
 
To ensure there is a clear understanding of responsibility for maintenance issues, the 
Traveller Accommodation Unit (TAU) in conjunction with the traveller community 
has developed a user-friendly traveller specific handbook that clearly outlines 
responsibility for maintenance issues.  This is currently being finalised and will shortly 
be printed and circulated to all tenants. 
 
It should be noted that there have been several challenges in delivering maintenance 
services as well as capital projects to the following Traveller Sites: 
 
Spring Lane – Access is restricted on this site due to health and safety concerns. The 
Housing Directorate has made every effort to restore full service to this site which 
includes engaging with residents and Traveller Groups as well as engaging in the 
services of Traveller Mediation Services and engagement of An Garda Síochána when 
works have been blocked.  This site is currently being maintained on an emergency 
protocol basis only due to health and safety issues which are present on this site.  
 
 
Carrigrohane Road – Access is being blocked by residents to this site for caretaking 
services.  Various measures have been taken to restore full service to this site which 
includes engaging with residents on a one-to-one basis, meeting with site 
representatives and engaging Traveller Mediation Services.  To date, this site cannot 
be maintained as the residents are physically blocking the entrance to the site to the 
Council and our contractors. Contractors cannot attend this site without the caretaker 
being present under health and safety protocols. 
 
St. Anthony’s Park – Access has now been restored in full following on-going 
consultation with the families on this site.  Due to this access issue, there is a backlog 

of maintenance issues which are being worked through at present by Housing 
Maintenance, contractors and TAU staff. 
 
 
The following sites receive a full maintenance service in line with the resources 
available in terms of available contractors who will take up jobs on Traveller Sites 
and budget available to the Housing Directorate. 
 
• Meelagh Group Housing Scheme 
• Hazelwood Grove Group Housing Scheme 
• Nash’s Boreen  
• Corcoran’s Quay  
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.8 
PEDESTRIANISATION OF DAUNT’S SQUARE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to consult the public about the pedestrianisation of Daunt’s 
Square, as detailed in the Luas Cork Emerging Preferred Route, as soon as possible 
and in time to affect any changes well before the end of this Council’s term in 2029. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The City Centre Development & Operations Directorate is reviewing the current 
configuration and use of Daunt’s Square with a view to bringing forward a package 
of measures to enhance same.  The outcome of this process will be discussed with the 
City Centre Committee once complete.   
 
Cormac Ó Súilleabháin, 
Director of Services, 
City Centre Development & Operations. 
 
6.9 
DORMANT CONSTRUCTION SITES 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE outline the construction sites currently dormant, on which a contractor is 
not currently on site or for which a tender is to be issued and planning has been 
approved, the cost of security on these sites, the status of these sites, the number of 
units which they would deliver and when construction is expected to complete on 
these sites. 
 
 
 
 

 
REPLY 
 
 
 
PROJECT 
NO OF 
UNITS 
SECURITY 
COSTS -
CCiC 
STATUS OF 
PROJECT 
ESTIMATED 
COMPLETION 
2 The Gardens, Rope Walk 
3 
Nil 
Pre Tender  
Q4 2027 
11-13 Straw Hall 
2 
Nil 
Pre-Planning 
TBC 
24 Thomas Davis St 
2 
Nil 
Pre-Tender 
Q3 2027 
8 Bramble Cottages 
1 
Nil 
Pre-Planning 
TBC 
Boyces St – Phase 3 
37 
Nil 
Re-Tender 
Q3 2028 
Clanrickarde Lodges 
4 
Nil 
Pre-Tender 
Q4 2027 
CNWQR Phase 1D(East) 
17 
Nil 
Planning  
TBC 
CNWQR Phase 3A 
15 
Nil 
Pre-Planning 
TBC 
CNWQR Phase 4A 
43 
Nil 
Pre-Tender 
Q4 2028 
Corcoran’s Quay 
3 
Nil 
Awaiting resolution by 
Traveller Accommodation 
Unit re the adjacent site 
TBC 
Gerald Griffin Street 
67 
Nil 
Pre Planning/ 
Contract Award  
Q2 2028 
Grattan Street 
TBC 
Nil 
Competitive Dialogue 
Procurement Process 
TBC 
Milestream, Blarney Road 
TBC 
Nil 
Feasibility Study 
TBC 
Skehard Road 
TBC 
Nil 
Competitive Dialogue 
Procurement Process 
TBC 
Woods Street 
TBC 
Nil 
Competitive Dialogue 
Procurement Process 
TBC 
 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
6.10 
HOUSING ALLOCATION SCHEME – DISABLED APPLICANTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir C. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
How does Cork City Council ensure that disabled applicants who require overnight or 
live-in personal assistance are properly accommodated within the Housing 
Allocations Scheme, particularly where this necessitates a two-bedroom dwelling 
despite the applicant being classified as a single person, and what engagement exists 
with the HSE and Department of Health to align housing provision with independent 
living supports? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council operate in accordance with the legislation and guidance provided 
by the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage. The current Guidelines 
for housing people with a disability came into effect from October 17th, 2017. These 
guidelines assist us with the management of the housing assessment and allocation 
process for people with disabilities, including those living in the community and those 
transitioning to the community from residential care. 

 
As part of the assessment process which determines the property size that an applicant 
is approved for all the information provided in relation to the applicant’s household is 
considered. If an applicant is seeking housing support on disability or medical 
grounds, they will submit a Disability and/or Medical Information Form (HMD Form 
1). The form was designed in consultation with local authority and HSE 
representatives. The purpose of the form is to ensure that we are given the appropriate 
information in a more structured, uniform way to allow us to assess an applicant’s 
needs. The form is used for all types of disability whether physical, intellectual, 
sensory or mental health. The decision made in relation to the applicant’s housing 
need is based on the information provided on the form and considers both their current 
housing situation and their future accommodation needs. This would include an 
applicant’s requirement to have an extra bedroom to accommodate live in or overnight 
carers or any other requirements supported by medical information. 
 
It should be noted that if an applicant is engaged with the HSE or Service Provider, 
they will have a key role to play in ensuring that the individual is prepared for 
independent living and has the necessary personal and practical supports in place. This 
role shall include practical issues around living in the property and the training and 
support to be given shall form part of the person-centred plan prepared for the 
individual. It is of extreme importance that the supports are put in place to ensure that 
the person can sustain the tenancy and the resulting independence.  
 
We engage an on regular basis with Enable Ireland, Horizons (Cope Foundation) and 
Cheshire Homes in particular in relation to applicants that they are supporting.   
 
Within the Allocations Section priority cases of applicants with disability/medical 
needs identified through the HMD1 Form review can be referred to the Tenancy 
Welfare Officer for further review and engagement. This would involve liaising with 
social workers and services supporting the individuals to identify their housing needs. 
 
Housing and Disability Steering Groups (HDSGs) were established in each local 
authority area under the National Housing Strategy for People with a Disability 2011 
to 2016 (extended to 2021). The National Housing Strategy for People with a 
Disability 2022-2027 follows on from the previous National Strategy with an aim to 
support people with disabilities in community-based living with maximum 
independence and choice.  The steering group provides a forum for Cork City Council, 
Cork County Council, HSE Disability Services, HSE Mental Health Services, 
Approved Housing Bodies, Disability Groups and the Housing Agency to meet 
quarterly.  
 
The setting up of the Regional Interagency Group is currently in progress. The role of 
this Group will be to bring together the local authority disability representatives and 
the HSE dedicated housing representatives for both Disability Services and Mental 
Health Services to allow for co-operation and collaboration at an operational level. 
The Group will be facilitated by The Housing Agency, who will chair and provide 
administrative support to the Group and will meet at least each quarter.  
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 

Housing Directorate.  
 
6.11 
FIRE COVER REVIEW 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE why - over six months since the publication of the city's Fire Cover 
Review - no suitable location for a new fire station to serve the south-west of the city 
has been identified; when the site identification process will be concluded; what 
engagements have been had with central government in respect of funding delivery of 
the project; and to set out a timeline for the delivery of a fully operational fire station. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The process of selecting an appropriate site and evaluating the suitability of same is 
ongoing.  It is not possible at this stage to put a definitive timeline on the completion 
of this very complex process but work will continue until a site has been identified.  
 
Cork City Council has been in contact with the Department with regards to this project 
and we have impressed upon them that this is a priority infrastructural project for Cork 
City and will play an important role in the future of Fire Service delivery in Cork City 
as the City expands over time.  
 
The funding for the project with be considered under the National Fire Services 
Capital Programme 2026-2030. Allocations under this programme are based on the 
totality of requests received from Fire Authorities countrywide and Cork City will 
insure that our capital funding request will be submitted for consideration as part of 
this programme. 
 
David Joyce, 
Director of Services, 
Emergency Management & Climate Action.  
 
6.12 
COUNCIL POLICY ON CCTV IN PARKS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE on the Council policy on using CCTV in parks and in public spaces and 
the work programme to implement same. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The Parks & Recreation Department in conjunction with An Garda Siochana had 
sought to regularise the use of CCTV in parks, cemeteries , walkways and open spaces 
within Cork City in 2023, under S 38 of the Garda Siochana Act 2005, but had to defer 
further progress until a Code of Practice for the operation of Community CCTV 
schemes required under Section 47 ( 3) of the Garda Siochana( Recording Devices ) 
Act was in place. The LGMA has informed the City Council that the Gardai have 

prepared a draft Code of Practice for Public Closed Circuit Television and when this 
is finalised, the S 38 process will be completed without delay 
 
Noel Murtagh, 
A/Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.13 
PLANNING FOR SHORT TERM LETTING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide information regarding planning for short term 
letting in the city to including but not limited to the following; the number of 
complaints that have been received about properties operating as short term lets 
without permission and the status of those cases (whether a warning letter or 
enforcement notice has been issued and the outcome of same). 
 
 
REPLY 
 
As part of the measures to help address pressures in the private housing rental market, 
legislative reforms were introduced in 2019 to regulate the short-term letting sector.  
 
In accordance with current planning legislation, i.e. the Planning and Development 
Act 2000 and associated Planning and Development Regulations 2001, short-term 
letting is defined as letting all or part of a property, where the property owner or ’host’, 
may or may not be present, for periods of up to 2 weeks at a time. It is also defined as 
a material change of use that may, in certain circumstances, require planning 
permission.  
 
At present, planning permission is not required for short-term letting use in any 
location where: 
   
• a house or apartment that is a person’s principal private residence (i.e. main 
home), is used for short-term letting for a cumulative period of up to 90 days 
per annum, where the host is not present; or  
• a house or apartment that is a person’s principal private residence, is used for 
short-term letting where the host also continues to reside, for any period; or  
• a residential property already has planning permission for short-term letting 
use, which may include a hotel, aparthotel, tourist village or student 
accommodation, as well as any houses or apartments for which planning 
permission for short-term letting use has been granted. 
 
There is currently no statutory national-level planning policy in place with regard to 
short-term letting. 
 
In the period 2019 – 2025, Cork City Council received a total of 46 complaints from 
members of the public relating to properties operating as short-term lets.  An 
additional 319 properties were identified as potentially engaging in short-term letting, 
as a result of proactive investigation by the local authority. A total of 147 warning 

letters were issued on foot of these complaints and investigations.  No enforcement 
notices have been served and all cases have either been dismissed or resolved through 
negotiation.  
 
It is important to note that significant legislative changes are proposed at government 
level regarding the future responsibility for and management of Short Term Letting. 
These proposed changes have and will affect the resourcing and approach that the City 
Council can give to this issue. As such the Department have advised that the current 
STL Regulations will expire at the end of February 2026. Replacement legislation, the 
Short-Term Letting and Tourism Bill, involving the registration of short-term letting 
properties, which is under development by the Department of Enterprise, Tourism and 
Employment and in conjunction with Fáilte Ireland, is at an advanced stage and is 
expected to be in place in Q1 2026. The Council awaits further updates and details in 
this regard.  
 
Niall Ó Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development Directorate 
 
6.14 
SHARED BIKE SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the expansion of the shared bike scheme 
across the city?  
 
 
REPLY 
 
The NTA operate and maintain the shared bike scheme in Cork City. Cork City 
Council is aware that the NTA are actively looking at improving the operational 
performance of the scheme, thereby enhancing its access and expanding its services. 
We understand from discussions with NTA they hope to carry out this upgrade work 
in 2026.  
 
Noel Murtagh, 
Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.15 
HOMELESS DAY CENTRE FUNDING 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive when the funding of the Homeless Day Centre was applied 
for from the government and the HSE, when was it approved, how much has been 
allocated, has a partner been found to come on board with this project and if yes, when 
will it be open. I have consistently advocated for the opening of such a vital facility 
the homeless people of Cork. For many of them they are not allowed remain in 
emergency accommodation during the day. Once again, homeless people are walking 

the streets of Cork in freezing cold and wet weather conditions. I have previously 
looked for correspondence on this and I would respectfully request a full and 
comprehensive reply.  
 
 
REPLY 
 
A joint application for funding was sent to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government Heritage (DHLGH) and the Department of Health on the 3rd of October, 
2024 as a joint partnership between Cork City Council and the HSE Social Inclusion 
Cork Kerry. The application is awaiting approval.  
 
€912,000 was sought by Cork City Council in Section 10 funding from the DHLGH. 
 
Following receipt of approval discussions will commence with partners for the 
delivery and operation of this facility. 
 
An opening date is not known as it is dependent on clarification of answers given in 
this response. 
 
Nicky Carroll,  
Acting Director of Services, 
Housing Directorate.  
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs.  
 
6.16 
MULTI PURPOSE COMMUNITY CENTRE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir G. O’Brien, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
In 2018 Cork County Council gave a commitment in principle to offer lands for the 
development of a multi purpose community centre. Will the chief executive honour 
this agreement and progress talks to making the multi purpose community centre a 
reality for the many organisations in Ballincollig. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
Cork City Council through the Community & Sports Team have been working with 
Ballincollig Community Forum for a number of years to support the development of 
a multi-purpose community centre and support the forum in the governance and 
management of same. To date, the forum have been supported to become a company 
limited by guarantee and consultations have been held to examine the number of 
community organisations who would avail of and benefit from the centre. Potential 
plans have been drawn up. Scoping works of potential sites have also been completed 
by the Community but to date no site has been deemed suitable. The Community & 
Sports Team will continue to engage with the Forum to scope potential lands and 
examine the development of a multi-purpose community centre for Ballincollig.   
 

Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs. 
 
6.17 
NET COST TO CORK CITY COUNCIL FOR CORKMAS 2025 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the Chief Executive provide the net cost to Cork City Council for Corkmas 2025 
(gross expenditure minus revenues from tickets, stall fees, sponsorships etc.), 
including a breakdown for the main elements (Parade, Lighting incl. energy, Markets, 
Ferris 
Wheel 
& 
Carousel, 
Santa 
Experience, 
Entertainment, 
Security, 
PR/Marketing/Advertising, Staff Overtime, Waste management/Clean-up, and 
others), and outline the metrics and data used to measure economic benefits to city 
centre businesses (e.g. footfall figures, estimated extra spend, surveys, or impact 
studies). 
 
 
REPLY 
 
The Corkmas took place from November 14th to December 31st, bringing over 6 six 
week of sustained Christmas activity and promotion to the City Centre this Christmas. 
The direct programme of delivery included the following:  
• Corkmas Parade/Switch on of the Christmas Lights – Friday 14th November. 
• Corkmas Markets at Emmet Place - Friday November 21 to Monday 22nd 
December, each weekend from 10am to 8pm. 
• Ferris Wheel at Grand Parade – 28th November to December 31st 
• Family Programming and Games in Bishop Lucey Park – Saturday and 
Sunday from December 6th to 19th, 12noon to 6pm. 
• Concerts at Counting House – 6th, 7th, and 13th December  
 
The total cost of the overall planning, programme, and delivery of the above was:  
Corkmas Parade: €98,455 
Corkmas Festival Programme and Delivery: €230,363 
Communications promotion and marketing: €14,452  
 
Total: €343,270 
 
Income earned from the Ferris Wheel and the Christmas markets was €74,399. 
 
The net cost to Cork City Council for Corkmas Festival 2025 was €268,871. 
 
The metrics used to evaluate the economic value and impact to the City Centre include 
attendance and footfall to events, reach and value of PR coverage in promotion of the 
City Centre at Christmas and through direct feedback from business and social media.  
 
The overall footfall at directly programmed Corkmas events above is approximately 
185,000. This is calculated through counting footfall at events, calculating density of 
attendance per square meter and ticket sales.  
 

A sustained eight-week PR campaign promoting Corkmas and come to Cork at 
Christmas was undertaken and the advertising value (AVE) of print and online 
coverage received is in the region of €340,000. 
 
The final festival reconciliation and debrief with suppliers is still underway and a full 
report will be prepared and presented to the Arts Committee in due course. 
 
Rebecca Loughry, 
Director of Service, 
Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
NPF 
IMPLEMENTATION: 
HOUSING 
GROWTH 
REQUIREMENTS 
GUIDELINES FOR PLANNING AUTHORITIES (2025) 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, seconded by Comhairleoir C. Kelleher, 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the non-statutory Chief Executive’s Report 
prepared in accordance with section 3.1 of the ‘NPF Implementation: Housing Growth 
Requirements Guidelines for Planning Authorities’ (2025).   
 
7.2 
PROPERTY DISPOSALS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the reports of the Chief Executive, dated 29th 
January 2026 on the following property disposals:- 
 
1. Disposal of Stall No. 16 Grand Parade Market to KWB Meat Centre Ltd. c/o Frank 
Buttimer & Company Solicitors, 19 Washington Street, Cork by way of lease for a 
term of 21 years from the 1st January 2024 at an annual rent of €3,741.60 plus rates 
and service charges. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Maher, 
An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
2. Disposal of Stall No. 30A Grand Parade Market to San Thidar, c/o Best & Co. 
Solicitors, 3 Marlboro Street, Cork by way of lease for a term of 21 years from the 
1st January 2024 at an annual rent of €2,636.07 plus rates and service charges. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Connor, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Sheehan, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 
3. Disposal by way of exchange of property known as No. 14 Oakpark, Ballyvolane, 
Cork to Patrick & Marie O’Sullivan, c/o Finbarr Murphy Solicitors, Lee White 
House, 8 Washington St, Cork in exchange for the property owned by the said 
Patrick & Marie O’Sullivan at No. 28 Dunmore Gardens, Knocknaheeny, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, seconded by Comhairleoir K. 
Collins, An Chomhairle approved the disposal. 
 

7.3 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT EVERGREEN ROAD, 
TURNERS CROSS. 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed residential development at 
Evergreen Road, Turners Cross, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive thereon as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development 
Act, 2000, as amended, dated 14th January 2026.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed development at Evergreen Road, 
Turners Cross, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, 
T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, 
K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. 
Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. 
Lynch, T. Coleman, C. O’Connor. (28) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed development at Evergreen Road, Turners 
Cross approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir 
S. Martin, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Evergreen Road, Turners Cross, in the City of Cork and the report of 
the Chief Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, that the development at Evergreen Road, Turners Cross, in the City of Cork 
be carried out as recommended in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City 
Council, which was put before Council on the 9th February 2026.” 
 
7.4 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT ANGLESEA TERRACE 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed residential development at 
Anglesea Terrace, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive thereon 
as required under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as 
amended, dated 5th February 2026. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed development at Anglesea Terrace, 
where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, 
T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, K. 

McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. 
Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. 
Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (28) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed development at Anglesea Terrace 
approved. On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir D. 
Cahill, An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Anglesea Terrace, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 
Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Anglesea Terrace, in the City of Cork be carried out as recommended 
in the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was put before 
Council on the 9th February 2026.” 
 
7.5 
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AT PHASE 1D EAST 
 
 
In accordance with Section 179(4)(a) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as 
amended, An Chomhairle considered the proposed residential development at Phase 
1D East, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief Executive thereon as required 
under Section 179(3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, dated 
30th January 2026. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir A. Deasy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed development at Phase 1D East, 
where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, 
T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, 
K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. 
Martin, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, J. 
Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (29) 
 
 
AGAINST: (0) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir A. Deasy. (1) 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried and the proposed development at Phase 1D East approved. 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:- 
  
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development at Phase 1D East, in the City of Cork and the report of the Chief 

Executive, Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions 
of Section 179 (4) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the 
development at Phase 1D East, in the City of Cork be carried out as recommended in 
the said report of the Chief Executive, Cork City Council, which was put before 
Council on the 9th February 2026.” 
 
7.6 
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME: 2 THE STEEPLES, SILVERSPRINGS 
ROAD, MAYFIELD, CORK - COPE FOUNDATION CLG 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 19th January 2026 in relation to a loan facility for Cope Foundation 
CLG in respect of the provision of 1 four bed house at 2 The Steeples, Silversprings 
Road, Mayfield, Cork.  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. Martin, seconded by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-   
 
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €489,997.00 be granted to Cope 
Foundation CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for the 
provision of one 4-bed detached house at 2 The Steeples, Silversprings Road, 
Mayfield, Cork.” 
 
7.7 
CAPITAL 
ASSISTANCE 
SCHEME: 
20 
KINVARA 
AVENUE, 
BALLYVOLANE, CORK - COPE FOUNDATION CLG 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 19th January 2026 in relation to a loan facility for Cope Foundation 
CLG in respect of the provision of 1 four bed house at 20 Kinvara Avenue, 
Ballyvolane, Cork. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
  
“Resolved that, pursuant to the provision of Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1992, a loan facility not exceeding €623,006.00 be granted to Cope 
Foundation CLG, subject to the terms of the Capital Assistance Scheme for the 
provision of one 4-bed semi-detached house at 20 Kinvara Avenue, Ballyvolane, 
Cork.” 
 
7.8 
DRAFT FRUGAL ENERGY EFFICIENT LIVING POLICY 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Boyle, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle agreed to adopt the Draft Frugal Energy Efficient Living Policy. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 3rd FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 3rd February 2026. 
 

8.1 
MOTIONS 
 
8.1.1 
EU PRESIDENCY OF THE COUNCIL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 29th January 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘In light of Ireland hosting the EU Presidency of the Council later in 2026, that Cork 
City Council takes an interest in hosting EU Council Presidency meetings.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 26/022) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Members will be aware that Ireland 
will host the Presidency of the European Council from July to December 2026.  
 
Cork City Council has been engaging with various government departments, the 
Taoiseach’s Office, European as well as regional partners and the Office of Public 
Works with regards to hosting events as part of the presidency and other events aligned 
to the Presidency. Further information will be shared with members as events are 
confirmed. 
 
8.1.2 
GENDER-RESPONSIVE POLICYMAKING TRAINING 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 29th January 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council notes the publication of the Government’s National Strategy 
for Women and Girls 2025–2030, which commits to embedding gender equality 
across all areas of public policy, including at local authority level. The Council 
acknowledges that its policies, plans, projects and budgetary decisions can have 
different impacts on women and men.  
 
In this context, Cork City Council calls on the Chief Executive to support the provision 
of gender-responsive policymaking training for councillors and relevant council staff, 
including training in gender mainstreaming and gender-responsive budgeting, in order 
to ensure that gender equality impacts are considered in council decision-making. The 
Council further supports the role of Cork City Council’s Women’s Caucus in 
advocating for and supporting this work.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’ Connor 26/057) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through Human 
Resources will examine the provision of training on gender-responsive policymaking 
for both councillors and relevant council staff, including training in gender 
mainstreaming and gender-responsive budgeting. 
 
 
 

9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 26th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 26th January 2026. 
 
9.1 
MOTIONS 
 
9.1.1 
DESIGNATE THE NEW BRIDGE AS THE “FREDERICK DOUGLASS 
BRIDGE” 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Directors of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, and Infrastructure Development, dated 12th 
January 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council, on the back of a previous motion I submitted to this Council 
in 2022, can look to name the new bridge in Cork City the “Frederick Douglass 
Bridge.” 
 
Statement of Rationale: 
 
Frederick Douglass, the eminent abolitionist, writer, and global advocate for human 
and civil rights, visited Cork in 1845 during his historic Irish tour. His lectures and 
engagements in the city had a lasting impact on Cork’s civic and cultural life and 
continue to form an important chapter in our shared history. 
 
The proposal to name this bridge after Frederick Douglass carries additional 
significance. A major bridge in Washington, D.C. is already named the Frederick 
Douglass Memorial Bridge, a landmark of national importance in the United States. 
During a previous visit by representatives of Cork City Council to Washington, D.C., 
it was suggested that should Cork choose to name its new bridge in honour of 
Frederick Douglass, there may be an opportunity to explore the twinning of the two 
bridges. Such a twinning arrangement would strengthen international civic 
relationships, highlight shared values of justice and equality, and deepen cultural and 
educational ties. 
 
Naming the bridge after Frederick Douglass would therefore: 
 
1. 
Honour a Historic Connection: Recognise the important relationship between 
Frederick Douglass and the people of Cork. 
2. 
Continue the Work of the 2022 Motion: Build directly on the aims and 
principles of the motion I submitted in 2022, reaffirming Cork City Council’s 
commitment to inclusion, equality, and the recognition of figures who 
embody these values. 
3. 
Promote International Civic Links: Provide the basis for exploring the 
potential twinning of Cork’s new bridge with the Frederick Douglass 
Memorial Bridge in Washington, D.C. 
4. 
Enhance Public Awareness: Offer a meaningful civic landmark inspiring 
reflection on Cork’s role in global human rights history. 
5. 
Celebrate a Shared Global Legacy: Align Cork with other cities that honour 
Frederick Douglass as a leader of enduring moral importance. 

 
In light of the above, and in keeping with the objectives outlined in the 2022 motion, 
I request that the Council formally look at designating the new bridge as the Frederick 
Douglass Bridge, and undertake any necessary administrative or diplomatic steps to 
support this designation and explore opportunities for international bridge twinning.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. Kelleher 26/001) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that a process for the naming of the new 
bridge was considered and approved by Party Whips at its meeting of 24th November 
2025 and further adopted by Council on 8th December 2025.  The process is similar to 
the process that saw the naming of both Mary Elmes Bridge in 2019, and Vernon 
Mount Bridge in 2023.  Submissions from the public will be accepted until Monday 
26 January 2026 at 4pm.  The suggestion contained in the motion will be included in 
the list of suggested names to be shortlisted. 
 
10. 
ENVIRONMENT, 
WATER 
& 
AMENITY 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - COMHSHAOL, 
UISCE & ÁISEANNA – 20th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Environment, Water & 
Amenity Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 20th January 2026. 
 
10.1 
MOTIONS 
 
10.1.1 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE CORK LUAS ACROSS THE RIVER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 12th September 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That a comprehensive river uses feasibility study be carried out prior to any further 
development of the Cork Luas across the river.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. K. McCarthy, Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/311) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that it is acknowledged that the delivery 
of the proposed enabling infrastructure in the Cork Docklands must balance the 
demands of both existing and future river users and uses, and the integration of new 
bridge structures and quayside infrastructure. The Cork City Development Plan 2022-
2028 includes Objective 6.21, which sets out Cork City Council’s intention to 
commission a river use and management study to examine the commercial and 
recreational potential of the River Lee and Upper Harbour area for all users, and 
identify essential infrastructure and appropriate locations for the delivery of this 
infrastructure in partnership with key stakeholders. As confirmed to Councillors 
during the City Development Plan ‘Variation No. 2 (Cork Docklands)’ process in July, 
Cork City Council intends to commission this study, which will consider tourism, 
marine recreation and wider river use, as soon as possible. A brief is currently being 
prepared with the intention of progressing to tender as soon as possible.  
 

10.1.2 
DOG PARK FOR MARINA PARK 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 17th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will report on the ongoing use of the dog park area in Ballincollig 
and seek to establish a similar set up for somewhere in Marina Park.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/419) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the Dog Park in the Regional 
Park Ballincollig has proven to be a very well used facility with positive feed back 
from users. Given the availability of suitable land within the Regional Park this 1.2 
acre site comprising 2 distinct areas separating large dogs from smaller dogs, made it 
feasible to locate a dog park here. The Park cost approximately €60,000 to provide. 
 
The only large open space in the Marina Park has been designed as an ecological 
biodiverse amenity. It is therefore not a suitable location for a dog park.   
  
A full report on the possibilities of establishing additional dog parks will be brought 
to Council early in 2026. 
 
10.1.3 
PROVISION OF PUBLIC TOILETS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 17th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council as a matter of policy include the provision of public toilets 
when planning the development of public parks and public spaces.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 25/440) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that it is the Policy of the Parks 
and Recreation Department, where possible, to provide public toilets at our major 
parks i.e. those with the highest footfall and where users stay for long periods. The 
provision and maintenance of toilets is costly and there is no budgetary provision to 
have toilets at smaller parks. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion to the City Centre Committee for 
further consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.1.4 
CLIMATE CRISIS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, Acting Director of Services, Local Area Development & 
Operations and Director of Services, Corporate, Community and Cultural Affairs, 
dated 17th November 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘In recognition of the climate crisis, in advance of the crucial COP30 United Nations 
Climate Change Conference in November, and in honour of the 10th anniversary of 
the Paris Agreement, that Cork City Council: 
 
(a) Recognises road transport as Cork’s primary source of greenhouse gas pollution, 
recognises bus priority on Saint Patrick’s Street as the primary change it can make to 
cut this pollution, recognises Bus Éireann’s advice to extend bus priority hours there, 
will engage with Bus Éireann and the National Transport Authority to model the 
related improvements to bus reliability and footfall in the city centre, will engage with 
stakeholders about extending the hours and, on that basis, commits itself in principle 
to extending the hours to coincide with the introduction of the new Bus Connects 
network, due from April 2026, to collaboratively and successfully implement Cork’s 
greatest response to the existential crisis of climate change. 
 
(b) Will join the worldwide movement of Earth Hour by switching off non-essential 
lights at City Hall for one hour from 8:30pm-9:30pm, on the last or penultimate 
Saturday in March that Earth Hour is held, every year, as a symbol of commitment to 
the planet.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/442) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that: 
 
(a) 
Busconnects program is the national program for the upgrading of bus services, 
the new network was adopted by the NTA following public consultation and 
rollout is expecting to be commenced in 2026. This will include, frequency, 
routing and scheduling throughout the city centre. The new City Centre 
Directorate will also engage with Bus Éireann and NTA in relation to bus 
priority on St. Patrick Street as requested by Cllr Kamegni. 
 
(b) 
While it is not possible to turn off all lighting due to Health and Safety 
Regulations, we will support by turning off all unnecessary lighting and promote 
Earth Hour with all City Council staff. 
 
10.1.5 
WATER FOUNTAINS IN PUBLIC PARKS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 17th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council as a matter of policy would aim for where practicable that 
every public park would have at least one water fountain. With the changing climate 

and more usage of our parks with Parkruns etc this should enhance the usage of our 
parks.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Sheehan 25/445) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that a number of drinking water 
fountains have been installed by the Parks & Recreation Department across a number 
of parks in the past two years, it being the objective  to continue this programme of 
installation to other parks on a rolling basis subject to it being feasible to connect to a 
suitable water supply.  
 
10.1.6 
INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC WATER REFILL STATIONS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development, dated 17th November 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council, noting the success of the Refill Water Initiative in Dublin 
City Council and other local authorities, agrees to install publicly accessible water 
refill stations in Cork City Centre to reduce single-use plastic waste, promote 
sustainability, and provide a practical service for residents and visitors alike.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/457) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Deposit Return Scheme (DRS) 
encourages the recycling of plastic bottles and cans and has resulted in a significant 
decrease in waste of this nature in Cork City.  Since it’s introduction in February 2024 
Ireland’s recycling rate for plastic bottles and aluminium and steel cans has jumped 
from 49% to 91%, of this, 76% is directly captured via the scheme.  This equates to 
798 million more containers now being recycled annually in Ireland.  Irish Business 
Against Litter (IBAL) reports a 50% drop in litter from bottles and cans since the 
scheme launched. Notwithstanding that Cork City Council will review the potential 
for publicly accessible water refill stations to be installed in the city centre.  
 
10.1.7 
WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN THE CITY CENTRE 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 17th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council recognises: 
 
a. that the current system of waste management in the city centre and surrounds 
is not fit for purpose in areas of dense population where homeowners have 
nowhere to store bins but on the footpaths outside their homes;  
b. that the current system leads to vast tracts of footpaths in the city being 
rendered completely unusable and impossible to navigate if you are reliant on 
a mobility aid, pushing a buggy, physically impaired etc; 
c. that the current system poses a safety risk to walkers by rendering the said 
footpaths unusable and is incompatible with the city’s stated goal of being a 
city that encourages active travel; 

d. that the current system materially detracts from the overall look of the city, 
 
And recognising the foregoing that the City Council resolves to investigate 
alternatives to the current system including but not limited to investigating the 
possibility of moving to a similar system to that being currently rolled out by Dublin 
City Council i.e. the introduction of on street waste compactors.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Connor 25/472) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is currently 
in talks with Dublin City Council and waste companies on the options available for 
the street waste compactors and accessing if this is a suitable option for residential 
waste collection. 
 
10.1.8 
HOUSEHOLD AND COMMERCIAL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 17th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would reinstate ownership and direct management of 
household and commercial refuse collection services, and that it would reintroduce a 
waiver scheme for pensioners, persons with disabilities, and other eligible 
individuals.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/477) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that Dublin City Council 
commissioned the Institute of Public Administration (IPA) to undertake research in 
respect of the re-municipalisation of waste services in Dublin City Council. The 
results of this research were published in February 2023. The key finding of this report 
was that the re-municipalisation of waste services in Ireland (and thus the exclusion 
of private collectors) would require changes to the primary legislation i.e. to the Waste 
Management Act, 1996. The report was very clear that without said changes to the 
national legislation and re-municipalisation would be deemed anti-competitive by the 
Irish and European Courts. The report went further and stated that even if a Local 
Authority were to re-enter the market in competition with private operators, it is likely 
that the Courts could view its dual roles as both regulator and market operator as a 
conflict of interests and therefore also anti-competitive, unless legislative changes 
were introduced. It is thus clear from the above report that unless changes to national 
legislation are implemented, the re-municipalisation of waste collection services by 
Local Authorities is not permissible.  
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion to the Corporate Policy Group for 
further consideration. 
 
10.1.9 
ANIMAL WELFARE CONCERNS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 17th November 2025 on the following motion:- 

 
‘Given the tremendous work undertaken by Council staff and other supports I wish to 
ask Cork City Council to prepare a report on:  
 
1. The number of areas in the city where animal welfare issues have been 
highlighted.  
2. The number of horses reported and taken into care.  
3. What inter agency approaches have been undertaken in terms of animal 
welfare prevention.  
4. What's the length of time taken from reporting the issue to collecting the 
animals and taking them into care. 
5. To establish if those claiming they own the animals are capable of looking 
after the animals and in compliance with legislation.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. T. Fitzgerald 25/481) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that: 
 
1. Animal Welfare issues are being highlighted in the suburban areas of the City on 
an ongoing basis. 
2. In the first six months of the year 2025, there were 56 reports received in respect 
of horses. This resulted in 40 horses being seized in that six-month time period. 
There were 36 horses successfully re-homed and 4 horses remained in the Pound 
at the end of June 2025. No horses were euthanised.  
3. Cork City Council interacts with the ISPCA, CSPCA and the Veterinary Service 
in the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine as required on an ongoing 
basis. There was also an Animal Welfare Day previously held at Spring Lane. 
The Housing Directorate is engaging with Corporate, Community and Culture 
Affairs regarding a further roll out. 
4. The time taken from receiving a report to collecting a horse varies but in most 
cases the horse would usually be collected the next day once there is no danger 
to the public. Requests where horses are straying and posing an imminent 
danger to the Public which are deemed urgent would usually be dealt within an 
hour or so. 
5. The requirement for the return of seized horses to owners is covered by the 
Control of Horses Act 1996. The requirements consist of:  Evidence of a current 
horse passport, Evidence that the owner has the necessary facilities and lands 
for the proper upkeep and welfare of the horse, Evidence of an Equine Premises 
Number and Proof of ownership. Payment of the return fee for the horse is also 
required. 
 
In the first six months of the year 2025, no horses were successfully reclaimed by an 
owner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.1.10 CITY CENTRE STREET CLUTTER AUDIT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development, dated 17th November 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That a city centre street clutter audit be undertaken specifically on streets such as St. 
Patrick’s Street and the Grand Parade.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/509) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Centre Development and 
Operations Directorate has commenced a process of data collection which is 
identifying and quantifying street furniture in the city centre. Items being recorded in 
the survey include, but are not limited to, bollards, seating, plinths, planters, signage 
poles, traffic signals, etc.  
 
10.1.11 HOUSEHOLD WASTE COLLECTION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 17th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council supports the report and recommendations of the Competition 
and Consumer Protection Commission into The Operation of the Household Waste 
Collection Market.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/517) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the 2018 Competition and 
Consumer Protection Commission recommendations aim to create a more efficient, 
competitive, and consumer friendly household waste collection market in Ireland. By 
addressing the structural issues and enhancing regulatory oversight, the commission 
seeks to improve service delivery and environmental outcomes in the waste 
management sector.  
 
Although Cork City Council supports any improvements that can be made to the 
Operation of the Household Waste Collection Market its role is to implement any 
legislation created by the Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to forward the motion to the Minister for Climate, 
Energy and the Environment. 
 
10.1.12 RE-TURN UNITS AT PUBLIC FACILITIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 17th November 2025 on the 
following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will add dedicated Re-turn units for bottles and cans at City 
Hall, libraries, and other public facilities and will consider the example of Cork 

University Hospital (CUH) and Cork Airport in nominating charities to benefit from 
these deposits.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 25/525) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Council Services will examine the 
feasibility of this request for the provision of dedicated Re-turn units for bottles and 
cans in City Hall. An initial examination of the potential for locating the units in the 
Library Service indicated that the space required may be a challenge but this will be 
reviewed further. A further report will issue in relation to this motion once the 
feasibility study is complete. 
 
10.1.13 COMMUNITY ALLOTMENTS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 17th November 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council commits to expanding the provision of community allotments 
across the city, recognising their value in promoting biodiversity, sustainability, 
mental and physical wellbeing, and social inclusion. The Council will identify suitable 
green spaces, including underutilised public parks and lands, for the development of 
accessible allotments, with particular consideration given to raised bed gardening for 
older people and those with disabilities. Furthermore, the Council will explore 
partnerships with community organisations, schools, and healthcare providers to 
maximise the social and educational benefits of allotment spaces.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/530) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the Parks & Recreation 
Department have two large garden allotments in operation, one at Churchfield and the 
other at the Regional Park in Ballincollig. The development costs of these gardens is 
expensive, allowing for the provision of necessary fencing enclosure, water and 
sewage supplies, toilets and storage unit, site layout including top soil etc. 
 
In recent years, the Department has with other agencies such as Green Spaces for 
Health and others, helped provide community gardens for growing vegetables across 
a number of parks and open spaces including at Clashduv Park in Togher , Murphys 
Farm at Bishopstown, Douglas Community Park, Ballinlough Park, Mahon, 
Ballyhooley Quarry, the Glen Resource Centre and work progressing for a new garden 
at the Fairfield at Fairhill. This model has proved to be very popular, effective and 
achievable, without a budgetary constraint preventing a local community from having 
a local community garden. We will continue to work with other agencies and 
communities to support further provision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.1.14 TRIAL CONVERSION OF A STREET TO A PERMEABLE MATERIAL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 16th January 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will trial conversion of a street to a permeable material to 
assist in relief from the impact of cloudbursts and other flash flooding situations.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/624) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that permeable surface materials have not 
been a common feature of road/street construction in Cork City due to challenges 
presented by way of high installation cost, additional ground condition requirements, 
susceptibility to cracking in cold weather, potential for clogging/accumulation of fine 
material, additional maintenance requirements, structural limitations, groundwater 
contamination risks, installation susceptibility etc. The potential use of such materials 
will continue to be reviewed by Council having regard to future advances in materials 
and design solutions. In the meantime, the Council will continue to expand the use of 
other sustainable urban drainage solutions in the development of new works including 
rain gardens, swales, wetlands, trees/planting, soakways, rainwater harvesting, 
attenuation systems etc. 
 
10.1.15 GREENING PLAN FOR THE CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, City 
Centre Development, dated 16th January 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council welcomes the opening of Bishop Lucey Park, particularly the 
removal of the railings, notes that its success will be measured by the number and 
variety of people enjoying it, and resolves to mark the occasion by deliberately 
greening the city, starting with restoring green space within the park and detailing a 
greening and de-paving plan for public space throughout Cork, starting in the city 
centre, noting the recent example of grasscrete for car-parking spaces at the Marina 
Promenade and the potential for the radical retrofit of sustainable drainage systems 
(SuDS) to manage surface water, mitigate flood risk and materially add to Cork’s 
appearance, colour, health and wellbeing.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/652) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the thematic objectives of the City 
Centre Development & Operations: Action Plan 2025-2030, which was adopted by 
Cork City Council at its December meeting, are consistent with the proposal set out 
in the Notice of Motion.  It is noted in the Action Plan that “by enhancing key streets 
and public spaces, revitalisation will transform currently cluttered and underutilised 
areas into attractive, green and welcoming places that encourage community 
development, social interaction and increase footfall.”   The actions referenced in the 
Notice of Motion can be factored into considerations in terms of enhanced 
streetscaping as projects are progressed under the Action Plan. In the meantime, it is 
confirmed that restorative and additional planting will be undertaken as necessary at 
the recently completed Marina Park and Bishop Lucy Park following the very high 

levels of people using the new facilities along with the inclement weather of recent 
weeks. 
 
10.1.16 PLAQUE AT SPRIGGS ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Acting Director of Services, 
Local Area Development & Operations, dated 16th January 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council in remembrance of Volunteer Denis Spriggs install a plaque 
at Spriggs Road, Gurranabraher to be included in the Revolutionary Trail.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/573) 
 
The report of the Acting Director of Services stated that the committee refer this 
motion to the relevant Local Area Committee for further consideration. 
 
11. 
COMMUNITY, CULTURE & PLACEMAKING STRATEGIC POLICY 
COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - POBAL, CULTÚR & 
COMHFHORBAIRT ÁITE – 22nd JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Community, Culture & 
Placemaking Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 22nd January 2026. 
 
11.1 
MINUTES OF THE ARTS COMMITTEE – 22nd OCTOBER 2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Arts Committee meeting held 
on the 22nd October 2025. 
 
11.2 
MOTIONS 
 
11.2.1 
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CORK TRAUMA SENSITIVE CITIES 
STRATEGY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 18th December 2025 on the 
following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council supports the review and continuation of the Cork Trauma 
Sensitive Cities Strategy beyond 2025, and that the Council will work in partnership 
with the Community section and the Steering Group to develop the next phase of the 
strategy. The continuation of this work will ensure that Cork remains a leader in 
embedding trauma-informed principles across services, communities, and policy 
development.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. C. O’Connor 25/576) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community team engage a number of stakeholders and agencies across the city to 
facilitate an inter-agency steering committee which responds to our commitment to 

making Cork a Trauma Sensitive City. In 2025, the steering committee was re-
established and each partner agency signed a pledge, signalling their commitment to 
embed trauma-informed principles across services, communities, and policy 
development. 
 
In 2026, the Community Team will lead the development of a Trauma Sensitive Cities 
strategy for Cork city from 2026-2029. This will involve a needs analysis and 
engagement with stakeholders and services across the city to ensure services, 
communities, and policy development are supported and informed in our joint 
commitment to being trauma informed.  
 
11.2.2 
DEVELOPMENT OF A CORK CITY MUSEUM OF MUSIC 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 22nd December 2025 on the 
following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council explore the feasibility of establishing a dedicated Cork 
Museum of Music, reflecting the city’s rich musical heritage across two core themes: 
 
1. Artists and Bands – documenting and celebrating the contributions of Cork’s 
musicians, bands, composers and performers across the decades; and 
2. Iconic Venues – preserving the history, stories and cultural impact of the 
city’s legendary music venues, past and present. 
 
That Council initiate the preparation of a preliminary business case to examine: 
 
• 
suitable sites or existing buildings capable of accommodating the project; 
• 
potential for phased development or partnership models (public, private, 
cultural, educational); 
• 
visitor-attraction potential and projected footfall; 
• 
operating costs, revenue opportunities and funding sources (local, national, 
EU cultural funding); 
• 
integration with the city’s tourism strategy and night-time economy; and 
• 
opportunities for digital archives, exhibitions, and educational or community 
programming. 
 
That a report be brought back to Council outlining options, estimated costs and next 
steps.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/614) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council operate a highly 
regarded Music Library (Rory Gallagher Music Library) as part of its City Libraries 
Service providing a unique musical resource in the city with free access to music 
materials in all formats including CDs, DVDs, streaming services, music books and 
scores in all genres; classical, choral, traditional, jazz, contemporary, rock and pop for 
lending and for reference and archival purposes. Our libraries are involved with many 
of the festivals and cultural events in the city, hosting events during the Jazz Festival, 

Choral Festival, Folk Festival, Heritage Week, Lifelong Learning Festival, and 
Culture Night. 
 
Cork City Libraries established The Cork Music and Performing Arts Archive the 
Cork Music Archive to give a permanent home to the wealth of music produced by 
Cork people. The collections held in the archive cover all forms of music. is an online 
resource dedicated to showcasing and preserving Cork’s rich musical and performing 
arts heritage. It features a diverse range of collections which contain texts, sheet 
music, sound recordings, photographs, and scrapbooks filled with fascinating 
ephemera which offer a unique look at the lives and work of notable artists and 
musicians. Some of the Archive has been digitised and is available online. Developing 
this offering is actively pursued through the documenting and celebrating the 
contributions of Cork’s musicians, bands, composers and performers and identifying 
and  preserving the history, stories and cultural impact of the city’s legendary music 
venues, past and present is a core aspiration of the Library Service along with its sister 
services in Cork Public Museum and Cork City and County Archives as resources 
become available. 
 
The City Library will work on ways to celebrate and record Musicians and their impact 
on our city as part of this process. An example of this is the recent Cork Rocks for 
Rory celebration of the life of Rory Gallagher - which will further develop and be 
recorded in 2026. A podcast series is in planning for the coming years that will reach 
across musical topics including big bands, musicians and venues.  
 
A report will be prepared for the committee in the first half of 2026. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting 
past 8pm. 
 
11.2.3 
PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE ADRENALINE AUTO-INJETORS (EPIPENS) 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 16th January 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘Can the Council assess the feasibility and governance requirements of providing 
publicly accessible adrenaline auto-injectors (EpiPens) alongside existing AEDs in 
the city, and of supporting community, sporting and voluntary groups to hold stock 
EpiPens for emergency use?’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 26/024) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team and colleagues in the Health Service Executive will assess the 
feasibility and governance requirements of providing publicly accessible adrenaline 
auto-injectors (EpiPens) alongside existing AEDs in the city, and of supporting 

community, sporting and voluntary groups to hold stock EpiPens for emergency use 
and revert with an update at the next meeting.  
 
11.2.4 
FULL-TIME DISABILITY OFFICER 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Corporate, Community & Cultural Affairs, dated 16th January 2026 on the following 
motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council fund and recruit a full-time Disability Officer, tasked with 
engaging with disability organisations and advocacy groups and to work across 
Council departments to help ensure that Cork is a disability-friendly city that is 
accessible and inclusive for all.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 26/025) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council through the 
Community Team and colleagues in Operations, Infrastructure and ICT Services have 
worked in collaboration with disability groups for a number of years in a variety of 
areas across a number of Directorates. In 2021 the Community Team were awarded a 
‘Disability Participation Awareness Fund’. As part of this fund it completed an access 
audit of six council owned properties, including Leisureworld, St Peters Church, 
Glanmire Library and the city centre Library. Cork City Council has worked with the 
Cork City Access Group for over 10 years. This is a group of volunteers. Cork City 
Council Operations Directorate, specifically Roads Operations, meet the Cork City 
Access group to take feedback from them on issues arising with regards to access in 
the city. This includes staff from Traffic Operations and Infrastructure Development 
and focus on accessibility of the Roads infrastructure for use by people with 
disabilities in and around Cork city. The aim is to accommodate requirements to 
improve the quality of life and access of these users of the public asset by improving 
existing facilities, considering requests for new facilities and consultation on planned 
works around the city. The Community Team within Corporate, Community & 
Cultural Affairs attend the Cork Access Group including for the organisation of Make 
Way Day in Cork City.  
 
The Community Team will review this matter with colleagues from other directorates 
with a view to developing a funding bid around implementation. 
 
12. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 13th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 13th January 2026. 
 
13. 
CITY CENTRE COMMITTEE – 28th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the City Centre Committee from 
its meeting held, 28th January 2026. 
 
 
 

14. 
FINANCE & ESTIMATES COMMITTEE – 3rd FEBRUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Finance & Estimates 
Committee from its meeting held, 3rd February 2026. 
 
15. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th January 2026. 
 
16. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th January 2026. 
 
17. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th January 2026. 
 
18. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 26th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 26th January 2026. 
 
18.1 
MOTIONS 
 
18.1.1 
ST. PATRICK'S HILL, AUDLEY PLACE, BELLS FIELD, LADY'S WELL, 
FEVER HOSPITAL STEPS AND SURROUNDING AREAS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, and the A/Director of Services, Local Area Development 
& Operations, dated 9th and 22nd January 2026 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council would hold an architectural competition for the redesign of 
St. Patrick's Hill, Audley Place, Bell's Field, Lady's Well and Fever Hospital steps, 
and surrounding areas. Engage consultants to oversee the redevelopment and 
enhancement of this historic area of Cork City.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. N. O’Flynn, Cllr. O. Moran 25/606) 
 
The report of the Directors of Services stated that Cork City Council will explore 
potential grant funding sources which could be used to further the appointment of a 
design team to prepare refurbishment proposals/plans for the Patricks’ Hill, Audley 
Place, Bells Field, Lady’s Well and Fever Hospital steps as suggested. 
 
Parks & Recreation are currently preparing draft landscape drawings for the upgrade 
of Bells Field, to include footpath improvements, seating and soft landscaping to 
enhance biodiversity in the area. This landscape plan will then be costed and Capital 
funding will need to be secured, as there is no provision in the current budget. 

 
In considering the report members noted the huge potential of the area, and also the 
need to look at short term improvements while identifying funding for a major 
refurbishment plan.  A review of a 2007 report on the area would provide a useful 
starting point.  
 
The A/Director of Services, Local Area Development & Operations agreed to review 
the 2007 report with his team and report back to the Committee on possible short term 
actions. 
 
19. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 27th JANUARY 2026 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 27th January 2026. 
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir T. Coleman at the Cork London Association Dinner, held at 
London, UK, 24th October 2025. 
• Comhairleoir T. Coleman at the National Presentation of Fire Service Long 
Service Awards, held at Knightsbrook Hotel, Trim, Co. Meath, 13th November 
2025. 
• Comhairleoir T. Coleman at the Deeds of Bravery Awards Ceremony, held at 
Leinster House, Co. Dublin, 5th December 2025. 
• Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh at the LAMA Spring Seminar, held at Connacht 
Hotel, Co. Galway, 28th - 29th January 2026. 
• Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy at the United Nations Mayors Forum, 
held at Geneva, Switzerland, 5th - 8th October 2025. 
• Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy as part of the Lord Mayor’s Delegation 
Visit to Shanghai, China, 15th - 22nd November 2025. 
• Ardmhéara Comhairleoir F. Dennehy as part of the visit to Coventry, UK, 25th 
- 28th September 2025. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
None received. 
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
23.1 
ASSOCIATION OF IRISH REGIONS (AIR) TRAINING SEMINAR 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attendance of Comhairleoirí D. Boyle, 
J. Kavanagh, T. Shannon and S. Martin at the Association of Irish Regions (AIR) 

Training Seminar at the Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal from 25th 
- 26th February 2026. 
 
23.2 
‘SAFER ROADS’ CONFERENCE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the attendance of Comhairleoirí P. Horgan 
and O. Moran at the ‘Safer Roads’ national conference hosted by Kerry County 
Council at Gleneagle, INEC Arena, Killarney, Co. Kerry from 11th - 12th March 2026. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
reports for November and December 2025. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
An Chomhairle noted that motions 22, Works along Knockfree Avenue and 
Knockpogue Avenue, and 23, Knockfree and Knockpogue Avenues, would be 
discussed under suspension of standing orders. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS 
 
27.1 
PROVISION OF IRISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council / local authority call upon Government to enact legislation to 
systematically, sustainably and steadily increase the provision of Irish-medium 
education so that future generations of Irish children will have the opportunity to be 
educated through their national language, if they so desire.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 26/067) 
 
27.2 
TIGHTER RESTRICTIONS FOR SCRAMBLERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
  
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Taoiseach’s office calling for tighter restrictions 
on the use of scramblers in public spaces.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 26/069) 
 

On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, An Chomhairle approved the motion 
revised to read as follows:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Taoiseach’s office and the Garda Commissioner 
calling for tighter restrictions on the use of scramblers in public spaces.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 26/069) 
 
27.3 
EARLY WARNING MOBILE ALERT SYSTEM  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council calls on the Government and the Minister for Climate, 
Energy and the Environment to accelerate the development, strengthening, and full 
national implementation of a modern Early Warning Mobile Alert System capable of 
issuing immediate, location-based emergency alerts to all mobile phones across all 
networks during severe weather events and other major public safety emergencies. 
Similar to the Spanish alert system in Spain, called the ES-Alerts.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Flynn 26/070) 
 
27.4 
DEVELOPMENT OF A JOINT SCHOOL CAMPUS AT LISHEENS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council: 
 
- 
Notes with concern the recent publication of the Department of Education's 
Sectoral Investment Plan and its failure to address the urgent need for new 
school buildings to be provided for Le Chéile secondary school and Gaelscoil 
an Chaisleáin in Ballincollig; 
 
- 
Notes that both schools have been operating out of temporary premises since 
they opened in 2017 and 2021 respectively, with a suitable site for the 
development of a joint school campus at Lisheens, Ovens being identified in 
2020; 
 
- 
Recalls that this Council completed a compulsory purchase of this site in 2024 
and that the land remains in Council ownership; 
 
- 
Calls for this school building project to be afforded the priority it warrants and 
that it be delivered without delay - given the urgent need for school places in 
Ballincollig and surrounding communities; 
 
- 
Shall write to the Minister for Education communicating the contents of this 
motion to her.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Lynch 26/079) 
 
 

27.5 
MAXIMISE SUPPORT TO UKRAINE  
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council, supporting the significant Ukrainian community living within our 
city, acknowledge the fourth anniversary of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the 
continuing assault of that country's democratic independent right to be, calling upon 
the Irish Government to continue and maximise support to Ukraine and its people.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boyle 26/099) 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir K. Collins to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
 
‘That 
Cork 
City 
Council 
notes 
the 
contentious 
elements 
of 
the 
Knockpogue/Knockfree Avenues Active Travel Scheme and agrees to engage with 
residents to appoint an agreed, qualified and independent mediator.’ 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. Collins, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, F. Kerins, J. 
Lynch. (6) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, K. 
McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, S. O’Callaghan, S. Martin, P. Dineen, D. Boyle, F. 
Dennehy, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman. (13) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, D. Boylan, P. Horgan, N. O’Connor, 
A. Deasy, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (8) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
WORKS ALONG KNOCKFREE AVENUE AND KNOCKPOGUE AVENUE 
 
‘That Cork City Council would agree to temporarily suspend all ongoing and 
scheduled works along Knockfree Avenue and Knockpogue Avenue, Farranree. 
 
This pause would allow for structured and community engagement, improved 
transparency, and the presentation of clear and comprehensive project plans to 
residents and elected members. 
 

While a vast majority of residents welcome the principle of an improvement scheme 
for the area, they have clearly indicated that they do not support key elements of the 
current proposals. In particular, there is significant concern regarding the removal of 
mature trees, the introduction of cycle lanes in place of existing landscaping, and the 
associated reduction in on street car parking spaces. These aspects are viewed as 
having considerable environmental, visual, and practical impacts on daily life in the 
community.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. N. O’Flynn 26/083) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, F. Kerins, J. 
Lynch, A. Deasy. (7) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, O. Moran, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, P. Horgan, S. 
O’Callaghan, S. Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, 
C. O’Connor. (18) 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí P. Dineen, N. O’Connor. (2) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara invited Comhairleoir B. McCarthy to address An Chomhairle on the 
following motion:- 
 
KNOCKFREE AND KNOCKPOGUE AVENUES 
 
‘In light of the significant community opposition to the plans for Knockfree and 
Knockpogue Avenues, this Council calls for an immediate temporary stoppage of 
work to allow space for the Council to seriously engage with residents who are calling 
for clarity, clear and full plans and better community engagement. The contractor 
should also be engaged with by the Council to allow for this temporary stoppage.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 26/084) 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, 
a vote was called for on the approval of the motion where there appeared as follows:- 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, F. Kerins, J. 
Lynch. (6) 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. 
Sheehan, T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, S. 
Martin, D. Boyle, F. Dennehy, C. Kelleher, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (17) 

 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, O. Moran, P. Dineen, N. O’Connor. (4) 
 
As those voting for the motion were less than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote and the motion defeated. 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
