MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY 10th MARCH 2025 
 
PRESENT                             Ardmhéara Comhairleoir D. Boyle. 
 
NORTH EAST 
 Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, 
O. Moran, N. O’Flynn. 
 
NORTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí T. Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, 
K. Collins, B. McCarthy. 
 
SOUTH EAST 
Comhairleoirí T. Shannon, K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, 
H. Kamegni, P. Horgan. 
 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
Comhairleoirí S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, P. Dineen, N. 
O’Connor. 
 
SOUTH WEST 
Comhairleoirí J. Lynch, A. Deasy, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor.  
 
ALSO PRESENT 
 
Mr. V. O’Sullivan, Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. B. Geaney, Assistant Chief Executive. 
Mr. J. Hallahan, Head of Finance. 
Mr. P. Moynihan, Director of Services, Local Area Development 
and Operations. 
Mr. N. Ó Donnabháin, Director of Services, Planning & 
Integrated Development.  
Mr. G. O’Beirne, Director of Services, Infrastructure 
Development. 
Mr. D. Joyce, Director of Services, Emergency Management and 
Climate Action.  
Ms. R. Buckley, Head of I.C.T. and Business Services. 
Ms. M. Broderick, A/Director of Services, Housing. 
Ms. N. Stewart, Meetings Administrator. 
Ms. R. Lynch, Administrative Officer, Corporate & Community 
Affairs.  
Ms. V. Keating, Staff Officer, Corporate & Community Affairs.  
 
An tArdmhéara recited the opening prayer. 
 
1. 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
 
• The Murray family on the death of Graham Murray. 
• The Collins family on the death of Finbarr Collins. 
• The Barrett family on the death of Agnes Barrett.  
• The Couch family on the death of Margaret Couch. 
• The O’Mahony family on the death of Deirdre O’Mahony. 
• The O’Regan family on the death of Tim O’Regan. 
• The Higgins family on the death of Breda Higgins. 
• The O’Driscoll family on the death of Shirley Warrington O’Driscoll. 
• The O’Driscoll family on the death of Oliver O’Driscoll. 

• The O’Donnell family on the death of Alma O’Donnell. 
• The Parkes family on the death of Amanda Parkes. 
• The Harrington family on the death of Joan Harrington. 
 
2. 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS/BEST WISHES 
 
• Jim Ryng on being named Bishopstown GAA Member of the Year and 
services to HSE Air Ambulance.  
• Ballincollig AFC on securing title to land at the Landing Field, Ballincollig. 
• Deaglán Ó Deargáin on organising Ceolchoirm na Scoile. 
• Peter O’Mahony on retiring from Irish International Rugby. 
• Conor Murray on retiring from Irish International Rugby. 
• JP McNamara on finishing up as producer of ‘Cork Today’ on C103 after 16 
years. 
• All five of Cork City Council’s LAMA nominations and the three successful 
winners.  
  
3. 
LORD MAYOR’S ITEMS 
 
3.1 
WELCOME TO UCC STUDENTS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara welcomed UCC students present in the public gallery. 
 
3.2 
LORD MAYOR LED DELEGATION TO THE UNITED STATES 
 
An tArdmhéara noted the success of the recent Lord Mayor led delegation to the 
United States. 
 
3.3 
BRUSSELS ST. PATRICK’S DAY PROGRAMME 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the travel of An Leas-Ardmhéara H. 
Kamegni to Brussels from 14th - 16th March 2025 to participate in the Brussels St. 
Patrick’s Day programme and support the Cork – Charleroi Flight Route. 
 
3.4 
CIVIC RECEPTION 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that a Civic Reception for Martin A. Harvey 
would take place on Wednesday 12th March at 6.30pm in the Council Chamber. 
 
3.5 
COMMEMORATION OF THE CORK WAR MEMORIAL 
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle that a commemorative ceremony would be 
held on Sunday 16th March at 1.30pm at the Cork War Memorial, South Mall, to mark 
100 years since its unveiling. 
 
3.6 
ST. PATRICK’S DAY ARRANGEMENTS  
 
 
An tArdmhéara reminded An Chomhairle of the St. Patrick’s Day arrangements which 
have been circulated. 

 
3.7 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
An tArdmhéara proposed a trial of new speaking times at the end of the meeting for 
non-statutory items.  
 
4. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ITEMS 
 
None received. 
 
5. 
MINUTES 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the minutes of:- 
 
• Ordinary Meeting of An Chomhairle held, 10th February 2025. 
 
6. 
QUESTION TIME 
 
6.1 
FENCE & GATE AT ARDPATRICK AVENUE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE please advise and provide an update on the current status of the proposed 
and approved status on the installation of the Fence and Gate at the cul de sac at the 
end of Ardpatrick Avenue in Blackpool. 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
A referral under Section 5 of the Planning Act in April 2024 was made to An Bord 
Pleanala in April last year as to “whether the proposed erection of a fence and gate is, 
or is not, exempted development within the meaning of the Planning and Development 
Acts, 2000 (as amended) (PDA) and the PDR, whether such development would result 
in the segregation of the estate, and the control, and or prohibition, of access through 
Ardpatrick, and whether this would represent development that would materially alter 
the terms of the parent planning permission, as amended, and the interruption of a 
recreational amenity currently enjoyed by residents and members of the public.”  
 
A decision on the referral is awaited. Once the decision is made it will be advised to 
the Local Area Committee for consideration.  
 
Paul Moynihan,  
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
 
 
 
 

6.2 
FOREIGN TRAVEL 2024 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the CE confirm the total sum expended by Cork City Council on all foreign travel 
in 2024, such sum to include the cost of transport, accommodation and sustenance, 
and under the same expenditure headings to specify the total sum expended on the 
Lord Mayor led delegation to Shanghai, China, in November, 2024. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
(a) The total sum expended by Cork City Council for foreign travel in 2024 including 
transport, accommodation, and subsistence (excluding delegation to Shanghai – 
November 2024) - €218,345.35  
 
(b) The total sum expended by Cork City Council for the Lord Mayor led delegation 
to Shanghai, China – November 2024 including transport, accommodation and 
subsistence € 25,870.02  
 
Valerie O’Sullivan,  
Chief Executive. 
 
6.3 
LA NA GAEILGE 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Dineen, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
I wish to ask the CEO what actions the Council intends to take to promote La Na 
Gaeilge (Irish Language Day) on March the 16th 2025. An Annual La Na Gaeilge day 
was agreed by Cork City Council in 2022. The reason for the motion behind La Na 
Gaeilge Day on the 16th of March is to ensure that it coincides with Saint Patrick’s 
Day each and every year and that we Cork City Council would do what is deemed 
necessary to promote La Na Gaeilge (Irish Language Day) through our media 
presence and a press release for same.  
 
I fully appreciate that much is done through (Seachtain na Gaeilge) during the month 
of March however the spirit of the said motion when submitted in 2022 was/is to 
encourage the people of Cork to use the Irish Language when and where possible or 
appropriate beginning on the Eve of the Saint Patrick’s Day Festivities thereby 
revitalizing the Irish Language overall and over time and to date we have in my view 
failed to promote La Na Gaeilge and the spirit of the said motion which is now 3 years 
in the making. 
 
REPLY 
 
There is a comprehensive programme of events for Seachtain na Gaeilge 2025.  
 

As 16th of March falls on a Sunday this year, Friday 14th March has been designated 
Lá na Gaeilge in 2025. Cork City Council will deliver and support a range of events 
including but not limited to the following:  
➢ Distributing an information card with Irish language proverbs (seanfhocail) 
and commonly used phrases to the public through Cork City Council’s library 
network, public offices as well as the business community via partners in Cork 
Chamber, the CBA and Local Enterprise Office. This will be promoted on the 
City Council’s social media platforms.  
➢ Delivering over 35 bilingual or Irish language only events throughout the 
network of 10 libraries during Seachtain na Gaeilge.  
➢ Facilitating an Céilí Mór on Saturday 15th March in the Millennium Hall. 
➢ Supporting a bilingual Quiz in the Clayton hotel on St Patrick’s Eve. 
➢ Supporting the relaunch of Gradam Padraig Uí Chuanacháin (recognising 
businesses who promote the further use of Irish) by Gael Taca with the support 
of the business community.  
 
Within Cork City Council, Seachtain na Gaeilge, as well as our commitment to the 
Irish language in general, continues to be enhanced by:  
➢ Our staff subsidy scheme to encourage staff to send children on residential 
Irish language gaeltacht courses (running since 2005). This is also available to 
elected members of council.  
➢ An Irish language competency survey to establish training needs to meet our 
commitments under the Official language (amendment) Act of 2021. 
➢ Seanfhocal an lae - daily proverb in Irish as part of the internal daily global e-
mail from the communications section.  
 
Catherine Kelly,  
A/Director of Services,  
Corporate & Community Affairs. 
 
6.4 
O’GROWNEY CRESCENT 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Kerins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
Can the CE update the council as to when insulation works will be carried out on 
properties at O' Growney Crescent, Pearse Road. 
 
REPLY 
 
The properties at O’Growney Crescent have been surveyed for inclusion in the Energy 
Efficiency Retrofit Programme. The requisite works were put out to tender with a 
number of tenders received thereafter.  
 
It should be noted that the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme provides funding 
for properties to be upgraded to a B2 energy rating with a set maximum funding level 
available per property. The tendered costs of the necessary upgrades at O’Growney 
Crescent, to achieve a B2 energy rating, are well in excess of the funding available 
per property at this time.  
 

Survey details from O’Growney Crescent are being retained with a view to 
progressing works as soon as funding allows.  
 
Martina Broderick,  
A/Director of Services,  
Housing Directorate. 
 
6.5 
COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF 2040 PLAN 
FOR COUNTERBALANCE CITY OF CORK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir N. O’Flynn, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Would the Chief Executive of Cork City Council engage with key stakeholders, 
including the Port of Cork, Cork County Council, and relevant community 
representatives, to collaboratively develop a comprehensive program of five strategic 
points aimed at effectively realizing the objectives of the Government’s 2040 Plan for 
the Counterbalance City of Cork.  
 
**Objectives:**  
 
The proposed collaborative program should encapsulate the following five critical 
areas of focus:  
 
1. **Economic Development:** Identify strategic initiatives that will stimulate 
economic growth, job creation, and entrepreneurial activities within both the city and 
county, ensuring that we leverage our unique assets and resources.  
 
2. **Cultural Enrichment:** Foster a rich cultural landscape by promoting initiatives 
that enhance the arts, heritage, and community engagement, reflecting the diverse 
identity of Cork and enhancing the quality of life for all residents.  
 
3. **Educational Advancement:** Collaborate with educational institutions to 
address and enhance educational opportunities and accessibility, thereby supporting 
lifelong learning and the development of a skilled workforce.  
 
4. **Infrastructure Enhancement:** Assess and prioritize infrastructural needs that 
will facilitate sustainable growth and accessibility, including transportation, public 
amenities, and digital connectivity, ensuring our infrastructure meets the demands of 
a growing population.  
 
5. **Community Engagement and Inclusiveness:** Develop mechanisms for ongoing 
dialogue with residents and stakeholders from both Cork City and County, ensuring 
their voices and needs are integral to the planning and implementation process.  
 
This question calls for a proactive approach to aligning our efforts across municipal 
and regional lines, ensuring that all stakeholders work collaboratively towards a 
shared vision for the future of Cork as a counterbalance city, promoting a unified and 
comprehensive strategy to communicate our needs and aspirations to the government 

and ensuring that the voices of both city and county residents are heard in the 
realization of the 2040 Plan.  
 
I ask that the Chief executive to undertake immediate steps to initiate discussions with 
aforementioned stakeholders, with a report on progress to be presented to the Council 
within three months and would she make a reply to my question? 
 
REPLY  
 
As Chief Executive. I have recently initiated a decisive reorganisation of the Council’s 
senior management team and related Directorates, including new senior appointments 
to deliver on the strategic pillars of the National Planning Framework as they relate to 
Cork City to make it a long-term counterbalance to Dublin. Already considerable 
progress is being made, and it is the City Council’s policy to firstly identify and 
conduct effective stakeholder engagement with all the key stakeholders. As part of 
this engagement I have already been in contact with my counterparts in Cork County 
Council and the Port of Cork to explore how we might all work together to promote 
Cork as a counterbalance to Dublin.  
 
I will be updating the Council on plans, progress and outcomes regularly as matters 
progress. In the interim, achievements on the journey towards 2040 will be very 
visible across the city, month by month. These are exciting times for Cork with so 
much investment and opportunities abounding.  
 
Valerie O’Sullivan,  
Chief Executive. 
 
6.6 
ROAD SAFETY MEASURES ON EGLANTINE PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to state what stage of the process the proposed road safety 
measures on Eglantine Park for Eglantine National School are currently at. 
Specifically, please clarify whether they are: 
 
(I) 
at design stage only? If so, what are the next steps? 
 
(II) 
at the stage where design has been selected and is awaiting approval? If so, 
by whom and what is the approximate timeframe in respect of same? 
 
(III) 
at the stage where design has been approved and is awaiting funding? If so, 
by whom and what is the approximate timeframe in respect of same? 
 
REPLY 
 
The NTA have provided funding to look at the feasibility and options of providing a 
pedestrian crossing in the vicinity of Scoil Bhríde Eglantine as part of a wider active 
travel project at a number of locations citywide. A consultant has been appointed and 
has carried out surveys and is assessing each location to inform an options report and 

cost estimate. When this work is completed, the NTA and Cork City Council will 
agree a programme to deliver pedestrian crossings at these locations, based on priority 
and subject to funding.  
 
Paul Moynihan,  
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.7 
SOCIAL HOUSING 2024 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir M. Gould, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how many social, affordable and cost rental properties 
were delivered/ allocated in 2024 with these figures broken down by unit size/type ie. 
1-bed, 2- bed, 3-bed, 4-bed and how many new individuals and families were added 
to the Cork City Council social housing list in the same period 2024. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council’s delivery figure for social, affordable and cost rental properties 
for 2024 is still awaiting validation by the Department of Housing, Local Government 
& Heritage. This figure will be made available once confirmation of same is received 
from the Department. 
 
The following social housing units were allocated in 2024. 
 
Properties Allocated 
 
Property Type 
Number of Social 
Housing Units 
Allocated 
1 Bed 
224 
2 Bed 
274 
3 Bed 
206 
4 Bed 
21 
5 Bed 
1 
Total Units Allocated 
726 
 
 
 
Number of New Households Approved for Social Housing Supports in 2024:  
 
774 households.  
 
Brian Geaney,  
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 

6.8 
FIREMAN’S HUT 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. Collins, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the CE the initial tender price/budgeted cost of the Fireman’s Hut, whether a 
Value for Money exercise was undertaken and if so at what stage and the expected 
cost of the installation of interpretive panels and whether a tender has been awarded 
for this project. 
 
 
REPLY  
 
 
The breakdown of costs is set out below.  The project was subject to a competitive 
tendering process and therefore prices are reflective of the market prices for such skills 
and experience. 
 
 
The project was based upon a competitively tendered works package and involved the 
careful, skilled dismantling of the existing structure, transport for stripping, blasting 
and casting of new panels, extensive repair of cracked cast iron panels, working with 
wrought iron, lead roofing and stonemasonry to the new cut limestone plinth to 
replicate the initial scheme. The refurbishment of the Fireman’s Rest necessitated a 
standard of conservation craftmanship that most general construction contractors do 
not possess.  
 
An in-house team brought the project forward. The team was responsible for the 
surveys involved, the scoping of work and the appointment of the specialist 
contractors needed. Procurement requirements were followed throughout.  
 
The refurbishment of the Fireman's Rest / Hut is now complete and it will be opened 
up to the public during scheduled events. The interpretation of the history of the 
Item 
Item 
breakdown 
Cost 
Enabling/site works 
 
€112,000.00 
Conservation consultants 
 
€18,988.38 
Photography 
 
€908.00 
Roof Leading  
€12,000.00 
 
Roof Structure 
€3,000.00 
 
Metalwork repair restoration and recasting 
€143,750.00 
 
Limecrete floor  
€5,500.00 
 
External Doors 
€4,500.00 
 
Ceiling 
€2,500.00 
 
Scaffold 
€4,600.00 
 
Prelims 
€25,500.00 
 
Limestone plinth and steps 
€13,200.00 
 
Total for Restoration contractor 
 
€214,550.00 
Alterations to create hanging gable for cresting 
 
€15,000.00 
Total construction costs 
 
€361,446.38  

building, including its history as a fire-fighting asset and late as a base for city bus 
services, will form an important element of the project and discussions have already 
taken place with stakeholders. At this stage, this is a work in progress and there is no 
design or format for the content or its final interpretation.  
 
Valerie O’Sullivan,  
Chief Executive. 
 
6.9 
CORK WATERWORKS EXPERIENCE 
 
 
The following question submitted by Comhairleoir K. McCarthy was deferred to 
the next meeting of An Chomhairle to be held, 14th April 2025:- 
 
 
To ask the CE on the progress of reinstating the playground at the Old Cork 
Waterworks Experience and the fixing of the roof within the visitor experience 
building? 
 
6.10 
HOUSING DELIVERY ACTION PLAN 2022-2026 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
That the CE provide an update on Cork City Council's Housing Delivery Action Plan 
(2022- 2026); that targeted delivery versus actual output be set out under the headings 
'new build', 'acquisition' and 'leasing' for the years 2022, 2023 and 2024; and that 
targeted delivery versus projected output be set out for the years 2025 and 2026. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council’s (CCC) overall delivery programme is outlined in its Housing 
Delivery Action Plan (HDAP).  
 
The total delivery output of social & affordable housing for 2022 & 2023 for CCC 
and its delivery partners is 1819 homes. The housing delivery figures for 2024 still 
await validation by the Department and at stage, the Council will update you with this 
information.  
 
The City Council is on course to meet the targets with a strong pipeline of social & 
affordable projects across the City.  
 
Brian Geaney,  
Assistant Chief Executive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.11 
ILLEGAL DUMPING CLEAN UP COST 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the amount it has cost Cork City Council financially to 
clean up illegal dumping within the city limits for the years 2023 and 2024 and the 
status of CCTV facilities to catch illegal dumping in all forms. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council Cleansing section spends approx. €630,000 annually on clean up 
of illegal dumping with costs for the 2 years of 2023 and 2024 coming in at 
approximately €1,260,000 this figure includes wages, disposal of waste and Plant & 
Machinery.  
 
There are stringent Guidelines in place for CCTV and it is no longer possible to install 
cameras without adhering to prescribed processes. There is now a Code of Practice 
for the Operation of CCTV for the Purposes of Prevention, Detection & Prosecution 
of Litter and Waste Offences as required by the Circular Economy & Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act 2022. There is now a requirement for a location specific DPIA as well 
as business case and suite of SOPs so as to ensure compliance with the new Codes of 
Practice. There is also a requirement of public consultation and approval by a Council 
oversight group for any new installation of CCTV.  
 
In accordance with the above approval for CCTV has been sanctioned for one and the 
necessary documentation and processes will be put in place for another 8 sites where 
it is considered that the introduction of CCTV would help to prevent illegal dumping.  
 
Paul Moynihan,  
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.12 
BENCHES/SEATING AT ENTRANCE TO TRAMORE VALLEY PARK ON 
GRAND ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir S. Martin, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Can the manager confirm that following discussions at the South Central Ward 
Meeting a process has commenced to install seating at this location as agreed by 
members and management. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
The provision of seating along the pedestrian/cycle connection from Grange to 
Tramore Valley Park is being examined as agreed at the recent South Central Area 
Committee Meeting.  
 

The approval for the original works package did not allow for such measures. 
However, having regard to the successful operation of the new facility and with the 
passage of time it has been agreed that the matter be revisited with a view to the 
provision of some seating along the route.  
 
Gerry O’Beirne,  
Director of Services,  
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.13 
LEHENAGHMORE / TOGHER ROAD UPGRADE SCHEME 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir F. Dennehy, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Lehenaghmore / Togher Road upgrade 
scheme in terms of where the project is with timelines, budget and anticipated start 
date? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
As part of the 2025 funding allocation process, Cork City Council secured an initial 
grant of €5.2m in respect of next phase of the Lehenaghmore Road Improvement 
Scheme. This phase involve the procurement of a contractor and commencement of 
construction works. Subject to the normal approvals, the construction tender process 
is scheduled to commence in the coming weeks and it is anticipated that process will 
be completed over the coming months so as to enable the appointment of a contractor 
to commence construction works in early July 2025. A construction period in excess 
of 12 months is anticipated. Members will continue to be updated on related progress 
over the coming months.  
 
Gerry O’Beirne,  
Director of Services,  
Infrastructure Development. 
 
6.14 
EV CHARGING POINTS 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir H. Kamegni, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
Could you provide and update on the progress of EV charging points accessible to 
public installation across the city? Specifically, I would appreciate details on the 
number of new charging points installed to date with their location, any planned 
expansions, and the timeline for future developments.  
 
Additionally, are there any barriers delaying the rollout, and how can we work to 
address them? 
 
 
 
 

REPLY 
 
The recently completed Cork City Council Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy allows 
for the planned delivery of both fast and normal speed charging options.  
 
There are currently approximately 50 locations through the city where EV drivers can 
avail of charging facilities with 9 different Charge point providers. The majority of 
these are destination charging but the provision has increased somewhat from the 
original 13 sites which were provided in the city by ESB E-cars which included 
locations at the Park and Ride and Paul St Carpark.  
 
Cork City Council is actively engaging with Zero Emission Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI) 
with respect to the implementation of the Cork City Council Electric Vehicle Charging 
Strategy.  
 
Cork City Council recently received confirmation from the Department of Transport 
of approval to a new post to steer the implementation of the electric vehicle charging 
strategy. The Council will now seek sanction for this post through the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage and following recruitment an 
implementation plan can commence which will set out the delivery pathway.  
 
It is estimated that a capital investment of approx. €17million will be required to 
undertake the programme, including procurement of specialist contractor/s to operate 
the service. Delivery of charging points will require availability of energy capacity 
and connections to enable the sites, the availability of civil/electrical contractors to 
complete the works and stakeholder engagement on a site specific basis.  
 
Paul Moynihan,  
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
6.15 
VULNERABLE ANIMALS ON NORTH RING ROAD 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir J. Maher, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, what actions have been carried out to protect the 
vulnerable animals that are seeking refuge on the North Ring Road?  
 
Has a head count of the animals been neglected taken place?  
Have the owners been identified?  
How many animals have been rescued?  
What types of animals have been rescued?  
What sanctions have been imposed on those who have neglected the animals?  
What is the cost associated with this rescue operation?  
Are all the animals now safe? 
 
 
 
 

REPLY 
 
The Council in recent months has appointed a specialist Contractor to deal with the 
issue of goats grazing on public lands adjoining roads including the North Ring Road. 
The work involved is necessarily time consuming involving many man hours, as 
successful removal involves being able to work very closely near the goats and 
establish their trust prior to capture, any stress to the animals resulting in unpredictable 
flight, possibly on to a nearby road.  
 
The primary responsibility for animal welfare lies with the Department of Agriculture, 
Food and the Marina ( Animal Health and Welfare Act 2013) whose authorized 
officers have responsibilities in relation to the enforcement of animal welfare 
legislation.  
 
Any person who holds goats in the State, must apply for registration to the 
Department, all goats being required to be double tagged under the National Goat 
Identification System ( NGIS), a tag in each ear with a 12 digit number which includes 
the goat owner and an individual goat ID number. To date, nine goats have been 
removed, with an estimate that there are at least another eight still to be removed. The 
captured goats have no tags, making it impossible to identify owners.  
 
The Council will continue with the operation and liaise with the Department.  
 
Paul Moynihan,  
Director of Services,  
Local Area Development & Operations. 
 
7.16 
NORTH WEST PARK 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, a 
written reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the chief executive for an update on the plans for the North West Park and 
confirm the time frame for the proposed consultation process. 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
In 2024 the City Council appointed a multi-disciplinary Design Team to prepare a 
draft masterplan and implementation strategy for the North West City Park. The Team 
is currently concluding the baseline assessment for the project. This assessment 
includes a preliminary habitat survey, heritage and archaeological studies, 
accessibility reviews, etc. As part of the process for preparing the draft masterplan, 
the design team will also be engaging widely with elected members and the 
communities of the North West Local Area. This engagement will commence in April 
and continue over the following months. It will include workshops with local primary 
and secondary schools, local youth groups, walking groups and senior citizens, as well 
as meetings with local historians. It is also intended to engage directly with sports 
clubs and other interest groups. The Team is seeking to ensure that the engagement 
undertaken at this early stage of the project is as extensive and far-reaching as possible 
and Members will be kept informed of all related arrangements. The information 

arising will inform the ongoing masterplan design process and it is envisaged that the 
draft Masterplan will be ready for presentation to Members in Q4 2025 following 
which it will be the subject of public consultation and Council approval. Area 
Members will continue to be updated on progress on the emerging proposals over the 
coming months.  
 
Gerry O’Beirne,  
Director of Services,  
Infrastructure Development. 
 
7.17 
PLANNING PERMISSION POLICY 
 
 
In response to the following question submitted by Comhairleoir O. Moran, a written 
reply was circulated as outlined below:- 
 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for Cork City Council's policy with regards to the planning 
permission required (or otherwise) for the retrofitting of external wall insulation to 
existing buildings? 
 
 
REPLY 
 
 
Cork City Council fully supports the retrofitting of existing housing stock, including 
insulation of external walls of existing dwellings. With regard to the question of 
whether planning permission is required, in general external wall insulation does not 
require planning permission and is exempt from the need for planning permission 
under Section 4 1(H) of the Planning and Development Act as amended, where it does 
not materially affect the external appearance of the structure so as to render its 
appearance inconsistent with the character of the structure or of neighbouring 
structures.  
 
Site specific issues such as, but not limited to, its status as a Protected Structure, 
location within an Architectural Conservation Area or where the work does materially 
affect the external appearance of the structure so as to render the appearance 
inconsistent with the character of the structure or of neighbouring structures, would 
require planning permission for external wall insulation.  
 
Niall O’Donnabháin,  
Director of Services,  
Planning & Integrated Development. 
 
7. 
STATUTORY ITEMS 
 
7.1 
SECTION 19 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 – CASUAL VACANCIES 
 
7.1.1 
VACANCY IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Ciara O’Connor to fill the 
vacancy arising from the resignation of Comhairleoir L. Harmon. 
 

7.1.2 
VACANCIES ON BOARDS/COMMITTEES  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Maher, seconded by Comhairleoir P. Horgan, An 
Chomhairle approved the nomination of Comhairleoir C. O’Connor to the following 
Boards/Committees arising from the resignation of Comhairleoir L. Harmon. 
 
Housing Strategic Policy Committee / Coiste Beartais Straitéisigh - Tithíocht 
 
International Relations and Tourism Strategic Policy Committee / Coiste Beartais 
Straitéisigh - Caidreamh Idirnáisiúnta & Turasóireacht 
 
South West Local Area Committee 
 
Joint Cork City Council/Cork County Council Committee 
 
School Meals Committee 
 
An Grúpa Forbartha Gaeilge 
 
Cork Area Strategic Plan Committee (CASP) 
 
Board of Cork Film Festival 
 
Cork Education and Training Board 
 
RAPID ABC - City Wide Steering Committee 
 
7.1.3 
VACANCY IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF CORK CITY COUNCIL 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the nomination of Gary O’Brien to fill the 
vacancy arising from the resignation of Comhairleoir G. Kelleher. 
 
7.1.4 
VACANCIES ON BOARDS/COMMITTEES  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Boylan, An 
Chomhairle approved the nomination of Comhairleoir G. O’Brien to the following 
Boards/Committees arising from the resignation of Comhairleoir G. Kelleher. 
 
Transport & Mobility Strategic Policy Committee / Coiste Beartais Straitéisigh - 
Iompar & Soghluaisteacht 
 
International Relations and Tourism Strategic Policy Committee / Coiste Beartais 
Straitéisigh - Caidreamh Idirnáisiúnta & Turasóireacht 
 
South West Local Area Committee 
 
Finance and Estimates Committee 
 
Climate Action Committee 
 
Joint Cork City Council/Cork County Council Committee 
 
Southern Regional Assembly 
 
Association of Irish Local Government 
 
Board of Leisure World 
 
An Grúpa Forbartha Gaeilge 
 
Cork Regional Athletics Stadium Management Committee 
 
Sports Committee 
 
 
An tÁrdmheara invited Comhairleoirí C. O’Connor and G. O’Brien to address An 
Chomhairle. 
 
 
The Chief Executive welcomed Comhairleoirí C. O’Connor and G. O’Brien on behalf 
of the Executive. 

 
7.2 
EXTERNAL NOMINATIONS TO STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEES 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An 
Chomhairle considered and approved the Public Participation Network’s nominations 
to Cork City Council’s Strategic Policy Committees. 
 
7.3 
EMMET PLACE ENHANCEMENT PROJECT 
 
 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 179 (4) (a) of Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed 
Emmet Place Enhancement Project and the report of the Director of Infrastructure 
Development thereon, as required under Section 179 (3) of the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended). 
  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development viz. the Emmet Place Enhancement Project and the report of the Director 
of Services, Infrastructure Development Directorate, Cork City Council, dated 24th 
February 2025, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions of Section 179 (4) of 
the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, that the Emmet Place 
Enhancement Project be carried out as recommended in the said report of the Director 
of Services, Infrastructure Development Directorate, Cork City Council.” 
 
7.4 
ANGLESEA STREET CONTRAFLOW BUS LANE - SECTION 38 
APPROVAL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the report and recommendation of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 21st February 2025, following public consultation, 
on the proposed Anglesea Street Contraflow Bus Lane pursuant to Section 38 of the 
Road Traffic Act, 1994, as amended by Section 46 of the Public Transport Regulation 
Act, 2009.  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Dineen, seconded by Comhairleoir A. Deasy, a 
vote was called for on the approval of the proposed Anglesea Street Contraflow Bus 
Lane, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Tynan, O. Moran, T. 
Fitzgerald, D. Boylan, J. Sheehan, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. McCarthy, T. Shannon, 
K. McCarthy, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. 
Kerins, D. Boyle, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, T. Coleman, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (25) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí N. O’Flynn, P. Dineen, A. Deasy. (3) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: (0) 
 
 
As those voting in favour were greater than those voting against, An tArdmhéara 
declared the vote carried. On the proposal of Comhairleoir S. O’Callaghan, seconded 

by Comhairleoir O. Moran, An Chomhairle approved the proposed Anglesea Street 
Contraflow Bus Lane. 
 
7.5 
PART 8 REPORT ON THE WEIGHTMASTER’S HOUSE, SHANDON, CORK 
 
 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 179 (4) (a) of Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), An Chomhairle considered and approved the proposed 
Weighmaster’s House Refurbishment and the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 16th January 2025 thereon, as required 
under Section 179 (3) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended). 
 
  
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir K. Collins, 
An Chomhairle further agreed to adopt the following Resolution:-  
 
 
“Now Council hereby RESOLVE THAT having considered the proposed 
development and the report of the Director of Planning & Integrated Development, 
Cork City Council thereon, it is hereby resolved pursuant to the provisions of Section 
179(4) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 as amended, that refurbishment, 
alterations and change of use of the Weighmaster’s House be carried out as 
recommended in the said report, which was put before Council on 10 March 2025.” 
 
7.6 
SHANDON INTEGRATED URBAN STRATEGY 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Fitzgerald, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Sheehan, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the Shandon Integrated Urban Strategy, 
dated March 2025 as proposed by the Director of Services, Planning and Integrated 
Development.  
 
7.7 
COMMUNITY HERITAGE GRANT SCHEME 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir J. 
Kavanagh, An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation 
of the Director of Services, Planning and Integrated Development, dated 17th February 
2025 on the Community Heritage Grant Scheme. 
 
7.8 
ARCHITECTURAL CONSERVATION AREA GRANT SCHEME 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir K. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir T. Shannon, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report and recommendation of the 
Director of Services, Planning and Integrated Development, dated 12th February 2025 
on the Architectural Conservation Area Grant Scheme. 
 
8. 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP – 3rd MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group from 
its meeting held, 3rd March 2025. 
 
8.1 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO 31/01/2025 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Financial Statement to 31/01/2025. 

 
8.2 
MOTIONS 
 
8.2.1 
USE OF AI 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Chief Information Officer, 
dated 27th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will: 
 
Limit the use of AI and ensure no jobs are replaced by this technology including but 
not limited to the areas of finance, communications, customer service and public 
works and will write to all other local authorities and the Minister for Local 
Government to advise and encourage those local authorities to do the same.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/053) 
 
 
The report of the Chief Information Officer stated that Cork City Council recognises 
the many potential opportunities for improved customer service, efficiencies and 
innovation due to new AI technologies. The AI domain is evolving rapidly and the 
unanimous adoption of the EU AI Act by all members states last February 2024 was 
welcomed by the Irish government. This is the first regulation of its kind in the world 
however it has yet to be transposed into Irish law. It is anticipated that all EU states 
will adopt this into their national legislation by 2028.  
 
Cork City Council anticipates sectoral guidance at a national level on the use of AI 
will be published by the LGMA to encourage a uniform approach to the adoption of 
AI across all 31 local authorities. In the interim Cork City Council ICT has prepared 
a draft amendment to the Information Systems Acceptable Usage Policy governing 
the use of all cyber assets by staff and external parties, which caters for the use of AI 
in a way that is reasonable and minimises any risk of data leakage, data loss or other 
unintended consequences.  
 
The ICT department is working on a draft plan to develop ‘safe spaces’ where AI can 
be used to tackle current dilemmas as per recent highly successful pilots, recently 
demonstrated by some larger local urban local authorities at the recent e-Gov 
conference in Dublin.  
 
Simultaneously the organisation has advised all staff that external organisations 
should not use AI to take minutes of meetings with council staff without prior consent 
of all attendees and in some cases should not use AI under any circumstances. The 
latter context relates directly to planning meetings with external third parties for 
example.  
 
AI is at a very early stage of adoption by the public sector in general and a cautious 
approach within the existing and new legal framework will be adopted in line with 
best practice. Last year the CIO of UCC Dr Gerard Culley was invited by the CIO of 
Cork City Council to provide the senior management team with an overview of their 
approach to AI. We will continue to consult with others and ensure the city council 
keeps abreast of new developments regarding AI through the sharing of experiences 

with colleagues across the government sectors and prioritizing the training and 
development of staff. 
 
8.2.2 
VICE CHAIRS OF SPCS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the Director of Services, Corporate 
& Community Affairs, dated 27th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That consideration be given to having Vice Chairs of SPCs, who can represent the 
Chair when missing at the SPC and at the Corporate Policy Group meeting.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. McCarthy 25/069) 
 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Standing Orders for the regulation 
of Council business do not currently provide for the election of a Vice Chair of 
Strategic Policy Committees.  The established practice is that in the absence of the 
Chair, the members of the committees elect one member from the Committee to chair 
the meeting.  A review of Standing Orders is currently underway.  Any proposal to 
amend standing orders to provide for the election of Vice-Chairs should be considered 
as part of that review process. 
 
8.2.3 
CORK CITY SPECIFIC ISSUES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will seek to invite the Ministers for Transport Darragh O’Brien, 
Justice Jim O’Callaghan and Housing James Browne for engagement on Cork City 
specific issues in the areas of public transport, infrastructural investment, Gardaí 
support and housing provision amongst other areas as a matter of urgency.’ 
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/055) 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir P. Horgan, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Lynch, a 
proposed amendment to the motion was tabled to read as follows:- 
 
 
‘That this Council will seek to invite the Ministers for Transport Darragh O’Brien, 
Justice Jim O’Callaghan and Housing James Browne for separate engagement on Cork 
City specific issues in these specific areas: 
 
The Minister for Transport: 
Bus Connects update 
Cork Luas update 
Funding for roads and footpath repairs 
The operation of Cork based Transport Police  
Funding and issues associated with major road projects in the city  
 
The Minister for Justice 
The number of Gardaí in Cork 
The operation of the replacement of the Joint Policing Committees 
The capital Infrastructure of An Garda Síochána stations in cork city and suburbs 

The future of the Cork Transport Police 
 
The Minister for Housing: 
 
Housing targets for Cork City 
Issues with infrastructure impacting the Docklands  
Tenant in Situ Scheme 
Vacancy and Dereliction Powers and Supports to City Council on Staffing.’  
 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/055) 
 
 
A vote was called for on the approval of the amendment where there appeared as 
follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, D. Cahill, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, N. 
O’Connor, J. Lynch, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (15) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí M. McDonnell, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, P. Dineen, A. Deasy, T. Coleman. (9) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, H. Kamegni, D. Boyle. (3) 
 
 
As those voting in favour of the amendment were greater than those voting against, 
An tArdmhéara declared the vote carried and the amendment to the motion approved. 
 
9. 
PARTY WHIPS – 24th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Party Whips from its meeting 
held, 24th February 2025. 
 
9.1 
MOTIONS 
 
9.1.1 
MEMORIAL STONE AT CURRAGHKIPPANE, ST. MARY’S GRAVEYARD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the report of the A/Director of Services, 
Corporate & Community Affairs, dated 20th February 2025 on the following motion:-  
 
‘That Cork City Council would erect a memorial stone along with a seating area in 
memory of those who were victims of mother and baby homes, and industrial schools 
who are buried in Curraghkippane, St. Mary’s Graveyard.’  
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 25/098) 
 
The report of the A/Director of Services stated that the HSE own the Right of Burial 
for a section of plots at St Mary’s Cemetery where the remains of those who died in 
mother and baby homes are interred. Discussions are taking place by Council officials 
in our Parks and Recreation Section, with members of the Survivors Group through 
Cork Kerry Outreach Care, and the HSE, with a view to providing an appropriate 

memorial at the graves. 
 
 
10. 
TRANSPORT & MOBILITY STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE 
BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH - IOMPAR & SOGHLUAISTEACHT – 17th 
FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Transport & Mobility 
Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting held, 17th February 2025. 
 
10.1 
MOTIONS  
 
10.1.1 
DISABLED ON-STREET PARKING BAYS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 17th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will provide a policy for the addition or removal of disabled 
on-street parking bays outside private residences that are no longer needed (e.g. when 
a new occupant moves into a house); that there will be a published way for residents 
to request their addition or removal; and that parking fines will be waived for residents 
where a bone fide request to remove a disabled parking bay has been agreed but not 
yet implemented.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/599) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a request to install or remove a 
disabled bay outside a private residence on a public street can be submitted using a 
Disabled Bay Request Form which can be requested from and submitted to 
trafficrequests@corkcity.ie. The established policy and disabled bay application form 
will be published on the website imminently. 
 
In relation to the removal of a Disabled Parking Bay outside a private residence on a 
public street, once the above form is submitted, the location is assessed and if it is 
deemed that the space is not needed on that street, it will be added to the works 
programme for removal. In the event that a need for a disabled parking bay is 
identified based on the location of the bay, the bay will not be removed and will remain 
for general public use. 
 
To qualify for a new Disabled Parking Bay the applicant must satisfy the following 
criteria: 
1. 
The applicant must hold a valid and in date Disabled Persons Parking Permit 
(issued by either the Irish Wheelchair Association or the Disabled Drivers 
Association); 
2. 
The applicant must have a vehicle registered to the address that the application 
refers; 
3. 
The applicant must have no off-road parking i.e. private grounds for 
parking/private driveway at the address that the application refers. 
 

• 
Once the above information is submitted and deemed to meet the requirements, 
the request will be added to a list for assessment and a site visit conducted by Cork 
City Council. 
• 
Installation of a space is not guaranteed even if the above criteria are met as 
other factors must be considered e.g. road width, proximity to junction, sight lines, 
etc. 
• 
While disabled bays in residential areas are primarily installed to facilitate the 
holder of the permit who is resident at the premises and who has requested the 
installation of the bay, it should be noted that any holder of a valid Disabled Parking 
Permit may legally park in any designated on-street disabled parking bay. 
• 
In the event, that there is a disabled parking bay(s) already provided in the 
vicinity of the address, you may be advised to utilise this space(s). Please note that 
disabled parking bays are for the use of any vehicle displaying a disabled person’s 
parking permit. 
 
Enforcement of all parking offences is governed by national and local legislation. A 
disabled parking bay is not intended for the sole use of one individual. It is provided 
for the use of anyone who has a valid Disabled Persons Parking Permit (blue badge).  
Once the appropriate signs and lines are in place the Parking Enforcement team must 
issue Fixed Charge Penalty Notices for any instances of illegal parking. There is no 
discretion in this matter. Cork City Council cannot operate a system whereby Fixed 
Charge Penalty Notices are issued for some, but not all parking offences. 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS  
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir D. Cahill, a 
vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to continue the meeting past 
8pm to consider statutory items only, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, T. Fitzgerald, J. Sheehan, T. 
Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, T. Coleman. (8) 
 
 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, N. O’Flynn, M. Gould, K. 
Collins, B. McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. 
Kerins, P. Dineen, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (18) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoir D. Boyle. (1) 
 
 
As those voting against the proposal to suspend standing orders was greater than those 
voting for, An tArdmhéara declared the proposal defeated. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir B. McCarthy, seconded by Comhairleoir M. Gould, 
a vote was called for on the suspension of standing orders to continue the meeting past 
8pm to consider all remaining items on the Agenda, where there appeared as follows:- 
 
 
FOR: Comhairleoirí J. Maher, T. Tynan, O. Moran, M. Gould, K. Collins, B. 
McCarthy, K. McCarthy, H. Kamegni, P. Horgan, S. O’Callaghan, F. Kerins, P. 
Dineen, N. O’Connor, J. Lynch, A. Deasy, G. O’Brien, C. O’Connor. (17) 
 

 
AGAINST: Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh, M. McDonnell, N. O’Flynn, T. Fitzgerald, J. 
Sheehan, T. Shannon, M.R. Desmond, D. Cahill, T. Coleman. (9) 
 
 
ABSTAIN: Comhairleoirí D. Boyle. (1) 
 
 
As those voting in favour of the proposal to suspend standing orders did not meet the 
2/3 majority required in accordance with standing orders, An tArdmhéara declared the 
proposal defeated. 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir D. Cahill, seconded by Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, 
An Chomhairle agreed to suspend standing orders to continue the meeting 1 hour past 
8pm. 
 
10.1.2 
FOOTPATHS ACROSS CORK CITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 17th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will draft up a document on funding required to fix the footpaths 
across Cork City and write to the new Minister for Transport requesting that this be 
made available to us through new active travel funding’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. L. Harmon 24/619) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Members would be aware that as part 
of the process of preparing Budget 2025, it was agreed that the City Council would 
raise a loan of €4 million to increase the investment in footpath renewal. The approval 
process for this loan is now in train. When loan approvals are in place a plan will be 
formulated for the carrying out of works which will include an assessment of the 
overall investment requirement for full footpath renewal. At that stage, and with the 
commitment and intent of the City Council demonstrated, options to pursue additional 
central funding can be pursued. 
 
10.1.3 
LITTER BINS AT BUS SHELTERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 17th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council engage with Bus Éireann and put a plan in place ensuring 
that the inclusion of litter bins be included in all future specifications on the 
installation of new bus shelters across the city.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Kavanagh 25/004) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council have engaged with 
Bus Eireann in the past for any areas where there are problems with litter, and we have 
installed bins at several of these locations. 
 
Currently we don’t have major littering issues at the 184 bus stops in the city and when 
issues do arise, we investigate and monitor the area to see if a bin is required. 

 
Cork City Council is currently monitoring a number of locations that may require bins. 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir J. Kavanagh, An Chomhairle further agreed to refer 
the motion back to the Transport & Mobility Strategic Policy Committee for further 
consideration. 
 
10.1.4 
FUNDING AND CONSTRUCTION OF PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 17th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That funding and construction for pedestrian crossings be fully devolved from the 
NTA to Cork City Council directly to deploy on a multi annual basis with staff 
complements to match the number of crossings required, regardless of Bus Connects 
proposals.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/016) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that a significant capital investment has 
been committed to under the Bus Connects programme and other infrastructural 
schemes, which will deliver significant safety improvement benefits to communities 
through the roll-out of the schemes which includes pedestrian crossings and other 
measures. It would not represent best practice to frontload developments and may 
prove to be inefficient to deploy infrastructural solutions in isolation to the overall Bus 
Connects Programme and other infrastructural schemes. 
 
Any change in the established mechanisms for NTA funding and construction of 
pedestrian crossings would be a matter for that authority and any move to full 
devolvement should include for all the required financial and human resources 
necessary for any substantial multi-annual programme. 
 
10.1.5 
UPDATE ON THE NORTHERN DISTRIBUTOR ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Infrastructure Development, dated 17th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council update on the Northern Distributor Road including details on 
route selection and timeline for completion.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. K. Collins 25/040) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the proposed Cork Northern 
Distributor Multi-Modal Road (CNDMR) is a critical enabler for the planned growth 
of Cork City and the wider Cork Metropolitan Area. The proposed new transport 
corridor will provide access to key residential lands in the northern part of Cork City, 
support and encourage greater use of sustainable transport (via bus lanes, cycle lanes 
and pedestrian infrastructure), facilitate orbital movements and reduce traffic flows 
on existing routes, create high-quality public realm zones and enhance access for both 
existing and new communities as well as local employment centres. The proposed 

new transport corridor will prioritise sustainable transport movement and will 
comprise of 2 footpaths, 2 cycle lanes, 2 bus lanes, 2 traffic lanes and 
planting/landscaping areas. 
  
With support from the National Transport Authority, the City Council appointed a 
dedicated design team for the project 2021. The strategic assessment process for the 
scheme was then undertaken and approved by the National Transport Authority in 
December 2023. This included an assessment of the rationale for investment of public 
funds in the project. It also established the schemes objectives and confirmed its 
alignment with government policy, in particular the National Planning Framework, 
the National Development Plan, the Climate Action Plan and the National Investment 
Framework for Transport in Ireland. The route options assessment process was then 
progressed, and the related approval was issued by the National Transport Authority 
in December 2024. This process included the identification of key constraints, feasible 
route options and the completion of a systematic assessment of each. Analysis of the 
best performing options led to the identification of an emerging preferred corridor and 
the most recent NTA approval enables the process of finalising the preferred route in 
advance of preliminary design and planning approval. 
 
The project team is currently finalising the relevant drawings and will be holding a 
detailed briefing for Elected Members in advance of a non-statutory public 
consultation on the emerging preferred route. It is anticipated that this consultation 
process will commence later this month and will be supported by a number of public 
open days, dedicated website, brochures/ drawings/image and other documents as well 
as presentations by and meetings with the project team with opportunities for 
questions and discussion.  
 
While the consultation process is non-statutory, it is an important step in the 
development of the scheme and will assist in securing insights/ knowledge/ expertise 
from individuals, communities and other stakeholders. This supports improved 
decision-making and the refinement of plans leading to the confirmation of the 
preferred route for the scheme. Following confirmation of the preferred route, the 
Council will procure a Design Team to prepare the preliminary designs and in due 
course a planning application for the scheme. This appointment is likely to occur in 
Q3 2025 and Members will be further updated on timelines at that stage.  
 
The initial cost estimate for the project will be confirmed following completion of the 
preliminary design process and further updated as detailed design are developed.  The 
project has been funded to date by the NTA and it anticipated that continued funding 
will be made available in 2025 for the preparation of preliminary designs. 
 
10.1.6 
PV SOLAR CAR PARK CANOPIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, Local 
Area Development & Operations, dated 17th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will install PV solar car park canopies at scale at the Black 
Ash Park & Ride, connecting with the existing electricity generation infrastructure at 
Tramore Valley Park.’ 
 

(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 25/033) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Council are currently 
investigating the feasibility and potential layout options for this proposal. We aim to 
seek further clarity regarding the connection point for the solar car ports — whether 
they would be for behind-the-meter consumption or export, depending on grid 
connection possibilities.  Additionally, the potential crossing of the N27 for 
connection requires further examination in relation to private wire connection and 
additional infrastructure requirements. 
 
We will continue to assess these factors and coordinate with the appropriate 
stakeholders. 
 
10.1.7 
APPLICATION PROCESS FOR RESIDENTIAL CAR-PARKING PERMITS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the accompanying report of the Director of 
Services, Local Area Development & Operations, dated 12th February 2025 on the 
following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will review the application process for residential car-parking 
permits, including that a landlord's Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) registration 
number would be optional instead of required.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 24/572) 
 
The report of the 16th of December stated that the Parking Permit Policy 2022 and 
Parking Permit Scheme 2022 set out the requirements that must be fulfilled for an 
application for a residents permit to the considered. Revisions were made in 2022, and 
one measure was to provide that applicants in rented accommodation must submit 
proof that the property is registered with the Residential Tenancies Board. This was 
introduced by the Elected Members to make the Scheme more robust and less likely 
to abuse. Any changes to the Policy & Scheme are a matter for the Elected Members.  
 
The members also considered the attached report dated 12th February 2025. 
 
11. 
STRATEGIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, ENTERPRISE & PLANNING 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS STRAITÉISIGH 
- 
STRAITÉISEACHT, 
FORBAIRT 
EACNAMAÍOCH, 
FIONTAR 
& 
PLEANÁIL – 17th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Strategic, Economic 
Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee from its meeting 
held, 17th February 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11.1 
MOTIONS  
 
11.1.1 
SUPPORT THE HOSPITALITY SECTOR 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 17th February 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That this Council will convene a meeting of hospitality representatives and 
businesses along with workers representative groups in hospitality to identify specific 
Cork issues and opportunities that can be resolved from Cork City Council’s remit to 
support the hospitality sector.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. P. Horgan 25/054) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council is currently in the 
process of establishing the City Centre Development and Operations Directorate. 
Once the associated structures are finalised and positions filled Members will be 
advised accordingly. In the meantime, the Council will continue to engage with 
representative associations and individual business through the established 
communication processes & Committees such as CORE where the hospitality sector 
is represented. 
 
11.1.2 
CPO / DEVELOP / CLEAN UP OF LAND 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Planning & Integrated Development, dated 17th February 2025 on the following 
motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council consider a CPO / develop / clean up the land in front of the 
Bridewell Garda Station in Cork City and the plot of land in front of the Tax Office in 
Blackpool.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. J. Maher 25/087) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that Cork City Council completed a 
Compulsory Purchase Order via the Derelict Sites Act 1990 in respect of land north 
of the Bridewell Garda Station.  
 
The Property Department is finalising a schedule of works to address reinstatement of 
sections of the existing hoarding and clean-up of the site. A working group is currently 
considering development options for the land.  
 
Land north of the Revenue Commissioners building on Assumption Road, Blackpool, 
is in private ownership and recorded on the Vacant Sites Register by Cork City 
Council.  
 

Cork City Council Planning & Integrated Development Directorate will contact the 
registered owner to request clean-up of the site, establish any development proposals 
they may have for the site and upon receipt of information assess the options available. 
 
11.2 
PAINTING GRANT SCHEME 
 
 
On the proposal of Comhairleoir T. Shannon, seconded by Comhairleoir O. Moran, 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report on the Painting Grant Scheme 
2025. 
 
12. 
HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE / COISTE BEARTAIS 
STRAITÉISIGH - TITHÍOCHT – 18th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee from its meeting held, 18th February 2025. 
 
12.1 
HOUSING PROGRESS REPORT 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Housing Progress report for December 2024. 
 
12.2 
MOTIONS 
 
12.2.1 
FIREPLACES IN CITY COUNCIL-OWNED PROPERTIES 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council will remove or close open fireplaces in City Council-owned 
properties as part of routine refurbishment between tenancies; and offer to do so as 
part of energy upgrades.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. O. Moran 24/568) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the Housing Directorate’s Energy 
Efficiency Retrofit Programme includes for the removal/close up of fireplaces as part 
of the energy efficiency upgrade works and this programme has been very successful 
to date and is proposed to expand in the future.  
 
With regard to vacant properties, and their refurbishment, this is assessed on a case-
by-case basis and will depend on the level of works required, ventilation requirements 
and the suitability of the proposed works to any individual property. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 

12.2.2 
KNOCKNAHEENY REGENERATION 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the report of the Director of Services, 
Housing, dated 13th February 2025 on the following motion:- 
 
 
‘That Cork City Council would apply to the Government for funding to include 
Courtown Drive, Courtown Park, Kilkieran Close and Coolmaine Crescent in the 
Knocknaheeny Regeneration with regards the installation of new windows and doors 
and where relevant porches along with the installation of solar panels and updated 
heating systems similar to the retrofitting of the houses that took place on Harbour 
View Road.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. M. Gould 24/615) 
 
The report of the Director of Services stated that the City Council is currently engaged 
in the delivery of the Cork City Northwest Regeneration Masterplan & 
Implementation Report (‘Masterplan’), which was adopted by Council, with funding 
being made available for the delivery of the contents of the Masterplan only by the 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage.  
 
Notwithstanding the above, Cork City Council is committed to reducing the carbon 
footprint of its existing housing stock. To that end it has embarked on a thirty year 
program to ensure that all of its housing stock has an energy rating of B2 or better by 
2050.  
 
The program known as the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Program (EERP) phase two 
commenced in 2021 and has two milestones:  
 
a. 25% completion by 2030  
b. 100% completion by 2050  
 
The program is funded by the DHLGH, Cork City Council and the Energy Efficiency 
Obligation Scheme. The measures funded or part funded by the DHLGH include roof 
Insulation, wall insulation, windows and doors, heat pump installation, LED lighting, 
project management and building energy rating certificates (BER).  
 
In 2024 the Council was allocated funding to complete one hundred and sixteen 
houses. The Council exceeded this target by completing one hundred and twenty three 
houses. The Council has a current pipeline of two hundred and ninety houses which 
will be progressed in 2025.  
 
Courtown Drive, Courtown Park, Kilkieran Close and Coolmaine Crescent are not 
included in the present pipeline but will be considered for future years of the 
programme. 
 
An Chomhairle further agreed to refer the motion back to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee for further consideration. 
 
 
 

13. 
CLIMATE ACTION COMMITTEE – 11th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the Climate Action Committee 
from its meeting held, 11th February 2025. 
 
14. 
SOUTH CENTRAL LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South Central Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th February 2025. 
 
15. 
SOUTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th February 2025. 
 
16. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th February 2025. 
 
17. 
NORTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 24th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 24th February 2025. 
 
18. 
SOUTH EAST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – 25th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the South East Local Area 
Committee from its meeting held, 25th February 2025. 
 
19. 
NORTH WEST LOCAL AREA COMMITTEE – SPECIAL MEETING 3rd 
MARCH 2025 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the minutes of the North West Local Area 
Committee from its special meeting held, 3rd March 2025. 
 
20. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
 
An Chomhairle noted correspondence received. 
 
21. 
CONFERENCE/SEMINAR SUMMARIES 
 
An Chomhairle noted summaries of conferences/seminars attended as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh and S. Martin at the LAMA Spring Seminar, held 
at Kilford Arms Park Hotel, Co. Kilkenny, 30th - 31st January 2025.  
• Comhairleoirí J. Kavanagh and S. Martin at the Association of Irish Regions 
Training Seminar, held at Radisson Blu Hotel, Athlone, Co. Westmeath, 5th - 
6th February 2025. 

• Comhairleoir S. Martin at the AILG Module 1 Training, An Overview of Wind 
Energy, held at Fairways Hotel, Dundalk, Co. Louth, 20th February 2025. 
 
22. 
SECTION 141 REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle noted section 141 reports as follows:- 
 
• Comhairleoir P. Dineen – Cork International Film Festival – January to June 
2024. 
• Comhairleoir P. Dineen – Cork Local Drug Task Force – January to June 2024. 
• Comhairleoir P. Dineen – CORE – January to June 2024. 
 
23. 
CONFERENCES/SEMINARS 
 
None received. 
 
24. 
TRAINING 
 
None received. 
 
25. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MONTHLY MANAGEMENT REPORTS 
 
An Chomhairle considered and noted the Chief Executive’s monthly management 
reports for January 2025. 
 
26. 
MOTIONS REFERRED TO COMMITTEES 
 
An Chomhairle noted the motions on Appendix 1 attached, that have been referred to 
the relevant Committees as determined by the Meetings Administrator, due notice of 
which has been given. 
 
27. 
MOTIONS DEFERRED FROM MEETING OF AN CHOMHAIRLE HELD 
ON THE 10th FEBRUARY 2025 
 
27.1 
CONTROL OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES (OCCUPIED TERRITORIES) 
BILL 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That this Council registers its concern at recent indications from the Government that 
they will not follow up on their election commitment to enact the Control of Economic 
Activities (Occupied Territories) Bill 2018 and opposes any attempts to row back on 
enacting the bill in full. 
 
This important bill was introduced in the context of the International Court of Justice 
(ICJ) Advisory Opinion from July 2024 which deemed Israeli settlements on occupied 
Palestinian land illegal and stated that all countries were obliged not to trade with 
them.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. B. McCarthy 25/067)  

 
27.2 
UPGRADE OF THE R624 ROAD 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Government to emphasise the strategic 
priority and urgent upgrade of the R624 road to unlock the brownfield urban 
regeneration of the Cork docklands through the development of 1,325 homes with 
planning permission.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/079) 
 
27.3 
TFI 90-MINUTE LEAP CARD FARE 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Government and the National Transport 
Authority to ask them to make the new bus network for Cork a national priority and 
bring the TFI 90-Minute Leap Card Fare to Cork.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. H. Kamegni 25/081) 
 
27.4 
ONGOING ISSUES WITH WATER QUALITY 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council will write to the Chief Executive of the EPA, Uisce Éireann 
and the HSE to request their urgent attendance at a special meeting of Cork City 
Council to discuss ongoing issues with water quality in Cork City and the potential 
public health risk of same.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. K. Collins, Cllr. M. Gould, Cllr. F. Kerins 25/090) 
 
28. 
MOTIONS 
 
28.1 
DEVOLVE 
ACTIVE TRAVEL BUDGET TO TARGET EXISTING 
FOOTPATHS 
 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to defer the following motion to the next Ordinary Meeting of 
An Chomhairle to be held, 14th April 2025:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council call on Government to devolve at least 10% of the Active 
Travel Budget to target old and existing footpaths and bring them up to a safe and 
healthy standard. The practice of insisting on the inclusion of a cycle lane or nothing 
happens needs to stop. Walking is the most popular and efficient means of active travel 
and needs to be encouraged and facilitated more.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. Martin 24/344) 
 
 

28.2 
LICENCING OF QUADRICYCLE DRIVERS 
 
 
An Chomhairle agreed to defer the following motion to the next Ordinary Meeting of 
An Chomhairle to be held, 14th April 2025:- 
 
‘This Council calls on the Government to: 
1. Introduce legislation to allow individuals aged 16 and over to drive light 
quadricycles (such as the Citroën Ami) on Irish roads, following the example 
of several European countries. 
2. Establish a clear framework for driver training and safety requirements to 
ensure young drivers are adequately prepared, potentially through a modified 
version of the Essential Driver Training (EDT) scheme. 
3. Recognise light quadricycles as a safer and more environmentally friendly 
alternative to scooters and motorcycles, offering increased protection and zero 
emissions for young drivers. 
 
Rationale: 
Ireland is one of the few European countries that does not permit teenagers to drive 
light quadricycles, despite their availability and affordability. Countries such as 
France, Spain, and Italy allow 14 to 16-year-olds to operate these vehicles under 
specific training and licensing schemes. Introducing similar legislation here would 
promote safe, sustainable mobility options for younger people and reduce reliance on 
higher-risk two-wheeled vehicles. 
 
This motion calls for modernisation of road traffic laws to reflect advancements in 
light vehicle technology and provide practical transport solutions for young people 
across Ireland.’ 
 
(Proposer: Cllr. D. Boylan 25/107) 
 
28.3 
DISTRICT COURT FAMILY LAW 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minister for Public Expenditure Jack Chambers 
and the Minister for Justice Jim O’Callaghan calling on them to increase the legal aid 
fees payable to solicitors on the District Court Family Law Solicitors Panel so as to 
ensure that more solicitors are able to do family law legal aid work and with a view to 
clearing the backlog in family law applications in the District Court in areas such as 
applications for domestic violence orders, disputes regarding custody and access to 
children and maintenance applications.’   
 
(Proposer: Cllr. S. O’Callaghan 25/115) 
 
28.4 
EDUCATION FOR CHILDREN WITH ADDITIONAL NEEDS 
 
 
An Chomhairle considered and approved the following motion:- 
 
‘That Cork City Council write to the Minster for Education urgently calling on her to: 
(i) immediately expand the number of special school places, special classes and 

special education teaching hours in Cork and across the State; (ii) ensure that every 
child currently without a suitable school place for the 2025/26 school year gains access 
to a school place within a reasonable distance from their home; and (iii) radically 
overhaul an education system that fails to uphold the rights of children with additional 
needs.’ 
 
(Proposers: Cllr. J. Lynch, Cllr. K. Collins, Cllr. M. Gould 25/124) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting 
 
 
 
ARDMHÉARA 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
