Comhairle Cathrach Chorcai
Cork City Council
LCDéet
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Åitiüil
Chathair Chorcai
Cork City Local Community Development
Committee
Minutes of the LCDC meeting of Thursday, 17th of November 2022
In attendance:
Cllr Fergal Dennehy
Cllr Kelleher
Cllr Keohane
Ann Doherty
Joe Curtin
Niall O'Keeffe
Adrienne Rodgers
Nora O'Donovan
Catherine Kennedy
Adrian Kane
Gabriel O'Keeffe
Also in attendance:
Held on Microsoft Teams
Chairperson
Richard McCarthy, Rebecca Loughry, Kieran O'Connell, Ruth Lynch, Sandy
Mcgroarty, Stephen Murphy, Karen Duke, Tanya O'Sullivan
Apologies
1. Welcome
Eoin Gunn, Helen Murphy, Denis Leamy
The Chairperson, Cllr Fergal Dennehy welcomed the committee members. Fergal thanked Nora on
behalf of the Committee for her contribution to the work of the LCDC over the two terms Nora has
served as a Cork City PPN representative. Nora thanked all the LCDC members, Cork City Council
staff, past and present, for their support during her membership.
2. Minutes
The minutes of the 20th of October 2022 were proposed as read by Cllr Kelleher and seconded by Joe
Curtin. There were no matters arising.
3. Membership of LCDC — PPN Representatives, TOR/Standing Orders and Replacements
All new PPN representatives who will be elected members to the LCDC from the PPN plenary will
receive the relevant TOR/Standing Oiders in advance of their first meeting of the LCDC.
4. Ukraine Community Response Forum Update: 'Glance Back — Look Forward' 6th December Event
Invite
Cork City Council's Ukrainian Response Coordinator gave an update on the Ukraine Community
Response Forum outlining that there are 60,000 Ukrainians in Ireland currently. There are 600
Ukrainians spread across 6 different facilities in Cork. There will be a call towards pledged
accommodation by the end of November. Funding from Healthy Ireland will be used towards the
health and wellbeing of Ukrainians,
'Glance Back — Look Forward' Event Invite: The Lord Mayor Cllr Deirdre Forde will host this event in
the Concert Hall on Tuesday 6th of December 2022. This event, in cooperation with the Cork
Volunteer Centre, funded by the DRCD, will be a chance for networking, renewing connections, and
reflecting on the work of the Community Response Forum during the pandemic. It will be an
opportunity to recognise the work of the community and voluntary sector, the public services, and
volunteers.
5. For Information:
(a) Cork City Councit/LGBTl + Inter-Agency was elected as a Board member of
the Rainbow Cities Network. This is a huge achievement and recognition
of the work and collaboration with and between the Council, the
Interagency and the Network.
(b) Community Enhancement Programme Funding has been announced.
(c) Launch of the Trauma Strategy for the City and the E- training module
(16th November 2022)
6. PPN Report: LCDC PPN Representatives and Annual Conference Report
PPN Representative Joe Curtin reported that Linkage groups are being developed with the PPN
representatives grouped underthe three pillars. The Winter plenary of Cork City PPN is being held
on 21st November in City Hall for election of Representatives from the three pillars.
7. SICAP-
a) Annual Plan 2023 — and End of Year Report
DRCD announced an overall increase of 3% (€1.4 million in total)
b) SICAP Transition Group
SICAP will change due to boundary extension once the current contracts are
completed in 2023.
c) Cork City Partnership Request on Ukraine Response Funding
The Chairperson reported on the request from Cork City Partnership on
refocusing funding to the recruitment of a Ukraine migrant resource worker.
Cork City Partnership reported that no response to their tender process on
the section to support families. The options now being proposed are to utilise
the fund to recruit a resource worker or re-tender. The money must be
allocated to an agreed project by end of year. The Chairperson proposed that
the SICAP Sub-Group would be given autonomy to decide on this request
once they had received additional information. They would report back to
the LCDC at the next meeting. This was approved unanimously.
d) DRCD approved carryover of 8% of the SICAP budget into 2023
Pobal and the DRCD have agreed that 8% carryover of the SICAP budget
could be carried over into 2023. Normally a 5% carryover is only allowed but
as the Ukraine funding came late in the year flexibility has allowed the
increase.
e) (Non-SICAP) - Empowering Communities Programme The new ECP
coordinator has been appointed and will commence work on the
programme in the Killala gardens area of Knocknaheeny over the next 12
months.
8. LCDC: Audit (CEP and SICAP 2021) and Annual Report 2021
The meeting was informed that the DRCD has selected Cork City LCDC for an Audit on its work on the
CEP and SICAP for 2021. This Audit will commence on 28th November 2022.
Cllr Dennehy proposed the Draft Annual Report for 2021 would be commended to the meeting as
presented and this was seconded by Cllr Keohane.
9. Strategic Items:
a.
b.
Sléintecare Healthy Communities/Healthy Ireland Fund —
The Slainecare coordinator gave a presentation on "Slaintecare Healthy
Communities" and the RAPID Coordinator gave a presentation on the €75,000 SEED
funding.
Cork City LECP Update-
The Social Inclusion Development Officer gave an updated presentation to the
meeting on the Ulocat economic & community plan 2023-2029"
Adrienne Rodgers outlined to the meeting how this new draft LECP is now achieving
a more balanced input from both the community & economic elements of the plan.
10. AOB-
The next meeting will receive a presentation from the students of St. Vincent's Secondary
School on their engagement in the Yellow Flag Programme for the next meeting. Action Ref
No 7.18 (Pure cork)
PPN Representative, Catherine Kennedy highlighted the upcoming "world aids day" walk or
run parks event on the 26th of November.
The next meeting will be an in-person meeting on the 15th of December 2022 from 3.30 p.m.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
ennehy
Chairperson.
17th November 2022