Comhairle Cathrach Chorcai
Cork City Council
LCDé•t
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Åitiüil
Chathair Chorcai
Cork Citg Local Community Development
Committee
Minutes of the LCDC meeting of Thursday, 20th of October 2022
In attendance:
Cllr Fergal Dennehy
Joe Curtin
Niall O'Keeffe
Adrienne Rodgers
Nora O'Donovan
Siobhan Goulding
Catherine Kennedy
Also in attendance:
Held in the Imperial Hotel
Chairperson
Richard McCarthy, Rebecca Loughry, Kieran O'Connell
Ann Doherty, Eoin Gunn, Ger Keohane, Garrett Kelleher, Mick O'Connell, Helen
Apologies
Murphy, Gabriel O'Keeffe, Denis Leamy, Adrian Kane
1. Welcome
The Chair welcomed the committee members
2. Minutes
The minutes of 22nd of September 2022 minutes were approved by Fergal Dennehy and seconded by
Nora O'Donovan with no matters arising.
3. PPN Report
PPN Community training needs assessment complete with partner groups. Plenary meeting will be
held on November 21st, 2022. Inductions of new PPN representative's will be held in early
December. The LCDC second term representative's will be held on the 14th of November through the
Secretariat vote.
Two Cork 'City Council Community Team members will attend the national PPN conference on 22nd of
October 2022.
4. SICAP -a) KPI Requests 2022
Cork City Partnership as the SICAP LDC have requested a reduction on the KPI 1 by 20% in terms of
their engagement Local Community Groups (LCG) as staff supports have altered towards Ukrainian
supports. According to the IRIS system individual group capacity has increased. Fergal D agreed the
terms on the new proposals from Pobal on 20% reduction.
(b) Annual Report 2023 — Emerging Need
Elderly and Long term unemployed have been the focus with the department and Pobal wanting to
keep this the same. Next year is the last year of this programme. The Department to be notified by
the 4th of November.
5. LCDC Annual Report 2021-
LCDC to consider this report for approval at next meeting
6 Strategic Items
a. Slaintecaire Hearty Communities/Healthy Ireland Fund
Slaintecare €250,000 — working through projects, The Glen awning project is finished. A suggestion
was made for a presentation around the north side projects to the LCDC,
€75,000 SEED will be used for projects along with community consultation around LECP
Healthy Ireland new funding stream has been launched with Karen Duke, the new H.l. Development
worker starting on the 27th of October.
b. 'Pure Cork' LECP Review Day — noted due to previous meeting
c. SICAP— Audit by Karen Higgins report was generally positive some follow up on
recommendations were agreed by Pl.
7 AOB
It was agreed to hold the next meeting online and the December meeting face to face.
Notifications: Employer's engagement seminar on at the Silver Springs Hotel on the 26th of October.
Cork City partnership 'employment post covid change and opportunity' seminar on line also on 26th
of October.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Fergal De
Chairperson.
20thOctober 2022