Comhairle Cathrach Chorcai
Cork City Council
LCDéet
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Åitiüil
Chathair Chorcai
Cork Citg Local Community Development
Committee
Minutes of the LCDC meeting of Thursday, 22nd of September 2022
In attendance:
Cllr Fergal Dennehy
Thomas Myers
Cllr Garret Kelleher
Cllr Ger Keohane
Joe Curtin
Denis Leamy
Gabriel O'Keeffe
Niall O'Keeffe
Adrienne Rodgers
Nora O'Donovan
Helen Murphy
Also in attendance:
In Person/ Teams Meeting
Chairperson
Richard McCarthy, Rebecca Loughry, Kieran O'Connell, Ruth Lynch
Apologies
Ann Doherty, Siobhan Goulding, Eoin Gunn
1. Welcome
The Chair welcomed the committee members
2. Minutes
The minutes of 21st of July 2022 minutes were approved with no matters arising.
3. Membership of LCDC — PPN Representatives, Terms of Office, and Replacements A background
explanation of the Cork City PPN current membership was delivered by Council support staff.
Positions will be elected/filled at the next plenary meeting on November 21st 2022. The Meeting
discussed the need to review the Cork City PPN Representation given the next plenary meeting on
21st November 2022. PPN Representative Request Application form will be forwarded to Cork City
PPN ahead of their Plenary.
4. Ukraine Community Response Forum Update
The LCDC received an update on the Ukraine crisis and what Cork City have in place in dealing with
refugees. Roughly 47,000 Ukrainian refugees in Ireland, 108 arriving per day & there is 6 settings in
Cork. The Ukrainians have been linked in with all the services such as ETB, Nano Nagle, Libraries etc
5. For Information — Staff Update
Both Social Inclusion Development Officers are now in place. Healthy Ireland Post has been filled.
Age Friendly Co-ordinator post will be advertised over the next few weeks.
6. PPN Report
PPN Resource Worker gave a presentation on Cork City PPN and its progress to date.
7 SICAP — Pobal Review— Empowering Communities Programme (ECP)
DRCD have approved a fund of (€140,000) to target an area who scored high on the deprivation
Index. A specific site map was identified according to the DRCD criteria for this programme with a
target specific population of 300. Using the deprivation index map and local needs knowledge of the
area, Cork City Council and Cork City Partnership agreed the Killala gardens area of Knocknaheeny
would be best placed to benefit from such a programme. Given the area would benefit from pre-
regeneration work and preparation for the regeneration. Cork City Partnership will be delivering the
Programme and will submit a plan.
8 LCDC Annual Report 2021: Deferred and will be ready for next meeting.
9 Strategic Items
a. Slaintecaire Healthy communities/ Healthy Ireland fund
Slaintecare €250,000 — working through projects, 8 projects — suggested a presentation around the
north side projects.
€75,000 SEED will be used for "B" projects along with community consultation around LECP
Slaintecaire steering group will be meeting in October.
b. LECP Update
The key task of the LCDC of overseeing the "LECP Pure Cork report as it's a statutory obligation.
Report to be delivered mid-2023.
Diary date for the 20th of October 2022 at the Imperial Hotel to review the LECP Pure Cork, 2016-
2021.
An oversight presentation on the LECP work currently and next phases was delivered.
10 AOB
The potential to hold a straw poll about Hybrid meetings in the future will be explored.
This c
uded
u •ness of the
rgal Den
Chairperson.
22thSeptember 2022