 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Áitiúil Chathair Chorcaí, 
An Stiúrthóireacht um Ghnóthaí Corparáideachaagus Pobail 
Urlár 3, Halla na Cathrach, Corcaigh. T12 T997 
Fón: 021-492 4628 
 
 
Cork City Local Community Development Committee,  
Corporate & Community Affairs Directorate,  
3
rd Floor, City Hall, Cork. T12 T997 
Tel: 021-492 4628 
 
 
Minutes of LCDC Meeting 24th April 2025 4pm TEAMS Online 
 
In attendance: 
Chair: Denis Leamy, Denis Fitzpatrick, Martin Davoren, Katherine Harford, 
Michael Delargey, Cllr. Tony Fitzgerald, Cllr. Shane O’Callaghan, Eoin Gunn, 
Cllr. John Maher, Bernadette Connolly, Cliona Barnes. (Quorum Achieved). 
Also in attendance:  
Kieran O’Connell (CCC), Stephen Murphy (CCC) Denise Murphy (CCC).  
Apologies:  
Majo Rivas, Gabrielle O’Keeffe, Rebecca Loughry, Melissa Cotter, Thomas 
Myers, Dermot Crosby, Cllr Kenneth Collins, Niall O’Keeffe. 
 
1. Welcome and Apologies   
Denis Leamy, Chair, welcomed the committee members. 
Apologies were noted. 
2. Jamie Cuthbert Dindabure, Administrative Officer, Cork City Council, presented on ‘Recreate 
Shandon CLG’. Denis Leamy (Chair) thanked Jamie for her presentation and opened the floor 
for questions.  
 
3. Declaration/conflict of interest:  
The Chairperson reminded the Committee of the need to declare any conflict of interests. 
4. Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting 27th March 2025 
Minutes of this meeting were not available due to unforeseen circumstances. It was proposed 
to defer the presentation of the March minutes to the May meeting.  
Proposed by:  Cllr. Tony Fitzgerald  
Seconded by:  Michael Delargey 
5. Matters Arising 
               No matters arising 
6. LCDC Local Enhancement Programme Grant 2025 for Information. 
KO’C noted to the LCDC members the recommendation for approval of LEP Grants have gone 
to the Department of Rural and Community Development (DRCD) and Cork City Council/LCDC 
are awaiting communication from DRCD.  The Chair reminded the LCDC the need for 
confidentiality until the DRCD make their announcements. 
7. PPN Report  
Denis J Fitzpatrick presented the PPN Report to the LCDC Members.  
 
 

Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Áitiúil Chathair Chorcaí, 
An Stiúrthóireacht um Ghnóthaí Corparáideachaagus Pobail 
Urlár 3, Halla na Cathrach, Corcaigh. T12 T997 
Fón: 021-492 4628 
Cork City Local Community Development Committee,  
Corporate & Community Affairs Directorate,  
3
rd Floor, City Hall, Cork. T12 T997 
Tel: 021-492 4628 
8.
Strategic Items
(a.) Local Economic and Community Plan 2024-2029: 
KOC reported the update on the progress of the work to the LCDC members.  
(b.) Healthy Ireland Fund Update 
Stephen Murphy updated the committee on the activities and work programme of 
Janet O’Connor, Healthy Ireland Coordinator for Cork City.  
(c.) Sláintecare Healthy Communities Update 
Stephen Murphy updated the committee on the activities and work programme of 
Tanya O’Sullivan, Slaintecare Coordinator for Cork City.  
9.
AOB:
Nothing arising.
Decisions arising from Meeting 
Decision 
None 
Action Items arising from Meeting 
Action Item 
Responsible Person(s) 
Due date 
None 
Next Meeting 
The next LCDC meeting will take place in person on Thursday 29th May 4pm in the L’Arche Community 
Services Centre in Togher who will host the LCDC meeting and give the members a tour of their centre, 
the Community Garden and Coffee Dock, which has been part funded by the Community Recognition 
Fund 2023. 
______________________ 
Denis Leamy 
Chairperson       
  24th April 2025 
