 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Áitiúil Chathair Chorcaí, 
An Stiúrthóireacht um Ghnóthaí Corparáideachaagus Pobail 
Urlár 3, Halla na Cathrach, Corcaigh. T12 T997 
Fón: 021-492 4628 
 
 
Cork City Local Community Development Committee,  
Corporate, Community & Cultural  Affairs Directorate,  
3
rd Floor, City Hall, Cork. T12 T997 
Tel: 021-492 4628 
 
Minutes of LCDC Meeting 30th October 2025, 4pm 
Microsoft TEAMS Online Meeting 
 
In attendance: 
Denis Leamy (Chair), Rebecca Loughry (CO), Martin Davoren, Bernadette 
Connolly, Katherine Harford, Gabrielle O’Keeffe Michael Delargey, Cliona 
Barnes, Cllr. John Maher, Cllr. Tony Fitzgerald, Denis Fitzpatrick, Konrad Im, 
Cllr. Gary O’Brien, Eoin Gunn. (Quorum Achieved). 
Apologies:  
Thomas Myers, Cllr. Kenneth Collins, Dermot Crosby, Niall O’Keeffe, Kieran 
O’Connell. 
Also in attendance:  
PJ Murphy (CCC), Denise Murphy (CCC). 
1. Welcome and Apologies   
Denis Leamy (Chair) welcomed the committee members.  
Apologies were noted. 
2. Declaration/conflict of interest:  
The Chairperson reminded the Committee of the need to declare any conflict of interests. 
3. Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting 25th September 2025 
Minutes of this meeting were approved. 
Proposed by:   Denis J. Fitzpatrick 
Seconded by:   Cllr. Tony Fitzgerald 
4. Matters Arising 
               No matters arising 
5. Membership and Nominations for Vice -Chairperson 
Melissa Cotter submitted her resignation to the LCDC. Kieran O’Connell has issued letter to 
the PPN to commence elections for a new PPN rep to the LCDC. Denis Leamy thanked Melissa 
Cotter for her service to the LCDC and wished her well for the future. This was unanimously 
supported. 
Discussion held regarding the election of the LCDC Vice Chairperson. Decision made to issue 
ballot papers to elect new Vice Chairperson. 
6. PPN Report  
DJF presented the PPN Report to the LCDC Members & outlined the work of the PPN to date. 
Denis Leamy thanks DJF for his comprehensive report and thanked him for all his 
representations of the PPN at the events he outlined.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Áitiúil Chathair Chorcaí, 
An Stiúrthóireacht um Ghnóthaí Corparáideachaagus Pobail 
Urlár 3, Halla na Cathrach, Corcaigh. T12 T997 
Fón: 021-492 4628 
 
 
Cork City Local Community Development Committee,  
Corporate, Community & Cultural  Affairs Directorate,  
3
rd Floor, City Hall, Cork. T12 T997 
Tel: 021-492 4628 
 
7. Strategic Items: 
 
a. SICAP + ECP Programmes – CCP Report 
Martin Davoren gave SICAP update to committee members. Noted to the members 
the meeting held with Susan Randalls of Pobal and its productivity.  
b. Sláintecare Healthy Communities 
Martin Davoren updated the committee on the work of Tany O’Sullivan, Sláintecare 
Healthy Communities Co Ordinator. A report was given on the Genio Fund, Greening 
Cities Initiatives and Health & Wellbeing initiatives across the city.  
 
c. Healthy Ireland Fund 
Martin Davoren updated the committee on the work of Janet O’Connor, Healthy 
Ireland Co-Ordinator. There are currently 6 projects being rolled out across the city. 
Psyched, Green Spaces for Health, Let’s Play Cork, Transport Mobility Forum, Cultural 
Companions and Sexual Health Network.  
d. LECP 2024-2029 Up-date 
PJ Murphy, Social Inclusion Development Worker joined the meeting to update 
committee members on the LECP 2024-2029 action tracker. PJ gave a demonstration 
of the tracker and invited members to reach out to him with any further questions.  
PJ noted to the committee, a High-Level Goal leads partner workshop will take place 
on 26th November 2025.   
 
Denis Leamy thanked PJ for his presentation and offer to members for further support 
with the tracker.  
 
 
8. AOB 
               None. 
 
9. ECP Update/SICAP Annual Plan 2026 
 
The meeting was informed of the SICAP Sub-Group meeting with Pobal and Cork City 
Partnership. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Áitiúil Chathair Chorcaí, 
An Stiúrthóireacht um Ghnóthaí Corparáideachaagus Pobail 
Urlár 3, Halla na Cathrach, Corcaigh. T12 T997 
Fón: 021-492 4628 
Cork City Local Community Development Committee,  
Corporate, Community & Cultural  Affairs Directorate,  
3
rd Floor, City Hall, Cork. T12 T997 
Tel: 021-492 4628 
Decisions arising from Meeting 
Decision 
Convene SICAP Sub-Group to discuss item 9 above. 
LCDC Consensus 
Action items arising from meeting. 
Action Item from Meeting 
Official Letter from LCDC to Melissa Cotter thanking her for her service 
and contributions to the LCDC 
Kieran O’Connell 
Issue Ballot for Vice Chair Nominations 
Kieran O’Connell 
Convene SICAP Sub-Group ASAP to make decision on behalf of LCDC on 
the following: 1) Increase KPI’s of Individuals by 5% and 2) Discuss 
strengthening engagement process between LCDC and Cork City 
Partnership.  
Kieran O’Connell 
Issue full address of Newbury House to LCDC Members for next 
meeting to take place on Thursday 27th November @4pm. Newbury 
House Family Centre CLG Old Youghal Road Mayfield Cork T23C3FW 
Kieran O’Connell 
Check LCDC guidelines regarding the following: Does the LCDC 
committee member representing the private sector have to be a board 
or senior staff member.  
Kieran O’Connell 
Next Meeting 
The next LCDC meeting will take place on Thursday 27th November 4pm at Newbury House Family 
Centre CLG Old Youghal Road Mayfield Cork T23C3FW. https://www.newburyhouse.ie/.  
______________________ 
Denis Leamy 
Chairperson       
30th October 2025 
