Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 15th October 2018
in Aras an Chontae, Mullingar Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Members:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs Sorca Clarke, Cllr Andrew Duncan, Cllr Tom
Farrell, Cllr Paul Hogan, Cllr Frank McDermott, Cllr
Michael CYBrien, Cllr Bill Collentine, .
Deputy Robert Troy
Marie Reddin, Dave Raftis, Kathleen Grennan
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff, Superintendent Alan
Murray and Superintendent Shane Cumrnins
Barry Kehoe, Deputy Chief Executive, Westmeath
County Council
Annette Barr-Jordan, Community Development, WCC,
Pat Keating, Mullingar Municipal District Manager,
WCC, Breda Daly, Corporate Services, WCC.
Cllr Ken Glynn, Cllr Frankie Keena, Cllr Aengus
O'Rourke, Cllr John Shaw, Cllr Emily Wallace, Pat
Gallagher, Billy Coughlan, Pat Grimes, Des Sheridan,
Sheena Lawless, Senator Paul Daly, Senator Gabrielle
McFadden, Senator Aidan Davitt and Deputy Peter
Burke,
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman, opened the meeting and gave apologies on behalf of Mr
Pat Gallagher and Mr Billy Coughlan who were unable to attend this morning's
meeting. Cllr Hill informed the JPC Members that Mr Barry Kehoe, Director of
Services was deputising for Mr Pat Gallagher.
• To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on Monday, 16th April
2018.
On the proposal of Cllr. Paul Hogan and seconded by Cllr Frank McDermott, the
Members approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on Monday, 16th July 2018
in Council Chambers, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar.
1
Report from Westmeath County Council
Nfr Barry Kehoe, Deputy Chief Executive, informed the JPC Members of the
following:
Traffic Safety:
Mr Kehoe informed the JPC Members that as of 30üt June 2018 there were 73 fatal
collisions, which resulted in 78 fatalities on Irish roads. This represents 3% more
collisions (+2) and 3% more deaths (+2) compared to provisional Garda data for the
same period in 2017.
Mr Kehoe informed the Members that there were 3 fatalities in Westmeath to date in
2018 which occurred on the:
• R395 Castlepollard — Single vehicle / Car Driver
• R395 Drumcree — Single vehicle / Motor Cyclist
• R446 Athlone — Pedestrian
Mr Kehoe also it-formed the Members that in the period January — December 2017
there were 142 fatal collisions resulting in 157 fatalities on Irish roads, which
represents a 17% fewer collisions (-3()) and 16% fewer deaths compared to
provisional Garda data for the full year of 2016. Mr Kehoe informed the Members
that there was 1 fatality in Westrneath during 2017 which occurred on the:
• N55 The Pidgeons, Athlone — Multi Vehicle / Motorist Cyclist.
Mr Kehoe asked the Members to note that a "National Slow Down Day" was taking
place for a 24 hour period from 07.00hrs on Friday 19th October to 07.00hrs on
Saturday 20th October 2018.
Mr Kehoe informed the Members that the Junior School Warden Instruction Training
was completed on the 5th September 2018 which was attended by 12 Gardaf and the
Vice Principal of St Etchens NS Kinnegad.
Mr Kehoe further informed the Members that Athlone Gardai is arranging a Mock
Trafic Accident which is due to take place on the 5ü1 December 2018 at the Athlone
Regional Sports Centre.
Mr. Kehoe referred to the restriction on 5-axle frucks using some roads in the County
and that the initiative is working well in terms of enhancing safety and amenity.
However, Mr. Kehoe did indicate that there are some 5-axle frucks using the R390
and that the assistance of An Garda Siochåna may be requested to assist in enforcing
the measure.
2
Greenway Bye Laws:
Mr Kehoe informed the Members that Greenway Bye Laws were drafted by
Westmeath County Council and were subject to public consultation. Mr Kehoe
confirmed that no submissions were received. Mr Kehoe further informed the
Members that the Draft Bye Laws were going before the full Council at their October
Meeting for approval. Mr Kehoe stated that the purpose of the draft bye laws is to
allow the Council or An Garda Siochana to take enforcement action against
individuals who misuse the facility in a manner that affects the enjoyment of the
facility by the wider community. Mr Kehoe further stated that the bye laws would
allow Westmeath County Council to deal with particular issues such as anti-social
behaviour.
Cllr Paddy Hill thanked Mr Kehoe for his presentation.
Report from An Garda Siochäna
Chief Supt. Peter Duff gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath
Division as circulated prior to the meeting.
This report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff highlighted the following:
Crime Analysis 01/01/2018 to 31/09/2018 inclusive —
circulated.
Community Engagement and Public Safety:
as per Report
o Westmeath Divisional Youth Awards — Chief Supt Peter Duff informed
the Members that :
Lidl have taken sponsorship of The Westmeath Divisional Youth
Awards for 2018 and the Official Medial Launch took place on the 19th
Sept 2018. Application forms are available at all Garda Stations, Lidl
stores and online through the Garda website. There will be 3 no.
category winners which will represent Co Westmeath when the
National Awards are presented on the 7th Feb 2019 in the Mullingar
Park Hotel. These Awards will celebrate the outstanding young
people between the ages of 13 and 21 yrs. Closing date for entries is
31st October 2018 and the winners will be selected by a judging panel
made up of local dignitaries.
3
o Garda Band Concert: - Chief Supt Peter Duff informed the Members
that the proceeds from the Concert which was held on the 2nd Oct 2018
will go towards the funding of the local Community Police Units
annual active age parties and youth group activities.
o Community Meetings: - Chief Supt Peter Duff informed the Members
that Community Meetings were held in Kilbeggan on the 26th Sept 2018
and in the Grand Hotel Moate on the 4th Oct 2018. The Meetings
provided an opportunity for the local residents to engage with the
Gardai and discuss any concerns regarding crime in their area. He
further informed the Members that more public meetings are
scheduled for Castlepollard (17th Oct) and Devlin on the 18th Oct.
• Confronting Crime: - as per Garda Report circulated, Chief Supt Peter Duff
reported a significant drop in burglary figures from 1st July to 30th September
2018 in comparison to the same period in 2017, (88 in 2017 and 70 in 2018) a
drop of 18. Chief Supt Peter Duff stated that a significant contributing factor
to the reduction of burglaries is the operation plan to increase anti-crime
patrols and crime checkpoints throughout the division. He further informed
the Members that patrols and checkpoints are managed on a daily basis and
target specific areas based on analysis of crime statistics. Mr Duff stated that
checkpoints and patrols are carried out by both the uniform and non-uniform
units.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff also informed the Members that the high visibility
patrols and checkpoints cannot be overestimated as it not only deters the
activity of criminal behaviour but also serves as reassurance to the local
community of active policing in their area.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff also informed the Members that in the third quarter of
2018, there were 2,699 Proactive Policing Patrols and 1,295 Proactive Policing
Checkpoints.
• Roads Policing: - Operation Taitneamh - Chief Supt Peter Duff informed the
Members that Operation Taitneamh took place over the August Bank Holiday
weekend which its main aim is to create a mind-set amongst drivers that
Garda presence is extensive and influence driver behaviour. Mr Duff
informed Members that over 500 crime prevention packs were distributed
and hundreds of florescent jackets given to motorists.
Chief Supt Duff further informed the Members that Multi-Agency Checkpoint
continue to be conducted on a monthly basis and Mandatory Intoxicant
Texting (MIT) checkpoints are also conducted at several times on a daily basis
throughout the division.
• Organisational Development and Capacity Improvement: Chief Supt Peter
Duff informed the Members that promotions within An Garda Siochana had
taken place for the rank of Sergeant and 6 candidates from the Westmeath
4
Division were successful. Four of the successful candidates have been
promoted and allocated new stations and two candidates will be promoted in
the coming months. N,'fr Duff also informed the Members that Sergeant
Paddy Guinan is Westmeath's new Crime Prevention Officer following the
retirement of Sergeant John Connolly. Sgt Guinan took up the new role in
September 2018.
Chief Supt Peter Duff further informed the Members that the merger of the
Divisional Control Rooms to Regional Communications Centre is due to take
place in the coming weeks and will result in all 999 calls for the Westrneath area
being dealt with by a Regional Control centre based in Garda Headquarters,
Dublin. It is envisaged that the change will result in extra uniform personnel
being deployed in operational duties.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Duff for his comprehensive
Garda Report.
In response to Cllr Clarke's question regarding what sections in the Cultural Audit -
Westmeath Division were strongest and weakest in, Chief Supt Peter Duff informed
the Members that overall the division came out particularly strong and he got a lot
of positive feedback from Gardaf in both Athlone and Mullingar and he further
stated that the ratings were consistent amongst all ranks.
Cllr Hogan commended the work of An Garda Siochana in relation to the recent
drug seizures throughout the County.
Cllr Hogan welcomed the new Crime Prevention Officer Sgt Paddy Guinan and
asked if he could make a Presentation to the JPC at a future meeting.
In response Chief Supt Peter Duff agreed to have a presentation at our next JPC
Meeting in January 2019.
Cllr Hogan also asked if there could be more Garda presence in place coming up to
Halloween and Christmas. In response, Chief Supt Peter Duff informed the
Members that there was a Policing Plan in place for Mullingar and Athlone
regarding Halloween and he stated that An Garda Siochana will not allow anti-social
behaviour take over the celebration of Halloween. In relation to the Christmas
holiday period, Chief Supt Peter Duff advised the Members that traditionally the
number of burglaries increases during the winter months. Mr Duff urged
householders to keep as little money as possible at home during the Christmas
period. He also advised members of the public to be vigilant and exercise caution
when withdrawing money from ATMs.
5
Cllrs McDermott, Duncan and Farrell complemented and highly welcomed the
Community Garda Meetings recently held in the County and asked that they be
continued throughout the year in various town and villages within the County.
Request from An Garda Siochåna to nominate a IPC representative to the judging
panel for the Westmeath Garda Youth Awards 2019.
On the proposal of Cllr Sorca Clarke and seconded by Cllr Frank McDermot the JPC
Members unanimously nominated Cllr Paddy Hill as JPC representative to the
judging panel for the Westmeath Garda Youth Awards 2019.
PPN Report
Mr Dave Raftis, Community Representative presented the PPN Report to the. JPC.
Members as circulated prior to today's meeting.
The PPN report was noted by the Members.
Following the PPN presentation the following was noted and agreed on:
Mobile Camera Unit - Mr Kehoe reiterated to the Members that the mobile camera
unit is used primarily to detect litter and waste management offences. Mr Kehoe did
give a commitment to the PPN that Westmeath County Council would draft a 1 page
protocol document whereby Community & Voluntary groups can request WCC to
locate the mobile unit in black spot areas to capture and address littering and illegal
dumping.
Speed Limit Signage for Estates: - Mr Barry Kehoe confirmed to the Members that
he would follow up to ensure the appropriate speed lirnit signage for Woodland
Grove Estate in Athlone had been erected.
Public Safety and Confidence in Garda - The PPN commended the work of An
Garda Siochana in relation to the increase in Garda presence in estates and expressed
their appreciation of a Community Garda to Grange, Mullingar.
Anti Social Behaviour Policy — Annette Barr Jordan on behalf of the PPN requested
that the Westmeath County Council Tenant Handbook be issued to Resident
Associations. Mr Kehoe confirmed that he would discuss this matter with the
Director for Housing to see if this can be done.
Dumping at Mullingar Harriers Z Farran - Mr Barry Kehoe confirmed to the PPN
that he was in conununication with the Mullingar Municipal District Manager
regarding rubbish being dumped on grounds near the Mullingar Harriers Athletic
Club and the Presbyterian Church in Farran. Mr Kehoe confirmed that rubbish has
6
been removed but that the area is subject to regular dumping and the Municipal
District will continue to monitor this location.
In relation to Item No. 9 of the PPN Report, Cllr Sorca Clarke and the PPN Members
raised concerns regarding the increase of online selling of drugs and criminal
activity through Social Media. Cllr Clarke asked Chief Supt. Peter Duff what
resources local Gardaf have to tackle this particular problem. In response, Chief
Supt. Peter Duff informed the Members that there are divisional drugs units in both
Mullingar and Athlone. Mr Duff also confirmed that there is a divisional liaison
officer who works with the Gardai National Cyber Crime Bureau which plays an
increasingly important role in many investigations. Mr Duff did state that there are
issues in relation to the sale of drugs whereby online drug deals are done through a
third party which makes detection more difficult.
CCTV Query — Cllr Paul Hogan asked if there were any plans by the Department to
extend CCTV cameras in our towns? In response, Chief Supt Peter Duff said there
are no plans in place for Athlone or Mullingar and stated that it is run by the Garda
Commissioner.
On the proposal of Cllr Paul Hogan and seconded by Cllr Frank McDermott the JPC
Members requested that Chief Supt Peter Duff write to the Garda Commissioner to
request more cameras in our towns.
Cllr Paddy Hill welcomed and thanked Mr Raftis for their PPN Report.
AOB:
Cllr Frank McDermott and Cllr Paddy Hill asked Chief Supt Peter Duff to follow up
on the conditions of the Castlepollard Garda Station in particular the reception area.
Cllr Tom Farrell stressed to the Members the importance and value of knowing and
using your Eircode and he appealed to the public to do likewise especially in times
of emergency.
Date of Next Meeting:
Monday, 14th January 2019, Council Chambers, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Cllr. Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Pad yH1 1,
Chairman,
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
7
Date
