 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Apologies   
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher  
In Person  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
In Person 
Dept of Social Protection  
Marie Flynn 
Apologies 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Apologies 
Health Services Executive  
Teresa Kennedy  
In Person  
Non-
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
In Person  
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
In Person  
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
In Person 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
In Person 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Ms Teams  
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
In Person 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Apologies   
Business/Employers  
Aisling Coleman 
MS Teams   
Trade Union  
Noel Maguire 
In Person 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
In Person  
Westmeath County Council, Acting Chief Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
In Person 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
MS Teams 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
MS Teams   
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
MS Teams   
 
Westmeath County Council, Sláintecare Healthy Comm.  
Brigid Geoghegan 
Apologies  
 
Westmeath County Council, Healthy Ireland  
Sarah McManus  
Apologies   
 
 
 
Draft minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 17th February 2023 at 10.00am (Hybrid Meeting).   

2 
 
Hugh Farrell welcomed all LCDC members, Westmeath County Council staff and Westmeath Community 
Development staff to the meeting.  He also extended a special welcome to Lourdes Neary to her first 
LCDC Meeting. Hugh reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and asked 
that they declare any conflicts of interests that they may have.   
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held on Friday 2nd December 2022 
 
On the proposal of Vincent Bagnall and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collintine the minutes of the LCDC meeting 
held on Friday 16th December 2022 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
Pat Murtagh updated members on the recent LCDC induction training held on 27th January 2023. Pat 
thanked the members for their attendance at the training. 
Pat also gave an update on the EOI to deliver the next LEADER Programme.  Following correspondence 
from DRCD, our EOI submission has been deemed successful to progress to the next stage 2 which is to 
develop the Local Development Strategy (LDS) for the delivery of the 2023-2027 LEADER Programme. 
Deadline for submission of the LDS is 14th July 2023. 
 
3.  
LEADER  
 
4. 
 SICAP  
Pat Murtagh and Annette Barr-Jordan gave members an update on the SICAP Programme.  
For 2023, Brawney Housing Estate have been added as a new target group. Roma and Traveller 
Communities have been added as new priority groups also.  
The adoption of the 2022 Progress Report was proposed by Cathryn Whelehan and seconded by 
Margaret Kiernan.  
The SICAP Subcommittee recommended the adoption of the Annual Plan. The adoption of the Annual 
Plan for 2023 was proposed by Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Pat Gallagher.  
 
5. 
 Healthy Ireland  
Pat Murtagh gave the LCDC members an update on the Healthy Westmeath Programme. Two areas of 
focus for Westmeath are Lifestyle & Behaviour Risk and Wellbeing Factors. Cllr. Tom Farrell asked if the 
issue of drugs could be covered in this programme as a proposed action. Tom added that it is an issue in 
every parish and we need to address it.  
 
6.  
Local Economic & Community Plan 
Pat Murtagh informed the members that the Socio-economic Statement is in progress, and it will be sent 
to the Planning and Management Team in Westmeath County Council for their approval. A meeting of 
the Advisory Steering Group will be held in the next 2 to 3 weeks.  
 
7.  
Empowering Communities Programme. 
Frank Murtagh discussed the Empowering Communities Programme with the members.  2 staff members 
have been employed to work directly with the residents of the Dalton Park Estate in Mullingar. They will 
be reporting their work directly to the LCDC.  
 
 
 

3 
 
8. 
 Community Recognition Fund 2023 
Pat Murtagh discussed the Community Recognition Fund for 2023. This funding allocated to Westmeath 
is €1.6 million for capital-based projects to improve facilities to welcome new arrivals into the community. 
Closing date for receipt of EOIs is 6th March 2022. EOIs will be assessed on the 10th March 2023 and 
proposals will go to the Department in advance of the 15th March 2023 closing date.   
 
Cllr. Tom Farrell asked if it is targeted specifically for Ukrainian people? Pat Murtagh said it is for all new 
arrivals to welcome them into communities. Frank Murtagh queried if it is 100% funded scheme. Pat 
Murtagh answered that projects will be 100% funded, match funding will not be required from 
community groups.  Joe McEvoy suggested that this is published in a positive light on social media and 
show exactly what is being funded through the scheme. It will help to promote the integration process.  
 
 9. Correspondence  
• Local Improvement Scheme is now open for applications.  
• DRCD Update Feb 2023 
 
10. AOB  
Annette Barr Jordan congratulated Mullingar Tidy Towns and Grange housing estate on their recent win 
at the national Pride of Place awards. Cllr. Bill Collintine echoed Annette’s works saying Mullingar is a 
great town and we should be very proud of it.  
 
 
11. Date and Venue of Next Meeting 
The next LCDC meeting will take place on Friday 28th May 2023 at 10am. The meeting will be held on 
Chamber of Commerce, Mullingar 
 
 
 
