 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Apologies  
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
Present 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher 
Present  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Apologies  
Dept of Social Protection  
Shaun Dorrian  
Apologies  
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Present 
Health Services Executive  
Valerie Hand 
Present 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Apologies  
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
Present 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Present 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
Present 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Present 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Present 
Business/Employers  
John Geoghegan 
Apologies  
Trade Union  
Hazel Gavigan  
Apologies 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
Present  
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Apologies 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Present 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 3rd September 2021 at 10.00am via teleconference.   

2 
 
 
In the absence of the Chairperson, Hugh Farrell, Vice-chairperson Pat Gallagher welcomed all LCDC 
members and staff to the meeting. Apologies were noted from Hugh Farrell, Cllr Vinny McCormack, Shaun 
Dorian, Hazel Gavigan and John Geoghegan. Pat reminded members of the confidentiality of the items 
on today’s agenda and thanked all members for attending today’s meeting.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 23rd July 2021 
 
On the proposal of Marie Fox and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collentine the minutes of the previous LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 23rd July 2021 were approved.   
 
2.  
No Matters Arising 
 
 
3.  
SICAP Funding Carry Over – Spend Proposal 
Frank Murtagh brought the members through the circulated spreadsheet on the projected SICAP 2021 
Budget. Frank informed members that the SICAP sub-committee have been working on this task and their 
proposal is to. 
• Maximum percentage of the SICAP 2021 Budget carried forward to 2022 is currently set at 5%. 
Sub-committee are recommending requesting this maximum be increased to 7.5% of the budget. 
• Maximum amount of a grant allowable is currently set at 7.5% of the SICAP 2021 Budget, sub-
committee are proposing seeking approval to increase this value to 10% of the SICAP budget. 
 
Pat Gallagher asked regarding what rationale is being provided for the LCDC recommendations. 
 
Frank Murtagh confirmed that the impact and the response to COVID-19 is the main rationale for the 
recommendations. 
 
Pat Gallagher suggested when the recommendations are going to Pobal for consideration that examples 
of the impact of COVID in the delivery of the programme are included. 
 
Joe McEvoy asked if the underspend in the programme related to an administration. 
 
Frank Murtagh confirmed the underspend was in the actions budget and not relating to administration. 
 
Pat Gallagher thanked the SICAP sub-committee for their work on this recommendation, Pat sought LCDC 
approval for the following. 
• Recommending requesting the maximum budget percentage allowable to be carried forward to 
2022 be increased to 7.5% of the budget. 
• Recommending requesting the maximum amount of a grant allowable be increased from 7.5% of 
the SICAP 2021 Budget to 10% of the SICAP budget. 
 
Proposed by Joe McEvoy and seconded by Cllr Bill Collentine. 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
4.  
LGBTI Dormant Accounts funding application.  
Annette Barr Jordan brought the members through the LCDC submission to LGBTI Dormant accounts 
funding. Annette reminded the members that it was agreed by the committee at the last meeting that 
because of the deadline for applications, that she  and Marie Fox would work on the submission on behalf 
of the committee. Annette stated that Youth Work Ireland submitted two proposals as outlined in the 
document.  
Pat Gallagher asked the committee to formally consider the application, as was submitted before the 
closing date. Pat thanked Marie and Annette for their work on this application. 
 
Proposed by Frank Murtagh and seconded by Valerie Hand. 
 
5.  
Community Enhancement Programme  
Annette Barr Jordan brought the members through the process followed for the allocation of CEP 2021 
grants. Annette thanked the LCDC sub committee for their work in evaluating the CEP applications and 
their grant decisions. She brought the members through the programme and stated grants allocations. 
Annette stated that additional funding was allocated to groups in disadvantaged areas in line with the 
funding programme. She complimented the range of projects that were submitted. She also stated that 
CEP2021 allowed groups to apply for funding for current expenditure which was a welcome change to 
the programme. Approval was sought for the CEP grant allocations as per the LCDC subcommittee. 
 
Pat Gallagher thanked the group and the staff involved in the process. Pat asked whether these 
allocations were for noting or for full approval as there was Ministerial notification last week regarding 
the programme’s allocations.  
 
Annette confirmed the approval was delegated to the sub committee and the grant allocations are for 
noting. 
 
Pat Gallagher stated that the programme change allowing for applications towards current spend was a 
very welcome change. 
 
Frank Murtagh made the same point regarding the allowance of current spend and commended the 
subcommittee and the staff involved in dealing with such a large number of applications. 
 
Cllr Tom Farrell stated it was great to see so many active community groups and that the groups and staff 
involved in the programme should be commended. 
 
6.  
Correspondence  
Pat Murtagh brought the members through the correspondence received since the last meeting. 
I. 
LEADER 2014-22 delivery model review. 
II. 
Dormant Funds Social Enterprise Capital Grants Scheme. 
III. 
Make Way Day 24.09.2021 
 
7.  
AOB 
The members were made aware of Sláintecare Healthy Community, a new programme launched by the 
Department of Health to promote a healthy lifestyle. The programme will be initially delivered in RAPID 
areas of Westmeath. There has been funding sanctioned for a local development officer (funded by 
Department of Health). The LCDC will have an oversight role and the development officer will report to 

4 
 
the LCDC Chief Officer. The oversight role for the LCDC will need to be clarified at national level and will 
be brought before the LCDC Members when clarification is available., 
 
Annette Barr Jordan stated that currently working closely with group of people in the RAPID areas and 
there should be a great mixture of projects delivered. 
 
Pat Gallagher clarified that Sláintecare is being rolled out on a phased basis and Westmeath will be in 
phase one.  
 
Marie Fox said it is a very interesting programme and its good that there is a focus on the 
disadvantaged areas and working in RAPID areas is welcome. Marie asked if there is scope to work in 
other areas outside of the designated RAPID areas. 
 
Pat Gallagher said he was involved in the process, and the committee looked at areas at a high level and 
the process is ongoing. He stated that if success can be demonstrated in the pilot areas it will be rolled 
out nationally and will possibly look at other areas in the county over time. 
 
 
 
8.  
DATE OF NEXT MEETING  
The next meeting will be held on the 22nd October2021 at 10am.   
 
 
Pat Gallagher formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their cooperation and 
patience and wished everyone well.  
 
 
 
 
 
