 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Present   
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
Present  
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher 
Present  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Present  
Dept of Social Protection  
 
 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Present 
Health Services Executive  
 
 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Present 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
Present  
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Present  
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
Present 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Present  
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Present 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Present 
Business/Employers  
John Geoghegan 
Present 
Trade Union  
 
 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Present 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Apologies.  
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 11th February 2022 at 10.00am (MS Teams).   

2 
 
Hugh Farrell welcomed all LCDC members, Westmeath County Council staff and Westmeath Community 
Development staff to the first LCDC meeting of 2022. Hugh thanked Pat Gallagher for chairing the 
previous meetings in his absence. Hugh also expressed his condolences on behalf of the LCDC members 
to Bernie McCarthy on the recent passing of her father Sonny.   
 
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and asked that 
they declare any conflicts of interests that they may have.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 3rd December 2021 
 
On the proposal of Margaret Kiernan and seconded by Cllr. Tom Farrell the minutes of the previous LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 3rd December 2021 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
 
No items under Matters Arising.  
  
 
3.  
SICAP  
a)  SICAP Progress Report.   
Frank Murtagh gave a presentation to the members on the SICAP Progress Report. Frank asked 
that the report be circulated to the all members after today’s meeting.  
 
b) 2021 Annual Performance Review.  
Annette Barr-Jordan discussed the Annual Performance Review with the members. This report 
was approved by Maria Fox and seconded by Cathryn Whelehan.   
 
 
c) Final approval of Annual Plan 2022 
Annette Barr Jordan discussed the Annual Plan for 2022 with the members. The plan was 
approved by Pat Gallagher and seconded by Margaret Kiernan.  
 
Hugh Farrell thanked Annette, the staff and SICAP subcommittee for all their work in the SICAP 
area.  
 
4.  Sláintecare Healthy Communities Programme Update  
Pat Murtagh gave an update on the Healthy Communities Programme. He informed the members 
that the Local Development Officer has been appointed.  Brigid Geoghegan is the new Officer. Pat 
added that we are the first county in the country to have appointed our local development officer 
and thanked Pat Gallagher for moving quickly on the interview process and appointment.  
 
Pat Murtagh proposed members to join the new Sláintecare Healthy Communities Subcommittee. 
The proposed membership consists of Cllr. Bill Collintine, Cllr. Tom Farrell, Frank Murtagh, Cathryn 
Whelehan, Brigid Geoghegan, Pat Murtagh and Annette Barr Jordan.  
 
This was proposed by Cllr. Vinny McCormack and seconded by Margaret Kiernan.  
 

3 
 
Maria Fox asked if there was an update on the purchase of the community bus. Annette Barr 
Jordan answered saying that there is a slight delay as the bus being purchased needs to have 
disability access. Also match funding needs to be arranged to finalise the purchase. Annette added 
that she will keep members informed of any updates on this.  
 
5.  
Local Economic & Community Plan 
a) Overview of Guidelines 
Pat Murtagh gave a presentation to the members on the Overview of the LECP Guidelines.  
Hugh Farrell thanked Pat for his work and added that there is a sizeable piece of work and 
involvement required.  
 
b) Establishment of Advisory Steering Group.  
Pat Murtagh advised the members that a new Advisory Steering Group is being established to 
oversee the development of the LECP. He added that two LCDC representatives would need to be 
included in this group and he opened the floor for suggestions. Cllr Tom Farrell proposed Hugh 
Farrell and Frank Murtagh for the positions.  This was seconded by Pat Gallagher.  
 
Hugh Farrell thanked everyone for the nomination and acknowledged that there is a significant 
amount of work to do as part of this steering group.  
 
Pat Murtagh informed the members that the two SPC nominations for this steering group are John 
Geoghegan and Cllr. John Shaw.  
 
Pat added that this advisory group will be meeting regularly and that the Department have 
proposed four further events/ workshops to help with drafting the plan. These will be held in 
March and April of this year. Pat said that it is vital for members of the advisory steering group to 
attend these workshops. The workshops are open for all LCDC members to attend if they so wish.  
 
 
6.  
Draft LCDC Annual Report 2021. 
Pat Murtagh discussed the Draft LCDC Annual Report 2021 with the members. This report had 
been circulated to the members in advance of the meeting. Pat also thanked Westmeath 
Community Development for their work on the LEADER element of the report.  
 
The Annual Report was proposed by Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Margaret Kiernan.  
 
Pat Gallagher reminded members of a suggestion John Geoghegan made at the last meeting 
relating to publicising and advertising the good work the LCDC are involved in throughout the 
county. Pat added that it might be a good idea for both Hugh Farrell and Pat Murtagh to get 
together and come up with a proposal for this. Pat Murtagh said he would email all members and 
look for suggestions from them. He will then bring a proposal to the next LCDC meeting for the 
approval of the members. Pat added that there is a lot of potential here to publicise the good 
news stories.  
 
Frank Murtagh suggested an Infographic is published on Westmeath County Council’s website 
showing the “work accomplished in 2021”.  
 

4 
 
Cllr. Tom Farrell asked Pat Murtagh if the media are invited to LCDC meetings or if they can attend. 
Pat answered saying that the guidelines do not allow for attendance of media at LCDC meetings.  
 
7.  
Correspondence.  
 
Launch of Town Centre First Policy 
Pat Murtagh informed the members that the new Town Centre First Policy was launched in Moate 
last week by Minister Heather Humphries, with €100,000 awarded in funding to start the Moate 
project.  
 
Social Enterprise Allocations 
The list of Social Enterprise Allocations was circulated to the members in advance of today’s 
meeting. Pat Murtagh said it was great that 10 out of the 13 projects submitted had got approval 
under this scheme, with a total fund of €21,568 being approved for Westmeath.  
 
Social Enterprise Fund 2022 
The Social Enterprise Fund for 2022 is now open for application. The closing date for receipt of 
applications is 3rd March 2022. Pat Murtagh informed the members that our only responsibility 
with this scheme is to publish and circulate the documentation. Rethink Ireland are leading this 
funding stream.  
 
8.  
AOB  
Joe McEvoy complimented Westmeath Community Development and the Leader Team in 
particular on the recent water resources course. He also said that the training company were 
excellent in what they delivered.  
 
Frank Murtagh suggested that we hold some of our LCDC meetings in facilities funded by the 
LEADER Programme.  Hugh Farrell said he thought that was a good idea and it would be nice to 
see the finished projects. Cllr. Tom Farrell suggested that a survey is carried out to see what suits 
the members best, whether the meetings are held in person or continue to be held on MS Teams. 
Pat Gallagher informed the members that there has been a full IT upgrade of the Chamber and 
the Executive Lounge in Mullingar which should leave hybrid meetings a lot easier to host.  
 
John Geoghegan informed the members that it is his last meeting as a member of the LCDC and 
is retiring from the committee after today’s meeting. John acknowledged the hard work of this 
committee and had a special mention for Frank Murtagh and Bernie Leavy of WCD for all their 
work on the LEADER Programme.  Hugh Farrell thanked John for all his hard work with the LCDC 
over the last number of years and wished him well for the future.  
 
Annette Barr Jordan thanked all the agencies and staff who had helped out on the recent 
webinars.  
 
Pat Murtagh gave an update on LCDC membership. There are currently four vacancies on the 
committee. Two of these positions (Dept of Social Projection and Business/ Employers) have 
submitted their nominees and these will be going to the Council Members to be ratified later this 
month.  The HSE and ICTU are still working on replacements. Pat suggested arranging an induction 
course for all new members once all positions have been filled.  

5 
 
 
9.  
Date of Next Meeting.  
 
 
The next meeting will be held on the 25th March 2022 at 10am.    
 
 
Hugh Farrell formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their attendance at 
the meeting and wished John Geoghegan well for the future.    
 
 
 
 
