 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Present   
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
Present  
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher 
Present  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Present  
Dept of Social Protection  
 
 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Present 
Health Services Executive  
Valerie Hand 
Present 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Apologies  
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
Present  
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Present  
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
Present 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Present  
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Present 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Apologies 
Business/Employers  
John Geoghegan 
Present 
Trade Union  
 
 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Present 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Apologies.  
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 3rd December 2021 at 10.00am (MS Teams).   

2 
 
In the absence of the Chairperson, Hugh Farrell, Vice-chairperson Pat Gallagher welcomed all LCDC 
members and staff to the MS Teams meeting. Apologies were noted from Hugh Farrell, Bernie MacCarthy 
and David Deering.  
 
Pat Gallagher reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda. Pat also informed 
the members that Hugh Farrell intends to be back for the next meeting.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 22nd October 2021 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Vinny McCormack and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collentine the minutes of the previous 
LCDC meeting held on Friday 22nd October 2021 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
 
No items under Matters Arising.  
  
 
3.  
SICAP  
a)  Draft Annual Plan 2022.  
Frank Murtagh gave a presentation on the SICAP programme and discussed the Draft Annual Plan 
for 2022 with the members. Frank informed the members that there is a 13% increase in the 
budget since last year. Pat Gallagher thanked Frank for his work and welcomed the increase in 
the budget for this year. Pat also welcomed the new engagements with the Traveller and Roma 
Communities.  
 
b) Annual Plan review and process for approval.  
Annette Barr-Jordan outlined the processes for the review and approval of the Annual Plan for 
both the sub-committee and full LCDC. Annette thanked Frank and his team in Westmeath 
Community Development for having the budgets allocated at short notice as the figures were only 
released this week. Pat Gallagher informed the members that there will be several meetings 
before the plan is approved. This information is for preliminary consideration today.  
 
John Geoghegan acknowledged the Valuable work being carried out under the LEADER and SICAP 
Programmes and suggested that Frank Murtagh engage with local media to publicise this work. 
Pat Gallagher added it may be a good idea to publicise the good work being carried out on the 
ground when we are considering our annual report. Frank Murtagh said he is open to promoting 
the SICAP Programme and suggested that he does a piece with the papers on a local estate. Pat 
Gallagher said that this should be considered further at our next meeting. It will not only promote 
the good work being carried out in the county, but it will also encourage other groups to engage 
in the programmes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
4.  Sláintecare Healthy Communities Programme:  
 
a) Programme update.  
 
Pat Murtagh gave an update on the Healthy Communities Programme. He informed the members 
that locally based programme implementers have been appointed to deliver the programme on 
the ground. He also gave an update on the role of the Local Development Officer and stated that 
interviews for the position are taking place next week and he is hopeful that the new Officer will 
be in position in January 2022.   
 
 
b) Programme funding streams.  
 
Pat Murtagh informed the meeting that there is substantial investment in this Programme from 
the Department of Health. Specific areas in the county were selected, these are disadvantaged 
Rapid Areas in Mullingar and Athlone. Cllr. Vinny McCormack asked if there is scope for expanding 
these areas. Pat Gallagher replied stating the focus presently is on the most disadvantaged parts 
of the 19 selected pilot programme counties. It will extend to the disadvantaged areas in the 
remainder of the country first and then to additional areas within the counties. Pat added that he 
wouldn’t expect any additional areas in the short-term in Westmeath. Cllr. Vinny McCormack 
added that it may be suitable to work alongside Clár. Pat Gallagher responded saying that it has 
separate criteria to the Clár Programme.  
 
c) Establishment of management and monitoring subcommittee   
 
Pat Gallagher informed the members that as part of the Healthy Communities Programme a 
subcommittee is required for the management and monitoring of the programme. This 
subcommittee is a requirement from Sláintecare and they will report back to the LCDC for the 
duration of the Programme. Pat Murtagh proposed that the subcommittee is made up of a 
representative from the HSE, a representative from SICAP, the Local Development Officer, an 
elected member from Athlone, an elected member from Mullingar, Pat Murtagh as chief officer 
of LCDC, Annette Barr Jordan and a representative from PPN Social Inclusion. Pat asked the 
members to think about joining the subcommittee and said that the first meeting will be in  
quarter one of 2022. Subcommittee meetings will be held quarterly throughout the year. Pat 
Gallagher suggested that the HSE and WCD are contacted to see if they would be interested in 
having a representative on the subcommittee and asked Pat Murtagh to discuss it with the elected 
members.  
 
Maria Fox asked for the list of allocations under this programme. Pat Murtagh said the list would 
be circulated to all LCDC members.   Pat Gallagher thanked Pat Murtagh and said there would be 
a full update on this subcommittee at the next LCDC meeting.  
 
 
5.  
Healthy Ireland update  
 
Annette Barr Jordan gave the members an update on the Healthy Ireland Programme.   
Healthy Westmeath is progressing very well with circa 80% of all projects completed. Projects that 
have not been completed to date are in planning stages or have been rescheduled due to 

4 
 
government guidelines on Covid restrictions. Annette also informed members that Round 3 of the 
Healthy Ireland Programme has been extended to the end of March 2022. 
 
Consultation is underway on Round 4 Healthy Ireland with the subcommittee and local partners 
and with Chief Officers at a National level. Annette added that there is a Full time Healthy Ireland 
Co-ordinator being appointed to each LA for Round 4 programme. At the moment Westmeath 
have a part time co-ordinator (working between Offaly and Westmeath) so it is great that this is 
becoming a full-time position.  
 
 
6.  
Dormant accounts LGBTI allocation 
Annette Barr Jordan gave members an update on the Dormant accounts LGBTI allocation. On the 
27th October 2021 Westmeath LCDC were informed of the successful application for a reduced 
amount of €7,025 towards the implementation of the 2 proposed projects for Westmeath.  
On the 16th November 2021 we were informed by the Department that they were successful in 
obtaining additional budgets and the full amount applied for by the LCDC €13,328 has been 
approved for YOUTH WORK IRELAND MIDLANDS.  
Annette thanked Maria Fox for her help and support with this and informed the members that 
the LCDC will receive a presentation of the annual plan in early 2022 for approval. Monitoring and 
evaluation of the implementation of the plan will be ongoing with a final end of year report 
developed for the LCDC and subsequentially the Dept.  
7.  
Community Activities Fund 2022.  
Annette Barr Jordan discussed The Community Activities Fund (CAF) with the LCDC members. This 
fund provides funding to support community groups across Ireland. The CAF is funded by the 
Department of Rural and Community Development and administered by the Local Community 
Development Committees (LCDCs) in each Local Authority area. Westmeath County Council have 
been allocated funds of €273,141. 
This total amount comprises: 
• 
€166,920 Current funding (Non-Pay) for use towards running/operating costs 
• 
€106,222 Capital funding for use towards carrying out necessary repairs and 
improvements to facilities, energy efficiency type projects, purchase of equipment etc. 
Each Local Authority and the LCDCs administer this funding locally to ensure funding is targeted 
appropriately towards addressing disadvantage in the areas that need it most.  
 
Annette proposed the following steps for Westmeath LCDC 
 

5 
 
I. 
Advertise the scheme in mid -December 2021 through Community Development section 
of Westmeath County Council on WCC social media platforms including website, 
Westmeath PPN and local papers. 
II. 
Applications can be completed using online application forms, downloadable application 
forms submitted in hard copy or via email and hardcopy of application forms will be 
available to those who do not have the technology to submit their application in soft copy 
or online.  
III. 
Closing dates for applications submissions mid – late Feb 2022  
IV. 
Reminder notification of scheme mid- January 2022. 
V. 
LCDC subcommittee evaluate submissions received early March 2022. 
  
Cllr. Tom Farrell welcomed this good news for the communities and asked it groups can apply for 
both Capital and Current funding? Annette Barr Jordan answered yes groups can apply for both 
but we will have to look at all applications received to be as fair as we can be. Maria Fox asked if 
there is a minimum or maximum amount that groups can apply for. Annette said that there is no 
minimum or maximum amount groups can apply for, although groups do have to spend the 
money first before they can claim it back. Pat Gallagher said that we will have to see what 
applications come in and balance all considerations then. Frank Murtagh said it is great to see that 
current expenditure is eligible for funding. Frank thanked Annette for her hard work on getting 
the current expenditure element across the line with the Department. Frank continued that it is 
great for resident associations etc.  Cllr. Tom Farrell asked if GAA clubs are eligible to apply. 
Annette said that all community and voluntary groups through the PPN are eligible.  Pat Gallagher 
thanked all staff in advance who are going to work on this scheme.  
The process was proposed by Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr. Vincent McCormack.  
8.  
Local Economic & Community Plan Guidelines.  
 
Pat Murtagh gave the members a brief overview of the LECP Guidelines, saying that it is going to 
be a major piece of work for next year. Pat continued that the public consultation needs to be 
right and he encouraged members to attend the LECP workshop on the 9th December.  
 
Pat Gallagher thanked Pat Murtagh and said it is a big piece of work for the new year and 
emphasised the important role of the LCDC in this process.  
 
 
 
 
9.  
Correspondence 
Pat Murtagh outlined the content of the correspondence circulated to members for noting.  
 
10. 
AOB   
Pat Gallagher told the members that Valerie Hand had sent an email to Pat Murtagh yesterday 
informing him that she is taking early retirement. Valerie thanked the hard-working committee 
saying she really enjoyed her time working on the LCDC and wished everyone a happy Christmas 
and best wishes for the future. Pat Gallagher thanked Valerie for her work and said she was always 

6 
 
a very committed and supportive member of the group. Pat added that he hoped the Community 
Response Forum was some assistance to Valerie and her colleagues in the HSE during the 
pandemic.  
 
Pat Murtagh asked members to note the proposed meeting dates for next year. These were 
circulated in advance of today’s meeting. Pat Gallagher asked all members to add the dates to 
their diaries. 
 
11.  
Date of Next Meeting.  
 
 
The next meeting will be held on the 11th February 2022 at 10am.    
 
 
Pat Gallagher formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their attendance at the 
meeting and wished everyone a very Happy Christmas.   
 
 
 
 
