Westmeath Local Community Development Committee Meeting 26th February 2021 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
Present 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher  
Present  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Present 
Dept of Social Protection  
Shaun Dorrian  
Present 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Present 
Health Services Executive  
Valerie Hand 
Apologies 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Present 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Seamus McDermott  
Apologies 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Present 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
Present 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Present 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie MacCarthy  
Present 
Business/Employers  
John Geoghegan 
Present 
Trade Union  
Hazel Gavigan  
Present 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Annette Barr Jordan  
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
Present  
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Present 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Apologies 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 26th February 2021 at 10.00am via teleconference.   

 
Hugh Farrell, Chairperson of Westmeath LCDC declared the meeting open and formally welcomed all LCDC 
members, Westmeath Community Development staff and the staff of Westmeath County Council to the first 
meeting of the year. Apologies were noted from Seamus McDermott, Valerie Hand and Peter Ormond. Hugh 
Farrell reminded members that if they have a conflict of interest in any of the projects to declare same and 
reminded them of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda. Hugh acknowledged the good attendance 
at the meeting and thanked all members for their time.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 18th December 2020 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Frank Murtagh the minutes of the previous LCDC meeting 
held on Friday 18th December 2020 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
 
No matters arising on this occasion.  
 
3.  
SICAP  
 
a) Presentation on Annual Report 2020 and Annual Plan 2021 – WCD 
Documentation on the Annual Reports were circulated to the LCDC members in advance of the meeting. Frank 
Murtagh discussed the reports in detail with the members. Hugh Farrell thanked Frank for his work and said he 
gave a very good overview to the members. Cllr. Tom Farrell said well done to Frank and his staff for getting 
down to work on the ground and helping out the people who need it. He continued by saying it is important to 
get to work with the new estates identified as a priority area for work under SICAP by the LCDC once restrictions 
allow. 
 
b) Review and adoption of the SICAP 2020 Annual Performance Review Report 
Hugh Farrell informed the members that the adoption of the Annual Plan 2021 and the Annual Performance 
Review 2020 is a two-step process which have to be take together and asked members to consider the adoption 
of the reports.  
Annette Barr Jordan gave a comprehensive overview of the SICAP 2020 Annual Performance Review Report to 
the LCDC members.  The performance review is a formal process which must be undertaken with the support 
of numerous documents and reports produced through the IRIS CRM system and a report received from Pobal. 
All key performance indicators under the SICAP programme were over achieved and all financial checks were 
verified under this process, as a result there were no remedies to apply. On the proposal of Christine Charlton 
and seconded by John Geoghegan the report was formally adopted. Hugh thanked the members for formally 
adopting the report which allowed for the remainder of Q1 funding to be released to WCD. 
 
c) Adoption of Draft SICAP Annual Plan 2021 
As the SICAP 2020 Annual Performance Review report was formally adopted and having carried out a formal 
evaluation on the Draft SICAP Annual Plan 2021 presented to the LCDC at the December meeting, Hugh Farrell 
asked members of the LCDC to consider the adoption of the Draft SICAP Annual Plan for 2021. The adoption 
was proposed by Cllr. Vinny McCormack and seconded by Margaret Kiernan.  
 
d) Schedule of SICAP subcontractors for noting  
Annette Barr Jordan discussed the schedule of SICAP subcontractors with the members. Annette informed the 
members that it is a SICAP rules requirement for the SICAP subcontractors list of trainers to be noted by the 
LCDC which will remain the same for 2021 unless there is a requirement to add a new training course in which 
case this name will be added the schedule and the new schedule will be presented to the LCDC again for their 
noting. The schedule was noted by the LCDC members.  
 
 

 
4.  
Correspondence  
a) LEADER Transitional Funding contract 
Hugh Farrell asked the members to consider the LEADER Transitional Funding Contract. Adopting this contract 
would mean formally agreeing to the funding. The funding contract was proposed by Cllr. Tom Farrell and 
seconded by Margaret Kiernan.  
 
b) LECP   
 
Annette Barr Jordan informed the members of recent correspondence she received from Deirdre Kelly in the 
Department. The correspondence relates to the new LECP and guidelines. There will be an audit on training and 
capacity building needs for LCDC members. Required training will then be put in place which will facilitate fuller 
engagement on the development of the new LECP.  Further information will be available on the LECP as the 
year progresses. Hugh Farrell informed the members that this is the first step of the process and it is just for 
noting at the minute.  Maria Fox asked if there is a timescale in place for developing a new plan. Annette Barr 
Jordan answered Maria’s query saying that consultation is ongoing at the minute with the chief officers and 
there is no exact timeframe as yet, but Annette is hoping for an update very soon. Maria Fox said that is very 
difficult developing plans at the minute, the CSO data is old data and its going to be problematic. Hugh Farrell 
said that all members will be kept fully informed as updates come in.   
 
5.  
AOB  
  
David Deering asked the members to consider the LAG Minute Corrections document that was circulated before 
today’s meeting (See Appendix 1). David said that it is the findings of an end of programme house keeping task. 
Cllr. Tom Farrell said that he had a read through it, and it doesn’t affect the budget in anyway. Hugh Farrell 
reconfirmed that it does not affect any funding decisions previously made it is an admin tidy up. The corrections 
were proposed by Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Margaret Kiernan.  
 
 
 
6.  
Date of Next Meeting 
The next meeting will be held on 26th March 2021 at 10am via teleconference.  
 
 
Hugh Farrell formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their cooperation and patience 
during the teleconference and wished everyone well.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
