 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
Present 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Mark Keaveney 
Representing WCC CE 
Present  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Present 
Dept of Social Protection  
Shaun Dorrian  
Present 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Present 
Health Services Executive  
Valerie Hand 
Presents 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Present 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
Present 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Present 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
Present 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Apologies 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Present 
Business/Employers  
John Geoghegan 
Present 
Trade Union  
Hazel Gavigan  
Apologies 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Acting Chief Officer, LCDC 
Annette Barr Jordan  
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
Present  
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Apologies 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Present 
 
 
 
Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 23rd July 2021 at 10.00am via teleconference.   

2 
 
 
Hugh Farrell, Chairperson of Westmeath LCDC declared the meeting open and formally welcomed all 
LCDC members, Westmeath Community Development staff and the staff of Westmeath County Council. 
Hugh proposed a vote of sympathy for Annette Barr Jordan on the recent passing of her sister in law and 
her mother in law. Condolences were expressed by all members. 
Hugh welcomed our new LCDC member, Vincent Bagnall, who was ratified by the local authority as a 
replacement PPN Representative, replacing Mr Seamus McDermott. Hugh officially thanked Seamus for 
his contribution and officially welcomed Vincent to the committee. 
Hugh also welcomed Mark Keaveney to the meeting in his role representing the CE of the local authority, 
in the absence of Mr Pat Gallagher. 
 
 Apologies were noted from Mr Frank Murtagh, Ms Hazel Gavigan and Mr Pat Gallagher  
 
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and thanked all 
members for attending today’s meeting.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 28th May 2021 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collintine the minutes of the previous LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 28th May 2021 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
Cllr. Vinny McCormack stated he was absent at the last LCDC meeting when the LEADER Transitional 
Programme Policy document for Westmeath was approved. Specifically, the aspect of the policy that 
dealt with the approval limits and the €150,000 grant limit. Vinny felt that this limit would mean some 
groups may struggle to progress projects. Vinny asked if the committee had any discretion to award in 
excess of €150,000. 
 
Annette Barr Jordan Acting Chief Officer stated that the LEADER Transitional Programme Policy document 
was agreed at the last LCDC meeting and took account of; the limited funding available and the priorities 
outlined in the policy as to who shall benefit across the county, the €150,000 grant limit was agreed with 
this in mind. 
 
Vinny McCormack asked, “can there be a line added to the policy to give the members discretion in 
awarding grants over €150,000”. 
 
Annette Barr Jordan stated that any policy change was a matter for the LCDC members. 
 
Hugh Farrell advised that if a policy change is proposed it can be dealt with under the LEADER section of 
the meeting. 
 
 
3.  
SICAP 
 
a) SICAP Mid-Year Review– for approval 
Margaret Kiernan outlined the work the SICAP sub-committee had done in relation to this body of work 
over a number of meetings.  Annette Barr Jordan brought the members through the circulated formal  
SICAP Mid-Year review document and cited issues that were identified through the process that 

3 
 
required further clarification from the implementation partner Westmeath Community Development. 
She further stated that all issues that had been identified through the process were clarified to the 
LCDC SICAP subcommittee and one outstanding item regarding the spend of the carryover funding from 
the 2020 programme was being discussed at the next LCDC SICAP subcommittee meeting and a draft 
proposal on the spend will be brought for consideration of the LCDC members at their Sept meeting. A 
cross check with Pobal report noted similar finding as the LCDC SICAP subcommittee members and 
agreement on progress was agreed by all concerned.  
 
Hugh Farrell acknowledged the SICAP Sub-committee’s good work and commitment.   
Approval: Proposed for formal approval by Mark Keaveney and seconded by Tom Farrell. 
       
b) SICAP Programme Extension Addendum 
Annette Barr Jordan presented the proposed SICAP 2018 – 2022 programme extension addendum 
received from the Department of Rural and Community Development to extend the SICAP programme 
for a further 12 months to the end of 2023 as was circulated and stated that the addendum required 
LCDC approval. 
 
Approval: Proposed by Tom Farrell and seconded by Margaret Kiernan. 
 
 
 
4.  
National Play Day Report.  
Annette Barr Jordan presented the National Play Day Report as circulated to members. She outlined that 
the National Play Day funding will be utilised in RAPID areas and the LCDC priority areas under the SICAP 
programme. Play boxes will be circulated to 23 areas across the county to celebrate National Play Day 
from a total spend of €3,000. Members agreed that this funding was well utilised and it was good to see 
the programmes being able to be integrated to support those most in need through the programmes.  
 
 
5.  
Community Innovation Pilot Project – Update  
  
Annette Barr Jordan updated the members on the Community Innovation Pilot Project that was discussed 
at our last meeting. Annette informed the members that the project was shortlisted but did not make it 
through the final round. It was noted however, that the Department were supportive of the project and 
stated in their correspondence back to the project proposal that they will look at potential alternative 
funding options for this worthwhile project.  
 
 
6.  
Healthy Westmeath Addendum  
 
Annette Barr Jordan presented the HI Addendum from the Department of Health in relation to Healthy 
Ireland round 3 funding as was circulated to the members. Annette highlighted the amended details to 
accept an additional funding amount of €29,167 to extend the post of project co-ordinator to the end of 
Dec 2021 and also to extend the lifetime of the programme funding to Dec 2021. Approval for the 
addendum was sought.  
Approval: Proposed by Tom Farrell and seconded by Cathryn Whelehan.  
 
 

4 
 
7.  
Correspondence 
Annette Barr Jordan presented correspondence received since the last LCDC meeting. These included; 
• Dept correspondence; information note regarding the requirement to record non-progressed 
LEADER EOI’s on the ICT system. 
• Dept correspondence; announcement of the National Competence Centre for Social Innovation. 
• Dept correspondence; National BCP milestone reached. 
• Dept correspondence; National SICAP Programme Annual Progress Report 
• Dept correspondence; Announcement of €4.5m COVID Sustainability funding. 
• Dept correspondence; Letter to Chief Officers regarding SICAP Midterm Programme review. 
• Dept correspondence; Notification regarding Public Consultation on the next Sustainable 
Development Goals National Implementation Plan 
• Dept correspondence; regarding call from LCDCs to recommend award of funding to the LGBT 
community from the Dormant Funds accounts. 
• COVID 19 Vaccine Pack correspondence. 
 
Annette commented on the need to further the Department correspondence regarding the Dormant 
accounts funding for LGBTI projects as the closing date for the recommendations is the 28th August and 
no LCDC meeting is being held for the month of August. Preliminary discussion was held with Marie Fox 
regarding the progression of this particular piece of work and on recommendations clarified with the 
Department a number of existing LGBTI projects in Westmeath will be targeted to submit proposals for 
projects for consideration to be forwarded to the Department. It was agreed by members that in the 
absence of an August meeting that this project should be progressed by Annette during the summer 
period and reported back to the LCDC at the September meeting.   
 
Approval: Maria Fox and seconded by Mark Keaveney 
 
8.  
AOB 
Annette Barr Jordan noted that the next meeting is not until September, she noted that the CEP 2021 is 
due for allocation in August. Annette proposed, that if in agreement with the LCDC, the evaluation and 
proposed CEP grant allocation can be progressed through the LCDC sub-committee, as was the case in 
previous years. 
Approval: Proposed Mark Keaveney and seconded by Joe McEvoy. 
 
The next meeting will be held on 3rd of September 2021 at 10am.   
 
 
Hugh Farrell formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their cooperation and 
patience during this very long meeting and wished everyone well.  
 
 
