 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
MS Teams  
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
MS Teams 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher 
In Person 
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
In Person  
Dept of Social Protection  
Marie Flynn 
Apologies  
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
MS Teams 
Health Services Executive  
 
 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
In Person 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
MS Teams 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
In Person 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
In Person 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
MS Teams  
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Apologies 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
MS Teams  
Business/Employers  
Aisling Coleman 
In Person  
Trade Union  
Noel Maguire 
In Person 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Apologies  
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
In Person 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
MS Teams 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Apologies  
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
MS Teams   
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 15th July 2022 at 10.00am (Hybrid Meeting).   

2 
 
Hugh Farrell welcomed all LCDC members, Westmeath County Council staff and Westmeath Community 
Development staff to the meeting. On behalf of the LCDC members, Hugh offered his deepest sympathies 
to Cllr Tom Farrell and his family on the recent passing of his son Eoin.  
 
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and asked that 
they declare any conflicts of interests that they may have.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 25th May 2022 & Tuesday 14th June 2022 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Bill Collentine and seconded by Margaret Kiernan the minutes of the LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 25th May 2022 were approved.   
 
On the proposal of Margaret Kiernan and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collentine the minutes of the LCDC 
meeting held on Tuesday 14th June 2022 were approved.   
 
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
No items under matters arising. 
 
3. 
Presentation on LGBTI Project 
Annette Barr Jordan reminded members that the LGBTI+ project was awarded funding from Department 
of Rural and Community Development under the Dormant Accounts Action Plan 2021.  The Action plan 
included the provision of support to LGBTI+ community organisations and groups who target the LGBTI+ 
community.  A small subcommittee of the LCDC co-ordinated the submission process which included - 
LWETB represented by Maria Fox, the HSE represented by Valarie Hand and Annette. The subcommittee 
agreed a process and submissions were formally sough from organisations across the county for this 
funding stream.  One submission was received by Westmeath LCDC from Youth Work Ireland Midlands, 
this was subsequently submitted to the Department and was successful in being awarded €13,238. 
Westmeath LCDC has responsibility for oversight of the project and the project workplan  
 
Catherine McEntee from Youth Work Ireland Midlands presented details on the LGBTI programmes being 
delivered in Athlone and Mullingar. Both projects will address issues and concerns that affect LGBTI + 
young people. Catherine outlined the programme workplan which will run to the end of 2022. 
 
Hugh Farrell thanked Catherine for the presentation and opened the floor for questions. 
 
Tom Farrell asked how rural young people (outside of the Mullingar and Athlone areas) can access 
information on services provided. 
 
Catherine answered by confirming there is a rural development supports officer (Eileen Kelly) who creates 
awareness in rural areas. Eileen will also identify if a pop up is required in certain rural areas (based on 
demand). 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
4. SICAP 
 
a) Mid-year Review 
Annette Barr Jordan presented the SICAP 2022 Mid-year Review document highlighting progress made, 
performance review and KPI targets being met.  Annette confirmed the guidelines for this report are set 
out by Pobal and she thanked the LCDC SICAP sub-committee for their engagement and work in 
preparing this report. 
 
Hugh Farrell acknowledged the massive work the LCDC SICAP Sub-committee in this process. 
 
Pat Gallagher thanked Annette for the report and complimented the work of Westmeath Community 
Development as the implementing partner for the SICAP Programme and acknowledged that social 
inclusion is a very important aspect of our function. 
Pat queried whether the details under Section 3 (items 3 &4) are returned in the correct format (should 
be % and not a figure). 
 
Annette confirmed she will adjust this before submitting. 
 
SICAP Mid-year Review approval was proposed by Margaret Kiernan and seconded by Christine Charlton. 
 
b) Additional supports for Ukrainian response. 
Annette Barr Jordan presented detail (as circulated for the meeting) on additional SICAP funding for 
Ukrainian refugees under goal 1 and 2.  
 
The funding is for the provision of two full time development workers who will support the provision of 
information, communication and integration for Ukrainians in Westmeath. It is expected that the workers 
could also be a first point of contact if agreed by the Community Response Forum members and they will 
also cover a broad range of services engaging on the ground and will facilitate the provision of an inclusive 
education, training and labour market service. Annette expected that this funding will continue into next 
year 
 
Cllr Bill Collentine noted from the report that there was 670 Ukrainians currently housed in Westmeath 
with an additional 400 scheduled for arrival in the coming months. Is there adequate accommodation for 
the additional Ukrainians scheduled to arrive? 
 
Pat Murtagh confirmed that securing accommodation for the additional refugees is being actively worked 
on. There are several buildings currently being improved to take additional Ukrainians and WCC is actively 
working with properties to get them renovated and fit for accommodation. 
 
Joe McEvoy asked if social activities are being offered to Ukrainian adults and kids? 
 
Annette Barr Jordan confirmed this is the case and there are multiple organisations involved in delivering 
social activities such as Youth Work Ireland Midlands, New Horizons, ACT Gateway Project, Athlone  
Family Resource Centre, Westmeath Sports Partnership (sports camps), Westmeath County Council (Play 
Day, Play bags) etc . A lot of supports are being given through several agencies. 
 
Cllr. Tom Farrell asked is we are solely dealing with Ukrainian refugees, or does it include other refugees 
(Kinnegad)? 
 

4 
 
Pat Murtagh confirmed these are two separate entities (Kinnegad- Asylum seekers) and we have no 
involvement in the asylum-seeking process. 
 
Approval was proposed by Pat Gallagher and seconded by Christine Charlton. 
 
 
5 Correspondence 
Pat Murtagh outlined correspondence received since the last meeting. 
• Town & Village Renewal 2022- Property acquisition  
• SICAP Annual Report- Ministerial announcement 
• Allocation of funding- Agricultural Shows 
• Town & Village Streetscape 2022- timeframes update 
 
6 A.O.B 
Pat Murtagh gave an update on the Slainte Care Programme confirming the sub-committee will meet 
regarding the programme covering items such as Implementation plan, drafting terms of reference, seed 
money etc. 
 
Annette Barr Jordan confirmed seed money is only available to RAPID areas. 
 
7 Date of next meeting 
The next LCDC meeting is scheduled for the 2nd of September 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
