 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
MS Teams 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher/ Mark 
Keaveney  
In Person  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
In Person  
Dept of Social Protection  
Marie Flynn 
Apologies  
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
MS Teams 
Health Services Executive  
 
 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
In Person 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
MS Teams 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
MS Teams 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
In Person 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
MS Teams  
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Apologies 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Apologies  
Business/Employers  
Aisling Coleman 
Apologies  
Trade Union  
Noel Maguire 
MS Teams 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
In Person 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
In Person  
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
In Person  
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
MS Teams   
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 2nd September 2022 at 10.00am (Hybrid Meeting).   

2 
 
Hugh Farrell welcomed all LCDC members, Westmeath County Council staff and Westmeath Community 
Development staff to the meeting.  
 
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and asked that 
they declare any conflicts of interests that they may have.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held on Friday 15th July 2022 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Bill Collentine and seconded by Mark Keaveney the minutes of the LCDC meeting 
held on Friday 15th July 2022 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
No items under matters arising. 
 
 
3.   
SICAP 
 
Annette Barr Jordan gave members and update on the two full time development workers who will 
support the provision of information, communication and integration for Ukrainians in Westmeath.  Two 
integration workers have been employed, one will be located in Mullingar and the other will be located 
in Athlone. Annette also informed the meeting, that the Draft Plan has been drawn up and it will be sent 
to agencies for amendments/ suggestions. Hugh Farrell thanked Annette for her work and said well done 
to all involved.  
 
4.  
 Sláintecare 
 
Brigid Geoghegan gave the members an update on the Sláintecare Healthy Communities Programme. 
Hugh Farrell thanked Brigid for all her work. Christine Charlton added that there is a lot of great work 
being done. Pat Murtagh thanked Brigid Geoghegan and Annette Barr Jordan for all their hard work and 
evening work in particular in the Willow Park area. Pat added that we are well progressed in comparison 
to other counties.  
 
5. LECP  
Pat Murtagh gave members an update on the LECP. We are currently working on the preparation of the 
questionnaire for stakeholders which will hopefully be out towards the end of this month. Both Mary 
Goldsberry and Christine Charlton will be working on the consultation process.  
 
5. Correspondence  
 
David Deering gave members an update on the Streetscape Enhancement Scheme 2022. This year the 
scheme is focusing on one town within the county and the chosen town is Kilbeggan. There is €100,000 
available in funding to deliver the scheme. There are approx. 30 applications in to date. The scheme was 
put on hold by the Department back in June and officially approved on 31st August 2022. Application 
forms are available on the council website. David added the LEO have a similar scheme available to 
businesses within the county. Cllr. Tom Farrell asked David how much of the Kilbeggan area is covered.  
David answered saying it is for properties along the main street between the Tullamore Roundabout and 
the Clara Road. Mary Goldsberry added that the Department are looking for three adjacent properties 
and therefore we are readvertising the scheme again.  Cllr. Bill Collintine asked what type of applications. 

3 
 
David Deering answered that it is for domestic houses, LEO are targeting the businesses. Hugh Farrell said 
that it is a great opportunity for any town to avail of. Cllr. Vinny McCormack asked if there is any action 
we can take ourselves to bring forward derelict buildings? David answered saying many of the buildings 
are protected structures and there are heritage requirements,  he is tying in with the heritage officer for 
guidance on these. Joe McEvoy asked if there is a theme? It continued that it would be nice to promote 
the heritage of the town.  
 
6. AOB  
Peter Ormond discussed a retrospective addendum to a Letter of Offer in relation to Project Ref.  
No.  32 LDR WTM 106651 – Destination Marketing Activity CLG.  This Addendum is to retrospectively 
allow for the delivery of a revised proposal of the marketing project. All elements will still be delivered, 
and no new elements have been introduced. The Total Funding for the project will be in line with those 
approved by the LCDC at their meeting on the 6th September 2019. All other conditions of the project will 
remain unchanged.  
Proposed by: Cllr. Tom Farrell  
Seconded by: Cllr. Bill Collintine  
 
 
7. Date of Next Meeting 
 
The next LCDC meeting is scheduled for the 21st October 2022 at 10am. 
 
Hugh Farrell thanked members for attending todays meeting and wished them all a safe journey home.  
 
 
 
