 
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee Meeting 28th May 2021. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Present 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
Present 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher  
Present  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Present 
Dept of Social Protection  
Shaun Dorrian  
Present 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Present 
Health Services Executive  
Valerie Hand 
Apologies 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Present 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Seamus McDermott  
Apologies 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Present 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
Present 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Present 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie MacCarthy  
Present 
Business/Employers  
John Geoghegan 
Apologies 
Trade Union  
Hazel Gavigan  
Apologies 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Annette Barr Jordan  
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
Present  
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
Present 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Present 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Apologies 
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 28th May 2021 at 10.00am via teleconference.   

2 
 
 
Hugh Farrell, Chairperson of Westmeath LCDC declared the meeting open and formally welcomed all 
LCDC members, Westmeath Community Development staff and the staff of Westmeath County Council. 
Apologies were noted from Seamus McDermott, Valerie Hand, Cllr. Vinny McCormack, Hazel Gavigan and 
Peter Ormond.  
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and thanked all 
members for attending today’s meeting.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 26th March 2021 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collintine the minutes of the previous LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 26th March 2021 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
 
No matters arising on this occasion.  
 
 
3.  
SICAP 
 
a) SICAP Annual plan 2021 – Additional Action proposal – for approval 
 
The SICAP annual plan 2021 was adopted by the members at a previous LCDC meeting. However, an 
emerging need was identified by the SICAP programme implementer and was brought to the LCDC SICAP 
subcommittee for discussion at their last meeting. The emerging need was to address Children and 
Families under the SICPA programme which hasn’t been heretofore included as an action under the SICAP 
programme. Annette Barr Jordan and Frank Murtagh discussed the proposed additional action and asked  
approval for this action to be added to the SICPA annual plan 2021 from the LCDC members – the 
additional action would be included under Goal 2 of the programme. The proposed additional action 
detail is the hiring of two new part time staff members working as community mothers. Hugh Farrell 
added that the SICAP subcommittee have put a lot of work into the proposal and he thanked the 
subcommittee members and staff for this. Hugh added that it sounds like good value for money.   
 
Approved: Proposed by Margaret Kiernan and seconded by Cathryn Whelehan.   
 
4.  
Community Enhancement Programme 2021.  
Annette Barr Jordan discussed the Community Enhancement Programme 2021 with the LCDC Members. 
Insurances and utility bills etc are eligible under this year’s programme alongside the normal capital 
projects. The CEP funding stream will be launched in Westmeath on the 8th June 2021 and will be open 
for a 6-week period. Closing date for receipt of applications is 16th July 2021. Application forms will be 
available online and in hard copy. Links and documentation will be circulated to the LCDC once available. 
Draft allocations will be brought to the LCDC members for approval.  
 
 
5.  
Community Innovation Pilot Project – FRC  
  
Annette Barr Jordan discussed the pilot project with the LCDC members. The Westmeath project which 
was submitted within a very tight timeframe has 4 partner organisations the Family Resource Centre in 

3 
 
Athlone, New Horizons (direct provision site community support group), Westmeath Community 
Development and Westmeath County Council. The project is targeted at supporting individuals and 
families who live in the direct provision site in Lissywollen and also the Mount Temple site and individuals 
and families who have moved from the sites and need additional support.  
 
In line with the programme objectives the project will offer a wrap round service and will include Mental 
Health supports, healthy eating, training, educational opportunities, employment supports, and advocacy 
supports for housing, health and other needs. It is proposed to employ 2 workers who will carry out the 
roles of liaison and supports officers who will take on a case load of families as well as run universal 
programmes in the communities of Lissywollen and Mount Temple on a continual basis.  
 
The Westmeath project which will be led out through the Athlone Family Resource Centre have been 
shortlisted as a potential project. Annette thanked Delores Crerar Athlone FRC, Gerry O’Callaghan New 
Horizons and Frank Murtagh WCD for their work on the application.  Maria Fox congratulated everyone 
involved and offered the assistance of LWETB on a youth services perspective if they are any help to the 
programme.  
Frank Murtagh said hopefully the project will be successful and get through the shortlisting – it is very 
similar to the resettlement programme ran previously. Frank also acknowledged the hard work of Delores 
in the Family Resource Centre on this application. 
Annette will keep the members informed of developments.  
 
 
6.  
Correspondence 
Annette Barr Jordan thanked the LCDC members who had participated in recent LCDC training needs 
survey and added it would be great to see formal training in place. Hugh Farrell added that it was a 
great opportunity to get your views on record.  
 
 
7.  
AOB  
None.  
 
8.  
Date of Next Meeting 
 
The next meeting will be held on 16th July 2021 at 10am.  Cllr. Tom Farrell asked if it will be a 
teleconference or a conventional meeting. Hugh Farrell said that himself and the chief officer will decide 
closer to the date and inform the members at that stage.  
 
 
Hugh Farrell formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their cooperation and 
patience during the teleconference and wished everyone well.  
 
 
