 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Present (MS Teams).  
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Present (MS Teams) 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
Present (MS Teams) 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher 
Present  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Present  
Dept of Social Protection  
 
 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
Apologies 
Health Services Executive  
Valerie Hand 
Apologies 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Apologies  
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
Present (MS Teams) 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Present (MS Teams) 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
Present (MS Teams) 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Present (MS Teams) 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
Present 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Present (MS Teams) 
Business/Employers  
John Geoghegan 
Apologies  
Trade Union  
 
 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
Present 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
Present  
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
Apologies 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
Present (MS Teams) 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
Present 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Apologies.  
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 22nd October 2021 at 10.00am (Blended Meeting).   

2 
 
In the absence of the Chairperson, Hugh Farrell, Vice-chairperson Pat Gallagher welcomed all LCDC 
members and staff to the meeting. Apologies were noted from Hugh Farrell, Maria Fox, Valerie Hand, 
John Geoghegan, Annette Barr Jordan, Mary Goldsberry and Peter Ormond.  
 
Pat Gallagher reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda. Pat also, on 
behalf of the committee members, wished Hugh Farrell a speedy recovery and thanked all members for 
attending today’s meeting.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 3rd September 2021 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collentine the minutes of the previous LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 3rd September 2021 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
 
Following on from discussions at the September LCDC meeting, Pat Murtagh updated the members on 
the carryover of the SICAP 2021 Budget. The Department have been contacted to see if the 5% carryover 
could be increased to 7.5%. Pat Murtagh told the members that the increase looks unlikely, however, the 
Department have not made their decision as yet. Frank Murtagh asked if there was any update on the 
SICAP Budget for Grants. Pat Murtagh responded saying that he didn’t envisage any change. Pat Gallagher 
added the decision is still with the Department.  
 
Pat Gallagher asked members to formally note and welcome Pat Murtagh as Chief Officer of the LCDC. 
Pat thanked Annette Barr Jordan for all her work as acting Chief Officer following the retirement of Hugh 
O’Reilly.  
  
 
3.  
SICAP  
a)  2021 Case Study.  
Frank Murtagh invited all members at the meeting to watch an 8- minute video case study from 
Athlone Access Awareness. Pat Gallagher acknowledged the participation of the members of 
Athlone Access Awareness in the video and added it is great to see case studies telling the success 
stories in video form.  Frank Murtagh said that the video will be made available on social media 
sites and on the Westmeath Community Development website. They hope to make it more 
concise for social media posts.  Pat Gallagher asked if the Westmeath LCDC logo could be added 
at the start and end of the video. Frank noted Pat’s request. 
 
b) Emerging needs for 2022 Programme.  
Cllr. Tom Farrell asked if Clara Road in Moate could be included in this Programme. This proposal 
was seconded by Cllr. Vinny Mc Cormack. Frank Murtagh outlined that WCD has the capacity to 
extend the emerging needs areas to include Clara Road, Moate. It was agreed to add Clara Road 
Moate to the Emerging Needs grouping.   
 
c) 2022 Key Performance Indicators 
Frank Murtagh informed the members that there was no proposal to change the KPIs for 2022. 
Pat Gallagher acknowledged the strong delivery of SICAP since the LCDC started. He stated that 
we are currently on the upper limit of what can be put on the KPIs.  

3 
 
d) 2020 Financial Audit Report 
Pat Gallagher informed the members that there was an internal SICAP audit carried out with Aidan 
Bass of Westmeath County Council, Westmeath Community Development and the Community 
development staff of Westmeath County Council. Pat was pleased to announce that everything is 
in order and the financial aspect of the programme is going well. Pat thanked all the staff members 
involved.  Frank Murtagh wished to thank Aidan for all his help and said that it is great that the 
system in place is working well.  
 
4.  
Dormant Accounts Social Enterprise Capital Grants Scheme 2021.   
Pat Murtagh gave members an update on the Social Enterprise Capital Grants Scheme. The 
scheme was launched in Mid-September with a closing date for applications of 8th October 2021. 
16 Applications for funding were received with 3 not fulfilling the criteria. Pat thanked Cllr. Tom 
Farrell and Margaret Kiernan for giving their time to evaluate the applications. Pat added that due 
to the budget constraints 11 groups were offered funding. Each group received 65% of what they 
had applied for with a fair spread of funding across the county. Margaret Kiernan acknowledged 
the work done by staff at Westmeath County Council and said everyone did the best job they 
could. Cllr. Tom Farrell also thanked everyone concerned. The recommendation of the grants sub-
committee was noted by the LCDC members.  
 
5.  
Correspondence  
Pat Murtagh informed the members that he had received a nomination to replace the outgoing 
Trade Union Rep Hazel Gavigan. Pat Gallagher asked if there was a nomination in from the 
Department of Social Protection to replace Shaun Dorrian, Pat Murtagh said he had not received 
a nomination as yet but has been communicating with the DSP.  
 
 
6.  
AOB 
 
Bernie Leavy informed members of an issue with a previously approved LEADER project. 
 
 
9.  
DATE OF NEXT MEETING  
 
The next meeting will be held on the 3rd December at 10am.    
 
 
Pat Gallagher formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their patience and 
attendance at the meeting and wished everyone well.  Pat added that Chairman Hugh Farrell will decide 
if the December meeting is to be held in person, online or a hybrid of both. Members will be informed as 
soon as possible once a decision is made.  
 
 
