 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
MS Teams  
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher 
In Person 
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
MS Teams  
Dept of Social Protection  
Marie Flynn 
Apologies 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
MS Teams 
Health Services Executive  
 
 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
In Person 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
In Person 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
In Person 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
In Person 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
MS Teams  
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
MS Teams 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
MS Teams 
Business/Employers  
Aisling Coleman 
In Person 
Trade Union  
Noel Maguire 
In Person 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
In Person 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
MS Teams  
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
MS Teams   
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 25th March 2022 at 10.00am (Hybrid Meeting).   

2 
 
Hugh Farrell welcomed all LCDC members, Westmeath County Council staff, Westmeath Community 
Development staff and members of Comhairle na nOg to the first hybrid meeting of 2022. Hugh also had 
a special welcome for Aisling Coleman, Noel Maguire and Marie Flynn as new LCDC members.  
 
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and asked that 
they declare any conflicts of interests that they may have.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 11th February 2022 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Bill Collintine and seconded by Pat Gallagher the minutes of the previous LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 11th February 2022 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
 
No items under Matters Arising.  
  
 
 
3.  
SICAP – Tenders for Providers for the Delivery of Training 
Frank Murtagh informed the members that this was a recommendation from audits.  Christine 
Charlton asked Frank what type of training it covered. Frank answered saying it was a broad 
variety of courses, depending on what courses they were running they may need to run another 
course alongside it. For example, if WCD were running a manufacturing course they may need to 
run a manual handling course as part of it. These would be two separate courses.   
 
The WCD Tender Assessments for Training Panel was proposed by Margaret Kiernan and 
seconded by Pat Gallagher.  
 
4.  
Sláintecare Healthy Communities Programme Update  
Hugh Farrell welcomed Brigid Geoghegan to the meeting and wished her well in her new role. Pat 
Murtagh said that both Brigid and Annette Barr Jordan are making good progress on the ground 
with the community groups. Pat continued that both the Dept of Health and the HSE need to talk 
to each other in terms of what is expected from this programme. The KPIs set are a huge 
expectation which may not be met. Brigid Geoghegan said that they have consulted with local 
groups to see what was required locally. Brigid said they are making good progress on the projects 
and she wanted to thank the staff of the Municipal Districts for their help with these projects. 
Hugh Farrell thanked Pat, Brigid and staff for their work on this programme.  
 
5.  
Local Economic & Community Plan 
Pat Murtagh informed the LCDC members that he had heard back from the Department in relation 
to the review of the LECP.  The Department said it can be a desk-based review to reflect on what 
worked /what didn’t work and what we want to bring forward to the new plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
6.  
Comhairle na nOg Presentation.  
Hugh welcomed Christopher Lynn and Josh Dunne to the meeting and invited them to present 
the work of Comhairle na nOg.  Hugh thanked the boys for their work and information. Pat 
Gallagher thanked them for attending and for giving a very clear presentation. Pat added that it 
was great to see the committee were so active during the Covid Pandemic and noted that it was 
great to see that all secondary schools were represented at their AGM. Pat also said that 
Westmeath County Council would like to continue working with Comhairle na nOg on Climate 
Action and it is important to have their views on this project. Maria Fox acknowledged the role of 
Comhairle members on the Youth Work Subcommittee and asked that the LCDC members 
continue to engage with members of Comhairle. Annette Barr Jordan added that Comhairle na 
nOg also work closely with the Environment Section and the Transportation Section of Westmeath 
County Council.  
 
 
7. 
Community Activities Fund. 
Hugh Farrell asked the members to consider the funding proposals brought before them at 
today’s meeting. Hugh thanked the members of the subcommittee along with Margaret Egan and 
staff in WCC for their help in preparing these documents. Hugh acknowledged the workload to 
process and evaluate all the applications that were received. Hugh reminded and asked the LCDC 
members to maintain their confidentiality as applications approved by the LCDC members must 
also be approved by the Department.  Pat Murtagh said that the Department usually take a week 
or ten days to approve items like this. Pat added that applications sought by the community 
groups amounted to over €600,000, it is great to see such active communities in Westmeath. Pat 
continued that some groups applied for both capital and day to day expenses, however, there was 
not enough funding to pay them out under both streams.  Cllr. Tom Farrell thanked WCC Staff for 
their work on this programme. Frank Murtagh added that all questions asked by the evaluation 
committee had been answered. Cllr. Tom Farrell asked if letters will be sent to the groups if they 
are approved. Hugh Farrell confirmed that letters will be sent once approved.  
 
8.  
Promotion of LCDC Work  
Pat Murtagh gave a presentation to the members on the work of the LCDC. Hugh Farrell thanked 
Pat for a very comprehensive presentation. Joe McEvoy asked how the presentation will be made 
available – is it going to be online or in a booklet form? Joe added that it should be available in 
every clubhouse in the county. Pat Murtagh suggested that some extracts are taken from the 
presentation and put on social media and circulated through the PPN. David Deering said that we 
have been working on a project which will map all the good news. Further information on this will 
be available at the next meeting. Frank Murtagh asked if it is possible to use a video/ audio clip 
which only needs to be a minute or a minute and a half in length and put in on WCC and WHPPN 
website. David Deering answered that the system we are working on will have this function on it 
and he will discuss it in further detail at the next meeting.  
 
9.  
Update on Ukraine Refugee Crisis  
Pat Murtagh gave the members an update on the Ukrainian Refugee Crisis. The Community 
Response Forum has been reactivated to respond to the fluid situation/ condition people are 
finding themselves in. There is a framework plan being developed at National level.  
 

4 
 
Within the county itself, WCD are providing basic English lessons, some younger children are 
already enrolled in schools, we are trying to organise sporting activities for younger people. 
Emergency accommodation is being provided in hotels etc.  Pat Gallagher said that the matter 
was also discussed at the recent council meeting. Pat said that he appreciates all organisations 
participating in the forum working closely together and sharing information, this is very important 
locally. Pat continued by saying he will make sure all national information is passed on in a timely 
manner.  There are 10,000 refugees in the country at the minute. Pat added that the experience 
of working together during the Covid Pandemic will serve us well in helping the people of Ukraine.  
 
Frank Murtagh said that this week there has been 51 people housed in the Creggan Court in 
Athlone. Social Welfare staff came up to meet with these people and helped organise medical 
cards etc. Staff from AIT are going to call over to talk to the Ukrainians about what courses are 
available to them.  Frank added that school transport for the children is an issue, however, the 
Ukrainian Driving Licenses will be accepted in Ireland for 12 months.  The numbers arriving to 
Westmeath are manageable at the moment.  
 
10.  
Correspondence  
Pat Murtagh informed members that a portal has been launched to nominate volunteers from 
the community for their good work.  Further details will be circulated to members by email this 
afternoon.  
 
11.  
AOB  
Hugh Farrell complimented Westmeath County Council and the Chief Executive on their facilities 
for a blended meeting. It was a seamless process and thanked all involved. Hugh thanked the new 
members for their involvement in today’s meeting and informed them that formal 
training/induction will take place as soon as possible.  
 
12.  
Date of Next Meeting.  
 
The next meeting will be held on the 27th May 2022 at 10am.    
 
 
Hugh Farrell formally declared the meeting closed. He thanked everyone for their time and again 
complimented the fabulous facility in the council chamber.  
 
 
 
