 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
Apologies  
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher 
In Person 
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
In Person  
Dept of Social Protection  
Marie Flynn 
In Person  
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
In Person 
Health Services Executive  
 
 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
In Person 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
In Person 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
MS Teams 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
In Person 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
MS Teams  
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
MS Teams 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Apologies  
Business/Employers  
Aisling Coleman 
MS Teams  
Trade Union  
Noel Maguire 
Apologies 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
In Person  
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development. 
David Deering 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
In Person 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
In Person  
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
MS Teams   
 
 
 
Draft Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 27th May 2022 at 10.00am (Hybrid Meeting).   

2 
 
Hugh Farrell welcomed all LCDC members, Westmeath County Council staff and Westmeath Community 
Development staff to the meeting. On behalf of the LCDC members, Hugh offered his deepest sympathies 
to Pat Murtagh and his family on the recent passing of his father.  
 
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and asked that 
they declare any conflicts of interests that they may have.  
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held Friday 25th March 2022 
 
On the proposal of Margaret Kiernan and seconded by Cllr. Bill Collintine the minutes of the 
previous LCDC meeting held on Friday 25th March 2022 were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
 
No items under Matters Arising.  
  
 
3.  
Sláintecare Healthy Communities Programme Update 
Brigid Geoghegan gave the members a thorough update on the Healthy Communities Programme. 
She thanked the Municipal Districts and the Property Management Sections of Westmeath 
County Council for there assistance with the projects. Brigid also informed the members that it is 
hoped to officially launch the Healthy Communities Programme in July.  
 
4.  
Promotion of LCDC Work 
David Deering gave a presentation to the LCDC members on the new grant management system 
being rolled out by Westmeath County Council. This will give members of the LCDC, Westmeath 
County Council Staff and members of the public an insight into the projects being funded locally. 
It will clearly show the dispersal of funding within the county. Projects, locations, and the amount 
of funding awarded has been mapped on the system and will be available to view in a user-friendly 
manner. David added that he will circulate the link to all members of the LCDC once it is live on 
Westmeath County Council’s website. Hugh Farrell congratulated David and the team on a great 
initiative and a job well done.  
 
Marie Flynn asked if this the system is being used in other counties. David answered no it is not 
in use as far as he is aware. It was applied for under the Innovation Programme. Marie said she 
could see a lot of practicalities with it.  
 
5.  
Local Economic & Community Plan 
Mary Goldsberry gave the members an update on how work on the LECP is progressing stating 
that it is currently at the preparation stage.  
  
6.  
Update on Ukraine Refugee Crisis  
Mark Keaveney gave the members an update on the Ukrainian Refugee Crisis. There are 
approximately 230 arriving daily into the country, with approximately 550 Ukrainian Refugees 
currently in Westmeath.   
 
Mary Goldsberry informed members that there is a link on the Westmeath County Council website 
which is kept up to date with current information.  

3 
 
 
Cllr. Bill Collintine asked if the number of refugees in Westmeath is likely to increase or decrease 
in number. He also asked what the breakdown was between the two municipal districts. Mark 
Keaveney answered saying it is roughly 50/50 between the two districts. Mark continued saying 
that they expect the number of refugees to increase within the county but that the rate of 
increase has slowed over the last few weeks. Frank Murtagh said that they are concerns within 
the refugee community. Some refugees are here a number of months and are anxious as to what 
will happen to them after the 6 months accommodation contract is up. The majority of them want 
to stay where they are as their children have settled into schools in these areas, they have joined 
sports clubs and they are establishing themselves in the communities.  
 
  
7.  
Correspondence  
Hugh Farrell informed the members that we have received no correspondence since our last 
meeting.  
 
8.  
AOB  
None.  
 
9.  
Date of Next Meeting.  
 
The next meeting will be held on the 15th July 2022 at 10am.    
 
 
Hugh Farrell formally declared the meeting closed.  
 
 
 
 
