 
  
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
MS Team 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collentine  
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher  
In person 
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
In person 
Dept of Social Protection  
Marie Flynn 
Apologies 
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
MS Team 
Health Services Executive  
Teresa Kennedy  
In person 
Non-
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
Apologies 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
In person 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
In person 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
In person 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Ms Team 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
In person 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
Ms Team 
Business/Employers  
Aisling Coleman 
In person 
Trade Union  
Noel Maguire 
MS Team 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
In person 
Westmeath County Council, Acting Chief Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
MS Team 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Margaret Egan 
Apologies 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
In person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
In person 
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Apologies 
 
Westmeath County Council, Sláintecare Healthy Comm.  
Brigid Geoghegan 
In person 
 
Westmeath County Council, Healthy Ireland  
Sarah McManus  
Apologies  
 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development  
Lourdes Neary 
In person 
 
 
 
Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC)  
held on Friday 20th October 2023 at 10.00am  
in Mullingar, Council Chamber (Hybrid Meeting) 

2 
 
In the absence of Chairperson, Hugh Farrell, Pat Gallagher, vice-chairperson, chaired the LCDC/LAG 
meeting. Pat welcomed all LCDC/LAG members, Westmeath County Council staff and Westmeath 
Community Development staff to the meeting. Pat reminded everyone of the confidentiality of some of 
today’s agenda items and asked members to disclose any conflicts of interests they may have.  
 
1. Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held on Friday 14th July 2023 
On the proposal of Christine Charlton and seconded by Margaret Kiernan the minutes of the LCDC 
meeting held on Friday 14th July 2023 were approved.   
 
2.  Matters Arising 
None.  
 
3. LEADER  
 
 
4. Local Development Strategy (LDS) 2023 -2027 update 
Pat Murtagh gave the members an update on the LDS, stating the Draft LDS has been approved by DRCD 
subject to submission of a revised LDS to include an action plan to identify actions that will support the 
areas that have not benefitted from LEADER in the past. This will be included as part of the funding 
agreement that is expected to be received from DRCD in the coming weeks. 
 
5. Local Economic Community Plan (LECP) 2023-2029 
Pat Murtagh gave the members an update on the LECP, stating that the report on the Public Consultation 
Stage Outputs has been completed and will be brought to the Advisory Steering Group, The Economic 
and Enterprise Development SPC and the LCDC for consideration. He thanked Mary Goldsberry for her 
work to date on the new LECP.  
 
6. SICAP- Update on Tender Process (SICAP 2024-2028) 
Due to Conflict-of-Interest Bernie Leavy and Frank Murtagh of Westmeath Community Development left 
the meeting. 
 
Pat Murtagh reminded everyone of the confidentiality of information and gave them an update on the 
tender process, stating that a number of assessment meetings and a negotiation meeting have been held 
to date and part of the assessment process. He also stated that he anticipates the signing of a new SICAP 
contract in early to mid-December 2023 should all further requirements be met. 
 
Bernie Leavy and Frank Murtagh re-joined the meeting.  
 
 
 
 

3 
 
7. Sláintecare -Westmeath Sláintecare Healthy Communities (SHC) 
Brigid Geoghegan gave a presentation on her work under the SHC Programme. She thanked Westmeath 
County Council for the free use of Belvedere House and Gardens for the ‘Well Westmeath’ Expo held on 
10th June 2023.   
 
Brigid said she is working on re-establishing the Westmeath Traveller Inter- Agency Group (WTIG) 
The overall purpose of the TIGs is to improve traveller access to services and to provide more integrated 
service delivery to achieve it. The groups comprise membership drawn from relevant statutory bodies 
and the traveller community. 
 
The launch of the new SHC RAPID Athlone Community Garda Bus will take place on Friday 27 October 
2023 at 3pm at the Civic Offices in Athlone.  
 
8. Empowering Communities Programme Update 
Frank Murtagh discussed the Mid-Year Report with the LCDC Members. The Empowering Communities 
Programme Westmeath aims to build trusting supportive working relationships with the residents of the 
Dalton Park area and encourage and enhance engagement with existing agencies and services.   
 
9. Just Transition Fund update  
Pat Murtagh outlined the Just Transition Fund 2023 that prioritises the generation of employment for 
former peat communities by investing in the diversification of the local economy. 
 
This action focuses on 3 themes namely: 
 
• GREEN Territory- Supporting the development of the green economy, circular economy and low-
carbon economy and the creation of green and sustainable jobs by supporting innovation, skills 
development and the greening of existing sectors and jobs. 
• SMART Territory- supporting the development of digital skills, digitisation, and connectivity to 
create new employment opportunities in the territory. 
• SOCIAL Territory- Supporting education, skills development and training and social infrastructure 
that promotes inclusion and enables people to return to work, transition to new roles and be able 
to remain in employment. 
 
10. Correspondence 
• Call for Applications - 2023 Dormant Account Funds, Action 6.3 National LGBTI+ Inclusion Strategy 
• LEADER Food Initiative 2023 Call – LAG Request for Approval in Principle 
 
 
11. AOB   
Joe McEvoy asked if children from the Rapid Areas are involved with the local sports groups?  It was 
suggested that the new Garda Community Bus might be useful to transfer children from the RAPID areas 

4 
 
to games/ training sessions and perhaps gather and reuse football boots/gear as children grow out of 
them.  
 
It was decided Westmeath Sports Partnership would be invited to the next LCDC meeting to inform 
members of their work in the county and be on hand to answer any questions that may arise.  
 
Pat Murtagh informed the members that Hugh Farrell’s term as LCDC Chairman has come to an end. 
Election of a new Chairperson will be held at the next LCDC meeting. 
 
Pat Gallagher also advised that he will be stepping down as vice-chairperson at the next meeting.  
 
 
12. Date and Venue of Next Meeting 
The next LCDC meeting will take place on 1 December 2023 in the Council Chambers in Mullingar.  
 
Pat Gallagher thanked everyone for their attendance in person and online and for their contributions to 
a very informative meeting. 
 
 
 
 
