LCDé••
Coiste um Fhorbairt Pobail Åitlüil
na hlarmhi
Westmeath Local Communitg
Development Committee
Minutes of the Meeting of
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee (LCDC),
held on Friday 20th February 2026 at IOam
in Council Chamber Mullingar
Sector
Statutory
Members
Non-
Statutory
Members
In
Attendance
Agency
Westmeath County Council Elected Member
Westmeath County Council Elected Member
Westmeath County Council Elected Member
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive
Head of Enterprise
Dept of Social Protection
Education & Training Board
Health Services Executive
PPN Community & Voluntary
PPN Community & Voluntary
PPN Social Inclusion
PPN Social Inclusion
PPN Environment
Westmeath Community Development Ltd
Farming/Agriculture
Business/Employers
Trade Union
Westmeath County Council, Community Development
Westmeath County Council, Community Development
Westmeath County Council, Community Development
Westmeath County Council, Community Development
Westmeath County Council, Community Development
Westmeath County Council, Community Development
Name
Cllr Tom Farrell
Cllr Alfie Devine
Cllr Bill Collentine
Jackie Finney on behalf
of Barry Kehoe
Christine Charlton
Marie Flynn
Maria Fox
Teresa Kennedy
Vacant position
(Hugh Farrell)
Vincent Bagnall
John Bawle
Anne Drury
Joe McEvoy
Frank Murtagh
Bernie McCarthy
Suzanne McEvoy
Noel Maguire
Annette Barr Jordan
Veronica Moran
Lourdes Neary
Virginia Goldsberry
Thelma Garvey
Brigid Geoghegan
Present/
Apologies
In person
Online
Apologies
In person
In person
Apologies
Online
Apologies
Online
In person
In person
In person
In person
Online
Online
In person
In person
Apologies
In person
In person
In person
In person
1.
2.
ATTENDANCE / QUORUM
As the position of the LCDC chairperson was vacant, Ms. Jackie Finney acting for Mr. Barry Kehoe -Vice
Chair of the LCDC welcomed the members. Apologies were noted and a quorum was confirmed. 5
members from statutory sector and 7 from non-statutory sector.
Election of Chairperson
The Chief Officer (Annette Barr Jordan) explained the process of nominating a new chairperson following
the end of term as chairperson by Cathy Whelehan at the previous meeting. An Expression of Interest
application form was emailed to all LCDC members on Tuesday 10th February 2026 with a closing date of
Tuesday 17th February 2026.
One nomination was received by the closing date from Ms Anne Drury representing Westmeath PPN.
Annette read aloud Ann Drury application letter. On the proposal of Frank Murtagh and seconded by Joe
McEvoy, Anne Drury was elected as Chairperson.
Anne thanked everyone for electing her to the Chairperson position and welcomed all in attendance and
especially to the new member John Bawle and new administration team member Virgina Goldsberry.
3.
4.
5.
6.
DRAFT MINUTES OF LCDC MEETING
On the proposal of Frank Murtagh and seconded by Cllr Tom Farrell the minutes of the meeting held on
12th December 2025 were approved.
MATTERS ARISING
None
GIS GRANT MAPPING
Annette updated the members on the GIS grant mapping. At the last meeting when Edel Ennis
presented the GIS Mapping tool, the members asked if the schemes could be colour coded to enhance
the visual appearance.
The response from ICT is it can't be color coded, but it can be layered and filtered by types of grants.
It was agreed that all funding projects would be asked to provide a photo of the completed project in
JPEG format.
Members queried if the public will have access to the GIS Map. It was clarified that the public will have
certain levels of accessibility. Annette said all the data regarding the grants is saved on the
spreadsheets in the background and there is a lot of work done to get all this information. We will
present the GIS Mapping tool when the updates are made to keep members informed.
Frank asked at what point do we start to archive the data and how long the data will remain on the
map. Annette said we will have to review this and decide how long the data will remain visible on the
map.
Review of LCDC Subcommittees — Grants Slåintecare SICAP LEADER
Annette outlined the structure of the LCDC Subcommittees. The Subcommittees oversee numerous
programmes including; SICAP, LEADER, Slaintecare, Dormant Accounts and Healthy Ireland on behalf of
the LCDC Committee. Annette reminded all, that new members to the sub committees were always
welcome. Currently Hugh Farrell and Cathy Whelehan have finished their terms on the SICAP
2
7.
subcommittee so at least two new members are sought. Joe McEvoy and John Bawle volunteered for
the LCDC subcommittee.
Annette asked if any members were interested in volunteering for any other subcommittees and to
keep her informed of same.
SICAP
a) Training panel
Frank Murtagh presented the Training Panel for 2026 and said it would be circulated to all
members after the meeting. It is a requirement that the training panel is shared with the LCDC
members throughout the year. Frank explained that they sent out tenders for all programmes
and these are the training providers who were selected in the first instance. If there is a specific
sub-contractor required during the year that is not on the list, then the updated training panel
will be presented to the LCDC for approval.
b) SICAP Annual Report 2025 — Presentation
Frank Murtagh provided an update on the Annual Report 2025 which was circulated to all
members.
SICAP Annual Performance Review 2025
Annette Barr Jordan gave an overview of the Annual Performance Review 2025.
Appendix 1 Annual Performance Review Checklist ensures that all sections are completed and
compliant with the requirements. In addition, the Pobal Parallel Review was presented and was
reflective of the LCDC findings.
The KPI achievements for the reporting period exceeded expectations. KPI 1 reached 109% of
target, while KPI 2 significantly surpassed its target at 160%. Both indicators therefore performed
above the required 100% threshold, demonstrating strong engagement with both community
organisations and individuals during the year.
The Annual Performance Review 2025 report was proposed by Noel McGuire and seconded by
Christina Charlton.
c) SICAP Annual Plan 2026— Proposed action changes
The Annual Plan 2026 was circulated in advance to all members.
The Annual Plan 2026 outlines 14 actions aimed at supporting community groups and
individuals throughout the year.
Frank gave a detailed overview of a number of changed actions which are now incorporated in
the Annual Plan. The LCDC subcommittee in conjunction with Westmeath Community
3
8.
9.
Development identified the priority areas of work that will be focused on this year and set out
the planned action outcomes. The Annual KPI targets were also identified and agreed for 2026.
LCDC Membership - PPN Rep
The Chair outlined the need to fill two positions on the LCDC that have become vacant following the
departures of Hugh Farrell and Cathy Whelehan. New members will need to be elected through the
PPN, and this process will take place at the next Plenary.
The PPN Support worker has been consulted about filling the roles on the LCDC. Representation from
each of the three PPN pillars: Social Inclusion, Community & Voluntary, and Environment will be
required to fill future positions on the LCDC. The aim is to identify several potential nominees who can
go forward, not only to fill the current vacancies but also to be available should any further positions
arise during the year.
Correspondence
a) Community Safety Partnership — Consultation Workshops
Brigid Geoghegan provided an update on the establishment of the LCSP in Westmeath and the
progress made to date. The LCSP is now formally set up, and a committee has been appointed.
The next phase involves conducting consultations with community groups and focus groups.
Details of all upcoming meetings and focus group sessions will be shared on social media and
circulated through the PPN network.
An online survey will also be issued to all groups. The results of this survey will go towards
creating the LCSP development plan. The closing date for survey submissions is 31st March
2026, and it is important to encourage as many people as possible to participate.
b) National Community Safety Survey
Annette shared information that the National Office for Community Safety is leading on the
development of the first National Strategy for Improving Community Safety, on behalf of the
Department of Justice, Home Affairs and Migration. This National Community Survey has been
circulated to all members with a closing date of 27th February 2026.
10. A.O. B
LEP Local Enhancement Program — Letter to Department
Annette gave an update on the LEP allocation, it was agreed at the last meeting that a letter be sent to
the department to highlight the issues raised about the changes to the LEP Funding.
Annette said the letter was sent from the Chairperson of LCDC to the Department and it was also sent
to all the Chief Officers in the Midlands and Eastern region.
4
The Department responded that they welcomed the correspondence and noted it may give them more
leverage when advocating for future budgets. They recognised that current funding was more useful
for community based programmes and will strive to get this change implemented in 2027.
11. Date and time of next meeting
The next LCDC meeting will take place on the 17th of April 2026 in Rosemount Community Centre.
Approved
Chairperson
Date
SIC
5