 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector 
 
Agency 
Name 
Present/ 
Apologies 
Statutory 
Members 
 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member 
Cllr Tom Farrell 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr Vincent McCormack 
Apologies 
Westmeath County Council Elected Member  
Cllr. Bill Collintine  
In Person 
Westmeath County Council Chief Executive  
Pat Gallagher/ Mary 
Stuart  
In Person  
Head of Enterprise   
Christine Charlton  
Apologies  
Dept of Social Protection  
Marie Flynn 
Apologies  
Education & Training Board  
Maria Fox  
MS Teams 
Health Services Executive  
 
 
Non 
Statutory 
Members 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Hugh Farrell  
In Person 
PPN Community & Voluntary  
Vincent Bagnall 
MS Teams 
PPN Social Inclusion  
Cathryn Whelehan  
Apologies 
PPN Social Inclusion 
Margaret Kiernan 
In Person 
PPN Environment  
Joe McEvoy 
Apologies 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Frank Murtagh 
MS Teams 
Farming/Agriculture  
Bernie McCarthy  
MS Teams  
Business/Employers  
Aisling Coleman 
In Person 
Trade Union  
Noel Maguire 
Apologies 
In 
Attendance  
Westmeath County Council, Director of Service 
Mark Keaveney 
Apologies  
Westmeath County Council, Chief Officer, LCDC 
Pat Murtagh 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Administrative Officer 
Annette Barr Jordan 
In Person 
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Mary Goldsberry 
In Person 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd.  
Bernie Leavy 
In Person  
Westmeath County Council, Community Development 
Veronica Moran 
In Person  
 
Westmeath Community Development Ltd 
Peter Ormond  
Apologies    
 
 
 
Minutes of the Meeting of  
Westmeath Local Community Development Committee, (LCDC) held 
 on Friday 21st October 2022 at 10.00am (Hybrid Meeting).   

2 
 
Hugh Farrell welcomed all LCDC members, Westmeath County Council staff and Westmeath Community 
Development staff to the meeting. Hugh had a special welcome for Mary Stuart who was in attendance 
on behalf of Pat Gallagher.  
 
Hugh Farrell reminded members of the confidentiality of the items on today’s agenda and asked that 
they declare any conflicts of interests that they may have.   
 
1.  
Draft Minutes of LCDC Meeting held on Friday 2nd September 2022 
 
There was a small addition to the draft minutes RE Addendum to Letter of Offer (Item 8), on the proposal 
of Margaret Kiernan and seconded by Cllr. Tom Farrell the minutes of the LCDC meeting held on Friday 
2nd September were approved.   
 
2.  
Matters Arising 
No items under matters arising. 
 
 
3. 
SICAP 
 
a) Approval of additional providers to the trainers list 
 
Annette Barr Jordan gave members an update on the WCD Panel of Trainers for 2022. The tendering 
process was advertised on Active Link and on Westmeath Community Development’s website.  Closing 
date for receipt of tenders was 18th February 2022. 12 tenders were received with in total.  
 
Following a review of the information received the following have been placed on the panel of trainers 
for period 2022 to December 2023.   
 
All Safe Solutions 
 
 
Forus  
 
Frankie Stephens 
DG Consultancy 
 
 
SWEETS 
 
Aspire Training 
About Hygiene 
 
 
CRE Crafts 
 
O’Sullivan Training 
Additional Trainers added: 
Rita Dunne TEFL 
 
Andrea Martin TEFL 
 
Annette Barr Jordan asked the LCDC members to consider and approve the panel of trainers for 2022 to 
December 2023.  
 
Proposed by: Margaret Kiernan 
Seconded by: Cllr. Bill Collintine.  
 
 
b) KPIs for 2023.  
Annette Barr Jordan discussed the KPIs for 2023.  WCD and the subcommittee have proposed to decrease 
the KPI target under Goal 1 from 63 to 54 for 2023. This will allow them to have more targeted 
interventions and better-quality work with a smaller number of groups.  Pobal are supporting the 
suggested decrease.   
Under KPI 2, it is suggested to increase the KPI by 11% (from 681 to 750). Pat Murtagh added that WCD 
always overachieve and that they are not asking to do anything they are not capable of achieving.  
 

3 
 
Proposed by Margaret Kiernan. 
Seconded by Cllr. Tom Farrell.  
 
c) Emerging Needs 2023 
LCDCs can select one Emerging Needs Group for their Lot per year. It is proposed that Brawney Housing 
Estate in Athlone is added as an additional group for 2023.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. Tom Farrell. 
Seconded by Cllr. Bill Collintine.  
 
 
4.  
Sláintecare Healthy Communities  
 
Pat Murtagh gave the members an update on the Sláintecare Healthy Communities Programme. The 
Department have agreed that funding can be carried forward into early next year to allow for the 
completion of projects. Pat also informed members that the €41,000 originally assigned to progress the 
Community Bus Project in Athlone is not going to be enough, it is going to cost in the region of €74,000 
so additional funding needs to be sourced.  
 
The Dalton Park Community Hub project is progressed as far as possible at the minute. Pat thanked the 
Architects within Westmeath County Council for their help with this project. A decision has been made 
to delay an application to LEADER until 2023/2024 timeframe due to a current funding cap on LEADER 
applications (€150,000).  
 
The County Launch date is agreed for Friday 9th December 2023 from 2.30pm to 4.00pm in St. Kieran’s 
Community Centre, Tormey Villas, Athlone. LCDC Members will receive an invite to attend the event.  
 
5.   
Healthy Ireland  
 
Pat Murtagh gave members an update on the Healthy Ireland Programme. Round 4 of funding has been 
announced and it will run from 2023 to 2025. The new Healthy Ireland Coordinator will be in starting on 
7th November 2022. The Strategy for this programme needs to be developed and submitted by January 
2023.  The budget for the 2022 was set at €40,000 and any unused funds can be brought forward into 
2023. The budget for 2023 has been set at €75,000.   
Annette Barr Jordan informed the members that she had received an email from the Department 
congratulating Westmeath on all the projects they had managed to deliver in the last programme.  
Maria Fox asked if it is worth considering merging the Healthy Ireland Committee and the Sláintecare 
Committee? She added that it may not be feasible or practical, but it may be a way of linking everyone 
together and engaging with the communities. Pat Murtagh said it is something the unit has been thinking 
about as he is conscious of the number of meetings members are being asked to attend.  Cllr. Tom Farrell 
asked for a timeframe for this decision. Pat Murtagh answered saying if it is going to happen it will likely 
be in January 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
6. Community Activities Fund 2022 – Change of Use 
 
Pat Murtagh informed the LCDC Members that he had received some change of use requests from 
applicants under the CAF Scheme. He asked the members to consider the proposal that the Chief Officer 
could adjudicate change of use requests and approve same if they fulfil the criteria of the scheme. It will 
not involve any increase or change to the approved funding.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. Tom Farrell.  
Seconded by Margaret Kiernan.  
 
7. Agreement of dates for upcoming Subcommittee Meetings  
  
Pat Murtagh gave members an update on the upcoming subcommittee meetings. The next Sláintecare 
subcommittee meeting will take place on 1st November 2022 at 11am (blended meeting).  
It is proposed that the Healthy Ireland subcommittee will meet in mid-November, Pat will formalise date 
with the Healthy Ireland Co-ordinator when she starts. It is also suggested that the LECP advisory steering 
group will hold a meeting in Mid to Late November.   
 
8. Correspondence 
Pat Murtagh discussed the recent Press Releases from the Department.  
I. 
Values and Principles for Collaboration and Partnership Working with the C&V Sector. 
II. 
The Approval of Ireland’s CAP Strategic Plan by European Commission  
III. 
New initiative to support Women’s Sheds.  
 
9. AOB  
Pat Murtagh informed the members that he had received an LCDC nomination from the HSE.   The 
nomination is being brought to the Council Meeting on Monday 24th October 2022 to be ratified.  
 
Bernie Leavy informed the members that there is sufficient demand from promotors to exhaust the 
remaining budget in the Transitional Programme and the EURI Programme before the end of the year. 
Funding has to be committed under both programmes before the end of 2022. Pat Murtagh added that 
due to the number of projects coming through the system, there may be a need to hold a second meeting 
in December. Its suggested that the second meeting (if required) will take place on the 16th December 
2022.  
 
10. Date of Next Meeting 
 
The next LCDC meeting is scheduled for the 2nd December 2022 at 10am. 
Hugh Farrell thanked members for attending today’s meeting and wished them all a safe journey home.  
 
 
 
 
