Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 15th April 2019
in Athlone Civic Offices, Athlone Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies :
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs Tom Farrell, Paul Hogan, Frankie Keena, and Frank
McDermott
Senator Gabrielle McFadden,
Pat Grimes, Marie Reddin and Dave Raftis.
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff, Superintendent Alan Murray
and Superintendent Shane Cummins.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin,
Administrative Officer, Jacqueline Finney, Athlone Municipal
District, Frank Dolan, Athlone Municipal District, Annette Barr
Jordan, Community and Enterprise, WCC, Breda Daly
Corporate Services, WCC.
Cllr's.Sorca Clarke, Andrew Duncan, Ken Glynn, Michael
O'Brien, Aengus O'Rourke, John Shaw, Emily Wallace, Bill
Collentine, Senator Paul Daly, Senator Aidan Davitt, Deputy
Peter Burke, Deputy Robert Troy, Sheena Lawless, Dcs
Sheridan, Kathleen Grennan and Pat Keating.
The Chaiman, Cllr PaddyHill opened the meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all
Cllr Hill welcomed Anne Galvin as the new Administrative Officer to thc JPC
present.
Meeting and Cllr. Hill thanked Mr Billy Coughlan for his work and commitment with the
Westmeath JPC over the years. Cllr Hill wished Mr Coughlan and his family good health in
his retirement.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Mccting hcld on 14th January 2019:
On thc proposal of Cllr. Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Tom Farrell the Members
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 14th January 2019.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
• To consider and approve JPC Annual Report 2018
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Mr Dave Raftis, the Members
approved the Westmeath JPC Annual Report 2018.
Mr Pat Gallagher advised the JPC Members that once the JPC Annual Report for 2018 was
approved it would then be submitted to the Policing Authority.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt.Peter Duff gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath Division as
circulated prior to today' s meeting.
This report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Peter Duffhighlighted the following:
• Crime Analysis01/01/2019 to 31/03/2019 inclusive — as per Report circulated.
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff informed the Members that theft of valuables from cars
is the one category of crime that is increasing significantly in Westmeath. Chief Supt.
Duff informed the Members that there were 51 reported thefts from cars in Westmeath
during the first three months of 2019, compared with 19 for the same period last year.
Chief Supt Duff reiterated the importance of securing valuables when leaving your car
and advised the public to lock their valuables (ie sat-navs, phones, bags and other items)
in the boot of their vehicle before leaving their home.
Chief Supt. Duff stated that the difficulty with theft from MP Vs is that it is opportunistic,
ie car doors left unlocked, the detection of many of these incidents must be made by
catching the offender red-handed to secure a prosecution.
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff also informed the Members that there was an increase of
16% to thefts from shops from 92 in year 2018 to 107 in year 2019. Mr Duff advised the
Members that efforts undertaken to reduce thefts from shops included continued liaison
with individual retailers by the Divisional Crime Prevention Officer.
Chief Supt. Duff stated that there were 107 assaults in Westmeath in the first 3 months of
2019 compared with 87 in the same period in 2018. Chief Supt. Duff stated that the
increase in assaults is not unique to Westmeath but an issue nationally and stated that it
has been attributed to a rise in night-time economy. Chief Supt. Duff further informed
the Members that all available resources are being deployed on high visibility beats and
patrols during peak activity on the weekends in urban areas to curtail public disorder
which can lead to assault incidents.
Roads Policing: - Chief Supt. Duff advised the Members that operations continue
throughout the year with Crime and Road Policing Operations running over the Bank
Holiday weekends.
Community Engagement and Public Safety:Chief Supt. Duff informed the
Members that the Westmeath Garda Youth Awards Finals Night took place on 7th
February 2019 in the Mullingar Park Hotel with great success.Chief Superintendent
Peter Duff sincerely thanked the staff of AnGarda Siochåna, the judging panel and
Lidl for their sponsorship.
Fleadh Cheoil 2020: Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that Fleadh Cheoil
2020 is expected to attract 500,000 people to Mullingar and stated that the resources
required in policing the Fleadh would be a major financial drain on their budget and
the Gardai in Westmeath are requesting supplementary funding to help cover costs
incurred as a result of it.
Organisational Development and Capacity Improvement: Chief Supt. Duff
informed the Members that to date 152 Gardai nationwide have been reassigned to
frontline duties. He also informed the Members that the Westmeath Division would
be receiving one Inspector, three new Sergeants in the coming weeks and Sergeant
Patrick Guinan was being replaced with Sergeant John McWalter as new Crime
Prevention Officer.
Chief Supt. Duff informed the group thatAnGarda Siochåna has a new recruitment
campaign in place called "The Difference is You". In response to the queries raised,
Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that applicants must be aged between 18-35
yrs old, must have Leaving Certificate and two languages.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Duff for his comprehensive Garda
Report.
Cllr Paddy Hill then opened the meeting for questions:
Cllr Farrell raised concems about the increase in car thefts and asked if it be possible to place
an advertising campaign on the local radios and papers regularly to remind people not to
leave valuables in their vehicles. In response, Chief Supt Duff informed the Members that
the Crime Prevention Officer highlights this issue on local radio on a regular basis and it is
also carried out nationally.Cllr Farrell suggested that sporting organisations within
Westmeath should be contacted to create awareness of same.
Cllr Keena complimented An Garda Siochåna for their work regarding the Westmeath Garda
Youth Awards Finals Night and the Older Persons Party. Cllr Kccna also asked AnGarda
Siochåna if the Drug Awareness Campaign could be rolled out again where the public ring a
confidential number to seek help. In response, Chief Supt Duff advised the Members that the
public can ring the Garda Confidential phone number 1800 666 Illwhich gives on
drug activity but he also said he would look into the roll out of the Drug Awareness
Campaign. Chief Supt Duff further informed the Members that there is an ongoing drugs
operation division in Westmeath.
In response to Cllr Keena, Supt Cummins informed the Members that the completion date for
the Athlone Garda Station is April / May 2020.
Mr Dave Raftis informed the Members that the PPN will highlight the issue of car theft at
their PPN Meetings and place awareness of same on their website.
Cllr Frank McDermott also complemented the Youth Awards Final Night and he welcomed
the new recruits to Castlepollard and Delvin Garda Stations.
Cllr McDermott raised concerns about the condition of the Castlepollard Garda Station and
asked that this be prioritised.
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC thanked An Garda Siochåna and in particular the
attendance of Inspector Folan and Sergeant Nicholson for supporting the bid to bring Fleadh
2020 to Mullingar when members of CCÉ Ardchomhairle visited Mullingar Town in
February in a bid to host Fleadh 2020. Mr Gallagher stated that their presence and
interaction helped and assisted greatly. Mr Gallagher also informed the Members that
Westmeath County Council will be meeting with the Fleadh Committee to discuss a number
of issues including event management. Mr Gallagher is aware that Fleadh 2020 is a big task
but stated that there is a very active Fleadh Committee in place and working in conjunction
with Westmeath County Council and An Garda Siochåna he stated that he is confident that it
will be a successful event.
For the record, Mr Gallagher expressed his gratitude for the continued support by An Garda
Siochana to the Council across a number of areas of activity in the County.
Mr Gallagher informed the JPC Members that a "Pilot Initiative Scheme" is currently in place
within Westmeath County Council where Traffic Wardens are wearing body cameras to deter
and record anti-social behaviour. Mr Gallagher also stated that this initiative is in compliance
with the Data Protection Guidelines.
Cllr Paul Hogan commended An Garda Siochana for the recent significant drug detection
within the Westmeath Division and the human trafficking instance in Mullingar recently.
In response to Cllr Hogan's question regarding additional resources for Community Gardai,
Chief Supt Duff informed the Members that Westmeath Division will be receiving one
Inspector and three new Sergeants in the coming weeks, these vacancies are to replace staff
that will be leaving on promotion or have left on promotion.
Cllr John Dolan stated that anti-social behaviour is deterring some people from using the
Athlone to Mullingar Greenway and asked that regular Garda cycle patrols take place on the
Greenway. In response to Cllr Dolan, Supt. Shane Cummins informed the Members that no
recent reported incidents of anti-social behaviour were made to the Gardai since last Summer
and overall there is a minimal number of reported crimes on the Greenway. However, Supt.
Cummins did ask that members of the public report any anti-social behaviour to their local
Garda Station and the matter would be addressed accordingly.
Cllr Frank McDermott expressed gatitude to the Castlepollard Sergeant and Garda staff.
Cllr McDermott stated that CCTV is a necessity in order to address drug related anti-social
behaviour in Castlepollard.
PPN Report:
Community representatives, Ms Marie Reddin, Mr Dave Raftis and Mr. Pat Grimes presented
the "Westmeath PPN Submission 2019 Report "to the JPC Members.
Ms Annette Barr Jordan on behalf of the PPN acknowledged and thanked Westmeath County
Council and An Garda Siochåna for their continued support.
In response to the submissions raised by the PPN, Mr Pat Gallagher informed the Members
that Westmeath County Council's anti-social policy was reviewed and all Tenants received
the Tenancy handbook. Mr Gallagher advised the PPN to report concerns to Mr Gerry
Loughrey or Mr. Danny O'Neill, Housing Liaison Officers.
In relation to illegal dumping Mr Gallagher advised the PPN to report issues to the relevant
Municipal District Offices.
In relation to drug littering / drug paraphernalia Mr Gallagher informed the PPN that the
Midland Regional Drug and Alcohol Task Forum has a protocol in place to deal with drug
littering. Mr Gallagher also informed the Members that relevant Westmeath County Council
staff has received training in this area.
In response to an update on the National CCTV scheme, Mr Pat Gallagher advised the PPN
that there was no change to report on this matter and Local Authorities were advised by the
Department of Justice that they do not intend revising their code of Practice.
In response to Build and Design safety, Mr Gallagher advised the PPN members that the
Report of Westmeath Joint Policing Working Group in relation to Crime and Anti-Social
behaviour in the Built Environment was prepared and approved by this JPC. This report was
forwarded to the Minister at the time recommending certain changes in planning regulations
whereby the Gardai would be listed as a statutory consultee for certain classes of
development. While this was acknowledged on the Minister's behalf, the planning regulations
have not been amended as requested. Mr. Gallagher advised that relevant guidance re. passive
surveillance and similar measures are taken into account in the planning and design of
housing developments.
In response to the PPN's query regarding enforcement of speed limits/zones (30km) in
Housing estates, Mr Gallagher informed the PPN that it is proposed to introduce the 30km/hr
speed limit into all the Estates in taken in charge and the process is well underway.
Correspondence:
None.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 15thJuly 2019 at 10.00a.m in the Council
Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
5
Datc
Cl Paddy Ill,
Chairman, Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
