Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 13th January 2020
in the Council Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs John Dolan, Michael Dollard, Andrew Duncan,
Tom Farrell, Frankie Keena, Liam McDaniel,
Frank McDermott and Hazel Smyth.
Deputy Peter Burke
Pat Grimes, Michael Mulvey, Dave Raftis and Joyce Furlong
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan
Murray and Superintendent Aidan Minnock.
Martin Murray, Deputy Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin,
A.o, Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC
Mr Pat Gallagher, Ms Jackie Finney, Minister Damien English,
Senator Gabrielle McFadden, Senator Paul Daly,
Minister Kevin Moran, Senator Aidan Davitt, Deputy Robert
Troy, Cllr Ken Glynn, Cllr Emily Wallace, Cllr Bill Collentine,
Cllr Denis Leonard, Marie Reddin, and Kathleen Grennan.
The Chairman, Cllr Paddy Hill opened the meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all
present. Cllr Paddy Hill informed the Members that Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive was
unable to attend today's meeting and that Mr Martin Murray, Director of Services was
deputising for him.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 14th October 2019:
On the proposal of Cllr Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Liam McDaniel the Members
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 14th October 2019.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025
Ms Anne Galvin, Administrative Officer informed the Members that submissions were
received from Ms Jackie Finney, Athlone-Moate Municipal District, An Garda Siochåna and
the PPN regarding the JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025. Ms Galvin welcomed the submissions
received and advised the JPC Members to e-mail any late submissions to Breda Daly
(bdaly@westmeathcoco.ie) as soon as possible. Ms Galvin advised the Members that she
proposes holding a workshop in late February / early March inviting all Stakeholders named in
the Draft JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025 to attend and participate. The workshop will run for a
half day and small groups required only. JPC Members will be given proposed dates for this
1
workshop via e-mail in the coming weeks. Ms Galvin requested that any leading Stakeholders
listed on the Draft JPC Strategic Plan were made aware that they are on the Report and
agreeable to same.
• Schedule of JPC Meetings for 2020
Ms Anne Galvin informed the Members of the schedule of JPC Meetings for 2020 as set out
below.
January 2020:
April 2020:
July 2020:
Oct 2020:
Monday, 13 January 2020, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar at 1 Oam
Monday, 20 April 2020, Civic Centre, Athlone at 1 Oam.
Followed by Public Meeting - Venue to be confirmed.
Monday, 13 July 2020, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar at 1 Oam
Monday, 12 October 2020, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar at 1 Oam.
Followed by Public Mccting — Venue to be confirmed.
On the proposal of Ms Joyce Furlong and seconded by Cllr Frankie Keena, the JPC
Members unanimously approved the schedule for 2020.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy encouraged local communities to nominate persons for the
Westmeath Garda Youth Awards event taking place in February this year. Chief Supt. Fergus
Healy stated that it is important to ensure that young people most deserving of recognition in
their communities are considered. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that
application forms are available at all Westmeath Garda Stations and on the Garda website.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy gave a powerpoint presentation outlining the following crime
statistics in the County.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that the number of burglaries reported last
year rose significantly. In the Mullingar District the number of burglaries rose from 134 to
167, an increase of 25%. In the Athlone District the number of burglaries rose from 118 to
138, an increase of 17%.
The number of thefts from vehicles rose from 98 in 2018 to 162 in 2019, an increase of 65%.
In the Mullingar District the number of thefts from vehicles in 2018 was 44 and 88 in 2019 an
increase of 100%. In thc Athlonc District the number of thefts from vehicles rose from 54 to
74, an increase of 37%.
The number of cars stolen in the County rose by 92% from 49 in 2018 to 94 in 2019, a 92%
increase.
There was also a 24% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 428 in 2018 to 530
in 2019.
2
In relation to the rise in burglaries within the County, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the
Members of a new engraving machine which can be used by the public and the Gardai to
identifr their lost property. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy encouraged Westmeath County Council
to fund such a machine and he added that it costs approximately €5,000.
In response, Mr Martin Murray, Deputy Chief Executive stated that Westmeath County
Council would look into the purchase of an engraving machine and advance methodology.
The number of reported crimes against the person increased countywide from 437 in 2018 to
464 in 2019, a 6% increase.
The number of "other" property thefts decreased from 279 in 2018 to 261 in 2019, a decrease
of 6%.
The number of arrests from drug dealing decreased by 2% from 100 in 2018 to 98 in 2019.
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community
Engagements:
Attended Lake point Street Festival
Life Festival 2019
Community Policing attended Residents Association Meeting in Willow Park
CP Members attended AIT for Annual Sports Day
Attended Fleadh Meeting in The Greville Hotel, Mullingar
Attended a Road Safety Event at Golden Island
Assisted with duty at the Kilbeggan Races
Open Day at Mullingar Garda Station
Duty at Mullingar Agricultural Show
Westmeath Garda Facebook Page set up — nearly 2,000 Likes and one post reached
over 56,000
Athlone elderly bus run to Knock
Attended a green flag event in Mullingar Town Park
Assisting and Patrol at Ballymore Festival
Tri Athlone
Diamond Jubilee Anniversary of Women in an Garda Siochana at Annebrook
Hotel
Christmas Party for Children of Garda Members at Bloomfield Hotel
Older Persons Party in the Annebrook Hotel attended by approx 350 persons.
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources — Divisional
Overview
253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks)
151 Mullingar District
102 Athlone District
1 8 Divisional Roads Policing
6 Reserve Members
31 Garda Staff (Civilian)
13 Garda Stations
73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Fergus Healy for his Presentation.
3
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Siochana
(AGS) and officials present:
Cllr Frankie Keena asked if the increase in crime would strengthen the Garda Report
for additional Gardai particularly for the Athlone District. Cllr Keena requested a
completion date tor the Athlone Garda Station and an update on the new divisional
structure.
Cllr Keena and Cllr Dolan both raised serious concerns about the drug situation in the
County, both in Mullingar & Athlone towns and also in rural areas within the County.
Cllr Dolan stated that drugs are being dealt with right in front of our eyes and we need
to address it urgently.
Cllr Farrell stated that he recently received representations from concerned parents
regarding the growth in group violence, especially at Shopping Centres particularly at
night. Cllr Farrell asked that the Gardai, the owners of the Shopping Centres and the
Local Authorities work together in combating crime in such places. Cllr Farrell
suggested more public lighting be put in place on the grounds of Shopping Centres.
Cllr Dolan raised concerns about anti-social behaviour on the Greenway particularly in
the Athlone Area. Cllr Dolan informed the Members that he placed a Motion seeking
CCTV along the Greenway due to anti-social behaviour, drug dealing and assaults. Cllr
Dolan stated that as a Local Authority they cannot be a host for CCTV. Cllr Dolan
asked if funding was sought for CCTV, could the Gardai monitor it?
Cllr McDermott requested an update on the status of Castlepollard Garda Station. He
asked the Gardai can they assure the public complete confidentiality in reporting drug
crime.
Cllr Smyth asked if more support groups could be made available for those suffering
with drug addictions and for crime victims. In relation to the drug situation and cyber
bullying, Cllr Smyth asked if more could be done with regard to awareness campaigns,
education and liaising with schools. Cllr Smyth asked if increased signage could be
erected regarding car accidents/fatalities throughout Westmeath.
Cllr Michael Dollard requested a "zero tolerance" approach by Gardai regarding illegal
parking taking place at schools within Mullingar. Cllr Dollard asked if the Garda
Traffic Corps could investigate this matter urgently before an accident happens.
Cllr Liam McDaniel raised concerns regarding rural burglaries and how it is affecting
the elderly, burglaries are their big fear and phone scams.
Cllrs Paddy Hill requested a greater Garda presence in Castlepollard and Fore. Cllr Hill
again asked if Castlepollard Garda Station will be upgraded.
Cllr Frank McDermott and Cllr Dolan both welcomed the purchasing of an engraving machine
and Cllr Farrell suggested that Westmeath County Council join forces with a number of
community organisations to jointly fund the purchase of same.
In response to questions raised regarding the Garda Operating Model announced by the Garda
Commissioner, Mr Drew Han-is in 2019, Chief Supt. Fergus I-lealy inforrned the Members that
the regional headquarters are moving to Kilkenny, which will result in a reallocation of
resources. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that staff numbers will "level out"
between Mullingar and Athlone Garda Stations. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy also informed the
Members that he will be attending a meeting in January with the Garda Commissioner and his
team to progress the "merger" between Westmeath and Meath. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy
confirmed that local Garda management have the assistance of a National Team and
4
Consultants to provide support and ensure that the changes run smoothly. Chief Supt. Fergus
Healy also stated that the aim is to improve the service.
In relation to the drug situation, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that
detections are going up, showing a rise in the activity of Gardai. He assured all present that
the Gardai are actively involved in enforcing the law in this area. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy
advised the Members that there are drug units in both Westmeath and Meath and these will be
combined as part of the divisional changes to come.
In response to Cllr Dolan, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that the Gardai
cannot randomly stop and search citizens but he stated that the Gardai can enforce the public
order and if there is a reason -or suspicion, the Gardai can stop and search a person.
In response to Cllr McDermot, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy gave the Members and the public an
outright assurance that all matters reported to the Gardai are treated with the utmost
confidentiality and professionalism.
In relation to CCTV being installed on the Greenway, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the
Members that public funding is available for CCTV Schemes, but the Gardai cannot be the
"Data Controller" there is legislation to be followed. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy welcomes
CCTV once it is compliant with Data Protection Legislation and he is awaiting an outcome
from the Department of Justice on this matter.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that the completion date for the upgrade to
Athlone Garda Station is the end of 2020.
In relation to Castlepollard Garda Station Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that
there is a new building scheme coming into effect in 2021 between An Garda Siochåna (AGS)
and the OPW for buildings in need of repair. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy's intention is to put
forward Castlepollard Garda Station for this Scheme.
In response to Cllr Hazel Smyth's query regarding forensic science, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy
informed the Members that Forensic Ireland is a separate identity of AGS and comes under the
remit of the Department of Justice. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy stated that AGS do not have
input to the schemes. AGS have units, examination tests and the results are brought to
forensics.
In response to Cllr Hazel Smyth's query regarding drug awareness and cyber bullying, Chief
Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that local Community Gardai and Garda Liaison
Officers work with Primary and Secondary school teachers related to these particular issues.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy also advised the Members that there are support groups in place for
drug users, our Garda work with the youth in our communities, this comes under the remit of
our Garda Juvenile Liaison Officer.
Cllr Smyth furthered asked if AGS had an on-line form where members of the public could
report inappropriate road behaviour and it goes directly to AGS? In response, Chief Supt.
Fergus Healy informed the Members that there is the Garda Confidential Telephone Number
(1800 666 1 1 1) and this number is also displayed on every Garda patrol car. Chief Supt. Fergus
Healy stated they do not have an electronic on-line form facility at present.
5
In response to Cllr Michael Dollard regarding illegal parking, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy stated
that it is a problem in every school and that AGS work with the schools to get the message to
parents on this matter.
In responsc to Cllr Liam McDaniel's query regarding the elderly and phone scams, Chief Supt.
Fergus Hcaly statcd that investigations of this nature are cumbersome and most of the data is
storcd in another jurisdiction such as America. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy urged the public to
be vigilant regarding circulation of information about bank details.
PPN Report:
At this particular JPC Meeting, the PPN Report was discussed under the Agenda Item "Report
from Westmeath County Council"
"JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025". Mr Dave Raftis on
behalf of the PPN welcomed the Workshop which is scheduled to take place in late February /
early March.
Correspondence:
Ms Anne Galvin informed the Members that she received an e-mail from the Garda
Commissioner's Office dated 7ff January 2020 stating that the Garda Commissioner will attend
the Westmeath JPC Meeting on Monday, 20th April 2020.
Ms Anne Galvin invitcd the Members to e-mail any questions they may have for the Garda
Commissioner to Breda Daly (bdaly@wcstmeathcoco.ie) before the ISt April 2020.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 20th April 2020 at 9.30a.m instead of 10.00am as
requested by Cllr Tom Farrell and agreed by all Members present and to take place in the
Athlone Civic Offices, Athlone.
AOB:
Cllr Paddy Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Paddy HI
Chairman, Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date
6