Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 11 January 2021
held by teleconference (Go To Meetin )
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Introduction:
Cllr Liam McDaniel, Vice Chairman
Cllrs John Dolan, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Frankie Keena, Denis
Leonard, Frank McDcrmott, Hazel Smith and Emily Wallace.
Senator Paul Daly, Deputy Peadar Tobin and
Deputy Johnny Quirke.
Mr Dave Raftis and Mr Michael Mulvey.
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan Murray and
Superintendent David Nolan.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin, A.O, Pat
Keating, SEO, Mullingar Municipal District, Annette Barr Jordan,
A/SEO, Community Section, Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly,
wcc.
Cllrs Paddy Hill, Michael Dollard, Ken Glynn and Bill Collcntine.
Senator Aidan Davitt. Deputies Peler Burke, Robert Troy and Suca
Clarke. Mr Pat Grimes, Ms Joyce Furlong, Ms Marie Reddin and Ms
Kathleen Grennan.
The Vice JPC Chairman, Cllr Liam McDaniel deputised for Cllr Paddy Hill. Cllr McDaniel opened the
Go To Meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all logged in.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC MeeGng held on 12 October 2020:
On the proposal of Cllr. John Dolan and seconded by Dave Raftis, the Members approved the Minutes
of the JPC Meeting held on 12 October 2020.
Rcport from Westmeath County Council:
• Schedule of JPC Meetings for 2021
Ms Anne Galvin informed the Members of the schedule of JPC Meetings for 2021 as set out below.
January 2021.
April 2021:
July 2021:
Monday, 1 1 January 2021, via Teleconference (Go To Meeting at loam).
Monday, 12 April 2021, Civic Centre, Athlone at 10am. To be confirmed due
Io Covid-19 public heullh guidelines.
Followed by Public Meeting - To be confirmed.
Monday, 12 July 2021, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar at 10am. To be confirmed
due to Covid-19 public health guidelines.
1
Oct 2021:
Monday, 11 October 2021, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar at 10am. To be
confirmed due to Covid-19 public health guidelines.
Followed by Public Meeting - To be confirmed
On thc proposal of Cllr Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Frankie Keena, the JPC Members
unanimously approved the Schedule for 2021.
• Government launch of pilot Local Community Safety Partnerships
http://www.iustice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/PR20000261
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, Westmeath County Council informed the JPC Members of a recent
announcement made by Minister for Justice, Hclcn McEntcc regarding a ncw local partncrship projccts
to strcngthen community safety.
Mr Gallagher informed the Members that initially the new Local Community Safety Partnerships will
be established on a pilot basis. Mr Gallagher further advised that the pilots will run for two years and
will be located in the Dublin North Inner City Local Electoral Area, Waterford City and County Council
and Longford. The locations of the pilots were chosen based on factors including population density,
crime rates and deprivation.
Mr Gallagher outlined the key features to the JPC as follows:
• Each Local Community Safety Partnership will have an independent chairperson and will
develop a Local Community Safety Plan.
• The Partnerships will bring together residents, community representatives, business interest,
councillors, local authorities, An Garda Siochåna, Tulsa and the HSE to devise and implement
the Local Community Safety Plans.
• The Plans will detail how best lhe community wants to prevent crime and will reflect
community priorities and local safety issues.
Mr Gallagher also informed the Members that the Partnerships will replace and will be more
Community led than the existing Joint Policing Committee structure. Mr Gallagher explained to the
Members that any further information on this matter he would bring to the JPC particularly from
Longford County Council.
In response to Cllr Hazel Smith, Mr Gallagher advised the Members that the current JPCs will continue
as normal.
Cllr Liam McDaniel thanked Mr Gallagher for the update and welcomed the new proposals.
• Westmeath Keep Well Campaign presentation
Ms. Annette Barr Jordan, A/Senior Executive Officer gave the Members a presentation on the
Westmeath Keep well Campaign.
Ms. Barr Jordan presented an overview of the Campaign, its main themes, the Council's role,
the funding made available, and examples of community resilience initiatives being carried
out.
2
Cllr Frankie Keena commended Ms Barr Jordan and her team on all their hard work and
marvellous suite of initiatives. In response to Cllr Keena, Ms Barr Jordan inforrned the JPC
that strong community support has continued through the latest lockdown. Ms Barr Jordan
explained that it is important for Members to inform people of the Community Call helpline
(1800 805 816).
In response to Cllr Tom Farrell, Ms Barr Jordan said that goups could meet and examine the
plan to avoid overlap.
Cllr Emily Wallace asked why the walking element of Belvedere Gardens and Park was being
closed when it was a safe place to wall for people living nearby. In response, Mr Pat Gallagher
said that while the matter was likely to be raised at the Municipal District Meeting that
afternoon, he advised the JPC that the decision was taken on the basis that most people who
make use of Belvedere come from further away than the currently allowed 5km, and to leave
it open under the current tightened public health restrictions could be seen as an encouragement
to people to travel there. The matter would be kept under review depending on public health
advice.
Ms Barr Jordan thanked all relevant organisations, Westmeath County Council staff,
Westmeath Community Development and An Garda Siochåna.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Ms Barr Jordan for her presentation and dedication.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy presented the powerpoint outlining the following crime statistics for
the County.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy described 2020 as an unusual year in the sense that Covid was the
predominant issue since 12 March and explained that An Garda Siochåna are taking it on a
month by month basis going forward.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy said that overall crime trends were down as a result of Covid-19
however he stated domestic violence had accelerated.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that there was a 30% decrease in property
crime in the Mullingar District for yr. 2020 and a 23% decrease in the Athlone Area.
The number of thefts from vehicles were down dramatically from 162 in 2019 to 76 in 2020, a
decrease of 53%. (Divisional totals)
The number of vehicles stolen in the County decreased by 60% from 96 in 2019 to 38 in 2020.
(Divisional totals).
There was a 29% decrease in the number of reported thefts from shops, 533 in 2019 to 379 in
2020. (Divisional totals).
3
Of crimes against the persons category there was a 13% decrease in reported incidents.
(Divisional total).
The number of road fatalities increased from 3 in 2019 to 4 in 2020.
The number of drugs detections in the Mullingar Garda District plummeted last year due
primarily to the cancellation of two music events. Covid-19 led to the cancellation of the Life,
Body and Soul music festival in 2020.
In the Athlone District there was an increase in detections for both simplc possession and
dealing and there were 31 detections relating to drug dealing compared to 25 in 2019, an
increase of 2.4%. The number of detections for simple possession went from 77 in 2019 to
101 in 2020.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community
Engagements :
Operation Faoiseamh commenced on 1 April 2020 to offer support and protection to
victims of domcstic abuse during these extraordinary times. The Westmeath Garda
Victim Office is identifying domestic abuse victims within the Westmeath Division
and has initiated contact.
Members of An Garda Siochana in the Westmeath Division engaged with people in
social housing reminding them of the issues around COVID19.
An Garda Siochana continued communication and joint co-operation working with
local groups, housing estates, local council, Domestic Violence and lhe HSE during
the lockdown.
Garda Members engaged with the Islamic Community as it closed its Mosque due to
COVID 19 and has regular contact with members.
Members engaged with many elderly people during the COVID 19, collecting
prescriptions or doing gocery shopping.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources —
Divisional Overview
•
•
•
•
253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks)
151 Mullingar District
102 Athlone District
18 Divisional Roads Policing
6 Reserve Members
31 Garda Staff
13 Garda Stations
73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet
Vice Chairman Cllr Liam McDaniel and all JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt.
Fergus Healy, Supt. Alan Murray and Supt. David Nolan for their Presentation.
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Siochåna (AGS)
and officials present:
4
In response to Cllr Tom Farrell's question regarding the Garda replacement for Ballymore,
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the Members that he would discuss this with Supt. David
Nolan.
Cllr Farrell also raised concerns about on-line abuse, An Garda Siochåna and the general public
are experiencing at present, Chief Supt Fergus Healy did confirm that there is an increase in
on-line abuse in respect of the work carried out by An Garda Sfochåna but stated that there is
a welfare support system in place for his staff. Chief Supt Fergus Healy asked that the public
contact their local Garda Station if they are experiencing on-line abuse and the Garda will deal
with it.
In response to Cllr Frankie Keena, Chief Supt Fergus Healy did confirm that in general people
are complying to Covid- 19 rules, however 15-20% will not comply with requirements and this
will be addressed accordingly.
Cllr Frankie Keena asked why drug related detections rose in the Athlone area compared to
Mullingar? Cllr Keena also stated that drug dealers are continuing to intimidate families and
this needs to be addressed.
In response to Cllr Keena, Supt David Nolan informed the JPC that the increase in detections
was down to a number of factors. Supt David Nolan said that shortly after he took over as
Superintendent in the Athlone District in October 2020, the issue of local drug dealers
intimidating the community was raised at a JPC meeting and arising from that, Supt Nolan set
up a special operation to target people alleged to be involved and to conduct surveillance. Supt
Nolan explained to the JPC that between the start of the operation and the end of the year, 22
premises and 69 vehicles were searched, four money laundering operations are ongoing,
€30,000 of cash and €38,000 worth of drugs were seized. Supt Nolan informed the JPC that
they are continuing to maintain pressure on people they believe are involved in drugs
intimidation in the Athlone area.
In response to Cllr Keena regarding the completion of the Athlone Garda Station, Supt David
Nolan confirmed that the works are still on schedule to finish for March 2021.
Cllr Denis Leonard asked if a meeting could be held between the Local Authority and An Garda
Siochåna in relation to school safety/ road safety issues.
Cllr Leonard also asked for more Gardai resources in rural areas.
In response, Chief Supt Fergus Healy stated that AGS have a great relationship with Westmeath
County Council with regard to road safety and both sides will continue to be proactive in this
work during 2021.
Cllr Andrew Duncan raised conccrns regarding anti-social behaviour in the Grange Crescent
area and the Tunnel, Mullingar. Supt Alan Murray informed the JPC that the Gardai are aware
of the situation in both areas and confirmed that his staff are patrolling the area daily in Grange.
Supt Alan Murray also informed the JPC that he will increase Garda patrol at the Tunnel area.
Both Chief Supt Fergus Healy and Supt Alan Mun-ay said that the Garda are very proactive in
this area.
5
In rcsponsc to questions raised regarding drug detections, Chief Supt Fergus Healy explained
that an increase in drug detections was a sign of greater police activity in the community. Chief
Supt Fergus Healy also informed the JPC that the Drugs Unit in the Westmeath Garda Division
had been restructured las ycar with a new county wide föcus.
In response to Cllr Frank McDermott regarding modemising Castlepollard Garda Station,
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Membcrs that there is a new building scheme coming
into effect in 2021 between An Garda Siochåna (AGS) and the OPW for buildings in need of
repair.
PPN Report:
Mr Dave Raftis presented the "Westmeath PPNReport January 2021 " to the JPC Members.
Mr Raftis on behalf of the PPN acknowledged and thanked Westmeath County Council and
An Garda Siochåna for their continued support.
Correspondence:
Ms Anne Galvin informed the Members that further communication was made with the Garda
Commissioners office regarding a visit by the Garda Commissioner Drew Harris to Westmeath
JPC. It was proposed to have the Garda Commissioner attend our October 2021 JPC Meeting.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 12 April 2021 at 10.00a.m.
Further details of venue to be confirmed at a later dated due to Covid-19 public health
guidelines.
AOB:
None.
Cllr McDaniel thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Liam McDaniel
Vice Chairman,
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date
6