 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 12 July 2021 
by MS Teams Meeting  
 
Presiding 
 
: 
Cllr Liam McDaniel, Vice Chairman 
 
Local Authority  
Members 
: 
Cllrs John Dolan, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn, Denis 
Leonard, Frank McDermott and Hazel Smith 
 
Oireachtas Member:          None 
 
Community Members: 
Dave Raftis, Joyce Furlong, Kathleen Grennan and Mr Michael 
Mulvey. 
 
Garda Officers: 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan Murray 
and Superintendent David Nolan. 
 
Officers Present: 
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Pat Keating S.E.O., Anne 
Galvin, A.O, Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs Paddy Hill, Michael Dollard, Emily Wallace, Frankie Keena,  
and Bill Collentine. Senator Aidan Davitt and Senator Paul Daly, 
Deputies Peter Burke, Robert Troy and Sorca Clarke. Mr Pat Grimes 
and Ms  Marie Reddin. 
 
Introduction: 
The Vice JPC Chairman, Cllr Liam McDaniel deputised for Cllr Paddy Hill. Cllr McDaniel opened 
the MS Teams Meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all logged in. 
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 12 April 2021: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Denis Leonard and seconded by Cllr Frank McDermott, the Members 
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 12 April 2021. 
 
Report from Westmeath County Council: 
 
Mr Gallagher informed the Members that Westmeath County Council services have been gradually 
resuming in a more normal format in line with national and sectoral guidelines.  Mr Gallagher 
stated that Westmeath County Council is still at Level 5 restrictions.  In terms of the business of 
this meeting, Mr Gallagher updated the JPC on the Community Call Help Line (1800 805 816) 
and the Community Response Forum.  Mr Gallagher informed the Members that the Community 
Call Helpline is open 7 days per week from 9am to 5pm and calls for Covid assistance are answered 
by Council staff and referred then to the appropriate agency on the Community Response Forum.   
 

 
 
 The calls received are categorised as follows:  
 
• Requests for Collection and delivery 
• Requests in relation to social isolation/supports/engagement 
• Requests relation to Meals and their delivery 
• Garda related requests 
• Medical/ health needs 
• Transport  
• Misc 
 
 
Mr Gallagher advised the Members that the volume of calls dropped significantly in recent months 
as public health restrictions have gradually eased. 1,011 calls were received to the Helpline as of 
5pm on 11 July 2021 since the services commenced in March 2020.   Only 10 calls were received 
for the month of June 2021, which reflects that the situation is improving. 
 
Mr Gallagher further advised the Members that all agencies involved in the Community Form 
remain active and engaged.  Initially the Forum was meeting fortnightly, then it to went monthly 
and is currently meeting approximately every 6 weeks, but it can be convened more often at short 
notice if call demands escalate. 
 
Cllr Liam McDaniel, thanked Mr Gallagher for his report and his staff for their work on the Forum.  
 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy presented the powerpoint outlining the following crime statistics for the 
County.  
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that property crime had increased from 415 in 
2020 to 452 in 2021, a 9% increase on 2020 figures. In Athlone, figures were up from 205 in 2020 
to 228 in 2021.  For Mullingar, they were up from 210 in 2020 to 224 in 2021.   
 
In terms of burglary, the rate also increased from 81 in 2020 to 92 in 2021, a 14% divisional 
increase.    
 
The number of thefts from vehicles increased from 45 in 2020 to 64 in 2021, a 42% divisional 
increase. Detections came to 8 this year to date, an increase of 6 from the 2020 figures. Chief Supt 
Healy informed the Members that a number of catalytic convertors were stolen from vehicles 
within the County. 
 
The rate of theft and unauthorised taking of vehicles was up by 2 from 12 in 2020 to 14 in 2021. 
An increase of 17% (Divisional totals).  
 
There was a 17% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 143 in 2020 to 168 in 2021. 
(Divisional totals). 
 

 
 
 
There was a 33% decrease in the number of reported thefts from other property, 98 in 2020 to 66 
in 2021. (Divisional totals). 
 
Of crimes against the persons category there was a 6% decrease in reported incidents. (Divisional 
total). 
 
Drug figures: 
Chief Superintendent noted that when there is an increase in relation to drug related figures it 
normally means detections rates are getting higher.   
  
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations 
went from 58 in 2020 to 48 in 2021, a decrease of 17%, while incidents of Section 15 (possession 
of a drug with intent for sale or supply) went from 14 in 2020 to 16 in 2021, an increase of 14%. 
 
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 105 in 2020 to 78 in 2021, 
a decrease of 26%, while incidents of Section 15 went from 22 in 2020 to 25 in 2021, an increase 
of 14%.   
 
In relation to Roads Policing, there was one road fatality in 2021. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy 
informed the Members that 9 serious injury incidents occured in 2021. Incidents of driving while 
intoxicated decreased from 72 to 63. MIT (Mandatory Intoxicant Testing) checkpoint figures went 
from 263 in 2020 to 401 in 2021, an increase of 54%.  Incidents of vehicles seized under Section 
41 decreased from 221 to 218 in 2021.  
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community 
Engagements:  
 
• 
Operation Faoiseamh commenced on 1st April 2020 to offer support and protection 
to victims of domestic abuse during these extraordinary times. The Westmeath 
Garda Victim Office is identifying domestic abuse victims within the Westmeath 
Division and has initiated contact. 
• 
Members of An Garda Síochána in the Westmeath Division engaged with people in 
social housing reminding them of the issues around COVID19. 
• An Garda Síochána continued communication and joint co-operation working with 
local groups, housing estates, local council, Domestic Violence and the HSE during 
the lockdown. 
• 
Garda Members engaged with the Islamic Community as it closed its Mosque due 
to COVID19 and has regular contact with members.  
• 
Members engaged with many elderly people during the COVID19, collecting 
prescriptions or doing grocery shopping. 
 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources – Divisional 
Overview  
 

 
 
• 253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks) 
• 151 Mullingar District 
• 102 Athlone District 
• 18 Divisional Roads Policing  
• 6 Reserve Members  
• 31 Garda Staff  
• 13 Garda Stations 
• 73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet 
 
Vice Chairman, Cllr Liam McDaniel and all JPC Members welcomed and sincerely thanked Chief 
Supt. Fergus Healy, Supt. Alan Murray and Supt. David Nolan and their staff for today’s 
presentation. 
 
The Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Síochána (AGS) 
and officials present: 
 
Cllr Andrew Duncan enquired about 999 calls in relation to domestic abuse, what numbers did we 
have for Westmeath?  In response, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy stated that there were 49 such 
incidents in Westmeath and that the situation was under control.  He also informed the Members 
that two sergeants are working on this issue full-time and liaising with people who didn’t get the 
services they deserved.   
 
Cllr Leonard asked Chief Supt Fergus Healy could he give any indication of any increase in Garda 
number over the coming year.  In response, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that 
during the pandemic the recruitment process was curtailed with an ad hoc arrangement in place 
with regard to recruits.  Chief Supt. also informed the Members that a business case was going to 
the HR Department in the Garda Head Quarters to look at the resourcing of Athlone. 
 
Cllr Leonard also raised concerns about joyriders racing at high speed within the County and in 
particular in the Coralstown / Kinnegad/ Gaybrook areas and also at the Kinnegad Plaza area.  
 
Cllr Leonard also had concerns about “Greyways” within Westmeath and asked that if we could 
look at the old Kinnegad / Corlastown road under Active Travel.  Cllr Leonard stated that this road 
would be an ideal road for a “Greyway”.  In response, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy agreed to speak 
with Sergeant Gilsenan on this matter. 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy advised the Members that the Roads Policing Unit are actively policing 
this issue noting this was a problem in all parts of the county and country in dealing with high 
speed racing activity taking place within our County.  We engage with the Community regularly 
in relation to matters like this.  
 
Cllr Frank McDermott asked Chief Supt. Fergus Healy if there were unmarked cars available to 
patrol the Fore area to catch the perpetrators speeding through the Fore village.  In response, Chief 
Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that unmarked patrol cars are used regularly by all units 
throughout the county.  Chief Supt. Fergus Healy further informed the Members that they have 

 
 
surveillance teams supplied with cars that are not atypical garda-type vehicle which are used in the 
Community. 
 
In response to Cllr Frank McDermott’s question regarding the upgrade for Castlepollard Garda 
Station, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members he would like to see improvements to a 
number of Garda stations with the capital budget being expended in Athlone. 
 
Cllr Tom Farrell asked in relation to Section 3 (simple possession) and Section 15 (sale and supply) 
drug offences, why a Section 15 case is harder to prove. 
 
In response, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy stated that it is hard to get a case against those suspected of 
sale and supply because these people are pleading that it is for their own use or that they must be 
caught in the act.  He further stated that it was about the quantity of drugs that you catch a person 
with and accoutrements with them that would indicate that they were selling or supplying drugs to 
third parties.  
 
Mr Michael Mulvey asked could more Community Gardai be made available to Athlone.  
 
Cllr Liam McDaniel asked what the current resource numbers are assigned to Kilbeggan Garda 
Station. Cllr McDaniel did state that a community model was introduced a number of years ago 
by Superintendent Murray and asked are the numbers assigned in Kilbeggan Station efficient to 
maintain that community policing model. 
 
In response, Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members that there is currently one 
sergeant and two Gardaí in Kilbeggan and one sergeant and four Gardaí in Moate. He further 
informed the Members that the Gardaí in Kilbeggan teams up with the Gardaí in Moate to provide 
a policing service to the outside areas. Superintendent David Nolan also advised the Members that 
Community Policing Sergeant Damien Connaughton and Garda staff are assigned to particular 
areas in the town to ensure there is a presence of Garda liaising with people within particular 
estates and communities.     
 
He further added that he is working on a comprehensive business case to acquire additional 
resources for the District and if these resources come to hand, they will look at making those 
Gardaí full-time in Community policing. 
 
In response to Cllr McDaniel and Mr Michael Mulvey, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the 
Members that a staff member from Navan Garda Station has been recently transferred to Athlone 
Garda Station with a view to developing the area of Community Policing. 
 
 
Cllr McDaniel also raised concerns about the increasing number of motorised scooters in the 
district and asked if they need to be taxed and insured?  In response, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy 
informed the Members that in relation to the scooters, there is a Government Department Transport 
Review Group looking at how to regulate this issue.  He also added that mechanically propelled 
vehicles are required to have tax and insurance under the Road Traffic Act.  
 

 
 
Cllr Denis Leonard agreed with Cllr McDermott and Mr Michael Mulvey regarding “Boy Racers” 
and said that he would like to have more Garda resources for rural areas for issues such as speeding 
and burglaries. While Cllr Leonard praised the work of the local Gardaí but said, often, they are 
not able to reach an emergency inside of 30 minutes. 
   
In response, Chief Supt Fergus Healy stated that the dynamics of society are changing and noted 
that a new census will provide information with respect to where the community are living and 
where resources should be deployed going forward.  He further added that under the new operating 
model that is being introduced under the stewardship of Commissioner Harris, more people will 
be available for the front line and he would be very happy to have more uniformed members 
available as a result of the support services now being put in place in Garda Stations throughout 
the division. 
 
PPN Report: 
 
There was no PPN Report for the April 2021 JPC Meeting. 
 
Correspondence: 
Ms Anne Galvin, Meetings Administrator informed the Members of the following :: 
 
• Visit by Garda Commissioner Drew Harris to Westmeath JPC is still on target for the 
October 2021 JPC Meeting. 
 
Date of next meeting 
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 11 October 2021 at 10.00a.m.   
Further details of venue to be confirmed at a later dated due to Covid-19 public health 
guidelines.  
  
AOB: 
None. 
 
Cllr McDaniel thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
___________________________  
 
 
11 October 2021 ______ 
 
Cllr Liam McDaniel 
 
 
 
Date 
Vice Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee  
 
