Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 15th July 2019
in the Council Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Introductions:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs Bill Collentine, John Dolan, Michael Dollard,
Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn, Frankie Keena,
Denis Leonard, Liam McDaniel, Hazel Smyth
and Emily Wallace.
None
Pat Grimes, Marie Reddin and Des Sheridan
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff, Superintendent Alan Murray
and Superintendent Aidan Minnock.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin, A.O, Pat
Keating, Mullingar Municipal District, Brigid Geoghegan PPN,
Breda Daly, WCC.
Senator Gabrielle McFadden, Senator Paul Daly,
Senator Aidan Davitt, Deputy Peter Burke,
Deputy Robert Troy, Cllr Frank McDermott,
Sheena Lawless, Dave Raftis, Kathleen Grennan
and Ms Jackie Finney, Athlone Municipal District.
The Chairman, Cllr Paddy Hill opened the meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all
present. Cllr Hill also welcomed newly elected JPC Councillors Denis Leonard, Michael
Dollard, Hazel Smyth and Liam McDaniel. Having introduced himself, Cllr Hill invited all
JPC Members to introduce themselves.
Appointment of Chairperson (Elected Representative of Westmeath County Council):
On the proposal of Cllr. Ken Glynn, seconded by Cllr Denis Leonard, Cllr Paddy Hill was
nominated for this position. As there were no further proposals for the post of Chairperson,
Cllr. Hill was deemed elected as Chairperson of the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee and
he assumed the Chair.
Appointment of Vicc - Chairperson (Elcctcd Rcprcscntativc of Westmeath County
Council):
On the proposal of Cllr. Ken Glynn, seconded by Cllr Frankie Keena, C,llr Liam McDaniel
was nominated for this position.
1
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
8:
9:
IO:
11:
On the proposal of Ms Marie Reddin, seconded by Cllr Emily Wallace, Cllr John Dolan was
also nominated for this position.
Cllr Hill advised the Members that an Elected Representative must nominate the Chairperson
and or Vice Chairperson, Cllr John Dolan withdrew his nomination.
Cllr. Liam McDaniel was deemed elected as Vice-Chairperson of the Westmeath Joint
Policing Committee
Overview on the role and operation of the Joint Policing Committee (JPC):
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive opened his address by welcoming all the JPC Members to
the first meeting of the new term. He advised the Members that the nominations for the JPC
were taken at the first Annual Meeting on the 7th June 2019. The Members were informed
that the mandate of the PPN will be reviewed and renewed in September 2019. Mr Gallagher
advised the Members that Westmeath County Council will be in contact with the Oireachtas
Members regarding the review of their membership of the JPC.
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, gave a summary of the
Joint Policing Committees Guidelines — amended August 2014
to the Members and highlighted the following points (no. as per Guidelines)
12- 16.
Functions
Establishment
Chairperson
Members of Oireachtas who are not Members of JPC's
Meetings of a JPC
Public Meetings
Mr Gallagher asked the Members to pay particular attention to item no. 8 "Subject
Matter of Meetings".
Reports
Resources
Steering Group
Cllr Hill welcomed and thanked Mr Gallagher for his comprehensive Report.
Cllr Frankie Keena raised concerns in relation to "Task Forces" particularly local drug task
forces within County Westmeath. In response, Mr Gallagher referred the Members to 2.1 (d)
of the JPC Guidelines — amended August 2014 and informed the Members that there is no
local drug task force in Westmeath but advised the Members that they are in operation in a
small number of areas, principally Dublin and it was not intended to extend those areas. Mr
Gallagher further informed the Members that there is a regional drug task forces in the
Midlands.
Cllr Keena asked if it would be possible to make a submission to the Department in relation
to the establishment of a local drugs task force in Westmeath.
In response, Mr Gallagher referred to the cover letter supplied with the Guidelines to
Westmeath County Council by the Minister for Justice and the Minister for Local
Government in 2014 that it was not proposed to expand the establishment of local drug task
2
forces at this time. While Mr Gallagher stated Cllr Keena's concern was valid, he advised
Cllr Keena that the issue can be included in the new JPC Strategic Plan for the new term. Mr
Gallagher expressed to the Members that if the JPC felt that combating drugs is a priority in
terms of public safety, they could make that a priority in the new Strategic Plan.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 14th January 2019:
On the proposal of Cllr Emily Wallace and seconded by Cllr Tom Farrell the Members
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 1 5th April 2019.
JPC Strategic Plan:
Mr Gallagher advised the Members that Westmeath County Council will be liaising with the
JPC Members in Autumn in order to prepare a new Strategic Plan for the term 2020-2025.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
Mr Gallagher stated that there was nothing further to report.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt. Peter Duff gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath Division as
circulated prior to today's meeting.
This report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff highlighted the following:
• Crime Analysis: 01/04/2019 to 31/06/2019 inclusive — as per Report circulated.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff informed the Members there was a significant increase in thefts
from M.P.V.'s. Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that there were 34 reported
thefts from vehicles in Westmeath during the second quarter of 2019, an increase from 20
incidents in the second quarter of 2018 to 34 in 2019 for the same period. Chief Supt
Duffreiterated the importance of securing valuables when leaving your car.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff also informed the Members that there was a slight increase of 6%
to thefts from shops from 101 in quarter two of 2018 to 10 in the same period in 2019. Mr
Duff advised the Members that efforts undertaken to reduce thefts from shops included
continued liaison with individual retailers by the Local Crime Prevention Officer John
McAlter.
Chief Supt. Duff stated that the number of assaults in the Division has remained the same
with 196 incidents for the first 6 months of 2019 and 196 incidents for 2018. Chief Supt.
Duff further informed the Members that all available resources are being deployed on
high visibility beats and patrols during peak activity on the weekends in urban areas to
curtail public disorder which can lead to assault incidents.
• Roads Policing: - Chief Supt. Duff advised the Members that several operations will
continue throughout the year, with Crime and Road Policing Operations running over
the Bank Holiday weekends. Chief Supt. Duff also informed the Members that a Road
Safety event took place on the 10th May 2019 in Athlone Town Football Club which
3
was aimed at school going second level students. The main aim of this event was to
raise awareness of the importance of Road Safety and educate young people of the
dangers relating to the use of vehicles, bicycles and dangers for pedestrians.
• Community Engagement and Public Safety: Chief Supt. Duff informed the
Members that the Westmeath Divisional Youth Awards scheme will take place again
in late 2019 after a very successful first year. Awards will be considered for
nominated young people who make their communities a better place to live in.
Mullingar Garda Station Open Day: Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that on
the 13th July the Community Policing Unit attached to Mullingar Garda Station held
an open day for all members of the Community in Mullingar District.
Tri Athlone: Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that Gardai in Athlone prepared
an operational plan for this event and Sergeant Haran and the Athlone Gardai
Community Policing Unit engaged with event organisers to provide additional support
at various locations around the race route.
e Organisational Development and Capacity Improvement: Chief Supt. Duff
informed the Members that Superintendent Shane Cummins has been transferred from
Athlone to Galway and Superintendent Aidan Minnock has been appointed to Athlone
District to replace Supt. Cummins.
An additional Inspector (Ms Blaithin Moran) has been allocated to Mullingar District.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Duff for his comprehensive Garda
Report.
Cllr Paddy Hill welcomed Superintendent Aidan Minnock to his first JPC Meeting and also
thanked Superintendent Shane Cummins for his commitment and contribution to the JPC.
Cllr Hill then opened the meeting for questions:
Cllr Tom Farrell asked that we all cooperate with the Fleadh 2020 Committee to highlight the
risks and create awareness regarding thefts to vehicles. In response, Chief Supt Duff
informed the Members that Supt. Alan Murray is liaising with Gardai from Drogheda Garda
Station on a regular basis in order to plan and prepare for the Fleadh coming to Mullingar in
August 2020. Chief Supt. Duff further informed the Members that Fleadh 2020 will be the
largest event ever in Westmeath and they have a working group in place to plan for this major
event.
Cllr Andrew Duncan highlighted that he received a significant number of complaints by
residents affected by the Life Festival which took place in Belvedere recently. In response
Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that the event ran smoothly and crime was down
from 2018.
Cllr Michael Dollard requested that the Garda Traffic Corps investigate the ongoing parking
problem at St Colman's School, Delvin Road, Mullingar, i.e. motorists parking vehicles on
the footpaths. Chief Supt. Duff advised the Members that it is an offence to park on
footpaths and said he would have the matter investigated.
4
Cllr Ken Glynn asked the Gardai have they a role in investigating illegal dumping material
found by the general public in the County. Cllr Glynn asked the Gardai should you advise
people not to go through the materials and leave same for the inspectors or Gardai. In
response, Chief Supt. Duff advised the Members that it was unwise for people to open bags
that had been illegally dumped as they could contain dangerous items.
Chief Executive Pat Gallagher, requested members of the public to report illegal dumping to
the Local Authority as a matter of priority and that the responsible staff concerned would
investigate the matter. Mr Gallagher also advised the Members that where serious illegal
dumping takes place which may require co-ordination between public bodies, regional units
have been established and Westmeath County Council can avail of same. Mr Gallagher again
encouraged members of the public to always make reports to the Local Authority but not to
undertake any investigation themselves.
Cllr John Dolan requested that the Gardai make regular patrols to Coosan Point in Athlone
during the summer months. He stated that anti social behaviour is taking place in the ' 'geen
area". Cllr Dolan stated that Coosan Point is an important tourist amenity and we have to
protect and police it. In response, Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that he would
address the issue.
Cllr Dolan also raised concerns regarding drugs openly on sale in Athlone and requested that
the confidential phone number be highlighted more. He stated people are afraid to report
drug issues. In response, Chief Supt. Duffinformed the Members that the Garda Confidential
Number is 1800 666111 and he informed the Members that he would ask Sergeant McWalter
to publicise the number more.
Cllr Dolan raised concerns regarding "YouTube" videos with financial incentives. In
response, Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that the Gardai can do an "Asset Profile"
locally and send same to CAB in Dublin.
Cllr Emily Wallace enquired if schools could contact their local Garda Station in relation to
poor driver behaviour. In response, Chief Supt. Duff stated that the schools are welcome to
contact An Garda Siochåna but that they do conduct checkpoints for life saver offences,
targeting schools in particular.
In response to Cllr Denis Leonards' query on Garda response time to a particular incident
whereby divisions were redeveloped, Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that the Gardai
are monitored by An Garda Siochåna's computer-aided dispatch system and are timed to the
second with Automated Data Personnel Locating System (ADPLS), which can locate the car
using the GPS on the Tetra radio system from Harcourt Street.
In response to Cllr Denis Leonard's query on Garda resources in the Kinnegad area, Chief
Supt. Duff informed the Members that the numbers of resources available are set out by the
Government nationally. Chief Supt. Duff would put out more resources, have higher
visibility, more patrol cars, especially in rural areas but restrictions such as resources and
budgets prevent this from happening.
Cllr Denis Leonard further enquired if the Text Alert System in the Kinnegad area was
beneficial to the Gardai. In response, Chief Supt. Duff stated that if a matter is brought to the
attention of the local Gardai, they will discuss the best course of action. Chief Supt. Duff
5
informed the Members that Sergeant John McWalter is the new Crime Prevention Officer and
he is doing further works on the Text Alert System. Currently the Text Alert System is
working very well.
Cllr Keena requested that the Garda investigate an ongoing graffiti incident which is
occurring in the Athlone Area. In response, Chief Supt. Duff advised the Members that he
will discuss the matter in private with Supt Aidan Minnock.
In response to Cllr Keena's query on the expansion of Westmeath CCTV, Chief Supt. Duff
stated that he was in favour of the expansion but it comes with a price and vert labour
intensive for staff. Chief Supt. Duffis trying to get Gardai out of the stations and back on the
streets and visible.
Cllr Liam McDaniel's asked if crime levels were increasing in rural areas in particular
Kilbeggan. Cllr McDaniel further added that he recalled how former Superintendent Pat
Murray launched a Community Policing Initiative in the rural areas and asked if it was
successful and if it is still ongoing?
In response, Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that his senior staff review the situation
fortnightly to ensure they have the proper cover and it is continually under review.
Chief Supt. Duff agreed with Cllr McDaniel's that the number of rural Garda Stations within
the Westmeath Division were in need of considerable work in particular Rochfortbridge.
Chief Supt. Duff stated that he had put in requests to the OPW who operate the Garda
Stations.
Mr Des Sheridan congratulated Garda officers in Mullingar Area for their presence on our
streets in particular the younger members of the Garda force.
Cllr Smyth enquired for a more detailed list of thefts in the County, a calendar of events on
road safety for the year and an increase in CCTV at Garda checkpoints. In response, Chief
Supt. Duff stated that all burglaries are thefts on properties. Regarding CCTV Chief Supt.
Duff advised that legislation needs to be enacted to provide surveillance cameras in all Garda
vehicles.
PPN Report:
Ms Brigid Geoghegan presented the " Westmeath PPN Submission 2019 Report " to the JPC
Members.
Ms Marie Reddin (PPN representative) expressed the view that tenancy handbooks should be
provided to all tenants of Local Authority estates, even those who have purchased their own
house. In response, Mr Gallagher, Chief Executive informed the Members that tenancy
handbooks are only supplied to housing tenants and Westmeath County Council did not have
the authority to issue other residents with tenancy handbooks. Mr Gallagher further informed
the Members that tenancy training is organised on an ongoing basis for existing tenants and
new tenants.
In response to an update on the National CCTV Scheme, Mr Pat Gallagher advised the PPN
that the Data Protection Commissioner is currently conducting an in-depth audit into a
6
number of Local Authorities regarding the National CCTV Scheme but Westmeath is not
one. At present there was no change to report on this matter and Local Authorities were
advised by the Department of Justice that they do not intend revising their code of Practice.
Ms Geoghegan on behalf of the PPN acknowledged and thanked Westmeath County Council
and An Garda Siochåna for their continued support.
Correspondence:
None.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 14th October 2019 at 10.00a.m in the Council
Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
AOB:
Cllr Tom Farrell requested that we invite Muintir na Tire to give a presentation at the next
JPC Meeting.
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions. Cllr Hill
also thanked the previous JPC Councillors who were not re-elected for their contributions
during the term.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Paddy Hi
Date
Chairman, Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
19
7
