Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
held at 10.00am on Monday, 13th July 2020
in the Civic Offices, Athlone, Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Introduction:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs John Dolan, Tom Farrell, Frankie Keena, Liam McDaniel,
Frank McDermott, I-lazel Smith.
None
Ms Marie Reddin, Mr Michael Mulvey and Mr Dave Raftis
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan
Murray and Superintendent Aidan Minnock.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin, A.O,
Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC.
Cllrs Bill Collentine, Michael Dollard, Andrew Duncan, Ken
Glynn, Denis Leonard, Emily Wallace. Mr Pat Grimes, Ms
Joyce Furlong and Ms Kathleen Grennan.
The Chairman, Cllr Paddy Hill opened the meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all
present.
Ms Anne Galvin, Meetings Administrator, advised all present of the housekeeping protocol
due to Covid-19. Ms Galvin thanked the Athlone Municipal District for hosting the meeting
venue.
On the proposal of Cllr. Hill, and seconded by Cllr McDermott the JPC Members
unanimously resolved to hold a minute's silence in memory of the late Detective Garda Colm
Horkan R.I.P.
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive on his own behalf and that of the staff of Westmeath
County Council joined in the sentiments expressed by Cllr Hill.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 13th January 2020:
On thc proposal of Cllr. Liam McDaniel and seconded by Cllr Tom Farrell, the Members
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 13th January 2020.
1
Report from Westmeath Countv Council:
• To consider and approve JPC Annual Report 2019
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr Liam McDaniel, the Members
approved the Westmeath JPC Annual Report 2019.
Ms Anne Galvin advised the JPC Members that once the JPC Annual Report for 2019 was
approved it would then be submitted to The Policing Authority.
• To consider the updated Draft JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025:
Ms Anne Galvin askcd thc JPC Mcmbcrs to submit their final observations or comments by c-
mail to Breda Daly or Anne Galvin before close of business on Friday, 24th July 2020 in relation
to the Draft JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025. Ms Galvin informed the Members that she intends
organising a sub Committee Group consisting of herself, a PPN Representative and a Garda
Siochåna Representative to finalise the JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025.
• Report from Westmeath County Council on their response to COVID-19
As circulated to the JPC Members prior to today's meeting, Mr Pat Gallagher provided an
update on actions taken by Westmeath County Council in response to the Covid-19 pandemic.
Mr Gallagher intörmed the Members that to date, the Council approved approximately 700
applications amounting to approximately €2.5 million. Mr Gallagher encouraged businesses to
apply for the restart grant as soon as possible before the closing date of 31 st August 2020. Mr
Gallagher further informed the Members that qualifying businesses will receive a grant
equivalent to their commercial rates demand for 2019, with a minimum grant of €2,000 and a
maximum grant of €10,000.
Mr Gallagher expressed his appreciation to all the Community groups, organisations and staff
involved in Westmeath County Council 's response to COVID-19.
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy and Mr Dave Raftis also expressed their deep
appreciation to all involved for the work completed.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy gave a powerpoint presentation outlining the following crime
statistics in the County.
The number of thefts from vehicles were down dramatically from 85 in 2019 to 46 in 2020, a
decrease of 46%.
The number of cars stolen in the County decreased by 72% from 54 in 2019 to 15 in 2019.
There was a 30% decrease in the number of reported thefts from shops, 220 in 2019 to 154 in
2020.
2
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that most types of crimes had decreased in
were tWOWCätegöfies
where offences were on the rise.
The number of arrests from drug possession in the Athlone District increased by 58% from 38
in 2019 to 60 in 2020. 15 detections had been made for drug dealing in the Athlone District
which was up from 1 1 detections during the same period in 2019. An increase of 36%.
For the Mullingar District, the number of arrests from drug possession decreased by 88% from
908 in 2019 to 106 in 2020. 26 detections had been made for drug dealing in the Mullingar
District which was down from 58 detections during the same period in 2019. A decrease of
55%.
Chief Supt Fergus Healy stated that boredom experienced during the Covid-19 lockdown may
have contributed to a rise in illegal drug activity.
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the Members that there was a 36% decrease in property
crime in the Mullingar district and a 31% decrease in the Athlone Area for the first half of
2020.
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community
Engagements :
Operation Faoiseamh commenced on 1st April 2020 to offer support and
protection to victims of domestic abuse during these extraordinary times. The
Westmeath Garda Victim Office is identifying domestic abuse victims within the
Westmeath Division and has initiated contact.
Members of An Garda Siochana in the Westmeath Division engaged with people
in social housing reminding them of the issues around COVID 19.
An Garda Siochana continued communication and joint co-operation working
with local groups, housing estates, local council, Domestic Violence and the HSE
during the lockdown.
Garda Members engaged with the Islamic Community as it closed its Mosque due
to COVIDI 9 and has regular contact with members.
Members engaged with many elderly people during the COVID19, collecting
prescriptions or doing grocery shopping.
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources — Divisional
Overview
253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks)
151 Mullingar District
102 Athlone District
1 8 Divisional Roads Policing
15 Reserve Members
31 Garda Staff (Civilian)
13 Garda Stations
73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet
Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill and all JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt.
Fergus Healy for his Presentation and further thanked the Chief Supt. Fergus Healy for
3
all his hard work during Covid-19. Cllr Hill on behalf of all JPC Members, thanked the
Westmeath Divisional Garda staff for their hard work and community engagement.
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Siochana
(AGS) and officials present:
Cllr Frank McDermott thanked and complimented the Castlepollard and Delvin Gardai
who dealt with an incident at The Cut and at Lough Lene during the Pandemic which
involved securing the safety of the people.
Cllr Frankie Keena questioned how the Gardai will enforce the wearing of face masks on
public transport. Cllr Keena also raised concerns regarding anti-social behaviour, drug use
and intimidation by drug dealers. Cllr Keena suggested holding a Special In- Committee
meeting between the Gardai and Westmeath County Council Housing staffin a bid to weed
out anti-social behaviour in some housing estates in Mullingar and Athlone. Cllr Keena
described anti-social behaviour as a big problem within both private and public housing
estates.
Cllr John Dolan also raised concerns about anti-social behaviour and the drugs situation.
Cllr Dolan suggested the best situation was to involve the Criminal Assets Bureau (CAB).
Cllr Tom Farrcll askcd if thc JPC Mcmbcrs as a group, could writc to thc Ministcr of Justice
in relation to CCTV?
Cllr Hazel Smyth expressed concerns about anti-social behaviour taking place within
Mullingar Park. Cllr Smyth stated that she was informed that children were afraid to go
into the Park. Cllr Smith asked if there was scope for the Local Authority to work with the
Gardai to have a Community Warden present within the Park? Cllr Smith also asked what
can be done regarding Businesses not adhering to Covid-19 requirements? Cllr Smith
questioned what Garda supports were available for domestic violence victims.
Cllr Liam McDaniel also raised concerns about anti-social behaviour and agreed with Cllr's
Keena's request for a special in-Committee Meeting. Cllr McDaniel again raised concerns
over elderly people being scammed out of money especially on social media.
In response to Cllr Keena, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that the new
regulations regarding face masks came into effect today, 13th July. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy
advised the Members that the authorities, the bus driver, bus drivers, bus inspectors are the first
point of contact for enforcing mandatory wearing of face coverings. Chief Supt. Fergus Healy
stated that the transport staff can engage the Gardai to enforce the mandatory wearing of a face
mask. However, Chief Supt Fergus Healy did state that the Gardai would try to resolve the
problem rather than an enforcement.
In response to Councillors questions regarding the drugs situation, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy
informed the Members that it was alarming how the rate of sale and supply of drugs has gone
up in the County and nationally. It is a national issue that is aligned to Covid-19 he stated.
In response to the Members, Chicf Supt Fergus Healy informcd thc Members that thcrc had
been an increase in criminal activity during the pandemic period in relation to domestic
violence incidents. Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the Members that the Westmeath Garda
officers put in place a significant effort to deal with domestic violence. Chief Supt Healy
further informed the Members that the Gardai work with local refugees so that they feel secure
and have a safe to place to go in order to reorganise their lives.
4
Responding to anti-social behaviour, Chief Supt Fergus Healy acknowledged that there had
een VI eos In
Westmeath. He stated that the Gardai work tirelessly to resolve these issues by way of liaison
with the disputed parties and then by enforcement. Chief Supt Fergus Healy stated that the
legislation and the local judiciary are very strong in supporting the Garda in this matter.
In response to business premises not adhering to Covid-19 requirements, Chief Supt Fergus
Healy stated that the majority of businesses were complying with the new regulations and it is
successful.
In relation to CCTV, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that CCTV is a huge
area in the prevention of crime and that there are grants available from the Department for
communities but the application must come from the communities for the implementation of
CCTV. Chief Supt Fergus Healy stated that he would work with communities on this matter.
In response to Cllr Liam McDaniel 's query regarding the elderly and phone scams, Chief Supt.
Fergus Healy stated that vigilance is very important. Chief Supt further stated that the platform
hosts are located in America and websites are re-located through different countries. Chief
Supt. Fergus Healy urged the public to be vigilant regarding circulation of information about
bank details. Chief Supt further stated that the Gardai have a cyber unit in place and two
Superintendents are assigned to it.
Cllr Frankie Keena requested an update in relation to the purchase of a 'marking engraving
machine' which was discussed at the January 2020 JPC Meeting. Mr Martin Murray, Director
of Services gave a commitment to the JPC Members to investigate the purchasing of such a
device.
In response, both Chief Supt Fergus Healy and Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher advised the
Members that they would follow up on the marking engraving device.
PPN Report:
Mr Dave Raftis presented the " Westmeath PPN Submission 2019 Report " to the JPC Members.
Ms Geoghegan on behalf of the PPN acknowledged and thanked Westmeath County Council
and An Garda Siochåna for their continued support.
Correspondence:
None.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 12th October 2020 at 10.00a.m. Venue to be
confirmed at a later stage.
AOB:
Cllr Frankie Keena requested that Westmeath JPC extend our invitation to Garda
Commissioner for the October 2020 JPC Meeting.
Cllr McDermott expressed his concern over the speed of the traffic through Finea Village.
5
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions
This concluded the business of the meeting.
2-02--0
Cllr —n,
Date
Chairman, Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
6