Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 11 July 2022 
in the Council Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath and by MS Teams 
Meeting  
 
Presiding 
 
: 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman 
 
Local Authority  
Members 
: 
Cllrs John Dolan, Michael Dollard, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, 
Denis Leonard, Frank McDermott, Hazel Smyth and Emily 
Wallace. 
 
Oireachtas Member:          None 
 
Community Members: 
Joyce Furlong and Michael Mulvey. 
 
Garda Officers: 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Michelle Baker 
and Superintendent David Nolan. 
 
Officers Present: 
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Sheila Healy, Senior 
Executive Officer, Anne Galvin, A.O, Brigid Geoghegan PPN, 
Breda Daly, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs Bill Collentine, Ken Glynn, Frankie Keena, and Liam 
McDermott.  Senators Aidan Davitt and Paul Daly, Deputies Peter 
Burke, Robert Troy and Sorca Clarke. Mr Pat Grimes, Ms Marie 
Reddin, Dave Raftis and Kathleen Grennan. 
 
Introduction: 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill opened the JPC MS Teams Meeting and welcomed all JPC Members, to the 
Chamber, Áras an Chontae and all logged in on line. 
Cllr Hill expressed condolences to Cllr Tom Farrell on the recent passing of his son Mr Eoin 
Farrell, RIP. All JPC Members wished to be associated with Cllr Hill’s Vote of Sympathy. 
At the request of Cllr Hill, A Minutes Silence followed as a mark of respect to the late Mr Eoin 
Farrell, RIP.  
Cllr Hill on behalf of the Westmeath JPC Members extended best wishes to Chief Superintendent 
Fergus Healy who is retiring from An Garda Síochána in the coming weeks.  Cllr Hill sincerely 
thanked Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy for his excellent work and dedicated service during his term 
in office especially during the Covid Pandemic.  
 

Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC on his own behalf and on behalf of the staff of 
Westmeath County Council also wished Chief Superintendent Mr Fergus Healy and his family a 
very happy and healthy forthcoming retirement. Mr Gallagher thanked Chief Supt. Mr Healy for 
his ongoing support and the support of  An Garda Síochána at all times for the work of the Council, 
especially during the Covid Pandemic where Chief Supt. Mr Healy lead a heightened response by 
An Garda Síochána in the County and in the Division in support of the public health measures. Mr 
Gallagher further complimented Chief Supt. Mr Healy for his leadership in the modernisation 
programme in the Division where Westmeath and Meath are now linked.  
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 11 April 2022: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Denis Leonard, the Members 
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 11 April 2022. 
 
 
Report from Westmeath County Council: 
 
Mr Pat Gallagher confirmed to the JPC in terms of public safety that Westmeath County Council 
are continuing to work closely with the Fleadh Executive Committee, the Health Service Executive 
and An Garda Síochána in the preparation for Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann.  Mr Gallagher informed 
the Members that the event licence was granted last week and continuing preparatory work is 
underway between now and the end of July in getting ready for this event.  Mr Gallagher wished 
to acknowledge the support of Westmeath County Council staff, An Garda Síochána and Health 
Service Executive staff.  
 
 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy presented the powerpoint outlining the following crime statistics for the 
County.  
 
Property crime had increased from 442 in 2021 (Q2) to 640 in 2022 (Q2), divisional totals.  
In Athlone, figures were up from 224 (Q2) in 2021 to 341 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 218 in 2021 (Q2) to 299 (Q2) in 2022.   
 
In terms of burglary, the rate also increased from 94 in Q2 2021 to 123 in Q2 2022, a 31% 
divisional increase.    
 
The number of thefts from vehicles decreased from 64 in Q2 2021 to 52 in Q2 2022, a 19% 
divisional decrease.  
 
The rate of theft and unauthorised taking of vehicles at divisional level increased from 13 in Q2 
2021 to 15 Q2 in 2022, a 15% divisional increase.    
 
There was a 67% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 166 in Q2 2021 to 277 in 
Q2 2022. (Divisional totals). 

 
There was an increase in the number of reported thefts of other property, 58 in Q2 2021 to 122 
in Q2 2022. (Divisional totals). 
 
In relation to Drugs figures: 
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations 
went from 48 in Q2 2021 to 38 Q2 in 2022, a decrease of 21%, while incidents of Section 15 
(possession of a drug with intent for sale or supply) went from 16 in Q2 2021 to 9 in Q1 2022, a 
decrease of 44%. 
 
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 77 in Q2 2021 to 291 in 
Q2 2022, while incidents of Section 15 went from 25 in Q2 2021 to 15 in Q2 2022, a decrease of 
40%. 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community 
Engagements:  
 
• Indian Holi Day Celebration: On 8th March in Burgess Park Athlone members met up 
with the Indian Community who were celebrating Holi Festival an annual festival of 
colour. Gardaí were liberally doused with many colours and all who took part had a great 
time in celebrating this springtime event with the young members of the community mixing 
freely with Gardaí on duty.   
 
• Primary Schools GAA Blitz:  On the 13th of May Gardaí with the support of Westmeath 
GAA and LGFA Games Development Officers and TY students from a number of 
Secondary schools held a football blitz for all National Schools from around the District in 
Athlone GAA club.  The event was very successful with compliments from school 
principals, teachers and parents about the great day.  Hundreds of children participated and 
due to the level of preparation and coordination involved everything ran as planned.  
 
• Station Open Days: Both Athlone and Mullingar Garda Stations hosted Open Days. On 
these dates the public were invited to avail of tours of the Garda Stations and interact with 
Gardaí and numerous specialist units, such as the Mounted Unit, Dog Unit, ASU, Scenes 
of Crime Unit amongst others. There was also face painting and ice-creams for children. 
There was an exceptional turnout at both days with great feedback received from all in 
attendance. 
 
• Purple Day: On 2nd April both Districts marked Purple Day to raise awareness about 
Domestic Abuse and the services and supports available to those effected, by wearing 
purple. 
 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources – Divisional 
Overview : 

• 
253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks) 
• 
151 Mullingar District 
• 
102 Athlone District 
•  18 Divisional Roads Policing  
• 
   6 Reserve Members  
•  31 Garda Staff  
• 
13 Garda Stations 
• 
 73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet 
 
 
Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill and JPC Members thanked Chief Supt. Fergus Healy, Supt. Michelle 
Baker and Supt. David Nolan for their presentation.    
 
The Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Síochána (AGS) 
and officials present: 
 
Cllr Michael Dollard asked if an analysis of the reason behind a 67% increase in the theft of alcohol 
had been carried out.  In response Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that 
there is a unit in place which monitors, and analyses crime figures and the issues are discussed at 
length.   Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy stated that there has been a case of travelling criminals 
travelling throughout the province who were recently apprehended by Westmeath Gardaí.  Chief 
Superintendent Fergus Healy further stated that alcohol can be easily concealed, and it is a 
significant loss to supermarkets.  Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, also informed the Members 
that the Crime Prevention Officer will give advice to the supermarkets and off licence trade. 
 
Cllr Denis Leonard raised concerns regarding the increase in the number of people driving while 
intoxicated adding that engagement with publicans could play a role.  Cllr Leonard also asked 
about community awareness programmes in relation to the dangers of alcohol.  In response, Chief 
Supt. Mr Fergus Healy informed the Members that An Garda Síochána pride themselves on their 
community engagement and also informed the Members that the Department of Health does 
educate people about alcohol through various programmes. 
 
Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy further informed the Members that they had observed a shift towards 
the consumption of drugs instead of alcohol with respect to driving under the influence. Chief 
Supt. Mr Fergus Healy did state to the Members that An Garda Síochána are proactively policing 
this problem on an ongoing basis. Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy also informed the Members that 
the Gardaí engage regularly with the licensing trade and would encourage everyone to uphold the 
law with it comes to serving underage teens. 
 
Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy also added that the Gardaí liaise with the Road Safety Authority in 
terms of putting messages out there that driving under the influence is unacceptable. 
 
Cllr John Dolan requested that there be more Athlone Community Gardaí assistance given to 
Sergeant Damien Connaughton in order to reduce crime on the street.  
 

Cllr John Dolan raised concerns about thefts from shops and the use of criminals wearing masks 
in order to hide their identity, can this situation be addressed. 
 
Cllr John Dolan also raised concerns about the constant problem with drugs in our society and the 
use of CAB within the Westmeath division.  Cllr Dolan raised concerns regarding threatening 
videos being uploaded on social media regularly to fight for large quantity of monies.  Is this 
allowed and where are the people getting the money. 
 
Cllr Dolan congratulated the Gardai in Athlone regarding the recent Open Day in Athlone 
 
In response, Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy informed the Members that the Gardaí had changed their 
shifts from 5 to 4 shifts during the Covid period and Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy confirmed that 
they are currently on the 4-shift system. Mr Healy stated that the Commissioner is trying to bring 
about change regarding shift patterns and this matter is due to be resolved by September.   When 
this is resolved, it is expected that the Gardaí will have more freedom to engage more on the regular 
business hours where people are needed.  
 
Regarding shop thefts and the wearing of masks, Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy stated that there is 
a health issue, and it is a difficult situation.  But he stated people do make mistakes and take their 
masks off.  However, he stated that CCTV is not the total solution, it is an aid in helping resolve 
the particular problem.   
 
In response to drugs and drug profiling, Chief Supt. Mr. Fergus Healy confirmed that CAB are 
very active in the Westmeath division to address these problems. 
 
Cllr Tom Farrell raised concerns regarding the recent findings of Grow Houses within rural areas 
and asked An Garda Síochána could they make rural communities more aware of such findings so 
that the general public would ring An Garda Síochána if they know of such Grow houses? 
 
Cllr Tom Farrell also complimented An Garda Síochána on the Garda open days in both Mullingar 
and Athlone recently. 
 
Chief Supt. Mr. Fergus Healy confirmed that the recent Garda open days were “a huge success”, 
which was to be particularly welcomed in this, the centenary year of An Garda Síochána. 
 
Superintendent Michelle Baker spoke briefly about the success of the Athlone Garda Open day on 
the 18th June 2022, highlighting that it was the first public access to the newly renovated Athlone 
Garda Station, and confirmed that up to 1800 people attended same.  Superintendent Michelle 
Baker also confirmed a Road Safety Authority truck was situated on the street which provided 
excellent educational awareness for young people in relation to driving behaviour.  Superintendent 
Michelle Baker thanked Mr Pat Gallagher and Westmeath County Council staff in assisting the 
Gardaí to provide such an available space.  
 
 

Superintendent David Nolan said that there was something for all generations at the Mullingar 
open day, from the ice cream van to the scene of crime unit, the Garda helicopter landing, and the 
Garda Band playing. 
 
There was a historical display of uniforms presented by retired garda sergeant, Roger Nicholson. 
Other retired members of the force and their families also attended. 
Superintendent Nolan said that there was great feedback from all the stakeholders and it is hoped 
to make it an annual event. 
For people in Athlone it was an opportunity to get a look at the newly renovated and extended 
station which is to be officially opened later this month. 
 
In response to Cllr Frank McDermott’s concerns regarding the increase in drink driving, Chief 
Superintendent Fergus Healy said it is a concern, but he is more concerned with speeding. 
Speeding is the main contributor to road deaths and if An Garda Siochana can get the message out 
there to people to slow down and respect speed limits it will make the place a safer place for all 
concerned. 
 
Cllrs Hazel Smyth and Denis Leonard raised concerns about the sudden arrival of between 75 to 
150 male asylum seekers into a Kinnegad hotel without any notification to locals or Westmeath 
County Council. Both Councillors raised concerns about public safety and reported instances that 
had occurred in the town. Cllr Smyth said the community would like to have a Community Warden 
appointed to the town park in Kinnegad where children play.  
 
In response, Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy said he did not wish to comment on the centre in 
Kinnegad, however  Mr Healy did say that Gardaí treat all members of the community equally and 
fairly and the services we provide are there for all the Community.   
 
Superintendent David Nolan confirmed that a small number of instances had been reported and 
the Gardaí are investigating these incidents.   Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members 
that Sergeant Alison McDaid has been very proactive on the matter and has had numerous 
meetings with the Manager of the premises and has met with some of the individuals who have 
taken residence in the hotel.   Superintendent David Nolan also confirmed that there were extra 
patrols in Kinnegad and any issues reported to An Garda Síochána will be fully investigated. 
 
Cllr Smyth also asked An Gardaí Síochána if they have received an increase in call outs to the 
hospital, as some hospital staff members said within the Emergency Department there have seen 
an uptake in terms of the number of  staff members who have being dealing with difficult behaviour 
from some patients. In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy said he will take Cllr Smyth’s 
comments on board look at it in more detail. Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy said he is aware that the 
Emergency Department within the hospital can be very difficult place to work, 
 
 

In response to Cllr’s Smyth query about a bench which was removed from the Mullingar Town 
park due to anti-social behaviour, Superintendent David Nolan said he was unaware of any 
increase in such behaviour at this location.  He confirmed that the Community Policing Unit has 
been directed to patrol and concentrate on this area in particular. 
 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy also responded to Cllr’s Smyth’s query regarding repeat 
offenders.  Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy stated that analysts look at pattern of incidents that occur 
and they are taken into account.  Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy advised the Members that the 
emphasis is on the prevention of crime, and this is a better gauge to see what is going on in the 
community.  Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy stressed the vulnerable victims are the focus of the 
Gardaí. 
 
Regarding the upcoming Fleadh, Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy informed the Members that 
everyone is working towards the Fleadh in order to have a successful event and Chief Supt. Mr 
Fergus Healy said the emphasis in on family entertainment.  
 
Cllr Denis Leonard stated that Kinnegad town had a Sergeant and six Gardaí in 1992 when the 
population was 490 and now with a population of 3,000 Kinnegad has a Sergeant and four Gardaí.  
Cllr Leonard asked if towns like Kinnegad, Castlepollard, Killucan and Rochfortbridge could 
depend on resources being drafted in when needed.  Are the resources available when situations 
arise that resources are available to the various rural communities. 
 
In response, Chief Supt. Mr Fergus Healy advised the Members Westmeath would get its fair share 
of Gardaí resources to replace officers retiring to cater for population growth rates. Mr Healy 
confirmed that it is going in the right direction. 
 
Cllr Andrew Duncan raised the issue of inter-family disputes appearing online were a cause for 
concern and asked if anything could be done to curb them. In response, Chief Superintendent 
Fergus Healy agreed that inter-family disputes were a growing issue and the Gardaí emphasis was 
on protecting vulnerable people in these situations. Chief Supt. Mr. Fergus Healy confirmed that 
they are actively policing the issues and are acutely aware of the problems they pose for others 
living in the particular areas. 
 
PPN Report: 
 
Ms Brigid Geoghegan presented the “Westmeath PPN Report July 2022” to the JPC Members. 
Ms Geoghegan informed the JPC Members that an invitation will issue to all JPC Members after 
today’s meeting regarding the Official Launch & Demonstration of WPPN Property Marking 
Machine on Saturday 23rd July 2022 in Grange Community Centre Mullingar.  
 
Correspondence: 
Ms Anne Galvin, Meetings Administrator informed the Members of the following: 
 
• An e-mail received from the Department of Justice regarding Community Safety 
Innovation Fund recently launched by Minister McEntee – this e-mail was forwarded to 
all JPC Members for their information prior to today’s meeting. 

• Correspondence from Cork County Council dated 13th May 2022 re: Motion of Motion 
from Cork County Joint Policing Committee.  
 
“ At the meeting of Cork County Joint Policing Committee on Monday 9th May 2022 Cllr 
Ben Dalton O’Sullivan asked that the following be sent to all JPC in the country.” 
 
“That this JPC would write to the chairperson of each JPC in the country asking them to 
consider issuing co-ordinated media release/campaign on the dangers of increasing 
incidents of phishing and cybercrime”.  
 
 
Date of next meeting 
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 10 October 2022 at 10.00a.m.   
 
AOB: 
Cllr John Dolan requested that defibrillators should be provided at all Garda Stations as he stated 
the Gardaí are first responders and Garda Stations were the obvious place for them.  Cllr Dolan 
stated that he had raised the matter with the Minister of Justice, Helen McEntee and a recent event 
and he would be encouraging to have it rolled out nationally. 
 
Cllr Tom Farrell asked how the Text Alert system was operating in Westmeath and asked that this 
be an Agenda item at the next JPC Meeting. 
 
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 October 2022 
___________________________  
 
 
_________________ 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill 
 
 
 
 
Date 
Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee  
 
 
 
