1 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 16 January 2023 
held in Áras an Chontae, Mullingar and by MS Teams  
 
Presiding 
 
: 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman 
 
Local Authority  
Members 
: 
Cllrs, Michael Dollard Andrew Duncan, John Dolan, Tom 
Farrell, Liam McDaniel, Frank McDermott, Hazel Smyth, and 
Emily Wallace.  
 
Oireachtas Member:          Deputy Sorca Clarke, 
 
Community Members: 
Mr Dave Raftis, Mr John Bawle and Ms Kathleen Grennan.  
 
 
Garda Officers: 
Chief Superintendent John Dollard, Superintendent Michelle 
Baker, Superintendent David Nolan and Det.Inspt. Tom Quinn 
 
Officers Present: 
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Pat Murtagh, Senior 
Executive Officer, Laura Costelloe, Breda Daly, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
 
Ms Joyce Furlong, Bill Collentine, Ken Glynn, Denis Leonard, 
Frankie Keena. Senators Paul Daly and Aidan Davitt.   
 
 
Deputies Peter Burke, Robert Troy, Mr Pat Grimes, Ms Marie 
Reddin and Anne Galvin. 
 
 
Introduction: 
The JPC Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill welcomed all the JPC Members, Press and all logged into 
the first JPC Meeting of 2023.  
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 10 October 2022: 
On the proposal of Cllr. Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Andrew Duncan, the Members 
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 10 October 2022.  
 
 
Matters Arising: 
None 
 
 
Report from Westmeath County Council: 
 
1. Schedule of JPC Meetings for 2023  
 
Mr Pat Murtagh informed the Members of the schedule of JPC Meetings for 2023 as set out 
below.   
 

2 
 
January 2023: 
Monday, 16 January 2023, Áras an Chontae, Mullingar at 10am.  
 
 April 2023:        
Monday, 17 April 2023, Civic Centre, Athlone at 10am.  
 
 
 
Followed by Public Meeting - to be confirmed.   
 
 July 2023:          
Monday, 10 July 2023, Áras an Chontae, Mullingar at 10am  
 
Oct 2023:         
Monday, 9 October 2023, Áras an Chontae, Mullingar at 10am. 
 
 
 
Followed by Public Meeting –to be confirmed. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Andrew Duncan and seconded by Cllr Michael Dollard, the JPC 
Members unanimously approved the Schedule for 2023. 
 
2. The Chief Executive reported on the following. 
 
• Establishment of a sub-group to examine community CCTV systems 
• Appointment of the the Head of Information Systems to this sub-group when 
recruitment is complete 
• Text Alert System, Longford Co.Co. was revamped through funding received in 
conjunction with the pilot project of the Local Community Safety Partnership (these 
will replace JPCs in all LAs over time). 
• Correspondence received from the Policing Authority in mid-November advising they 
have replaced the previous 2014 JPC guidelines with a new set of guidelines and that 
they will be taking over the overseeing and supporting of JPCs from the Department of 
Justice.  
• Changes to the guidelines were very few, however Section 2.4 highlights the new Local 
Community Safety Partnership structures and Section 4.0 relates to Evaluation and 
Capacity Building and section 4.1 and 4.2 state the requirement of JPCs to carry out an 
assessment of the JPC’s effectiveness every 2 years. 
 
Q:  
Cllr. Farrell enquired about the change from JPCs to Local Community Safety 
Partnerships? And when will that happen? 
A:  
Chief Ex. Mr. Gallagher - The Westmeath JPC will stay as is until we receive further 
notification from the department re: the change in structure and members will be 
informed as soon as this information is received. 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
 
Chief Supt. Dollard presented the PowerPoint presentation outlining the following crime 
statistics for the Division.  
Firstly, the Chief Supt. informed the members of the changes the 999-call system  
“Computer Aided Despatch” or CAD which has established 4 regional centres in each of the 4 
geographical areas and a pilot project begins in the coming days re: Call Transferring Service 
which will be very beneficial to the Garda Siochana. 
 
Det. Insp. Quinn reported on criminal activity across the Division for Q4 of 2022. 
Property Crime increased by 51% throughout the country with detection rate at 29% in 
Westmeath, which is particularly good. 
Burglaries increased by 12%, due to Dublin based criminals coming into the county with a 
detection rate of 12% across the Division. 
Theft from Vehicles increased by 23% due to the theft of catalytic converters with a detection 
rate of 17% across the Division. 
Theft/unauthorised taking of vehicles has increased by 19% with a detection rate of 11% 
across the Division. 
Theft from Shop increased by 62% particularly in filling stations with a detection rate of 47% 
across the Division. 
Theft of other Property has increased by 140% a lot of rural theft particularly farmyards, with 
a detection rate of 14% across the Division. 
Crimes against the Person has increased by 21% due to the night-time economy back to 
normal, with a detection rate of 27% across the Division.  
Drugs crime has decreased by 44% across the Division. Drug detection has been effective in 
recent times. 
 
Chief Supt. Dollard: highlighted that all homicides have a 100% detection rate and that several 
bogus tradesmen were also detected. 
Theft from filling stations on the motorway are a particular problem. 
Travelling criminals are an additional issue however, good results re: Arrests and Charges 
made, although thefts in rural areas proving more difficult.   
 
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Síochána (AGS) 
and officials present: 
 
Q: Cllr. Dollard - important that shop owners report the crime within the timeframe. Theft of 
vehicles by organised gangs, are they European? 
A: Det. Insp. Quinn said that old style crime is back, and deportation is part of the policing 
process. 
Q: Cllr. Dolan - Drug dealing in Athlone town, is CCTV being used to detect dealers? 
Has CAB been engaged with? 
A: Supt. Baker- Drug activity is spread throughout the town and we constantly liaise with CAB 
however, it is a long process. 
 
Q: Cllr. Mcdermott, asked for clarification on the report and queried the burglaries in Mullingar 
and welcomed the reduction in speeding in north Westmeath. 
A: Det. Insp. Quinn explained the burglary figures. 
 
Q: Cllr. Farrell, requested and update on the drug unit and the county coverage? 

4 
 
A: Det. Insp. Quinn explained the different units in place and the successes of these units. 
 
Q: Cllr. Duncan, how many homicides are you referring to? 
A: Det. Insp. Quinn, one in Athlone, two in Multyfarnham and one in Kinnegad and there are 
persons before the courts. 
 
Q: Cllr. Dollard, raised the value of Community Policing out and about on bicycles in 
Mullingar and are they going to be in place again? 
A: Chief Supt. Dollard - Agreed with Cllr. Dollard and Supt. Nolan detailed the level of 
Community Gardai in the town and the areas to which they are designated. 
 
Roads- Insp. Gilsenan gave a breakdown of the figures for the year 2022. (see Slides) 
Notably, fatalities, fatal collisions and driving while intoxicated have all increased by 50% 
across the Westmeath Division. 
 
Chief Supt. Dollard - Delvin is now operating as a new policing hub and hope to increase the 
number of roads policing units to three. 
 
Q: Cllr. Dolan - concerned about the number of fatalities due to not wearing a seat belt and 
drink driving? Any campaigns planned to address this and drink driving? 
A: Insp. Gilsenan - nationally every quarter there are policing operations in place to address 
these offences among the public. 
 
Q: Cllr. Dollard - Enforcement of speed limits is needed. Traffic congestion in Mullingar if 
there was a greater garda presence at a number of areas in town it might reduce the speeding 
of traffic. Is there any e-scooter legislation coming on stream? 
A: Insp. Gilsenan, E-Scooter legislation is at an advanced stage, hope to have more information 
at the next meeting. 
 
Q: Cllr. McDermott - asked are speeding issues in C/pollard etc. dealt with by the Delvin traffic 
Corp? and the figure for cars seized to be explained. 
A: Insp. Gilsenan - the three units work jointly and so are detailed to where the need is on a 
particular day. No breakdown on the car seizure numbers but it can be acquired for the next 
meeting. 
 
Q: Cllr. Smyth – what impact the delay in NCT testing has caused ? Deaths of pedestrians and 
cyclists and what checks are in place? A Community instant messaging channel so members 
of the public can report it to the Gardai immediately? Need for a safety audit for winter walking 
regarding Women.? ASB- in Grange Heights occurring and residents feeling unsafe, can more 
be done? 
A: Chief Sup. Dollard - Recommends dialling 999 for the quickest response from Gardai but 
we will explore other options. Community Policing dedicated to the area is the best option to 
address ASB in estates. Open to engagement with the Council re: perceptions of safety among 
women in the community. People are responsible for their vehicles re: NCTS.  
Insp. Gilsenan - delay of 29 days is the average at present and there may be some discretion. 
A Road Safety Action plan being developed between the AGS, Westmeath County Council 
2022-2024 includes raising awareness for all road users including pedestrians and cyclists. 
 
A: Supt. Nolan, will contact the residents of Grange and Sgt. Stones is on the Board of the 
Domestic abuse Support Services. 

5 
 
 
Cllr. Hill thanked the AGS for the detailed report and said that people must take responsibility 
for themselves re: Safety Belts, drink driving and high visibility clothing when walking and 
cycling 
 
Community Engagement: 
Supt. Baker and Supt. Nolan spoke about the community engagement i.e., Halloween, BEEP 
BEEP, Christmas Card initiative etc.  (See Slides) 
 
Cllr. Hill commended and thanked the members of AGS and those retired for their great 
service. 
 
Resources: Chief Supt. Dollard indicated that Westmeath is doing very well when compared 
nationally and a new recruitment competition last year will see Garda graduates coming onto 
the force in the middle of this year.  
 
Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill and all JPC Members thanked Chief Supt. Dollard, Supt. Baker, 
Supt. Nolan, Supt. Gilsenan and Det. Insp. Quinn for their Presentation.    
 
 
PPN Report: 
 
Mr Bawle presented the “Westmeath PPN Report January 2022” to the JPC Members. 
 
Mr Bawle on behalf of the PPN acknowledged and thanked Westmeath County Council and 
An Garda Síochána for their continued support.  
 
 
Correspondence: 
 
• Webinar Session – Department of Justice – Local Community Safety Partnership 
briefing on the 9 December and 12 December 2022, this was circulated previously. 
 
 
Date of next meeting 
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 17 April 2023 at 10.00a.m, Athlone. 
 
  
AOB: None 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
___________________________  
 
 
___________________________ 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill 
 
 
 
Date 
Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee  
 
 
 
 
