 
1 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 11 January 2022 
held MS Teams   
 
Presiding 
 
: 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman 
 
Local Authority  
Members 
: 
Cllrs Bill Collentine, John Dolan, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn, 
Frank McDermott, Hazel Smith and Emily Wallace.  
 
Oireachtas Member:          None. 
 
Community Members: 
Mr Dave Raftis, Mr Michael Mulvey, Ms Joyce Furlong, Ms 
Kathleen Grennan.  
 
 
Garda Officers: 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan 
Murray and Superintendent David Nolan. 
 
Officers Present: 
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin, A.O, 
Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs Andrew Duncan, Michael Dollard, Liam McDaniel, Denis 
Leonard, Frankie Keena. Senators Paul Daly and Aidan Davitt.  
Deputies Peter Burke, Robert Troy and Sorca Clarke. Mr Pat 
Grimes, Ms Marie Reddin and Ms Kathleen Grennan.  
 
Introduction: 
The JPC Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill welcomed all the JPC Members, Press and all logged into 
the first JPC Meeting of 2022. 
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 11 October 2021: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr John Dolan, the Members 
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 11 October 2021.  
 
 
Matters Arising: 
Cllr Emily Wallace raised concerns about a spate of crime that occurred in north Westmeath 
during the first week of 2022 and asked if CCTV was the way forward to stop such activity or 
at least to curb it. 
 
Cllr Wallace asked what Westmeath County Council could do as an executive and as 
Members to make the public more vigilant at night. 
 
Cllr John Dolan again raised concerns that he had brought to the attention of the Garda 
Commissioner Drew Harris at the October JPC Meeting in 2021 in relation to installing CCTV 

 
2 
 
along the Greenway in Athlone.  Cllr Dolan said the Greenway was being used to facilitate 
crime and he asked if CCTV was provided by the Local Authority would An Garda Síochána 
monitor it. 
 
Mr Dave Raftis, Westmeath PPN noted that members of the Committee were looking to 
establish a working group regarding CCTV and he stated that the PPN would like to voice their 
interest in becoming members of this sub-committee. 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill asked if Garda numbers could be increased in the north Westmeath area and in 
rural areas in general where people feel vulnerable. 
 
In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy stated that CCTV schemes are regulated and 
approved by the Commissioner and the breach of privacy of members of the community was a 
big factor.  Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy explained to the Members that a committee 
receive applications for CCTV schemes nationally and advise the Commission who will then 
decide on the approval of such a scheme. 
 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy further added that if crime levels are high in a particular 
area, the Commissioner would likely approve the schemes with the Gardaí monitoring the 
CCTV. 
 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that the data controller is the local 
authority in those cases. 
 
In response to Cllr Paddy Hill, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that 
Gardaí numbers are constantly being reviewed and a new recruitment campaign will commence 
in February 2022 and Government approval is there to increase the number of Garda recruits 
in training between now and the end of 2022. 
 
Cllr Tom Farrell asked if Text Alert Groups could be contacted regarding crime in rural areas.  
Cllr Farrell stressed the importance of notifying members of the community to be aware of the 
threat of burglaries. 
 
In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy advised the Members that  An Garda Síochána 
are focusing on maintaining a service to the community but the Text Alert Scheme is constantly 
being reviewed and community engagement teams in both towns strive to continue to keep that 
service going. 
 
Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher informed the Members that there are two types of CCTV 
Schemes, one under the remit of An Garda Síochána and community based systems linked into 
the Gardaí.  Mr Gallagher, stated that for community based systems under the Department of 
Justice, it is required that the local authority act as Data Controller, and as stated several times 
by Mr Gallagher at previous JPC Meetings to the Members, Westmeath County Council are 
not in a position to take on that role in the County.  Mr Gallagher further advised the Members 

 
3 
 
that a review is taking place of the relevant provision at national level.  Mr Gallagher stated 
that there is a commitment by this Committee to establish a sub group to look at the CCTV 
issue. 
 
Mr Gallagher noted the Greenway is a public thoroughfare and subject to policing in the same 
way a road or footpath is. Mr Gallagher stressed that there has to be evidence that there is a 
pattern of crime ongoing in that area.  Mr Gallagher advised the Committee that no such 
information has come to Westmeath County Council’s attention. 
 
Cllr Emily Wallace proposed an Awareness Campaign be put in place between Westmeath 
County Council and An Garda Síochána as to what the public need to do to safeguard their 
property and join their local Text Alert scheme or set one up. 
 
In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that An Garda 
Síochána would work with Muintir na Tire in relation to these issues raised. 
 
Report from Westmeath County Council: 
 
• Schedule of JPC Meetings for 2022  
 
Ms Anne Galvin informed the Members of the schedule of JPC Meetings for 2022 as set out 
below.   
 
January 2022: 
Monday, 10 January 2022, Civic Centre, Athlone at 10am.  
 
 
 April 2022:        
Monday, 11 April 2022, Civic Centre, Athlone at 10am.  
 
 
 
Followed by Public Meeting  - to be confirmed.   
 
 
 July 2022:          
Monday, 11 July 2022, Áras an Chontae, Mullingar at 10am  
 
 
Oct 2022:         
Monday, 10 October 2022, Áras an Chontae, Mullingar at 10am. 
 
 
 
Followed by Public Meeting –to be confirmed. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr Frank McDermott, the JPC Members 
unanimously approved the Schedule for 2022. 
 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy presented the powerpoint outlining the following crime statistics for 
the County.  
 
 

 
4 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that property crime had increased from 815 
in 2020 to 938 in 2021, a 15% increase on 2020 figures. In Athlone, figures were up from 399 
in 2020 to 482 in 2021.  For Mullingar, they were up from 416 in 2020 to 456 in 2021.   
 
In terms of burglary, the rate also increased from 136 in Q3 2020 to 187 Q3 in 2021, a 38% 
divisional increase.    
 
The number of thefts from vehicles increased from 74 in 2020 (Q3) to 107 in 2021 (Q3), a 45% 
divisional increase. Chief Supt Healy informed the Members that a number of catalytic 
convertors were stolen from vehicles within the County. 
 
The rate of theft and unauthorised taking of vehicles at divisional level also increased from 25 
in 2020 to 33 in 2021, a 32% divisional increase.    
 
There was a 9% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 340 in 2020 to 372  in 
2021. (Divisional totals). 
 
There was a 19% decrease in the number of reported thefts from other property, 172 in 2020 
to 140 in 2021. (Divisional totals). 
 
In relation to Drugs figures: 
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations 
went from 67 in 2020 to 65 in 2021, a decrease of 3%, while incidents of Section 15 (possession 
of a drug with intent for sale or supply) remained the same from 27 in 2020 to 27 in 2021. 
 
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 195 in 2020 to 139 in 
2021, a decrease of 29%, while incidents of Section 15 went from 40 in 2020 to 38 in 2021, a 
decrease of 2%. 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community 
Engagements: 
 
• Operation Faoiseamh commenced on 1st April 2020 to offer support and protection to 
victims of domestic abuse during these extraordinary times. The Westmeath Garda 
Victim Office is identifying domestic abuse victims within the Westmeath Division and 
has initiated contact. 
• Members of An Garda Síochána in the Westmeath Division engaged with people in 
social housing reminding them of the issues around COVID19. 
• Members engaged with many elderly people during the COVID19, collecting 
prescriptions or doing grocery shopping. 
• An Garda Síochána continued communication and joint co-operation working with 
local groups, housing estates, local council, Domestic Violence and the HSE during the 
lockdown. 
 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources – Divisional 
Overview  
• 256 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks) 
• 123 Mullingar District 

 
5 
 
• 92 Athlone District 
• 41 Divisional Garda Members, (Roads Policing, DPSU, CPD,PSV, CIO, CPO, Scene 
of crime, Telecommunications) 
•  10 Reserve Members  
•  38 Garda Staff  
• 13 Garda Stations 
•  73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet 
 
Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill and all JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Fergus 
Healy, Supt. Alan Murray and Supt. David Nolan for their Presentation.    
 
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Síochána (AGS) 
and officials present: 
 
Cllr Tom Farrell asked if the rise in crime figures was due to individuals being released on bail 
or when individuals get out of jail.  In response, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy stated that there are 
a number of factors that can contribute to a crime spike, such as during darker evenings this 
kind of crime goes up in comparison to the Summer months. He also stated that Covid was a 
factor in 2021. 
 
Cllr Frank McDermott questioned why there was a steep increase in theft from vehicles. In 
response, Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that criminals can move from town 
to town and can be organised on a national level by crime groups.  
 
Cllr Hazel Smyth asked if the pandemic had led to delays in the prosecution of individuals and 
in response Chief Supt. Fergus Healy confirmed that this was not his experience however, he 
explained the Courts were closed for a period of time which added to back logs and operational 
issues but they were not insurmountable. 
 
Cllr Hazel Smyth also raised concerns regarding anti-social behaviour in Mullingar Town Park 
and the need for a community warden to be allocated to this area. 
 
In response, Superintendent Alan Murray informed the Members that he met recently with a 
number of school principals in order to tackle this issue and a policing plan had been rolled out 
with extra Gardaí patrolling the area and CCTV in operation.  Superintendent Alan Murray 
stressed that the situation is continuously monitored. 
 
Cllr Hazel Smyth expressed her concerns over the recent increase in burglaries that were taking 
place in the Mullingar area.  Cllr Smyth asked that the public be provided with information on 
what to do in the event of an attempted burglary in their home. 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members to contact the Crime Prevention Officer who 
is based in Mullingar and will provide essential crime prevention advice to the public on how 
best to protect their property. 
 
Cllr Smyth requested that she would like to be added to a working group in relation to CCTV. 
 
Cllr Ken Glynn also supported Cllr Hazel Smyth’s observation in relation to the Mullingar 
Town Park and he welcomed Superintendent Alan Murray’s on monitoring and patrolling the 

 
6 
 
area.  Cllr Glynn asked that both An Garda Síochána and Westmeath County Council work 
together in providing a community warden to monitor the Mullingar Town Park.  
 
Cllr Ken Glynn also raised concerns over the ongoing anti-social behaviour in the Ardleigh, 
Woodlands and Oaklawns areas of the Mullingar town.  
 
Superintendent Alan Murray confirmed that he was aware of the situation and informed the 
Members that he would meet with Westmeath County Council to resolve this problem. 
 
Cllr Hazel Smyth asked An Garda Síochána had they plans to address the ongoing issue of 
illegal dumping in rural areas within Westmeath. 
 
Superintendent Alan Murray informed the Members that illegal dumping was a matter for the 
local authority with the Gardaí having a secondary role in the enforcement of legislation. 
 
In response, Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, informed the Members that primary 
responsibility for illegal dumping is with the local authority. Mr Gallagher stated that each 
Municipal District had adopted a Litter Management Plan with national funding secured in 
2021. Mr Gallagher further reminded Members that included in the 2022 budget were funds to 
recruit additional community wardens which will mean there will shortly be two community 
wardens in each Municipal District. 
 
Mr Gallagher further advised the Members that Westmeath County Council can avail of the 
support of the regional Waste Enforcement Teams and for serious issues Westmeath County 
Council have sought Garda support which was always available. 
 
Mr Gallagher stated that illegal dumping is a matter that is actively addressed within the 
County.  
 
Cllr Emily Wallace also raised concerns about the crimes against the person and thefts were on 
the increase.  Cllr Wallace stressed that we need to get awareness out to the public.  Cllr 
Wallace explained how volunteers in clubs in both Rochfortbridge and Mullingar are being 
intimidated by youths.  
 
 
PPN Report: 
 
Mr Dave Raftis presented the “Westmeath PPN Report January 2022” to the JPC Members. 
 
Mr Raftis on behalf of the PPN acknowledged and thanked Westmeath County Council and 
An Garda Síochána for their continued support.  
 
Mr Raftis informed the Members that the Westmeath PPN had purchased a high end property 
marking machine which is hugely beneficial in helping to track stolen property.  Mr Raftis 
stated that the Westmeath PPN plans to loan the machine to trained volunteers who are 
interested.  
 
Mr Raftis also advised the JPC Members that the WPPN issued an expression of interests 
invitation to its member group across Westmeath to take part in a training day where they 
would learn how to use the marking machine in their area.  A total of 13 expressions of interest 

 
7 
 
were received and Mr Raftis informed the members that training took place on the 20 
November 2021. 
 
Mr Raftis stated that the groups involved included members from the Mens Shed groups, 
Community Alert groups and Tidy Towns.  Mr Raftis also said that it was hoped the 
Community Gardai would support the WPPN’s roll-out of the property marking machine into 
the community when Covid restrictions are lifted. 
 
Cllr Farrell asked if other organisations could receive training such as the farming community. 
Mr Raftis stressed that the WPPN are open to further applications for members of community 
groups for training and anyone interested can contact Westmeath PPN.  
 
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive suggested the various sectors liaise with the WPPN, the 
Gardai, the JPC and engage with members and come back to the next JPC meeting with a 
proposal going forward as to how we could take that action forward. 
 
 
Correspondence: 
None. 
 
Date of next meeting 
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 11 April 2022 at 10.00a.m.   
Further details of venue to be confirmed at a later date due to Covid-19 public health guidelines.  
  
AOB: 
In response to Cllr Dolan’s query regarding the completion of the Athlone Garda Station, 
Superintendent David Nolan advised the Members that works were fully complete and he intends 
hosting an official opening as soon as possible.  Superintendent David Nolan also informed the 
Members that the Minister for Justice will be invited subject to her availability.   
 
Cllr Frank McDermott asked that Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy will continue to support North 
Westmeath in their quest for a new Garda Station at Castlepollard as per pervious JPC Meeting in 
October 2021 where Cllr McDermott expressed his concerns to Garda Commissioner Drew Harris.  
 
Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher on behalf of the Executive of Westmeath County Council 
acknowledged the huge contribution that Superintendent Alan Murray made to the policing in 
Westmeath, particularly in the Mullingar District.  Mr Gallagher stated that Mr Murray, who is due to 
retire soon, was a great assistance to Westmeath County Council in all the different facts in which we 
engage with the Gardai.   Mr Gallagher wished Mr Murray a very happy retirement.  
 
Cllrs Paddy Hill and Tom Farrell also praised and thanked Mr Murray for his excellent work, time and 
contribution in keeping the Mullingar district safe and wished him and his family well for the future.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
  
 
 
 
11th April 2022 
___________________________  
 
 
___________________________ 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill 
 
 
 
Date 
Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee  
 
 
 
 
 

 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
