1 
 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 10 July 2023 
in the Council Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath and by MS Teams Meeting  
 
Presiding 
 
: 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman 
Local Authority  
Members 
 : 
Cllrs John Dolan, Michael Dollard, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell,  
 
 
Ken Glynn, Frankie Keena, Denis Leonard, Liam McDaniel, Frank McDermott, Hazel 
Smyth, Aoife Davitt and Paul Hogan. 
 
Oireachtas Member:          
Deputy Robert Troy and Deputy Sorca Clarke 
 
Community Members: 
Mr David Callinan, Mr John Bawle, Joyce Furlong and Ms Kathleen Grennan. 
 
Garda Officers: 
Superintendent David Nolan, Superintendent Michelle Baker, Detective Inspector 
Tom Quinn, Inspector Peter Gilsenan and Crime Prevention Officer Sergeant John 
McWalter 
 
Officers Present: 
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, Pat Murtagh, S.E.O., Sheila Healy, Breda Daly, 
Ms Annette Barr Jordan, Mark Ahern and Andrew Slevin, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
 
Chief Superintendent John Dollard, Cllrs Bill Collentine, 
 
 
Emily Wallace, Senator Paul Daly, Senator Aidan Davitt, Deputy Peter Burke, 
Community Reps. Pat Grimes and Dave Raftis. 
Introduction: 
Cllr Hill opened the hybrid JPC Meeting and welcomed all present and online.  Cllr Hill informed the Members 
that Superintendent John Dollard was unable to attend the meeting and that Superintendent David Nolan was 
therefore deputising for him. 
 
Cllr Hill welcomed Mr David Callinan, the new RAPID Representative from the PPN to the Westmeath Joint 
Policing Committee.  
 
Cllr Hill also thanked outgoing PPN Representative Ms Marie Reddin for her time, commitment, and dedication 
during her term in office. 
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 17th April 2023: 
On the proposal of Cllr. Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Andrew Duncan, the Members approved the 
Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 17 April 2023. 
 
 
Report from Westmeath County Council: 
There was no report from Westmeath County Council. 
 
 
 

2 
 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
 
Supt. David Nolan reported to the meeting, drawing attention to various crime statistics in the county, as 
contained in the Garda Report.   
 
Property crime had increased from 642 in 2022 (Q1) to 951 in 2023 (Q1), divisional totals.  
In Athlone, figures were up from 349 (Q1) in 2022 to 603 (Q1) in 2023.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 293 in 2022 (Q1) to 348 (Q1) in 2023.   
 
In terms of burglary, the rate decreased from 125 in Q1 2022 to 106 in Q1 2023, a 15% divisional decrease.    
 
The number of thefts from vehicles increased from 53 in Q1 2022 to 47 in Q1 2023, an 11% divisional decrease.  
 
The rate of theft /unauthorised taking of vehicles at divisional level increased from 15 in Q1 2022 to 43 Q1 in 
2023.    
 
There was a 61% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 272 in Q1 2022 to 439 in Q1 2023. 
(Divisional totals). 
 
There was an increase in the number of reported thefts of other property, 125 in Q1 2022 to 233 in Q1 2023. 
(Divisional totals). 
 
In relation to Drugs figures: 
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations went from 39 in 
Q1 2022 to 41 Q1 in 2023, an increase of 5%, while incidents of Section 15 (possession of a drug with intent for 
sale or supply) went from 8 in Q1 2022 to 11 in Q1 2023, an increase of 38%. 
 
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 290 in Q1 2022 to 172 in Q1 2023, while 
incidents of Section 15 went from 14 in Q1 2022 to 19 in Q1 2023, an increase of 36%. 
 
Supt. David Nolan informed the JPC Members of the following Community Engagements:  
 
• 
Little Blue Heroes Westmeath – Day of Action: On the 13th May 2023 the group convened at 
Mullingar Garda Station where they performed some policing duties e.g.. checkpoints / station 
tour/ station. This was followed by a Ceremony where the LBH graduated and were presented 
with LBH Scrolls and Medals. The day was a great success and an uplifting experience for both the 
children concerned and their families. 
• 
Cultural Heritage Family Fund Day: On 3rd June 2023 Mullingaro Lietuviu Bendruomene held a 
cultural heritage family fun day, where members gave a talk on what it is like to be a member of 
An Garda Síochána.  
• 
A Mass of Gratitude: On 30th May 2023 a Mass of Gratitude took place in St Peter and Paul’s 
Church with representatives from the Order of Malta, Ambulance Service, Army and An Garda 
Síochána taking part in the Service. 
• 
Community Engagement Week: As part of Community Engagement Week in May Community 
Policing in Mullingar held an information event at Tírlán Farm Life and spoke with the public on 
various farming issues. 

3 
 
 
Supt. David Nolan informed the JPC Members of the following Resources – Divisional Overview: 
 
• 
252 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks) 
• 
102 Mullingar District 
• 
  82 Athlone District 
• 
  48 Divisional Units  
• 
  20 Regional Units 
• 
  10 Reserve Members  
• 
  37 Garda Staff  
• 
 13 Garda Stations 
• 
 69 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet 
 
Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill and JPC Members thanked Supt. David Nolan and Supt. Michelle Baker for their 
presentation.    
The Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Síochána (AGS) and officials 
present: 
 
Cllr Duncan raised concerns about the recent negative trend figures regarding theft from cars to personal 
assaults and drug detections. In response, Detective Inspector Quinn informed the Members that there was a 
particular problem in Athlone in relation to the unauthorised taking of vehicles and he confirmed the matter 
has since been addressed through the Garda Liaison Officers (GLO) system. 
Detective Inspector Quinn also informed the Members that there was an issue with individuals travelling from 
Dublin where they were stealing imported cars from Japan, but Mr Quinn confirmed that this matter has since 
been resolved.   
 
Cllr Michael Dollard requested a brief synopsis on the following matters:  
Crimes against the Person, community policing for upcoming Fleadh, CCTV and Garda increase on our streets 
and within Housing Estates. 
 
Regarding Crimes against the Person, Supt. David Nolan informed the Members that some incidents are related 
to public order issues that occur at the weekends. Supt.  Nolan informed the Meeting that a lot of the assaults 
reported are Section 2 Assaults (assault minor) and Section 3 Assaults, more serious assaults.  Supt.  Nolan stated 
that in most cases, the victims are aware of who the offender is and in some cases the victims are withdrawing 
their statements or not cooperating with the subsequent Garda investigation.  Supt.  Nolan informed the 
Members that these assaults are recorded in our crime statistics.   
 
In relation to the upcoming Fleadh Cheoil 2023 in Mullingar, Supt. Nolan informed the Members that there is a 
Fleadh Policing Unit (Dedicated Event Office) in place under the direction of Inspector Garry Loughrey and 
Sergeant Ambrose Duggan who are engaging with all stakeholders i.e., Westmeath County Council, The Fleadh 
Executive Committee, HSE and Event Organisers.  This process has been ongoing since January 2023.   
 
As a number of Members raised the issue of CCTV operations in both Mullingar and Athlone town, Supt. Nolan 
confirmed to the Members that Mullingar has a very good CCTV system in place. Supt. Nolan stated that the 
monitoring of the CCTV system is carried out by a Garda on a fulltime basis and that AGS use CCTV in relation to 

4 
 
thefts from shops and other public offences.  Regarding Mullingar Town Park, Supt David Nolan confirmed that 
there is CCTV in the Town Park which is also monitored by Gardaí within the Station.  
Regarding CCTV in Athlone, Supt. Michelle Baker informed the Members that it is a live feed into the Garda 
Station which is monitored.  At present, there is no conversation in expanding CCTV in Athlone but going forward 
this will be investigated. 
In relation to increased Garda presence within Housing Estates, Supt. Nolan confirmed that Gardaí from 
Community Policing are assigned to areas. Supt. Nolan confirmed he would take on board Cllr Dollard’s request 
and seek more Garda visibility within these areas. 
 
Cllr Glynn raised concerns about the recent assaults, muggings and personal assaults which took place at the 
Fire Station Carpark and at Fairgreen, Mullingar.  Cllr Glynn equally asked for more Gardaí presence in Mullingar 
to ease the worries of the public. 
 
In response to Cllr Glynn, Supt. Nolan stated that certain matters mentioned are under active investigation and 
he appealed to the public to report crime to their local Garda Station.   Supt. Nolan informed the Meeting that 
Mullingar is a very safe town to live in and that he will take Cllr Glynn’s concerns on board regarding more Garda 
presence on the streets. 
 
A number of Members requested an update on E-Scooter legislation.  Supt. Nolan advised the Members that 
legislation is at an advanced stage, which will give AGS more powers to deal with such issues.   
 
Cllr Frankie Keena referred to the theft from shops statistics for Athlone District and asked why the figures are 
up 82%. In relation to people being stopped by AGS whilst driving under the influence of substances, Cllr Keena 
asked what the statistics are for same and has this figure increased. Cllr Keena raised serious concerns about 
drugs and anti-social behaviour in Athlone town and some residential areas.  He explained that several teenage 
gangs are causing serious problems in the town.  Cllr Keena asked if there is close collaboration between the 
AGS and Westmeath County Council as some of these gangs are living in local authority housing. Cllr Keena 
asked if the Tenancy Handbook is being implemented.  
 
Cllr Keena informed the Members that business owners are having to deal with anti-social behaviour issues 
outside their premises.  Cllr Keena asked can our Byelaws be enforced. 
 
In response to the 5% increase in drug detection, Supt. Michelle Baker informed the Members, that AGS are 
reviewing the figures in relation to their searches under the Drugs Act and in the last year this has increased by 
20% overall. Not every search secures a result and that includes a 75% increase Garda activity in Kilbeggan and 
a 100% increase in Garda activity in Moate.  Supt. Baker advised the Members that the Divisional Drugs Unit are 
very active within the County.  Supt Baker informed the Members that there is an increase in activity in relation 
our drug strategy in Athlone town and over the next couple of weeks we will see more results in this area.   
 
Regarding theft from shops, Supt. Baker explained that it is in relation to alcohol theft and theft to others at a 
premises in the Athlone District where there was a significant spike in “drives off” from petrol pumps. AGS has 
put in place measures with the company and hopefully these numbers will drop as pre-paid pumps are now 
installed. 
 

5 
 
Regarding burglaries in Athlone Town, a lot of businesses were unoccupied, and an operation was put in place 
and several people have since been arrested and are before the Courts. 
 
In relation to gangs and anti-social behaviour, Supt. Baker informed the Members, that there were 8 robberies 
Against the Person and all 8 were detected and are before the Courts.  A significant number of these 
perpetrators were juveniles.  
 
In relation to liaising with the Housing Department, Supt. Baker informed the Members that Community Gardaí 
are in regular communication with the Housing Department regarding the location of where people are placed.   
 
In response to anti-social behaviour on our streets Supt. Baker confirmed that AGS are not ignoring this 
behaviour and they are working with the people, it is very challenging as a number of these people are homeless. 
 
In response to Cllr Keena’s question about Garda resources, Supt Baker informed the Members that since 
today’s figures were printed, Athlone District is receiving two new Sergeants, 1 for Kilbeggan District and 1 for 
Athlone District and this should help support current situation.  
 
In response to Cllr Keena, Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher confirmed to the Members that Westmeath County 
Council has a very close working relationship with AGS in both districts in the County relating to pre-tenancy 
considerations prior to preparing allocations.  Mr Gallagher informed the Members that similar is carried out 
when managing and implementing anti-social behaviour policy.   
In relation to drug waste, Mr Gallagher advised that relevant Westmeath County Council staff are trained in this 
area.  Mr Gallagher wished to thank AGS in both districts for their help with such matters. 
In response to Cllr Keena’s query regarding intoxicating driving, Inspector Peter Gilsenan informed the Members 
that this area is broken down into two parts: alcohol and drugs. He further advised the Members that there was 
an increase in drug driving, 55 cases of drug driving detected, an increase of 90%. While drink driving, (49 cases) 
was down 13% year to date. 
Inspector Peter Gilsenan further informed the Members that coming into the summer months AGS have held 
scheduled mandatory intoxication checkpoints across the County to target drink/drug driving.   
Deputy Troy would like to see the Housing Department within Westmeath County Council be more forceful 
where there is clear and unambiguous evidence of people engaging in anti-social behaviour.   
In response to Deputy Troy’s question regarding Gardaí numbers, Mr Nolan confirmed that manpower was 
slightly down, but is confident that Westmeath will get new recruits in the coming months.   
Many Members raised concerns in relation to anti-social behaviour, illegal camping and dumping at 
Westmeath’s lakeshores particularly at Ladestown.   
In response to the issues raised Supt. Nolan confirmed he was aware of current situation at Ladestown and that 
the upturn in good weather may be a contributing factor.  He advised the Members that he had engaged with 
the Chief Executive, Mr Gallagher and insisted Gardaí will use byelaws to move people on where necessary.   

6 
 
Cllr Aoife Davitt requested that a private meeting be held urgently between An Garda Síochána, Westmeath 
County Council, litter and community wardens and residents to address this matter. 
In response to Cllr Paul Hogan’ question regarding Community Safety Partnerships, Supt. David Nolan informed 
the Members that there are Pilot Schemes in Longford and Waterford and Mr Nolan confirmed that the schemes 
are very successful. 
In terms of anti-social behaviour orders, Supt. Michelle Baker stated that she did not have the figures to hand 
but confirmed to Cllr Hogan she will have same for the next JPC Meeting. 
Cllr Hogan also asked for a breakdown on the type of drugs being used – in terms of crack cocaine detection, is 
there an increase the detection of same?  
Detective Inspector Quinn advised the Members that cocaine and cannabis are the most common drugs seized 
by Gardaí in Westmeath.  Mr Quinn stated that there is some use of cocaine and cannabis but our figures for 
detection/seizure has been very low.   There was significant seizures of ecstasy and heroine recently and Mr 
Quinn confirmed AGS are actively targeting people who are dealing with these drugs at street level with the 
assistance of CAB and through the Courts locally.    
In relation to response times, Supt. Michelle Baker informed the Members of a new Computer Aided Dispatch 
system for logging calls called “Garda Safe”, which was recently established in a bid to increase response times. 
Supt. Michelle Baker informed the Members that the nearest available Garda will go to the scene depending on 
the category of crime.   
Cllr Denis Leonard also raised concerns regarding Garda resources within Westmeath, especially for the 
Kinnegad Area with only 1 Sergeant and 4 Gardaí in Kinnegad.  Cllr Leonard asked AGS what Garda backup cover 
will be place in rural areas with the upcoming Fleadh?  Cllr Leonard stated that we need to keep our local Garda 
Stations opened and manned.   
In response to Cllr Leonard’s concern for more Garda enforcement presence coming into rural towns/villages 
such as Multyfarnham, Kinnegad, Supt. Nolan confirmed he will address this matter with Inspector Gilensan and 
target areas. 
Cllr Leonard suggested the need for having an updated register in place for people moving within the county 
and from outside who may have a criminal record. Cllr Leonard stated that IPASS is very slow. In response, Supt. 
David Nolan said there could be data protection issues regarding this area. Supt. David Nolan appealed to the 
local communities to report any suspicious activities to their local Garda Station. 
A number of Members asked for the drugs units in both Mullingar and Athlone be increased for our town and 
villages. 
In response, Supt. Nolan informed the Members that there was a new Drugs Unit set up in 2021 with some 
Gardai based in Athlone and some in Mullingar. He stated that a lot of work goes into the Drugs Operation such 
as surveillance and AGS use that information to underpin a warrant in the District Court.   

7 
 
Regarding beat patrols, Supt. Baker confirmed that Gardaí prioritise late night patrols for the night economy at 
bars/nightclubs where there is a higher concentration of potential public order issues.   
In response to Cllr Dolan’s concern regarding speeding taking place at Loughnavalley village, Inspector Gilsenan 
confirmed he would address the matter with the Roads Policing Unit. 
Supt. David Nolan confirmed that there were 6 anti-social behaviour orders issued for Mullingar.  
In response to Cllr Dolan’s question regarding placement of defibrillators outside Athlone and Mullingar Garda 
Station, Supt. David Nolan informed the Members that he will have an update at the next JPC Meeting . 
In relation to a register for response times, Supt. Michelle Baker confirmed she would discuss further with the 
Chief Supt, John Dollard on his return to see what information can be provided. 
In response to Cllr Smyth regarding the recent brawl which recently took place in Mullingar., Supt. David Nolan 
advised the Members that an individual (a juvenile) was arrested and AGS are preparing an investigation file for 
submission to the National Juvenile Office.  Supt. Nolan confirmed that he cannot comment any further on the 
matter, but AGS are monitoring the situation very carefully. 
Regarding Garda retention, Supt. David Nolan informed the Members that a Garda member is eligible to retire 
after 30 years’ service.   He further stated that he submitted a request for additional Gardaí for Mullingar and is 
hopeful so see resources for Westmeath going forward. 
Cllr Davitt also asked for more Garda patrols at Lakepoint, Mullingar where youths are gathering around at a 
specific building in the possession of the HSE.   
In response to Cllr Davitt’s request for more Garda presence at St Kenny’s National School, Ballinea especially 
during drop off and collections times i.e. 8.50am and 2.30pm, Supt, David Nolan confirmed that he would discuss 
this matter further with Inspector Gilensan and the Traffic Unit. 
Regarding the new roll out of the National Callout Centre, Cllr Davitt stated there is a frustration in relation to 
the reporting of incidents such as the request for an Eircode.  Cllr Davitt stated that not all incidents occur where 
there is an Eircode, i.e on a roadway.   
In response, Supt. David Nolan did state that there are some teething problems with the new National Callout 
Centre Supt. David Nolan stated that the idea is to enable AGS to have an enhanced response to callouts.   
At this stage, Cllr Liam McDaniel spoke and apologised for being late for today’s meeting. Cllr McDaniel 
requested under “Matters Arising” that the April 2023 JPC Minutes be corrected to reflect his question in 
relation to Garda resources for the Kilbeggan Station, where he received a welcome response from Supt. 
Michelle Baker at the time.   He asked that this be included in the April 2023 JPC Minutes. Cllr McDaniel further 
welcomed Supt. Michelle Bakers confirmation today that a new Sergeant is being appointed to Kilbeggan Garda 
Station.   
Cllr McDaniel raised an issue in relation to passport signatures, where an applicant applied for a passport, the 
local Garda signed same in a rural station and after a period of 5 to 6 weeks the application was returned because 

8 
 
the Passport Office was trying to contact the Rural Garda Station and it was not getting a response as it was not 
being fully manned, which Cllr McDaniel can understand. Cllr McDaniel asked can anything be done to address 
this type of situation. 
In relation to pre-tenancy arrangements Cllr McDaniel asked what pre-tenancy assessment is carried out by the 
Council in relation to: 
• HAP recipients from other Council areas who are tenants in properties in Westmeath: 
• Tenants of Affordable Housing Bodies in the County. 
In response, Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive confirmed to the Members that he did not have this information 
to hand but agreed to email a response to the full JPC Committee after today’s meeting. 
In response to the passport issue, Supt. David Nolan confirmed that there is a new measure in place, where a 
staff member in the Passport Office cannot reach the relevant Garda, they should contact the Superintendent’s 
Office and this arrangement has been agreed with An Garda Siochana and the Passport Office.  
Cllr Frank McDermott had three issues he wished to raise at todays’ meeting, dog fouling, drugs, and doughnuts. 
Cllr McDermott raised concerns about dogs running freely at The Cut, Collinstown.  Cllr McDermott asked that 
this situation be addressed as young children were playing in the area at the time. Supt. David Nolan agreed to 
discuss the matter privately with Cllr McDermott. 
 
In relation to drugs, Cllr McDermott spoke recently with young people regarding drugs and how they are 
constantly being persecuted about various types of drugs.  Cllr McDermott asked if trained dogs could be 
brought into local secondary schools to check for drugs?  
Cllr Frank McDermott also raised concerns about ‘doughnut’ driving taking place at The Cut, Collinstown recently 
and asked that AGS check this matter out as there is an element of danger along with noise pollution and 
disturbance to residents. 
 
Regarding drugs issue, Supt David Nolan, did reassure the Members that AGS have an excellent drugs unit 
working within the County as shown in todays’ report.  Mr Nolan confirmed that AGS does on occasion when 
conducting drug searches seek assistance from specialised units.  
Regarding ‘doughnut driving’ at The Cut, Collinstown, Supt. David Nolan confirmed he would act on this 
locally.   
 
Following the questions raised by the JPC Members, Sergeant John McWalter, Crime Prevention Officer 
Westmeath gave a Presentation to JPC on SARA Problem Solving Method which was greatly welcomed by the 
JPC Members.  
 
PPN Report: 
Mr John Bawle, (Mullingar Tidy Towns Representative) presented the “Westmeath PPN Report July 2023” to the JPC 
Members. 
 

9 
 
 
Correspondence: 
There was no correspondence 
 
Date of next meeting 
 
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 9 October 2023 at 10.00a.m.   
 
AOB: 
None 
 
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions. 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9th October 2023 
___________________________  
 
 
_________________ 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill  
 
 
 
 
Date 
Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee 
 
 
