Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 11 October 2021 
in Athlone Civic Centre, Athlone, Co Westmeath  
 
Presiding 
 
: 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman 
 
Local Authority  
Members 
: 
Cllrs Frankie Keena, John Dolan, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, 
Frank McDermott and Aengus O’Rourke 
 
Oireachtas Member:          Deputy Peter Burke 
 
Community Members: 
Dave Raftis, Joyce Furlong, Kathleen Grennan and Mr Michael 
Mulvey. 
 
Garda Officers: 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan Murray 
and Superintendent David Nolan. 
 
Garda Commissioner Drew Harris and Sergeant Paul Minogue.  
 
Officers Present: 
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Pat Keating S.E.O., Anne 
Galvin, A.O, Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs Liam McDaniel, Michael Dollard, Emily Wallace, Hazel 
Smith, Denis Leonard, Ken Glynn and Bill Collentine. Senator 
Aidan Davitt and Senator Paul Daly, Deputies Robert Troy and 
Sorca Clarke. Mr Pat Grimes and Ms Marie Reddin. 
 
Introduction: 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman of the Westmeath JPC opened the Meeting and firstly welcomed An 
Garda Commissioner Drew Harris, his staff, the JPC Members, An Garda Síochána, the PPN, the 
Press and all present. 
 
Presentation by Garda Commissioner, Mr Drew Harris 
Cllr Paddy Hill on behalf of the JPC Members invited An Garda Commissioner Drew Harris to 
make his presentation to the Members. 
Opening his address, Garda Commissioner firstly stated to the Members that it was good to be 
back meeting people in person and the importance of hearing local concerns. 
Mr Harris shared his presentation on “A new Operating Model for An Garda Síochána”.  
 
 

Mr Harris strongly stressed that community policing is now a priority and it needs to be efficient 
and protect the vulnerable in our society. 
Mr Harris stated that a lot of the crime we see is in the home or at the end of the world wide web 
and he referenced large increases in online fraud including investment scams.  Mr Harris further 
added that there was an increase in domestic violence, serious sexual assault and the abuse of 
children online. Mr Harris stated that An Garda Síochána are dealing with a changing and more 
diverse society and the force has to adapt to take account of this. 
Mr Harris informed the Members that the new Operating Model for policing will see the 
recruitment of up to 800 new members by the end of 2021 to bring the force up to its full 
complement of 15,000 from the current figure of 14,300 and will also place a renewed emphasis 
on a return to community policing. 
Mr Harris informed the Members of the Community benefits of the new Operating Model which 
means more Gardaí, and more specialist services available at a local level such as: 
• 24/7 Inspector - Each division will have an on-duty Inspector at all times to provide 
enhanced response, supervision and direction. 
• Divisional Crime Superintendent – Each Division will have its own dedicated 
Superintendent responsible for crime investigations. 
• More Frontline Inspectors & Sergeants - Each Division will see an increase in the 
number of Inspectors & Sergeants, increasing management & supervision of the 
frontline. 
 
• Community Engagement Teams - Each Division will see an increase in the number of 
Inspectors & Sergeants, increasing management & supervision of the frontline. 
• Improved Local Crime Capabilities - Larger Divisions, numbering 600-800 personnel, 
will be able to build more crime-fighting skills in key areas such as fraud & protective 
services. 
• More Frontline Gardaí- Each Division will continue to see skilled Garda Staff & 
Members moved into roles that allow redeployments to the front lines. 
Mr Pat Gallagher CEO, Westmeath County Council welcomed An Garda Commissioner Drew 
Harris to Westmeath and said it was a great honour and privilege to have the Commissioner present 
at today’s JPC Meeting.  Mr Gallagher stated that Westmeath has an active Joint Policing 
Committee involving the Community Representatives, the Members, the PPN, local authority staff 
and the Oireachtas Members who engage regularly with the local Gardaí.  Mr Gallagher wished to 
express his appreciation to the ongoing and excellent work carried out by Chief Superintendent 
Fergus Healy and his staff, in particular both Superintendents Alan Murray (Mullingar District) 
and David Nolan (Athlone District) particularly during the Covid-19 pandemic. 
 
Cllr Aengus O’Rourke welcomed Garda Commissioner Drew Harris to Athlone and stated that he 
was present today as Deputy Mayor of Athlone District as Cllr Liam McDaniel Mayor of Athlone 

was unable to attend due to recent illness.  Cllr O’Rourke wished Cllr McDaniel a speedy and 
healthy recovery. 
 
Cllr O’Rourke raised concerns about the possibility of losing a Superintendent based in Athlone, 
and stated that both Superintendent David Nolan and his predecessor, Aidan Minnock had been 
excellent in their roles.  In response, Garda Commissioner Drew Harris explained to the Members 
that it was a matter for the Chief Superintendent in each Garda division to decide where a 
Superintendent should be physically placed but added that the way forward in the new policing 
plan was not to start “stripping away” what is already in place. 
 
Cllr O’Rourke stated he was delighted to see that Community Policing is to the front and centre of 
the new Model as presented at today’s meeting.  He further stated that we need Gardai present on 
our streets and in our communities, early intervention is vital in reducing crime.   Cllr O’Rourke 
also stated that community policing is critical in the development of Athlone and it needs to be 
advanced as soon as possible.  
 
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that the intention under the new 
policing model is to have two Superintendents based in the County, one in Mullingar and one in 
Athlone. He further added that the portfolios of all Superintendents are set to change, and no 
decisions have yet been made on the area of responsibility to be assigned to each Superintendent. 
 
Cllr Frankie Keena also welcomed Garda Commissioner Drew Harris to Athlone and commended 
the great work carried out by the local Gardai in Westmeath in keeping the public safe. 
 
Cllr Keena agreed with the issues raised by Cllr O’Rourke regarding Community Policing and 
stated that the public warmly engage with community Gardai which then follows a great sense of 
trust, he stated we need to see more of this going forward. 
 
Cllrs Keena, Farrell and Dolan asked that An Garda Síochána keep on top of the drugs situation in 
rural Ireland as it is a major problem.  They stated that drugs awareness is vital within the 
communities and requested that An Garda Síochána work with our youth, in national schools, 
secondary schools and universities informing them of the dangers in dealing with drugs. 
 
In response to Cllr Keena’s question regarding the effectiveness of the Adult Caution Scheme, Mr 
Harris informed the Members that the scheme only came into effect recently and it is too early to 
say what the impact is at this stage. 
 
In response to the Cllrs., Garda Commissioner Drew Harris informed the Members that we all do 
our policing in the Community and the function of Community Policing teams is the structure we 
want to put in place going forward nationally. Mr Harris stated that he is not closing any stations 
and An Garda Síochána understand the importance of community policing.  
 
Cllr John Dolan raised a question to the Commissioner about installing CCTV security in certain 
areas on our Greenways where crime is taking place.  In response, Mr Harris informed the 
Members that there are rules in place around the provision of installing CCTV schemes in such 

areas. Mr Harris did agree that CCTV is a very useful tool for An Garda Síochána but there has to 
be a balance and there is a process in place which needs to be followed.   
 
Cllr Dolan also asked if the Criminal Assets Bureau (CAB) had a role in regional areas, in response 
Mr Harris and Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that there are CAB 
profilers working at regional level around the country and Mr Harris further informed the Members 
that CAB have invested in local level training.  
 
In response to Cllr Frank McDermott’s question regarding the upgrade of Castlepollard Garda 
Station, Mr Harris stated that he did not realise it was in such a poor condition and he did not want 
to see any member of the force working in Stations that were not fit for purpose.  Mr Harris agreed 
to have the matter investigated.  
Cllr Andrew Duncan also raised concerns about the increasing number of E-scooters on our 
footpaths?  In response, Mr Harris informed the Members that there is legislation currently being 
drafted on this matter.  Mr Harris also added that E-Scooters are mechanically propelled vehicles. 
 
Ms Brigid Geoghegan, (PPN-Public Participation Network - Resource Worker), on behalf of the 
Westmeath PPN thanked Garda Commissioner Drew Harris for his presentation and in particular 
the emphasis Mr Harris placed on Community Policing.  
 
Minister Peter Burke, acknowledged the excellent work carried out on a daily basis by An Garda 
Síochána and in particular over the last 18 months.  Minister Burke stated that he was very proud 
of our local Gardai, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, both Superintendents Alan Murray and 
David Nolan and all their team. 
Mr Harris thanked the Westmeath JPC for their invitation to today’s meeting and also for their 
generous comments to the Westmeath Garda Division staff members. 
Mr Harris also confirmed that he would respond to all questions directed to him from the JPC 
Members prior to today’s JPC Meeting.  
Cllr Paddy Hill on behalf of all the JPC Members thanked An Garda Commissioner Drew Harris 
for his detailed presentation, his time and dedication in keeping us all safe.  Cllr Hill wished the 
Garda Commissioner well in the future.   
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on Monday 12 July 2021: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr John Dolan, the Members approved the 
Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 12 July 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 

Report from Westmeath County Council: 
 
Prior to today’s meeting, an update to Westmeath JPC Meeting on Covid19 Community Response 
Forum and Council Helpline by Mr. Pat Gallagher was circulated to all JPC Members.   
Mr. Gallagher wished to inform the Members that there was a typo error on page 1 of the report 
listed under the Helpline breakdown of calls.  The report should have read: 
• Local Isolation, support & engagement  66. 
The Members noted the amendment and thanked Mr Gallagher for his detailed updated report.  
 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy through his power point presentation outlined the following crime 
statistics for the County.  
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that property crime had increased from 624 in 
2020 (Q3) to 678 in 2021, a 9% increase on 2020 figures. In Athlone, figures were up from 293 in 
2020 to 349 in 2021.  For Mullingar, they were down from 331 in 2020 to 329 in 2021.   
 
In terms of burglary, the rate also increased from 108 in 2020 to 129 in 2021, a 19% divisional 
increase.    
 
The number of thefts from vehicles increased from 62 in 2020 (Q3) to 98 in 2021 (Q3), a 58% 
divisional increase. Chief Supt Healy informed the Members that a number of catalytic convertors 
were stolen from vehicles within the County. 
 
The rate of theft and unauthorised taking of vehicles at divisional level for Q3 remained for 2020 
and 2021.  
 
There was a 5% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 242 in 2020 (Q3) to 254 
(Q3) in 2021. (Divisional totals). 
 
There was a 26% decrease in the number of reported thefts from other property, 139 in 2020 (Q3) 
to 103 in 2021 (Q3). (Divisional totals). 
 
In relation to Drugs figures: 
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations 
went from 65 in 2020 to 57 in 2021, a decrease of 12%, while incidents of Section 15 (possession 
of a drug with intent for sale or supply) went from 19 in 2020 to 21 in 2021, an increase of 11%. 
 
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 157 in 2020 to 107 in 2021, 
a decrease of 32%, while incidents of Section 15 remained the same; 34 in 2020 and 34 in 2021. 
 

In relation to Roads Policing, unfortunately, road fatalities were up from 1 in 2020 to 4 in 2021. 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that 14 serious injury incidents occurred in 2021. 
Incidents of driving while intoxicated decreased from 116 in 2020 to 105 in 2021. MIT (Mandatory 
Intoxicant Testing) checkpoint figures went from 305 in 2020 to 642 in 2021, an increase of 110%.  
Incidents of vehicles seized under Section 41 decreased from 335 in 2020 to 274 in 2021.  
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community 
Engagements:  
 
• 
Operation Faoiseamh commenced on 1st April 2020 to offer support and protection 
to victims of domestic abuse during these extraordinary times. The Westmeath Garda 
Victim Office is identifying domestic abuse victims within the Westmeath Division 
and has initiated contact. 
• 
Members of An Garda Siochana in the Westmeath Division engaged with people in 
social housing reminding them of the issues around COVID19. 
• 
Members engaged with many elderly people during the COVID19, collecting 
prescriptions or doing grocery shopping. 
• 
An Garda Siochana continued communication and joint co-operation working with 
local groups, housing estates, local council, Domestic Violence and the HSE during 
the lockdown. 
 
 
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources – Divisional 
Overview  
• 
256 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks) 
• 
123 Mullingar District 
• 
92 Athlone District 
• 
41 Divisional Garda Members, (Roads Policing, DPSU, CPD,PSV, 
CIO, CPO, Scene of crime, Telecommunications) 
• 
 10 Reserve Members  
• 
 38 Garda Staff  
• 
13 Garda Stations 
• 
 73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet 
 
 
Chairman, Cllr Paddy Hill and all JPC Members welcomed and sincerely thanked Chief Supt. 
Fergus Healy, Supt. Alan Murray and Supt. David Nolan and their staff for today’s presentation. 
 
PPN Report: 
 
There was no PPN Report for the October 2021 JPC Meeting. 
 
Correspondence: 
Ms Anne Galvin, Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the JPC Annual Event 
hosted by the Policing Authority took place on Thursday, 30 September from 10am to 12am via 
Zoom call. A synopsis of this will issue to members before the January meeting. 

 
Date of next meeting 
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 10 January 2022 at 10.00a.m.   
Further details of the venue to be confirmed at a later dated due to Covid-19 public health 
guidelines.  
  
 
AOB: 
 
Cllr Frankie Keena requested an update on a completion date for the new Athlone Garda Station. 
 
In response, Supt David Nolan informed the Members that work on the Athlone Garda Station is 
due to finish on 8 November 2021 with the official opening of the new facilities expected to take 
place in early 2022.  Cllr Keena said he was looking forward to seeing the Garda Commissioner, 
Drew Harris returning to Athlone for the official opening. 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill on behalf of all the JPC Members wished Cllr Liam McDaniel a speedy recovery 
from a recent illness. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10/01/2022 
___________________________  
 
___________________________ 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill 
 
 
 
Date 
Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee  
 
 
