Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policin Committee
held at 10.00am on Monday, 12 October 2020
held by teleconference (Go To Meeting)
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Introduction:
Cllr Liam McDaniel, Vice Chairman
Cllrs John Dolan, Tom Farrell, Frankie Keena, Bill Collentine,
Hazel Smith and Emily Wallace.
Deputy Robert Troy
Mr Michael Mulvey, Mr Dave Raftis, Ms Joyce Furlong
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan
Murray and Superintendent David Nolan.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin, A.O,
Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC.
Cllrs Paddy Hill, Michael Dollard, Andrew Duncan, Ken Glynn,
Denis Leonard, Frank McDermott. Senators Paul Daly and
Aidan Davitt. Deputies Peter Burke and Sorca Clarke. Mr Pat
Grimes, Ms Marie Reddin and Ms Kathleen Grennan.
The Vice JPC Chairman, Cllr Liam McDaniel deputised for Cllr Paddy Hill. Cllr McDaniel
opened the Go To Meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all logged in.
Cllr McDaniel welcomed the newly appointed Superintendent Mr David Nolan to the Athlone
Garda Division and to the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee. Cllr McDaniel on behalf of
the Westmeath JPC Members thanked outgoing Superintendent Mr Aidan Minnock for his
commitment and assistance during his term in office. Cllr McDaniel also extended best wishes
Lo Supt. Mr Minnock
Cllr McDaniel also welcomed newly appointed Oireachtas Members to the Westmeath JPC,
Deputy Sorca Clarke and Senator Aidan Davitt, who replaced Mr Kevin Boxer Moran and Ms
Gabrielle McFadden.
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive on his own behalf and that of the staff of Westmeath
County Council joined in the sentiments expressed by Cllr McDaniel.
Cllr McDaniel also welcomed Ms Magali Lapouge, Higher Executive Officer from The
Policing Authority.
1
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 13 July 2020:
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Mr Dave Raftis, the Members approved
the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 13 July 2020.
Mr Dave Raftis PPN, requested an amendment to lhe July 2020 JPC Minutes to reflect that
PPN report delivered by him at the July JPC meeting reférred to the last Westmeath JPC
Strategic Plan 2015-2020 (not 2020-2025 as stated).
Reoort from Westmeath Countv Council:
• To approve the Westmeath JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025
On the proposal of Mr Michael Mulvey and seconded by Cllr Frankie Keena, the Members
unanimously approved the Westmeath JPC Stratcgic Plan 2020-2025.
e Update on Westmeath Community Response Forum and Community Call
Helpline
Mr Pat Gallagher provided an update to the JPC Members on the Westmeath Community
Response Forum in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. Mr Gallagher informed the Members
that the Forum meets on a monthly basis. Mr Gallagher also informed the Members that the
Community Call Helpline (1800 805 816) is open 5 days per week from 9am to 5pm.
To date, 652 calls were received to this Helpline and are broken down as follows:
•
•
Collection and delivery
Social isolation/supports/engagement
Meals and their delivery
Garda related
Medical/ health needs
Transport
Other
Mr Gallagher expressed his appreciation to all the Community goups and broad range of
agencies and staff who have contributed to the work caried out by the Westmeath Community
Response Forum.
Cllr Liam McDaniel, further thanked all staff for their work on the Forum.
Report from An Garda Siochåna;
Supt. Alan Murray presented the powerpoint presentation (on behalf of Supt. Fergus Healy)
outlining the following crime statistics for the County.
2
Supt. Alan Murray informed the Members that there was a 31 % decrease in property crime in
e u one ea.
The number of thefts from vehicles were down dramatically from 134 in Q3 of 2019 to 64 in
2020, a decrease of 52%. (Divisional totals)
The number of vehicles stolen in the County decreased by 65% from 83 in Q3 of 2019 to 29 in
Q 3 of 2020. (Divisional totals).
There was a 30% decrease in the number of reported thefts from shops, 372 in Q3 of 2019 to
260 in Q3 of 2020. (Divisional totals).
Supt. Alan Murray informed the Members that most types of crimes had decreased in
Westmeath however, crime against the person had increased by 12% in the Mullingar Division.
Supt. Alan Murray informed the JPC Members of the following Community Engagements:
Operation Faoiseamh commenced on 1 April 2020 to offer support and protection
to victims of domestic abuse during these extraordinary times. The Westmeath
Garda Victim Office is identifying domestic abuse victims within the Westmeath
Division and has initiated contact.
Members of An Garda Sfochåna in the Westmeath Division engaged with people
in social housing reminding them of the issues around COVIDI 9.
An Garda Siochåna continued communication and joint co-operation working
with local groups, housing estates, local council, Domestic Violence and the HSE
during the lockdown.
Garda Members engaged with the Islamic Community as it closed its Mosque due
to COVID19 and has regular contact with members.
Members engaged with many elderly people during the COVID19, collecting
prescriptions or doing grocery shopping.
Operation Fanacht recommenced in the Westmeath Division on the 7 October
2020 in line with the Government announcement.
Supt Alan Murray informed the JPC Members of the following Resources — Divisional
Overview
253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks)
151 Mullingar District
102 Athlone District
18 Divisional Roads Policing
6 Reserve Members
31 Garda Staff (Civilian)
13 Garda Stations
73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet
Vice Chairman Cllr Liam McDaniel and all JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief
Supt. Fergus Healy and Supt. Alan Murray for their Presentation.
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Siochåna
(AGS) and officials present:
3
In response to Deputy Robert Troy question, Supt Alan Murray informed the JPC Members
that MIT Checkpoints, stands for Mandatory Intoxication Testing, whereby Gardai can test
drivers for both alcohol and drugs. Supt Alan Murray further inforlned the Members that the
reduction in MIT Checkpoints from 1009 in Q3 for 2019 to 304 in 2020 was as a result of
COVID-19.
In response to Deputy Troy's question regarding Operation Fanacht, Supt. Alan Murray
informed the Members that there are two static checkpoints at Athlone and Rathowen and
stated that motorists were being encouraged to remain within the County. Supt. Alan Murray
stated that the public have been 99 percent compliant at the road blocks manned by local
Gardai since Level 3 Covid-19 restrictions were introduced last week.
Both Supt. Alan Murray and Supt. David Nolan informed the Members that there was a high
level of compliance from local pubs in relation to Covid-19 guidelines.
Deputy Robert Troy's raised concerns regarding the relocation of the Traffic Corps coming
from Mullingar to Moate and asked on what basis was this decision taken? In response, Supt
Alan Murray stated that the relocation of the Roads Policing Unit from Mullingar to Moate
would take effect this week and this decision was made by the management of the Westmeath
Garda Division.
Cllr Tom Farrell raised a question in relation to the supply and sale of drugs, and asked if the
law has changed? In response, Supt. Alan Murray confirmed the law had not changed in
relation to the supply and sale of drugs and stated it is dependent on the amount of drugs that
the person has and any admissions that person makes.
Cllr Frankie Keena asked for an update on Athlone Garda Station. In response, Supt. David
Nolan informed the Members that there are three phases in the building programme,
stage/phase 2 (original station building) is expected to be completed by Spring 2021 after
which phase 3 (Old Telecom Eireann building) will commence.
In response to Cllr Keena's question regarding Garda plans for the Halloween period, Supt
Alan Murray informed the Members that both officers in Mullingar and Athlone were currently
preparing a plan for Halloween and confirmed that extra Garda staff will be deployed.
Cllr Keena also asked that Westmeath County Council staff in co-operation with An Garda
Siochåna prevent bonfires from being lit and gatherings taking place around them. In response,
Chief Executive Pat Gallagher assured the Members that Municipal District staff similar to
previous years, will be pro active in removing accumulations of bonfire material.
In response to Cllr Hazel Smyth's query on how the Gardai plan to clamp down on people
holding house parties in the run-up to Halloween, Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the
Members that while there was a concern over the prospect of people holding house parties, he
hoped that the introduction of on the spot fines would act as a "preventative measure". Chief
Supt. Fergus Healy further stated that there will be proactive communication with respect to
tackling this issue, both at local and national level.
4
Cllr Hazel Smyth asked that the Gardai investigate as to why An Garda Siochåna vehicles are
sometimes parked on the kerbs outside e Mul ingar urthouse.
le Supt. Fergus e y
advised the Members that Supt. Alan Murray will address this matter immediately.
Cllr Hazel Smyth also asked if clear opening hour siY1age could be erected outside Killucan
Garda Station. Supt. Alan Murray gave a commitment to get this matter checked out.
Ms Anne Galvin, Meetings Administrator, informed the Members that the Garda
Commissioner Drew Harris confirmed his attendance to the Westmeath JPC Meeting on
Monday, 1 1 January 2021, subject to public health advice at the time of the meeting.
Cllr Liam McDaniel asked the Gardai if Westmeath road fatalities were on line with national
road fatalities figures. In response, Supt Fergus Healy stated that to date, overall Westmeath
figures were on par with 2019 figures.
All JPC Members extended their sympathies to the families of recent road fatalities.
Cllr Liam McDaniel also asked the Gardai was there a designated drug squad within the Meath
/ Westmeath Division. In response Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that
Westmeath has a very "productive and active" drugs unit within the Division, but stated that
the drugs unit is being re-organised as part of the restructuring process.
PPN Report:
There was no PPN Report for October 2020.
Correspondence:
Ms Galvin informed the JPC Members of two letters of correspondence received from The
Policing Authority as follows:
Letter dated 17 September October 2020, regarding "A meeting of the Chairperson of
the JPC and Chief Executive of the Local Authorities". Ms Galvin informed the
Members that this meeting took place via a Zoom Call on Thursday 8 October 2020
Letter dated 9 September 2020, regarding Engagement with Joint Policing
Committees on priorities for Policing. (This correspondence was circulated to all JPC
Members).
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 11 January 2021 at 10.00a.m.
confirmed at a later stage.
AOB:
Venue to be
Cllr Tom Farrell expressed concel-ns from the public over the speed oftraffic in Loughnavalley
Village. Chief Supt Fcrgus Hcaly stated he would check this matter out.
5
In relation to Community CCTV, Ms Brigid Geoghegan, PPN, informed the Members that she
understands that there is a pilot project scheme in Co. Laois in relation to CCTV; where Laois
County Council is working with community groups, and wonders if similar could happen in
Co. Westmeath. Ms Geoghegan added that Westmeath PPN is looking forward to the
opportunity tn being part or CCTV working group once forrned — as per Ilem 3. I nn lhe
Westnzeath Strategic Work Plan 2020-2025, To seek a review at National level on the code of
practice and regulation regarding Community CCTV in consultation with JPC Partner
Agencies and establish a working group.
In response, Mr Pat Gallagher informed the Members that he was aware of the pilot scheme in
Co Laois, however, Mr Gallagher again reiterated to the Members that he received no response
to the survey of Westmeath from the Data Protection Commissioner in relation to Community
CCTV. Mr Gallaghcr adviscd thc Mcmbcrs that Wcstmcath County Council could not take
on the role of Data Processor.
Mr Gallagher stated that once the JPC Steering Committee is established, we will be setting
out the actions therein now that the Westmeath Strategic JPC Work Plan 2020-2025 was
approved at today's meeting. Mr Gallagher further stated that he intends having an update at
the next JPC Meeting.
Cllr Hazel Smyth asked if there was scope for joint controllers to share responsibilities?
In response to Cllr Frankie Keena's question regarding the CCTV camera on the R906/
roundabout at Garrycastle, Supt. David Nolan stated that he would seek clarity on this matter.
Cllr McDaniel thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Liam McDaniel
Vice Chairman,
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date
6