Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 14th October 2019
in the Council Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs John Dolan, Michael Dollard, Andrew Duncan,
Tom Farrell, Liam McDaniel, Frank McDermott
and Emily Wallace.
Deputy Robert Troy and Deputy Peter Burke
Marie Reddin, Michael Mulvey and Joyce Furlong
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent Alan
Murray and Superintendent Aidan Minnock.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin, A.O,
Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC and Ms Jackie
Finney, S.E.O. Athlone Municipal District.
Conor O'Leary, Muintir na Tire.
Minister Damien English, Senator Gabrielle McFadden,
Senator Paul Daly, Minister Kevin Moran,
Senator Aidan Davitt, Cllrs Ken Glynn, Hazel Smith,
Frankie Keena, Bill Collentine, Denis Leonard, Dave Raftis,
Pat Grimes and Kathleen Grennan.
The Chairman, Cllr Paddy Hill opened the meeting and welcomed the Members, Press and all
present. Cllr Hill then welcomed Chief Superintendent Mr Fergus Healy, recently appointed
to Westmeath, to the county and to the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee.
Cllr Hill on behalf of the Westmeath JPC Members thanked outgoing Chief Superintendent
Mr Peter Duff for his time, support and assistance during his term in office.
On behalf of the staff of Westmeath County Council, Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher also
welcomed Chief Superintendent Mr Fergus Healy to the Westmeath JPC and extended best
wishes to outgoing Chief Superintendent Mr Peter Duff.
Cllr Hill also welcomed our new PPN Representatives, Mr Michael Mulvey from the
Nominating Group Independent People with Disabilities and Ms Joyce Furlong from Athlone
Streetwise. Cllr Hill thanked outgoing PPN Representatives Mr Des Sheridan and Ms Sheena
Lawless for their commitment and dedication during their term in office.
Cllr Hill welcomed Mr Conor O'Leary from Muintir na Tire to today's meeting.
Cllr Hill expressed condolences to Cllr Hazel Smyth on the recent death of her Mother Breda
Smyth, R.I.P.
1
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 15th July 2019:
On the proposal of Cllr Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Michael Dollard the
Members approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 1 5th July 2019.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
JPC Strategic Plan 2020-2025
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive referred to the JPC Guidelines published in 2014 where it
states that each JPC is required to develop a six year Strategic Plan. Mr Gallagher stated that
there was some very positive work done in previous years under the JPC Strategic Plan 2015-
2020 such as the establishment of the Working Group on Design of the Built Environment.
The remit of this Working Group was to examine the design of the built environment in
respect of crime prevention and anti-social activity and make recommendations for
consideration for incorporation into policy and practice. Mr Gallagher further stated that the
JPC at the time made a recommendation to the Minister of the Environment Community &
Local Government requesting that An Garda Siochåna be afforded the opportunity to convey
their recommendations.
Mr Pat Gallagher then called on Ms Anne Galvin, Administrative Officer to outline the
proposed procedure to guide this Committee in setting up a new Strategic Plan for 2020-
2025.
Ms Galvin gave an overview and outlined the purpose of the six year Strategic Plan to the
Members. Ms Galvin referred to the Strategic Goals and Core Values of the current Strategic
Plan. Ms Galvin informcd the Members that they will be invited to take parl in the
consultation process which will involve the completion of a template primarily. Each JPC
Member will populate their ideas into this template for the preparation of the new Strategic
Plan.
Ms Galvin informed the Members that she will liaise with the JPC Members in the coming
weeks with a view to present the draft JPC Strategic Plan at the first JPC meeting in January
2020.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Superintendant Fergus Healy thanked the Westmeath JPC Members for their kind
words and stated that he will lead the Meath Westmeath Division until his retirement in 2022.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy gave a powemoint presentation outlining the following crime
statistics in the County.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that there were 86 burglaries reponed in the
division in Q3, a year on year increase of 46%. The number of thefts from vehicles rose from
25 in Q3 in 2018 to 49 in 2019, an increase of 96%.
The number of cars stolen in the County rose by 125% from 12 in Q3 2018 to 27 in Q3 2019.
There was also a 44% increase in the number of reponed thefts from shops, 104 in Q3 2018
to 150 in Q4 2019, a 44% increase.
2
The number of "other" property thefts decreased from 79 in Q3 in 2018 to 64 in Q3 2019, a
decrease of 19%.
The number of arrests from drug dealing decreased by 37% from 19 in Q3 in 2018 to 12 in
Q3 2019.
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community
Engagements:
Attended Lake point Street Festival
Life Festival 2019
Community Policing attended Residents Association Meeting in Willow Park
CP Members attended AIT for Annual Sports Day
Attended Fleadh Meeting in The Greville Hotel, Mullingar
Attended a Road Safety Event at Golden Island
Assisted with duty at the Kilbeggan Races
Open Day at Mullingar Garda Station
Duty at Mullingar Agricultural Show
Westmeath Garda Facebook Page set up — nearly 1 ,000 Likes and one post reached
over 56,000
Athlone elderly bus run to Knock
Attended a green flag event in Mullingar Town Park
Assisting and Patrol at Ballymore Festival
Tri Athlone
Chief Supt Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources
Overview
253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks)
151 Mullingar District
102 Athlone District
18 Divisional Roads Policing
6 Reserve Members
31 Garda Staff (Civilian)
13 Garda Stations
73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet
Divisional
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Fergus Healy for his Presentation.
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Siochana
(AGS) and officials present:
• Cllr Michael Dollard requested that the Garda Traffic Corps investigate the ongoing
parking problems at St Colman's School, Delvin Road, Mullingar and at Bishopsgate
Street, Mullingar.
• Cllrs Paddy Hill and Frank McDermott requested an increase in the Garda presence in
rural Westmeath.
• Cllr John Dolan raised concerns regarding anti-social behaviour in our towns and
villages and stated that we need to tackle the alcohol and drugs misuse.
3
• Cllr Liam McDaniel expressed his gratitude to Supt. Aidan Minnock and his team for
the Public Community Meeting held in Kilbeggan in August 2019. Cllr McDaniel
praised local Gardai for their success in dealing with the anti-social behaviour in
Kilbeggan Town. Cllr McDaniel further added that he recalled how the Gardai
launched a Community Policing Initiative in the rural areas sometime ago and
enquired as to its present status.
• Cllr Andrew Duncan requested more Garda visibility in Mullingar Town and in
particular at Penneys, Fair Green.
• Deputy Peter Burke added that the decision to locate the new division's headquarters
in Mullingar was the right one from a logistical perspective and a huge asset to the
town.
• Deputy Robert Troy also stated that it was great to have Chief Supt. Healy based in
Mullingar and he further stated that while officers are currently doing great work on
the ground, there are still challenges due to the number of personnel servicing the
community.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that the two counties (Westmeath and
Meath) will merge into one policing division and the restructuring of Garda Operations in
Westmeath and Meath will lead to officers being deployed where they are needed most.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy further informed the Members that Meath Westmeath will have
four Superintendents; two will be responsible for community engagement, one for crime and
one for performance related issues.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the Members that he recently appointed an Inspector to
take on the role of "Roads Policing", addressing issues around illegal parking within villages
and towns.
In relation to Byelaws and illegal camping it is a problem nationwide, Chief Supt. Fergus
Healy infonned the Members that there is a provision there and we can work together under
the legislation to address these issues.
PPN Report:
Ms Brigid Geoghegan and Ms Joyce Furlong presented the "Westmeath PPN Submission
2019 Report " to the JPC Members as circulated prior to today's meeting.
Chief Executive Pat Gallagher thanked the PPN for their report and welcomed the new PPN
Representatives Mr Michael Mulvey and Joyce Furlong to the new mandate.
Chief Executive Pat Gallagher congratulated the excellent work can-ied out by Westmeath
Comhairle na nog on their "Make Our Roads Safe Again" initiative.
Mr Gallagher advised the Members that Westmeath County Council staff will support and
work with Westmeath Comhairle na nÖg in 2020 and stated that Mr Colm Smith, Westmeath
County Council's Road Safety Officer is available to offer his assistance for an event in 2020.
In relation to anti-social behaviour, Mr Gallagher urged all Members to report such activity to
An Garda Siochana and Westmeath County Council.
4
Regarding CCTV, Mr Gallagher informed the Members that the Data Protection
Commissioner canied out a Survey in 2018 and advised Westmeath County Council that he
will be carrying out inspections and Westmeath County Council should expect a visit from a
Data Inspector in the coming months. Mr Gallagher advised the Members that he will keep
the Committee informed.
Mr Gallagher informed the Committee that certain Westmeath County Council staff are
trained in how to deal with drug paraphernalia and receive ongoing training in this regard.
Ms Geoghegan on behalf of the PPN acknowledged and thanked Westmeath County Council
and for their continued support.
• Muintir Na Tire Presentation
Mr Conor O'Leary, Development Officer, (Eastern Region) gave the Members a presentation
on Community Alert.
Cllr Hill on behalf of the Westmeath JPC Members thanked Mr O'Leary for his detailed
presentation.
Correspondence:
Ms Anne Galvin informed the Members of a letter received from the Policing Authority dated
2nd October 2019, of "A meeting of the Chairperson of the JPC and Chief Executive of the
Local Authorities" taking place in Dublin on the 24th October 2019.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 13th January 2020 at 10.00a.m in the Council
Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
AOB:
On the proposal of Cllr Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr Frank McDermott, Cllr Tom
Farrell requested that the Westmeath JPC write to Commissioner Drew Harris inviting him to
attend one of our JPC Meetings in the future.
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
13
Date
Cllr Paddy H 11,
Chairman, Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
I
2-0
5
