 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 9 October 2023 
in the Council Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath and by MS Teams Meeting  
Presiding: 
 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman 
 
Local Authority  
Members: 
Cllrs John Dolan, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn, Frankie Keena, 
Denis Leonard, Liam McDaniel, Frank McDermott, Hazel Smyth, Emily 
Wallace and Paul Hogan. 
 
Oireachtas Member:          
Deputies Sorca Clarke, Robert Troy and Peter Burke 
 
Community Members: 
Pat Grimes, John Bawle, Dave Raftis, Joyce Furlong and Kathleen 
Grennan. 
 
Garda Officers: 
Superintendent Michelle Baker, Superintendent David Nolan, Inspector 
Peter Gilsenan, Sergeant Ambrose Duggan and Detective Sergeant David 
Donnelly. 
 
Officers Present: 
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Sheila Healy, Senior Executive 
Officer, Mary Goldsberry, A.O, Mark Ahern Westmeath PPN, and Breda 
Daly, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
Chief Supt. John Dollard, Cllrs Bill Collentine and Michael Dollard.  
Senators Aidan Davitt and Paul Daly, and Mr David Callinan 
 
 
Introduction: 
 
Cllr Hill opened the hybrid JPC Meeting and welcomed all present and online. 
Cllr Hill welcomed Ms Mary Goldsberry, newly appointed Meetings Administrator to the Westmeath 
JPC.  Cllr Hill thanked Ms Anne Galvin for her time and dedication to the Westmeath JPC over the last 
four years. 
Cllr Hill informed the Members that Supt. Dollard was unable to attend the meeting and that Supt. 
Nolan was therefore deputising for him. 
 
The Roll Call was taken by the Meetings Administrator.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 10 July 2023: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Dolan and seconded by Cllr Hogan, the Members approved the Minutes of the 
JPC Meeting held on 10 July 2023. 
 
To re-approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 17 April 2023: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Duncan and seconded by Cllr Hogan, the Members approved the Minutes of the 
JPC Meeting held on 17 April 2023. 
 
Report from Westmeath County Council: 
 
Mr Gallagher gave a brief update to the JPC Members in relation to event control and public safety 
aspects of Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann 2023 held in Mullingar from 6th to the 14th August 2023. 
 
Mr Gallagher informed the members that an Event Licence was granted by Westmeath County Council 
in accordance with the Statutory process.  Following consultation with statutory agencies including An 
Garda Síochána, HSE and the Fire Service and the council’s particular remit in accordance with the 
Memorandum of Understanding, was to take responsibility for the event control and event 
management aspect of the Fleadh. 
 
Mr Gallagher also informed the Members that as part of the Procurement Process in 2022 there was 
an option in most contracts to extend the contract to Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann 2023 at the discretion 
of the Fleadh Executive Committee. It was agreed to re-engage with the 2022 Contractors which 
resulted in a considerable saving to the Fleadh Executive Committee as the Contractors maintained the 
2022 rates. 
 
Mr Gallagher explained that the Contractors were engaged in event control which included: health and 
safety responsibilities, security, signage, portable toilets, barriers, power and lighting, vendor 
management, traffic management, stages & performance areas, waste, vehicle recovery, medical & 
care facilities and campsites. 
 
During the Fleadh, Mr Gallagher informed the Meeting that the Event Control HQ, was based in the 
Executive Lounge of Westmeath County Council and present throughout the event in the Event Control 
rooms was the Event Control contractor (Safety Solutions), Westmeath Fleadh Co-Ordinator, AGS, 
Security Control, Medical Control and the Fire Officer was available on radio.   The Event Control Room 
managed onsite incidents and affairs in a co-ordinated manner between all relevant authorities.  
 
Mr Gallagher informed the Members that two review meetings were held daily during the Fleadh within 
the Event Control Room.  The objective shared by all was that all attendees and visitors to the Fleadh 
arrive safely, enjoy their stay and go home safely. 
 
Mr Gallagher thanked all involved in the successful running of Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann 2023, in 
particular in the context of the JPC, Mr Gallagher acknowledged the tremendous support and 
engagement by An Garda Síochána, led by Supt. Nolan and his team who assisted the Council and the 

 
 
Fleadh Executive Committee in ensuring an event of that scale could be held in the County in a safe 
manner.  
 
Cllr Hill and all JPC Members congratulated and thanked Mr Gallagher and the staff of Westmeath 
County Council and all agencies involved including An Garda Síochána for such a successful Fleadh. 
 
Cllr Keena raised a question where he referred to Section 2.5 (e) of the JPC Guidelines, Cllr. Keena asked 
if an Annual Policing Plan was completed for 2023? He further asked is it incumbent on the An Garda 
Síochana or the Local Authority to bring this Policing Plan forward to the JPC Members three months 
prior to the end of year for discussion? 
In response, Mr Gallagher informed the members that he would check this matter out with Supt. Nolan 
and revert to the JPC after today’s Meeting. 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
Supt. Nolan presented the PowerPoint outlining the following crime statistics for the County.  
 
Supt. Nolan spoke on the crime figures for Mullingar District and Supt. Baker spoke on the Athlone 
District figures of the Presentation as follows: 
 
Property crime had increased from 988 in 2022 (YTD) to 1421 in 2023 (YTD), divisional totals.  
In Athlone, figures were up from 534 (YTD) in 2022 to 902 (YTD) in 2023.   
For Mullingar, figures were up from 454 (TYD) in 2022 to 519 (YTD) in 2023.   
 
In terms of burglary, the rate decreased from 169 in (YTD) 2022 to 144 (YTD) in 2023, a 15% divisional 
decrease. 
In Athlone, figures were up from 80 (TYD) in 2022 to 89 (YTD) in 2023.   
For Mullingar, figures were down from 89 (YTD) in 2022 to 55 (YTD) in 2023.   
 
The number of thefts from vehicles decreased from 96 (YTD) in 2022 to 86 (YTD) in 2023, a 10% 
divisional decrease.  
In Athlone, figures were down from 49 (YTD) in 2022 to 52 (YTD) in 2023. 
For Mullingar, figures were down from 47 (YTD) in 2022 to 34 (YTD) in 2023.   
 
The rate of theft /unauthorised taking of vehicles at divisional level increased from 25 (YTD) in 2022 
to 55 (YTD) in 2023, a 120% divisional increase.    
In Athlone, figures were up from 8 (YTD) in 2022 to 20 (YTD) in 2023.   
For Mullingar, figures were up from 17 (YTD) in 2022 to 35 (YTD) in 2023.   
 
There was a 59% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 430 (YTD) in 2022 to 683 (YTD) 
in 2023. (Divisional totals). 
In Athlone, figures were up from 232 (YTD) in 2022 to 423 (YTD) in 2023.   
For Mullingar, figures were up from 198 (YTD) in 2022 to 260 (YTD) in 2023.   
 

 
 
There was an increase in the number of reported thefts of other property, 185 (YTD) in 2022 to 322 
(YTD) 2023. (Divisional totals). 
In Athlone, figures were up from 115 (YTD) in 2022 to 236 (YTD) in 2023.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 70 (YTD) in 2022 to 86 (YTD) in 2023.   
 
The rate of crimes against the person at divisional level increased from 399 (YTD) in 2022 to 406 (YTD) 
in 2023, a 2% divisional increase.   
 
In Athlone, figures decreased from 206 (YTD) in 2023 to 197 (YTD) in 2023.   
For Mullingar, figures were up from 193 (YTD) in 2022 to 209 (YTD) in 2023.   
 
In relation to Drugs figures: 
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations went 
from 52 (YTD) in 2022 to 54 (YTD) in 2023, an increase of 4%, while incidents of Section 15 (possession 
of a drug with intent for sale or supply) went from 10 (YTD) in 2022 to 34 (YTD) in 2023, an increase of 
240%. 
 
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 321 (YTD) in 2022 to 179 (YTD) 
2023, a decrease of 44%. Incidents of Section 15 went from 19 (YTD) in 2022 to 37 in 2023, an increase 
of 95%. 
 
Supt. Nolan informed the JPC Members of the following Community Engagements:  
 
• Mullingar Garda Station Annual Open Day: The Mullingar Garda Station Annual Open Day 
continues to be a major event with the community. 1500 people visit the station in July where 
our Community Policing members gave tours of the station and gave an insight into the running 
of a Garda Station. Some of the Specialist Units attended and the public thoroughly enjoyed The 
Roads Policing Unit, Scenes of Crime, Armed Support, Public Order Unit, Garda Water Unit from 
Athlone and of course the big hit was the Garda Air Support Unit.  
 
• Fleadh Cheoil na hEireann: Once again Fleadh Cheoil na hEireann 2023 was a massive success 
and an enjoyable experience for all attendees, with Community Policing maintaining a strong 
presence. 
 
• Operation Scathlan: Over the summer months Community Gardaí travelled on the train lines 
between Mullingar-Kinnegad and Athone-Tullamore on a number of occasions and engaged 
with staff and passengers on their respective journeys. 
 
• Promoting Road Safety: An Engaging Event for Westmeath Students: On September 28, a road 
safety event took place, where Community Policing Athlone and the Westmeath Road Traffic 
Unit joined forces with Comhairle Na nÓg and Westmeath County Council. This event was aimed 
at raising road safety awareness among over 1,100 Transition Year students from various local 
schools. 
 
 

 
 
 
Supt. Nolan informed the JPC Members of the following Resources – Divisional Overview: 
 
• 
253 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks) 
• 
102 Mullingar District 
• 
  86 Athlone District 
• 
  45 Divisional Units  
• 
  20 Regional Units 
• 
  10 Reserve Members  
• 
  37 Garda Staff  
• 
 13 Garda Stations 
• 
 71 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet 
 
Cllr Hill and JPC Members thanked Supt. Nolan, and his team for their presentation.    
 
The Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Síochána (AGS) and 
officials present: 
 
Cllr Keena asked for more Garda resources for Athlone area, stating that Athlone area was very badly 
hit by the New Garda Operational Model.   
 
Cllr Keena requested that the Westmeath JPC write to the Garda Commissioner, Mr Drew Harris and 
Minister for Justice, Ms Helen McEntee to express their deep concerns that under the new Garda 
Operational Model, Athlone Garda Station will no longer have a dedicated Garda Supt. based in the 
town covering day to day policing.  Cllr Keena asked that this decision be reviewed; and that such a 
Superintendent would be appointed or assigned to Athlone. 
 
In the discussion of the motion, a number of factors were considered including crime data and the role 
of Athlone as a Regional Growth Centre and a University town. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr F Keena and seconded by Cllrs J Dolan and P Hogan, the JPC Members 
unanimously agreed to write to Garda Commissioner Mr Drew Harris and Minister for Justice, Ms Helen 
McEntee. 
 
In response to Cllr Keena, Supt. Nolan briefed the JPC Members on the background to the new Garda 
Operational Model.  Supt. Nolan informed the members that the Future of Policing in Ireland Report 
was published in September 2018 as Garda Commissioner Mr Drew Harris was appointed.  There were 
11 people on the Commission, who made a wide range of recommendations. This Report was passed 
through the Oireachtas in May 2022 and it has been rolled out throughout the State.  Supt. Nolan stated 
that there are a lot of advantages to the new Model and opportunities for reviewing same. 
 
In response to Cllr Keena, Supt. Baker informed the Members that the drugs unit will fall under the 
supervision of the Detective Superintendent for the whole Division.  The Superintendent of Westmeath 
will have responsibility for all the uniformed personnel. 
 

 
 
In relation to the Community Policing unit in Athlone there is permission awaiting the commencement 
of a competition for permanent resources, which is expected to run in November 2023. 
 
Cllr Dolan fully supported Cllr Keena’s motion regarding the new Garda Operational Model.  Cllr Dolan 
requested that more Community Garda be present on Athlone streets. 
 
Cllr Dolan also asked for update on defibrillators and why the number of checkpoints are down? 
 
Cllr Duncan asked where are we in relation to Garda numbers in Westmeath. Cllr Duncan referred to 
the new roster in place and stated that Garda staff morale is low from what  he is hearing on the ground. 
 
Cllr Leonard referred to Rural Policing and the need to keep resources in rural stations in Westmeath, 
especially during big Events.   Cllr Leonard asked what can be done to attract more people into our 
Garda force. 
 
Regarding “hidden drugs”, such as vaping, Cllr Leonard asked what measures are in place to monitor 
and detect people selling attractive, which encourage young people to buy vapes given that some are 
more harmful than others. 
 
Cllr Leonard also asked for an update on the E-scooter legislation.  
    
Regarding defibrillators, Supt. Nolan informed the Members that there is one defibrillator based in 
Mullingar Garda Station, four defibrillators in each Arms Support Vehicles for the Eastern region of the 
country.  
 
In relation to checkpoints, Inspector Peter Gilensan informed the Members that Garda checkpoints 
were down 132 which equates to 3.5 checkpoints per week.  Inspector Gilsenan stated that one of the 
main reasons for this, is due to the backlog of court days after Covid, where Gardaí had to attend Court. 
 
Inspector Gilsenan informed the Members that Garda checkpoints will be increased in the coming 
weeks.  Supt. Nolan further informed the Members that there is a new road policing unit in Delvin and 
Moate. 
 
Regarding Garda resources, Supt. Nolan agreed there is a reduction in the number of Gardaí in 
Westmeath but the Division is always looking for more Gardaí. Supt. Nolan informed the Members that 
there will be a new Garda Campaign in January 2024 which will be most welcome.   
Supt. Nolan did inform the Members that a new Sergeant will be appointed to 
Multyfarnham/Ballinacarrigy in the coming weeks. 
 
Regarding rural policing, Supt. Nolan acknowledges Cllrs Leonards request for more Gardaí for rural 
areas such as Kinnegad.  Supt. Nolan did inform the Members that no Gardaí were taken away from 
Kinnegad in recent times.  Supt. Nolan complemented Sergeant McDaid and her team are doing in 
Kinnegad. 
 

 
 
In response to the vaping issue, Supt. Nolan advised the Meeting that there is a dedicated drugs unit in 
operation and measures are in place.   Supt. Nolan said he would discuss the matter privately with Cllr 
Leonard if required. 
 
In relation to E-Scooters, Inspector Gilensan advised that An Garda Siochana are awaiting legislation on 
same to identify what the relevant categories are.  
 
Cllr Hogan also raised concerns about Garda numbers down by 20% in the last year. 
Cllr Hogan fully supported Cllr Keena’s comments and concerns in relation to the new Garda 
Operational Model where it moves from a Community Model to a Business Model.   
Cllr Hogan asked how many times have we sought assistance from outside of the county for Athlone? 
Cllr Hogan also raised concerns about the outdated CCTV system for Athlone Town. 
 
Cllr McDermott raised concerns about drugs and fatalities, however complemented Castlepollard and 
Delvin Gardaí for their very active work within their communities. 
Cllr McDermott asked for Inspector Gilsenan to monitor the current situation at “The Cut”. 
 
Minister Burke, along with all the JPC Members complimented all agencies involved in the successful 
running of Fleadh 2023 held in Mullingar during the Summer.   
Minister Burke thanked the Community Policing Unit for the dedicated work they do daily.  Minister 
Burke stated that we need to support, acknowledge, understand and respect the work our Gardaí do 
on the ground. Minister Peter Burke informed the Members that there is a budget of approximately €2 
billion allocated for An Garda Siochana services.  
 
Regarding Athlone Garda Station and the new operation model, Minister Burke advised the Members 
that he has raised his concerns and pointed out the concerns raised by the Community to Minister 
McEntee. 
 
Cllr McDaniel firstly apologised for being slightly late for todays’ meeting. 
Cllr McDaniel asked if Kilbeggan / Moate Garda stations will continue to be managed by Athlone under 
the new model.  Cllr McDaniel asked for clarity as to who will manage the Kilbeggan Garda station under 
new model? 
 
Cllr McDaniel also asked if the new Sergeant recently assigned to Kilbeggan will be staying in the station 
where their role is?   
 
Cllr McDaniel also raised concerns about speeding occurring in our rural villages and asked that An 
Garda Siochana enforce the law in this regard.  Cllr McDaniel stated several people in his constituency 
have come to him over speeding issues.  Cllr McDaniel also stated large trucks are destroying or local 
rural roads, undoing the work carried by Westmeath County Council employees.  
 
Deputy Troy stated that rural areas are just as important as town areas in relation to Garda presence.  
He stated that we need a garda presence in our rural areas. 
 
Deputy Troy also raised concerns about speeding on our roads and asked that AGS maintain and raise 
a focus in this area. 

 
 
 
At a previous JPC Meeting, Deputy Troy stated that a business case (regarding Garda numbers) was 
submitted to the Commissioner, Deputy Troy asked if AGS received a response on same?  
 
Cllr Farrell asked for more Community Gardaí in our rural areas.  Cllr Farrell also raised concerns about 
speeding and asked if a “Road Speeding Week” Campaign could be carried out in our schools.   
Cllr Farrell stated the importance of supporting our Gardaí and complimented the Gardaí for the 
extremely difficult work that they do. 
 
Cllr Glynn raised concerns regarding the ongoing antisocial behaviour occurring at our Lakeshores.  Cllr 
Glynn asked that AGS put additional resources in place during peak times and enforce the Bye Laws set 
by Westmeath County Council. Cllr Glynn asked that this issue be addressed. 
 
Cllr Glynn thanked the Mullingar Community Policing Unit for the work carried within the housing 
estates and Cllr Glynn asked that this be continued especially during the dark evenings. 
 
Cllr Smith asked that rubbish be collected at the stream at the back of the hospital that runs parallel to 
Loretto School.  Cllr Smith informed AGS that there is anti-social behaviour occurring in this general 
walkway area (Famine Walk Way near St Oliver Plunkett’s GAA, Cllr Smith asked that AGS monitor this 
situation. 
 
Cllr Smith also asked Westmeath County Council to look at the lighting situation in these areas which 
are heavily used by the public. 
 
Regarding the Lakeshores, Cllr Smith asked what the outcome/learnings of the recent anti-social 
behaviour which occurred at our Lakeshores during the Summer months. 
 
Cllr Smith asked if there was any impact to Garda services in Westmeath, due to the recent Criminal 
Barristers strikes. 
  
In response to anti-social behaviour along the canal way, Supt. Nolan stated that he would flag this with 
the Community Policing Unit.  Supt. Nolan did advise the Members that there is a dedicated Community 
Policing Unit who regularly patrol the canal way. 
 
In response to queries on the Lakeshores, Supt. Nolan informed the Members that the issues were dealt 
with and individuals were moved.  Supt. Nolan also informed the Members that the Community Gardaí 
liaised with the Mullingar Municipal District Director of Services and the relevant staff within the local 
authority.  
 
In relation to the Barristers strikes, Supt. Nolan state that this did not impact Garda services in 
Westmeath. 
 
Supt. Nolan appreciated all the kind comments from the JPC Members regarding the successful policing 
of the Fleadh in Mullingar. 
 
Supt. Nolan did state that AGS will enforce Byelaws when necessary. 

 
 
In relation to policing footprint in rural areas, Supt. Nolan informed the Members that staff are only 
taken from rural areas in exceptional situations whereby a serious incident occurs.   
 
Regarding the Speed Week Campaign for schools – Supt. Nolan will progress this initiative with Sergeant 
Gilsenan. 
 
In response to the business case made to the Commissioner regarding staff resources – Supt. Nolan 
advised the Members that he will have an update at the next JPC Meeting.  
 
In response to Cllr Paul Hogan, Supt. Baker stated that it is common for AGS to move across the country 
to work at large events such as the Fleadh / large football games.   There are approximately 120 shifts 
every week in Athlone District of uniform personnel, of which one to two could be from Mullingar, 
Longford or Offaly areas, which only happens after local Gardaí are not available due to various reasons.  
 
Supt. Baker informed the meeting that CCTV is in operation since 2009 approx.  and Supt. Baker has 
asked for a review on this.  Supt. Baker will update the JPC on this matter. 
 
Supt. Nolan informed the Members that the Community Policing Units will continue to visit pre-schools, 
national schools and secondary schools.  
 
Regarding new Garda recruits Supt. Nolan advised that Westmeath will get new recruits in the coming 
months.  
 
Supt. Baker informed the meeting that the recent Comhairle na nÓg Event in Athlone which focused 
on Road Safety was very successful. This event was attended by Transition Year students from the 
county. 
 
Supt. Nolan stated that he will revert to Cllr McDaniel in relation to Kilbeggan Garda Station.    
 
Cllr Hill expressed his concerns about the New Garda Operational Model and fully supports Cllr Keena’s 
motion for the JPC to write to Garda Commissioner and Minister McEntee. 
 
PPN Report: 
 
Mr. John Bawle presented the “Westmeath PPN Report October 2023” to the JPC Members as 
circulated. 
 
Cllr Hill thanked Mr Bawle and the Westmeath PPN for their detailed report and for all their hard work 
and commitment.   
 
Correspondence: 
None. 
 
Date of next meeting 
The next JPC meeting was scheduled for Monday, 15 January 2024 at 10.00a.m, Áras an Chontae, 
Mullingar. 
 

 
 
 
AOB: 
 
Cllr McDaniel congratulated AGS on the recent Roads Safety Comhairle na nÓg event. 
 
Cllr Keena proposed a Vote of Sympathy to the late Garda Stacy White, AGS, Athlone. 
The Members unanimously supported the Vote of Sympathy proposed by Cllr Keena.  
 
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________  
 
 
_________________ 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill 
 
 
 
 
Date 
Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
