Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 18th April 2016
in the
Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Frank McDermott
Cllrs Sorca Clarke, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Frankie
Keena, Paddy Hill, Paul Hogan and Emily Wallace.
None Present
Mr. Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, and Kathleen Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley, Superintendents Alan
Murray and Patrick Murray.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Cllrs, Aidan Davitt, Michael O'Brien, Aengus O'Rourke, John
Shaw, Ken Glynn, Aengus O'Rourke, Phil Brennan, Sheena
Lawless and Deputy Willie Penrose.
In the absence of Cllr Aidan Davitt, Cllr Frank McDermott Vice Chair took the April JPC
Meeting. Cllr McDennott opened the meeting by welcoming all the Members and in
particular newly appointed JPC Councillor Emily Wallace.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 19th January 2016:
On the proposal of Cllr. Paul Hogan and seconded by Cllr Andrew Duncan it was agreed to
approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 1 9th January 2016 in the Council Chambers,
Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
Vote 0fSympathy - Mr Hugh McGuire RIP
Cllr McDermott lead the tributes to the late Hugh McGuire who passed away in February
2016 and to his wife and family.
Cllrs Paddy Hill and Frankie Keena proposed a vote of sympathy on behalf of the Fianna Fåil
Cllr Tom Farrell also proposed a vote of sympathy on behalf of the Fine Gael Party and Cllr
Paul Hogan on behalf of the Sinn Fein Party.
All JPC Members commended Mr Hugh McGuire RIP, on the great work that he did for
people with disabilities within the communities of Westmeath. He was a true campaigner
and great advocate for people with visual disabilities and he will be sadly missed.
The Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher extended the sympathy to the McGuire family on
behalf of the Management and Staff of Westmeath County Council and stated that he would
like to be associated with the sentiments expressed by the Members of the JPC. Mr
Gallagher also stated that Mr McGuire was a very effective campaigner and advocate, very
friendly and always courteous in dealing with staff.
Chief Superintendent, Ms Lorraine Wheatley also extended sympathy and condolences, on
behalf of the Garda Siochåna to the McGuire Family on the recent passing of Mr McGuire
RIP.
Matters Arising:
> Notice of Motion — Cllr Andrew Duncan
"That this Council, in conjunction with An Garda Siochäna, would instaZZ
CCTV in EnneZZ Court/St. Anthony's Cottages area".
Cllr Andrew Duncan tabled the above Motion to the Members and asked that Westmeath
County Council install a CCTV camera on a telegraph pole which is situated on lands owned
by Westmeath County Council at Ennell Court/ St Anthony's Cottages. Cllr Duncan stated
that residents in this particular area are afraid to go to the Gardai and children cannot sleep
properly at night all due to the disorderly and anti-social behaviour of 1 or 2 families.
In response to this Motion, Mr Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District advised the
Members that Westmeath County Council are liaising with a Contractor to have cameras
placed at certain locations within Mullingar town. He also informed the Members that in
some cases, CCTV cameras have had the memory chip removed and tampered with. He
further informed the Members that installation of cameras on a rotating basis is being
considered which will help reduce anti-social behaviour and littering.
> To consider vacancy on JPC — Mr Hugh McGuire (RIP)
Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator advised the Members that this matter is being
dealt with by the Public Private Network, the original proposer of Mr McGuire's appointment
to the JPC, who will consider and nominate a replacement for the late Mr McGuire's
vacancy.
Re ort from Westmeath Coun Council:
The Chief Executive briefed the Members on the Westmeath County Council JPC Working
Group re: Public Safety and Design of the Built Environment which was circulated to all
Members at today's meeting.
Cllr Keena welcomed the progress in this Report but felt that more external support agencies
such as MABs and the HSE should be included in order to help families with finances,
education and health issues.
Mr Des Sheridan welcomed the Report and expressed his gratitude to Mr Terry McCague,
Westmeath County Council, Senior Planner and the Gardai for their involvement in this
particular Working Group. He stated that more housing estate planning applications will be
back on the Agenda due to the economic change in the country and there is a pressing need
for good quality design and involvement of community representatives in the process.
In response to Cllr Keena, the Chief Executive advised the Members that Westmeath County
Council's role in this particular Committee is the physical design of the building. Mr
Gallagher further informed the Members that the concepts that Cllr Keena referred to would
come under the remit of the Local Community Development Committee (LCDC).
Public Meeting Request:
Following a request by the JPC Members to hold a Public Meeting, the Chief Executive
informed the Members that the JPC Steering Group Committee met on Tuesday, 12th April
2016 to discuss the matter.
Mr Gallagher infonned the Members as set out in Section 7 of the amended 2014 JPC
Guidelines, the Steering Group Committee agreed to hold 2 public meetings:
Athlone Public Meeting
Mullingar Public Meeting
end of May / early June, venue to be agreed.
end of Sept/early October, venue to be agreed.
This was agreed by all Members, but Cllr McDennott felt that the May meeting should be
delayed due to the formation of a new Government.
Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator is to organise the final scheduling of Public
Meetings with the Municipal Districts, Community & Development and the Gardai.
Re ort from An Garda Sfochåna:
Chief Superintendent Ms Lorraine Wheatley gave a summary of the Garda Report for the
Westmeath Division which was e-mailed to all Members prior to the Meeting.
Chief Supt. Wheatley highlighted the following:
Crime Analysis : 1/01/2016 to 31/3/2016
Crime Prevention Initiatives:
o Annual Neighbourhood Watch and Community Alert Forum
Operation Thor
Crime Prevention Officer
Report was noted.
Cllr Frank McDermott welcomed the Garda Report on behalf of all the Members and
commended the hard work of our Gardai. The following issues were raised by the Members.
Cllr Tom Farrell
a Commended the Garda Crime Unit in Athlone and also the excellent co-operation An
Gardai have within Housing Estates in Westmeath.
Cllr Paul Hogan:
Commended Dedicated Garda Dlugs Unit in Athlone.
Expressed serious concems regarding the stabbing of a Garda Member that was
recently stabbed in Athlone, this Garda member should be commended for his
bravery. Cllr Hogan further stated that following the Garda and Inspectors Annual
Conference which took place recently, no Garda personnel should travel alone.
Water Safety — Cllr Hogan requested that Westmeath County Council hold a Water
Safety Campaign for Athlone and Mullingar Areas, as we approach the Summer
months.
requested that Westmeath County Council invite
Active Retirement Groups —
Retirement Group(s) in to make a presentation to the JPC Members on the concerns
older people have within their communities.
Cllr Frankie Keena:
o Commended Dedicated Garda Drugs Unit in Athlone
o Requested statistics on the type of personnel carrying out burglaries.
Cllr Sorca Clarke:
o Sexual Offence Reporting (historic and current)- can we encourage people to come
forward to report sexual crimes.
o Westmeath Drivers — statistics on penalty points.
Cllr Paddy Hill
Welcomes the good work of the Garda on the ground on a daily basis.
Rural vulnerability — due to closure of Local Garda Stations. Feels this was a big
mistake. People living in rural Ireland do not lcnow the name of their local Garda.
Strong recmitment drive needed for more Gardai. New Government when formed,
should recruit more Gardaf to keep communities safe.
Gardai should never travel alone. Gardai put themselves at risk on a daily basis.
Des Sheridan:
o Public Order Offences — impacting on limited resources.
o New Recruits — congatulates the young Gardai joining the Force, they are the future,
but only disadvantage is the local Garda does not live in the Community anymore.
Cllr Frank McDermott:
e Cllr McDermott supported the views expressed by Cllr Hill.
o Farming Cornmunity — Reputable Dealers will not accept copper without the
legitimate markings— this is an advance.
12 Gardai Personnel working in Delvin Area — none living in the Parish — feels this is
wrong, local Gardai should engage more within their local more as this is where you
get the local knowledge.
In response to the Members, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that when Mullingar
Garda Station receives phone calls for call outs, body armour is provided and Gardai try to
travel in pairs where possible.
Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that burglaries come from a wide range of areas,
without labelling anyone, there is a strong connection between drug taking and burglary.
Chief Supt. Wheatley further informed the Members that Detective Inspector Dennot Drea
will be appointed to the Crime Prevention Initiative.
Superintendent Patrick Murray informed the Members that the matter in relation to the
injured Garda in Athlone is before the Courts.
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the Members that there is an increase in victims coming
forward both historical and present in relation to sexual assaults and stated the sensitive
nature of this type of crime.
In relation to Westmeath Drivers, Chief Supt. Wheatley stated that the high percentage points
recorded in Westmeath is a reflection of the high number of offenders being detected.
In relation to recruitment, Chief Supt. Wheatley infonned the Members that five new Gardai
will be deployed to the Westmeath Division in the coming weeks.
150 Gardai will be qualified fr0111 Templemore in the coming weeks, approximately 300-400
Gardai retiring this year.
In response to Cllr Hogan's request for a Water Safety Update, Chief Executive, Mr Pat
Gallagher infonned the Members that Enda Hanniffy, Water Safety Officer for Westmeath
County Council gave a presentation to the Members last year and will do so at our next JPC
Meeting in July.
Date of next meetin
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 18t
Church Street, Athlone.
Any other Business:
July 2016 at 11.00a.m in the Civic Offices,
Cllr Paddy Hill said he recently sent in a Motion to the Mullingar Municipal District:
"To ask this Municipal District to consider providing traffic calming measures at the
GAA Pitch on Packenhamhall Road, Castlepollard, as this is a very much used entrance
to the pitch, with traffic approaching from both sides travelling too fast"
This location is within the 50km/hr speed limit zone. There is no plan or
funding for traffic calming measures at this location.
Cllr Hill asked that the Gardai enforce speed restrictions at Packenhamhall Road and also at Fore and
Finnea.
Cllr Duncan said more Garda foot patrols are needed for Mullingar Town, if resources are available.
Votes of Sympathy:
o Cllr Hogan requested that Westmeath County Council write to the Maguire Family on
the recent death of Mr Hugh McGuire RIP.
e Cllr Keena requested that Westmeath County Council write to the Quirke Family on
the recent death of Ms Catriona Quirke RIP, Civilian, Athlone Garda Station. Cllrs
Hogan and Farrell seconded this proposal
Chief Supt. Wheatley extended her sympathy to the Quirke family on behalf of the staff of
An Garda Siochana. Chief Supt. Wheatley stated that Ms Quirke served 35 years with the
force and was a great colleague and played a huge contribution to Athlone Town. She will be
sadly missed.
Cllr Frank McDermott thanked all Members for attending today's meeting and wished Cllr Aidan
Davitt well in the upcoming Seanad Elections.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Frank McDermott,
V/Chairman
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date