Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 19th October 2015
in the
Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Frank McDermott, Vice Chairman
Cllrs. Peter Burke, Sorca Clarke, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn,
Paddy Hill, Paul Hogan, Frankie Keena, Aengus O'Rourke.
Deputy Robert Troy.
Mr. Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, Hugh McGuire, Sheena
Lawless, Kathleen Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley, Superintendents Alan
Murray and Patrick Murray.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Pat Keating, Athlone Municipal District Manager
Gerry Loughrey, Housing Liaison Officer
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Cllrs Aidan Davitt, Andrew Duncan, Michael O'Brien, John
Shaw, Phil Brennan, Deputies McFadden, Bannon, Toibin and
Penrose
The Vice Chainnan, Cllr Frank McDermott opened the meeting and advised the JPC
Members that the Chairman, Cllr Aidan Davitt was unavailable to attend the meeting and he
would chair the meeting.
Cllr McDermott extended his sympathies to the Members of An Garda Sfochåna on the death
of Garda Anthony Golden, RIP. He also extended condolences to the late Garda Golden's
family and those bereaved by the fire which claimed IO lives at Carrickmines, Co Dublin.
Cllr McDermott advised the JPC Members that two Books of Condolence were opened in
Westmeath County Council Civic Offices.
Sympathies were also expressed by Cllrs Paddy Hill, Paul Hogan and Des Sheridan.
On his own behalf and on behalf of the staff of Westmeath County Council, the Chief
Executive Pat Gallagher, also expressed sympathies to An Garda Siochåna, the Golden
Family and the Dublin Families of Can-ickmines.
All complaints are treated in a strictly confidential manner and tenants are informed of this on
a regular basis. Person making a complaint does not need to be in Court, no names are
released in Court or to anybody else.
Mr Loughrey further advised the Members that all Tenants receive the Tenant Handbook
and regular inspections are can-ied out.
Mr Loughrey advised the Members that he would take on board their issue raised.
Mr Pat Gallagher stressed to the JPC Members that all complaints made to the Housing
Department are dealt with in a strict confidential manner. He thanked the Gardai for their
assistance under the Anti-Social Behaviour Policy.
Re ort from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley thanked and appreciated all comments received in
relation to the late Garda Anthony Golden, RIP.
Chief Supt. Wheatley gave a summary of the Garda Report from the ISt July to the 30th
September 2015 which divided crime by category.
Crime Analysis:
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the JPC Members that the number of burglaries recorded in
Westmeath during the three months (July — Aug) were down 66% on the same period last
year as was the number is criminal damage incidents recorded which were down 34%
Chief Superintendent Wheatley expressed the importance of Crime Prevention Initiatives
such as:
Mullingar and District Older Persons Christmas Party:
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the Members that this is the Annual Christmas party for
older persons in the District. The event will be used as a platform to promote the Garda
Westmeath older Persons Strategy.
o Supporting Safer Communities Campaign:
She further informed the Members of the following initiatives to help prevent burglaries:
Home Security Checklist Challenge
o Do The Light Thing
Illuminate to Eliminate Burglaries
Chief Supt. Wheatley encouraged all to engage more in social media and to check the Garda
Website for further details.
e Crime Prevention Officer:
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the JPC Members that the Divisional Crime Prevention
Officer has been very active during the last three months providing schools and third level
institutions with advise in relation to avoiding holding of cash, protection of mobile phones,
laptops and media devices.
The focus in September moved to the Safer Communities Campaign as highlighted above.
Cllr Frank McDermott:
Seeking speeding checkpoints at: Collinstown and Finnea
Communities should be encouraged to work with Garda.
In response to the Members, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that Gardai work
very closely in relation to criminal activity between Towns.
In response to Door to Door bogus callers, she advised the Members that initiatives are in
place and people are encouraged not to engage with people they are unfamiliar with. Gardaf
are currently issuing a door to door check list to members of the public.
In relation to crime figures, she advised the Members that she can stand over the statistics
produced as per Garda Crime Report for Westmeath Division. Crime prevention is a priority.
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the Members that Athlone and Mullingar Traffic Corps are
very active in relation to speeding and checkpoints. The Gardai will take on board comments
made in relation to speeding issues raised in rural villages within Westmeath.
In relation to the Text Alert System, she advised that additional funding is required and the
Gardai are actively communicating via local and social media and Garda website.
In relation to the Drugs Unit, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that this unit will be
in place shortly and Juvenile Liaison Officers are in place who work very closely within
Estates and she expects that Westmeath will get additional Garda recruits in 2016.
Superintendent Alan Murray advised the Members that he will investigate issues raised in
Blackhall, Mullingar. He also confirmed that extra Garda staff will be available over the
Halloween period. Supt. Murray also advised that the Traffic Corp will address speeding
issues raised in Ballinea, Mullingar.
Superintendent Patrick Murray advised the Members that drugs policing in Athlone is
ongoing and the intention is to set up a drugs dedicated unit in Athlone.
In relation to lights on the Greenway, Supt. Patrick Murray confirmed that the Gardai are
liaising with the Local Authority regarding "Crime Prevention Design".
Chief Supt., Patrick Murray further informed the Members that a provisional date was set for
the 10th January 2016 to have access works commenced for universal access to Athlone
Garda Barracks.
Cllr. Frank McDermott, commended Chief Supt. Wheatley for the hard work and dedication
of the Community Gardai in Athlone/Mullingar.
Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher informed the Members that as part of the Westmeath JPC
Workplan 2015 — 2020, under the section "Public Safety" a Working Group needs to be
established. This Working Group will examine design of the built environment in respect of
crime prevention and anti-social activity and implement recommendations.