Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 16th April 2018
in Athlone Civic Offices, Athlone Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Frank McDermott, Chairman
Cllrs, Sorca Clarke, Tom Farrell, Paddy Hill, Frankie Keena,
Michael O'Brien.
None
Pat Grimes, Marie Reddin, Dave Raftis and Sheena Lawless.
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff, Superintendent Alan Murray
and Superintendent Shane Cummins.
Barry Kehoe, Director of Services, WCC,
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, WCC, Kitty Foyle,
Mullingar Municipal District, Frank Dolan, Athlone Municipal
District, Annette Barr Jordan, Community and Enterprise,
WCC, Breda Daly Corporate Services, WCC.
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, Westmeath County Council
Cllr's. Andrew Duncan, Ken Glynn, Paul Hogan Aengus
O'Rourke, John Shaw, Emily Wallace, Bill Collentine, Senator
Paul Daly, Senator Aidan Davitt, Senator Gabrielle McFadden,
Deputy Peter Burke, Deputy Robert Troy, Sheena Lawless and
Pat Keating, Des Sheridan, and Mr Pat Keating.
The Chairman, Cllr Frank McDermott opened the meeting and welcomed the Members, Press
and Mr Conor O'Leary from Muintir na Tire who was present as an Observer. Cllr
McDermott informed the Members that Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive was unable to
attend today's meeting and that Mr Barry Kehoe, Director of Services was deputising for
him.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 15th January 2018:
On the proposal of Cllr. Paddy Hill and seconded by Cllr Sorca Clarke the Members
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 15th January 2018.
Matters Arising:
Cllr Clarke asked if there was any update on roadside drug testing. In response, Chief Supt
Peter Duff agreed he would address this matter under his Garda Report.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
• To consider and approve JPC Annual Report 2017
On the proposal of Cllr. Frankie Keena, seconded by Cllr Sorca Clarke, the Members
approved the Westmeath JPC Annual Report 2017.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt. Peter Duff informed the Members that Supt. Shane Cummins had replaced Supt
Patrick Murray since February 2018.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath Division as
circulated prior to today's meeting.
This report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Peter Duffhighlighted the following:
Crime Analysis 01/01/2017 to 31/03/2018 inclusive — as per Report circulated.
Community Engagement and Public Safety:
Community Policing Model Westmeath — Chief Supt Peter Duff infonned the
Members that :
o
o
o
a review of the Community Policing delivery model within Westmeath
Division is being conducted with a view to enhancing the delivery of
Community Policing through resource pooling and assignment of specific
areas to personnel across Garda Stations.
St Patrick's Day Events — Operational Policing Plans were in place throughout
the County for St Patrick's Day Parades, with additional patrols and personnel
on duty to police the night time economy. Incidents of Public Order were
down considerably from last year. Mullingar town hosted its Annual half
Marathon on 17th March 2018 with an after party held for participants in
Blackhall after the race. Gardai in Mullingar prepared an operational plan for
this event with the event organisers to provide additional support at various
locations.
Syrian Families — who have been provided with accommodation in Mullingar
were welcomed by the Gardai attached to the Community Policing Units.
Westmeath Divisional Youth Awards — planning has commenced to establish
a Westmeath Divisional Youth Awards Scheme for 2018 with presentations to
be made during the ISt quarter of 2019 for the preceding year. Awards will be
considered for nominated young people (14 — 21 yrs) who by their presence
make their communities a better place to live in.
Music Events — 3 music events will be held in Westmeath during 2018 and in
conjunction with Westmeath County Council, the operational orders and
policing requirements are currently being evaluated in advance of the events.
Confronting Crime: - as per Garda ReDort circulated.
Roads Policing: - Gardai in the Westmeath Division continue to conduct roads
policing operations to minimise road deaths in the Westmeath Division. A number of
Multi Agency Checkpoints are carried out each month with strict enforcement of
legislation pertaining to speeding, seat belts, mobile phone usage, overweight
vehicles, wom tyres and lighting regulations.
Organisational Development and Capacity Improvement:
a new performance, accountability and Learning
0 PALF Training
Framework has commenced in An Garda Siochana and is currently being
rolled out in the Westmeath Division.
o Crime Prevention Officer — Sergeant John Connolly, the Divisional Crime
Prevention Officer for Westmeath will retire on the 3 ISt May 2018.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Duff for his comprehensive Garda
Report.
Cllr McDermott on behalf of the Westmeath JPC Members welcomed newly appointed Supt.
Shane Cummins to the Athlone Garda Division; he also thanked Supt Patrick Murray,
(Athlone Division) for his excellent work during his time on the Westmeath Joint Policing
Committee.
Cllrs McDermott, Clarke, Farrell, Hill, Keena, and O'Brien commended the outstanding work
of Sergeant John Connolly, Crime Prevention Officer who is due to retire on the 31 st May
2018. All Members thanked Sgt Connolly for his outstanding work, commitment, support,
and effort in combating crime within Westmeath Division. All JPC Members wished Sgt
Connolly good wishes on his retirement.
Mr Barry Kehoe on behalf of the Staff of Westmeath County Council also thanked Sgt John
Connolly for his contribution and wished both Mr Connolly and his family a happy
retirement.
Mr Dave Raftis, on behalf of the Westmeath JPC Community Representatives also
commended Sgt Connolly on his invaluable advice and commitment to the local communities
within Westmeath.
Chief Superintendent Duff confirmed that an application has been made to fill this position
and ensure continuity in the development of crime prevention.
Cllr Sorca Clarke complimented the Gardai on the establishment of the, Divisional Youth
Awards Scheme for Westmeath. Cllr Clarke stated that this new initiative will break down
barriers and welcomed same.
In response to Cllr Clarkes query regarding racial crimes/assaults, Chief Supt. Peter Duff
informed the Members that he was not aware of any.
Cllr Clarke asked the Gardai present if dash-cam footage can be used by the Gardai. In
response Chief Supt. Peter Duff confirmed it can be used by An Garda Siochana.
Cllr Clarke said she received complaints that a person engaging in indecent exposure was
reported by several people along the banks of the canal in Mullingar in recent weeks. Cllr
Clarke asked if there was any update. In response, Chief Supt. Peter Duff advised the
Members that the Gardai are continuing to operate foot patrols along the canal banks but to
date they have not been successful in apprehending anyone. Mr Duff stated that the Gardai
would continue to pursue the matter and he urged members of the public to report any
suspicious occurrences to their nearest Garda Station.
Cllr Frankie Keena raised concerns in relation to the Possession of Drugs for Sale or Supply
with 14 incidents in 2017 and 10 so far in 2018. Cllr Keena believed the figures were at
variance with what was happening on the streets. Chief Supt. Peter Duff informed the
Members that he hoped to have a presentation from the Head of the Criminal Assets Bureau
(CAB) at the July JPC Meeting. Mr Duff also confirmed that CAB work closely with local
Gardai to identify the suspected proceeds of criminal activity while the public is also urged to
report any suspicions they have about criminals and CAB in confidence.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff informed the Members that local Gardai are fully aware of local
activity in towns, villages and rural areas in relation to drugs and he confirmed that the Drugs
Units across the Westmeath Division are at strength.
Cllr Keena complimented the excellent work Supt Pat Murray carried out during his time in
the Moate/Kilbeggan area and asked that this work continue especially in terms of holding
Community Meetings within these two areas. Chief Supt Peter Duff informcd thc Mcmbcrs
that there is ongoing review of Community Policing for this area and he will follow up on the
matter.
In response to Cllr Keena's question regarding an update on the refurbishment of Athlone
Garda Station, Chief Supt Peter Duff infonned the Members that contracts are due to be
signed in the coming weeks and works are expected to start in mid May 2018.
Cllr Farrell also welcomed new Supt. Shane Cummins to the Athlone Divisional area and
thanked Supt Pat Murray for his contribution over the last number of years in Athlone.
In response to Cllr Farrell and Cllr Clarke's query regarding drug testing on roadsides, Chief
Supt Peter Duff informed the Members that drug testing on roadsides came into effect in
April 2017. Chief Supt Peter Duff read out a Report on Drug Testing on Roadside to clarify
issues raised on the matter. He further confirmed that he would e-mail this response to Mr
Billy Coughlan who agreed to circulate to all JPC Members prior to our next JPC Meeting.
Chief Supt Peter Duff advised the Members to view the Road Safety Authority website under
the heading Drug Testing to seek further details.
Cllr Michael O'Brien raised concems over anti-social behaviour on the Greenway in
particular areas at Garrycastle, Moate and Mount Temple. Cllr O'Brien requested that there
be more Garda presence on the Greenway. In response, Chief Supt Peter Duff informed the
Members that the Greenway is patrolled on a regularly basis but not perrnanently and he will
review the matter.
Cllr Paddy Hill raised the issue of Garda shortages in the North Westmeath areas such as
Delvin and Castlepollard. Cllr Hill said people are living in fear, especially older people who
live alone in the rural areas of Westmeath. Cllr Hill also stated that the Castlepollard Garda
Station is urgently in need of repair. Chief Supt Peter Duff, stated that he would like to
increase manpower levels across all Stations but it is not possible. Regarding Castlepollard
Garda Station, Mr Duff agreed that the conditions in Castlepollard Garda Station are "less
than ideal". He pointed out to the Members that the OPW are responsible for all Garda
Stations but there is a limited budget. Chief Supt Peter Duff assured the Members that Chief
Superintendents all over the country are making requests to the Department for extra
resources all the time.
Cllr McDermott thanked Chief Supt Peter Duff for his response and asked that speed checks
be put in place at Collinstown and Whitehall Schools and he requested further Garda
vigilance in this area due to the high level of speeding both day and night.
PPN Report:
Mr Dave Raftis, Community Representative presented the PPN Report to the JPC Members
as circulated prior to today' s meeting.
A number of queries and proposed projects were listed in this Report and the following was
noted and agreed on:
•
Mobile Camera Unit — Mr Barry Kehoe informed the Members that the mobile
camera unit is used primarily to detect littering offences.
Speed Limit signage for Estates - Mr Barry Kehoe informed the Members that
practically all Housing Estates taken in charge by Westmeath County Council have
had the 30kmph signage erected.
Public Safety and confidence in Garda — PPN requested increased Garda presence
in particular foot patrols and bicycle patrols where possible.
Mr Barry Kehoe advised the Members that
National CCTV Scheme
commencement of this Scheme has been deferred due to potential data protection
issues.
Anti Social Behaviour Policy in LA Estates — the Members requested the re-issue of
the Tenants Handbook to all Tenants and also requested that "Intimidation Training"
for Community and Voluntary groups in Westmeath be provided.
Clean Up Days — Mr Barry Kehoe confirmed that he would report the illegal
dumping at Mullingar Harriers Athletic Grounds and Farran, Mullingar to the
Mullingar Municipal District and arrange for a clean up as soon as possible.
Cllr McDermott thanked Mr Raftis and the Community Representatives for their Report.
Correspondence:
Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrative advised the Members of the following
correspondence.
(1) Correspondence from Cllr Una D'Arcy:
"Following significant anti social behaviour at Lough Lene, can Mullingar Municipal
District consider this location for a surveillance camera and other surveillance of the
standard to pursue prosecutions ".
Mr Kehoe advised the Members that the Mullingar Municipal District had considered this
matter at a recent meeting and were informed that there are no proposals to install cctv
cameras at this location.
(2) Correspondence from Cllr Paddv Hill:
To ask Mullingar Municipal District if it will take the required action to improve safety at
Whitehall National School.
In response to Cllr Hill's correspondence, Mr Barry Kehoe agreed to examine the area in
question with the Transportation Section and revert back to Cllr Hill.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 16th July 2018 at 10.00a.m in the Council
Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Frank McD mott,
Dat
Chairman, Westmeath Joint Policing Committee