Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00m on Monday, 20th July, 2015
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies
in the
Civic Offices, Church St., Athlone.
Cllr Aidan Davitt, Chairman
Cllrs. Peter Burke, Sorca Clarke, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell,
Ken Glynn, Frankie Keena, Michael O'Brien, John Shaw.
Deputy James Bannon, Deputy Gabrielle McFadden
Mr. Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, Kathleen Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley, Superintendents Alan
Murray and Patrick Murray.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Kitty Foyle, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Enda Hanniffy, Health & Safety Officer
Geraldine Barden, Clerical Officer
Cllrs. Paul Hogan, Aengus O'Rourke,
Deputy Toibin, Mr. Hugh Maguire.
The Chair-man, Cllr Aidan Davitt opened the meeting by welcoming all the Members and
advised them of Hugh McGuire's apologies as he was unable to attend the meeting.
1. To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 20th April 2015
On the proposal of Cllr. Michael O'Brien and seconded by Deputy James Bannon, it was
agreed to approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 20th April 2015 in the Council
Chamber, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar.
2. Matters arising
There were no matters arising.
3. Report from Westmeath County Council
Mr. Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, advised the Members that following the adoption of the
JPC Work Plan 2015, there are a number of sections in the Council finalising infonnation in
relation to same and he further advised the Members that he would give them an update on
this at the next JPC Meeting.
Mr. Gallagher also advised the Members in relation to a request by Cllr. Frankie Keena at the
April JPC meeting in relation to the importance of water safety. Mr. Enda Hanniffy, water
safety officer, is giving a presentation at today's meeting.
• Presentation on Westmeath Water Safety Annual Work Programme
2015
Mr. Enda Hanniffy, Water Safety Officer, gave a presentation to the Members on Westmeath
Water Safety Annual Work Programme 2015. He gave the Members an outline on the
amount of drownings in the Country since 1932. He advised the Members that 1983 was the
worst year in record with a total of 235 drownings in that year. Since 2003, there have been
135 drownings and that figure is dropping.
Mr. Hanniffy advised the Members that Irish Water Safety work closely with the Council in
relation to prevention and he advised the Members in relation to the "PAWS" programme
which is a strategy to educate children about water safety and lifeguard and pool training.
Mr. Hanniffy advised the Members that there are 116 ringbouys in the county with an annual
inspection programme. He also advised the Members in relation to a press release for the
summer season on water safety and in June 2015 Irish Water Safety launched a safety zone
initiative.
Mr. Billy Coughlan, Meetings Adminisfrator, advised the Members in relation to a
submission made by Mr. Hugh McGuire in which he expressed serious concems in relation to
people swimming in an area in Athlone known as Number 1. Mr. Hanniffy advised the
Members that he would look at the area again.
Cllr Aidan Davitt thanked Enda Hanniffy for his presentation and at this point he opened the
floor to questions.
In response to the Members, Enda Hanniffy advised that Irish Water Safety have a strategy in
place in respect of coastal areas and their focus is now turning towards inland waterways. In
the summer time, there are designated bathing areas with lifeguards however, in relation to
Portnashangan and the Cut in Lough Lene. Mr. Hannifö' advised the Members that they are
not manned areas, the Cut in Lough Lene is demarked with " A Safety Zone" for swimming.
Swimming in Lilliput has been suspended due to poor water quality and signage has been
erected. The water quality in Lilliput has substantially improved.
He also advised the Members that we have no Blue Flag areas in Westmeath. IWS has a staff
of six members. One staff member liaises with schools and the training officers visit schools.
Mr. Hanniffy advised that there is a huge amount of information aimed at young people in
regard to water safety and packs are sent to each school and the teacher then contacts
Mullingar swimming pool to arrange training.
In response to the Members, Mr. Hanniffy advised that RNLI posters have just come out and
these are on the Council website. Mr. Hanniffy also advised that these posters will be turned
into signs and put up around Westmeath.
Enda Hanniffy advised the Members that he will re-circulate the packs to schools again but
we need teachers to engage with the programme and all schools in the county to put a
swimming programme in place.
In response to Cllr. Keena in relation to teenagers swimming along the Shannon, Enda
Hanniffy advised he will consider putting up additional signage and posters to warn
swimmers of the dangers (as per RNLI Posters).
Identifying suicide as a concem, Enda Hanniffy advised Cllr. Clarke and the Members that at
the site of ringbouys there are helpline number stickers on the side of ring buoy boxes. Mr.
Hanniffy also advised that he received suicide awareness training from IWS.
In relation to ringbouy training, Enda Hanniffy advised the Members that Mullingar
swimming pool is training the children on how to throw the buoy into the water. He advised
that he will consider sending water safety information to schools (aimed at children and
parents) to raise awareness on safe bathing areas.
He also advised that Irish Water Safety are reviewing at putting ropes on ringbouys into
throw bags to prevent ropes from being damaged or vandalised.
In response to Cllr. O'Brien, Enda Hanniffy advised that he will discuss with IT Section in
Westmeath County Council in relation to the possibility of setting up a Facebook page on
water safety.
Mr. Hanniffy advised the Members that the 91 drownings that occurred in 2013 includes all
drownings, Irish Water Safety is compiling the data for 2014. He advised that on average, one
drowning per year occurs in a swimming pool.
In response to the Melnbers, Enda Hanniffy quoted that on a vessel less than 7 metres in
length, a person may be required to wear a life jacket but enforcement of this does not come
under the Council's remit,
Cllr. Aidan Davitt, Chairman, thanked Enda Hanniffy for his presentation and response to
Members.
4. Report from An Garda Siochina
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley gave a summary of the Garda Report up to 30th June
2015 which divided crime by category.
Chief Superintendent Wheatley expressed the importance of Crime Prevention Initiatives
such as:
• Community Policing Units
• Theft from Shops Strategy
• Allocation of newly attested Gardai
Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that the figures were improving and the theft
from shop strategy kicked off in April. She advised that the Garda are in the of
developing a text alert strategy for shops.
Chief Supt. Wheatley also advised the Members in relation to a Multicultural Open Day
which was held in Mullingar Garda Station Saturday, 27th June 2015 and advised that this
was very well attended and the use of social media such as the Garda twitter account and
Garda Face book account to advertise this was a success.
The Message in a Bottle Emergency initiative - which allows the elderly and vulnerable to
store all their relevant personal information and illness information in a plastic bottle has
been rolled out,
Chief Supt. Wheatley also advised the Members that Gardai on the beat have been assigned
to particular areas and Mullingar Garda Station will benefit from the allocation of five new
Gardai following their attestation at the Garda College in late July. This will enhance the
policing service being provided in the District and is the first allocation of Gardai to the
County of Westmeath since the initiation of the new recruitment drive. It is anticipated that a
further five Gardai will be allocated to the Division in September of this year and these
members will be allocated entirely to Athlone Garda Station.
Chairman Aidan Davitt welcomed the Report on behalf of all the Members and in particular
the news regarding the five new Gardai starting in Mullingar. The following issues were
raised by the Members.
Deputy McFadden complemented the Gardai on the drop in crime figures which she
regarded as very impressive but she expressed concern in relation to possession of
drugs, the fact that there was no decrease there. She advised the Members that she had
lobbied the Minister in relation to new recruits.
Cllr. Glynn raised concern in relation to the traffic lights at the Green Bridge in
Mullingar and whether the lights were out of sync and asked Ms. Wheatley for her
views on this.
Cllr, Duncan welcomed the Chief Superintendent's report and requested that an Garda
look at a assigning a liaison officer with the travelling community.
In response to the Members, the Chief Superintendent advised the Members that there would
be two retirements in Mullingar Garda Station and the new Gardai would be replacing these
members.
In relation to possession of drugs for sale or supply, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the
Members that there would always be a drugs problem and this increases at festivals held in
the summer months but she stressed that there were sufficient numbers of Gardai working on
the ground and the Gardai work in connection with promoters to keep the level of offences
down. This is a countrywide problem.
In relation to the traveller community, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that the
Gardai have very close links with the traveller community and that there is a liaison person
dealing with the traveller community and this liaison is ongoing.
Chief Supt. Wheatley at this point advised the Members that she had requested joint training
with Garda and members of the traveller community.
In relation to burglaries, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that the text alert system
has improved things greatly and the Gardai have made significant arrests and advised that
members of the public are more aware of locking doors etc.
Superintendent Alan Murray referred to the traffic lights sequences at the Green Bridge,
Mullingar advising the Members that there is not a problem with the sequences but that
drivers are taking chances and he advised that the Gardai will do operations there and raise
awareness on the issue.
In response to Cllr. Clarke, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that the Gardai were
not aware of companies selling CCTV and alarm systems. Supt. Alan Murray advised the
Members that the Gardai take CCTV from any premises at which there is an incident.
Supt. Alan Murray advised the Members that there are new initiatives coming together in
relation to control room statistics to be rolled out.
In relation to dissident activity, Supt. Alan Murray advised the Members that the Gardai are
very mindful of such activity and are working in that area.
In response to Mr. Des Sheridan's concems in relation to CCTV Cameras not working in
shops Chief Supt. Lorraine Wheatley advised the Members that the Theft from Shops
Strategy initiated in April 2015 has been supported by assignment of specific Gardai to liaise
with shop owners to promote crime prevention measures identified and to expedite the
circulation of CCTV to identify possible suspects for crimes in each District. Further
initiatives such as the Retail Text alert system which is currently being established in the
Division, together with the circulation of retail Text Alert window stickers which are to be
provided in the Division will enhance this strategy which is working well at present.
In relation to possession of drugs, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the Members that being in
possession of two to three units is regarded as sale and supply and this is covered under
legislation.
Mr. Aidan Davitt, Chairman, commended Supt. Alan Murray and the Gardai on being very
active in their approach to crime prevention initiatives.
5. Date of next meeting
On the proposal of Cllr. Glynn and seconded by Cllr. Farrell, the next meeting was scheduled
for Monday, 19th October 2015 at 11.00a.m in the Council Chamber, Åras an Chontae,
Mullingar.
6. Any other business
Deputy Bannon raised concems with public lighting at Tang Church and black spots in
between and he requested that the Gardai make a recommendation to the NRA in the interest
of public safety.
Cllr. Farrell advised that these are ongoing issues and the issues have already been raised
with the NRA.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Date
Chairman
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
