 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee, 
held at 10.00am on Monday, 10 October 2022 
in the Council Chambers, Mullingar, Co Westmeath and by MS Teams 
Meeting  
 
Presiding 
 
: 
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman 
 
Local Authority  
Members 
: 
Cllrs John Dolan, Michael Dollard, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, 
Frankie Keena, Denis Leonard, Frank McDermott, Hazel Smyth, 
Ken Glynn and Emily Wallace. 
 
Oireachtas Member:          Deputy Robert Troy 
 
Community Members: 
Pat Grimes, Dave Raftis and Joyce Furlong 
 
Garda Officers: 
Chief Superintendent John Dollard, Superintendent Michelle Baker, 
Superintendent David Nolan, Detective Inspector Mr Tom Quinn 
and Sergeant Peter Gilsenan. 
 
Officers Present: 
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC, Sheila Healy, Senior 
Executive Officer, Anne Galvin, A.O, Laura Costello Westmeath 
PPN, Andrew Slevin Westmeath PPN and Breda Daly, WCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs Bill Collentine and Liam McDermott.  Senators Aidan Davitt 
and Paul Daly, Deputies Peter Burke and Sorca Clarke. Mr Pat 
Grimes and Ms Marie Reddin.  
 
Introduction: 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill opened the JPC Meeting and welcomed all JPC Members, to the Chamber, Áras 
an Chontae, Mullingar and all online. 
Cllr Hill on behalf of the Westmeath JPC welcomed Chief Superintendent Mr John Dollard, 
recently appointed to Westmeath and to the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee.   
 
On behalf of the staff of Westmeath County Council, Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher also 
welcomed Chief Superintendent Mr John Dollard to the Westmeath JPC. 
 
At the request of Cllr Hill, A Minutes Silence was held as a mark of respect to remember the 
families and victims of the recent Creeslough tragedy in Co Donegal. 
 
 

 
 
 
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 11 April 2022: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr Emily Wallace, the Members approved 
the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 11 July 2022. 
 
 
Report from Westmeath County Council: 
 
Mr Pat Gallagher presented his report to the Westmeath JPC on the recent successful running of 
Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann 2022 held in Mullingar from 31st July to 8th August 2022. 
 
Mr Gallagher thanked all involved in the successful running of Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann 2022, 
and stated that a competent Event Controller was the key to the smooth running of such an event 
and to manage the collaboration between the organisers and the Emergency Services/Statutory 
Authorities, including An Garda Síochána. 
 
Mr Gallagher acknowledged the tremendous support and engagement by An Garda Síochána, led 
by Superintendent David Nolan and his team who assisted the Council and the Fleadh Executive 
Committee in ensuring an event of that scale could be held in the County in a safe manner.  
 
Cllr Paddy Hill and all JPC Members congratulated and thanked Mr Gallagher and the staff of 
Westmeath County Council and all agencies involved including An Garda Síochána for such a 
successful Fleadh. The JPC Members welcomed the presence of An Garda Síochána on the streets 
during the Fleadh and how this made a big difference in terms of safety and security during the 
safe running of the Fleadh. 
 
Mr Pat Gallagher thanked all the Members for their comments and Mr Gallagher further informed 
the Members that there was a formal debrief held with the relevant Agencies and the learning from 
this year will inform the planning for next year.  It would be useful to engage some volunteers 
earlier so they can be assigned to roles through forward planning.  Mr Gallagher stated that the 
important thing managing the event to ensure the safe and secure operation of the Fleadh is that 
you assess what needs to be done, plan and prepare for it while constant monitoring 24/7 during 
the event and you adjust the response as required.  Mr Gallagher wished to ensure the Members 
that in preparing for next years’ Fleadh all elements will be reviewed to ensure the safe running of 
Fleadh 2023. 
 
 
Report from An Garda Síochána: 
 
Chief Superintendent John Dollard thanked the Westmeath JPC Members for their kind words and 
stated that he was looking forward to working in the Westmeath Division. 
 
Chief Supt. John Dollard presented the PowerPoint outlining the following crime statistics for the 
County.  
 

 
 
 
Newly appointed Detective Inspector for Westmeath Mr Tom Quinn spoke on the crime figures of 
the Presentation as follows: 
 
Detective Inspector Tom Quinn said overall crime had increased dramatically in 2022. Mr Quinn 
informed the Members that the primary concern was burglaries in residential areas and thefts from 
shops and that is mainly because of things returning to normal after Covid.    However, Mr Quinn 
did state that An Garda Síochána are a lot further on than where they were three years ago in terms 
of total crimes committed in the division. 
 
Mr Quinn further informed the Members that An Garda Síochána have had many significant 
operations, merging different units, and having days of action or blitzes in rural areas in 
Westmeath.  Mr Quinn said that he aims to hold more of these operations going forward to tackle 
crime.  
 
Superintendent David Nolan spoke on the crime figures for Mullingar District and Superintendent 
Michelle Baker spoke on the Athlone District figures of the Presentation as follows: 
 
Property crime had increased from 668 in 2021 (Q2) to 1034 in 2022 (Q2), divisional totals.  
In Athlone, figures were up from 341 (Q2) in 2021 to 570 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 327 (Q2) in 2021 to 464 (Q2) in 2022.   
 
In terms of burglary, the rate also increased from 130 in Q2 2021 to 170 in Q2 2022, a 31% 
divisional increase. 
In Athlone, figures were up from 79 (Q2) in 2021 to 81 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 51 (Q2) in 2021 to 89 (Q2) in 2022.   
 
The number of thefts from vehicles decreased from 98 in Q2 2021 to 95 in Q2 2022, a 3% 
divisional decrease.  
In Athlone, figures were up from 38 (Q2) in 2021 to 48 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were down from 60 (Q2) in 2021 to 47 (Q2) in 2022.   
 
The rate of theft /unauthorised taking of vehicles at divisional level increased from 21 in Q2 
2021 to 24 Q2 in 2022, a 14% divisional increase.    
In Athlone, figures were up from 7 (Q2) in 2021 to 1 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 14 (Q2) in 2021 to 16 (Q2) in 2022.   
 
There was a 75% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 248 in Q2 2021 to 435 in 
Q2 2022. (Divisional totals). 
In Athlone, figures were up from 124 (Q2) in 2021 to 235 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 124 (Q2) in 2021 to 200 (Q2) in 2022.   
 
There was an increase in the number of reported thefts of other property, 98 in Q2 2021 to 228 
in Q2 2022. (Divisional totals). 
In Athlone, figures were up from 51 (Q2) in 2021 to 148 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 47 (Q2) in 2021 to 80 (Q2) in 2022.   

 
 
 
Superintendent David Nolan informed the JPC Members that theft of property is increasing in rural 
areas due to lack of CCTV and Mr Nolan confirmed that Detective Inspector Mr Tom Quinn is 
arranging to put a plan in place for rural areas and this plan is currently being deployed. 
 
The rate of crimes against the person at divisional level increased from 329 in Q2 2021 to 399 
Q2 in 2022, a 21% divisional increase.   
 
In Athlone, figures were up from 137 (Q2) in 2021 to 204 (Q2) in 2022.   
For Mullingar, they were up from 192 (Q2) in 2021 to 195 (Q2) in 2022.   
 
In relation to Drugs figures: 
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations 
went from 59 in Q3 2021 to 49 Q3 in 2022, a decrease of 17%, while incidents of Section 15 
(possession of a drug with intent for sale or supply) went from 20 in Q3 2021 to 11 in Q3 2022, a 
decrease of 45%. 
 
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 107 in Q3 2021 to 319 in 
Q2 2022, while incidents of Section 15 went from 34 in Q3 2021 to 18 in Q3 2022, a decrease of 
47%. 
Superintendent David Nolan explained the reason for such an increase in Section 3 violations was 
due to festivals and concerts taking place and the re-opening of society after Covid. 
 
 
Chief Superintendent John Dollard informed the JPC Members of the following Community 
Engagements:  
 
• LGBT+ Pride Parade: On 16July 2022 Gardaí attached to Compol took part in the local 
LGBTQ+ Pride Parade and attended an event in the Bloomfield Hotel. A number of 
meetings took place between Mullingar Pride and the Community Gardaí in the build up 
to the event which was very successful.  
Athlone District also held an event on the Shannon in conjunction with Viking Tours and 
Westmeath County Council. 
 
• Fleadh Cheoil Na hEireann 2022:  The Fleadh Cheoil Na hEireann 2022 held in 
Mullingar, saw the Community Policing unit have an important presence for the duration 
of the Fleadh. Gardaí assigned to Community Policing carried out daily foot and mountain 
bike patrols. It was a great opportunity for the Garda members to interact with local 
community and build rapport. Due to the strong policing presence there were minimal 
incidents of crime and the Fleadh proved to be a great success with very positive feedback 
from the community. 
  
• Make Way Day:  - On the 30 September 2022 An Garda Síochána in conjunction with 
Westmeath County Council and Irish Wheelchair Association held a Make Way Day to 
highlight Disability Access Day. This highlighted the top 3 obstacles that stop people with 

 
 
disabilities in their tracks – Cars parked on footpaths, bicycles illegally parked and bins 
left on footpaths. 
 
 
Chief Supt. John Dollard informed the JPC Members of the following Resources – Divisional 
Overview : 
• 
259 Sworn Garda Members (All Ranks) 
• 
110 Mullingar District 
• 
  82 Athlone District 
• 
  47 Divisional Units  
• 
  20 Regional Units 
• 
   6 Reserve Members  
• 
  42 Garda Staff  
• 
 13 Garda Stations 
• 
 71 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet 
 
 
Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill and JPC Members thanked Chief Supt. John Dollard, and his team for 
their presentation.    
 
The Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Síochána (AGS) 
and officials present: 
 
In response to Cllr Frank McDermott, Inspector Peter Gilsensan informed the Members that the 
main principle reason for the seizure of vehicles is due to a vehicle being out of  tax for two months, 
for having no car insurance, no NCT and unaccompanied learner driver driving a vehicle.   
 
Cllr John Dolan requested that more Gardaí be visible on the streets of Athlone and in our rural 
areas.  Cllr Dolan raised the issue again regarding CCTV on the Greenway and stressed the need 
for same.  Cllr Dolan asked that this matter be investigated and informed the Members that a 
number of Councils and Garda Authorities have CCTV in place on Greenways, such as Wexford, 
Westport and the Grand Canal, Dublin. Cllr Dolan asked if the CCTV system in Athlone could be 
linked into the Greenway.  
 
Cllr Wallace also asked was there a system or body in place to check in with older members of our 
communities especially in rural areas. In particular, older people leaving hospitals or nursing 
homes, is there a body that the HSE could help in getting information out on the supports that are 
available for the home alarm, the monitoring and check that their homes are safe.  
 
In response to Cllr Wallace’s question regarding the percentage breakdown of burglaries in rural 
and urban areas, Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members that there was an increase in 
burglaries in rural areas mainly due to lack of CCTV.  
 
In response to Cllr Wallace’s question regarding burglaries in shops, Superintendent David Nolan 
informed the Members that Sergeant John McWalters, Crime Prevention Officer for Westmeath 
has been communicating with Mullingar Chamber of Commerce in relation to issues such as thefts 

 
 
and ways to improve security within shops.  Superintendent David Nolan did state that more 
engagement is needed with the retailers and An Garda Síochána are dealing with this matter. 
 
Superintendent David Nolan thanked Mr Pat Gallagher and his staff, the Fleadh Executive 
Committee, the various agencies, and volunteers involved in the successful running of Fleadh 
2022.   
 
Cllr Frankie Keena asked for more Garda presence on the streets within our County. 
 
Cllr Frankie Keena asked An Garda Síochána is Community Text Alert system working and who 
is the point of contact for the Community Text Alert systems. 
 
Cllr Keena also asked how successful the Purple Flag Initiative is in Mullingar and Cllr Keena 
would like to see it coming to Athlone. 
 
Cllr Keena asked what is the procedure in relation to drug dealing taking place in a particular area 
/ house, how it is monitored and acted upon. And at what point the Local Authority become 
involved. 
Cllr Keena did agree with having CCTV installed on our Greenways and enquired as to the possible 
provision of same. 
 
In response to questions raised, Superintendent Michelle Baker did inform the Members that 
Sergeant John McWalter (Crime Prevention Officer) is tasked with the new Community Policing 
Unit in Athlone,  to establish a  business forum to liaise with retailers in order to address matters 
relating to retail burglaries.  It is intended to host this forum by the end of November 2022 in a 
local hotel.  
 
Superintendent Michelle Baker asked the public who are concerned about the vulnerable and 
elderly in their communities to contact the Community Policing Unit within in their local Garda 
Stations and the person in question  can be added to the Elderly / Vulnerable Person(s) Register 
with their consent or family consent and periodical check-ups can be carried out.    
 
In relation to Community Text Alert System, Superintendent Michelle Baker informed the 
Members that Sergeant McWalter is the Coordinator for this system and he is currently in the 
process of upskilling staff in both Districts under the Community Policing Unit.     
 
Superintendent Michelle Baker informed the Members that having more Gardai on the streets is a 
priority especially at peak times such as school times. Superintendent Michelle Baker stated that 
the Garda presence on the Greenway has proven to be very effective.   
 
Regarding the Purple Flag Initiative Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members that this 
Initiative is in Mullingar since 2015 and it was awarded to Mullingar again in 2021 and it is one 
of only 14 towns in the Country who have achieved this status.  Superintendent David Nolan did 
suggest that he would discuss this matter further with Cllr Keena and meet with Mr John 
Geoghegan of the Athlone Chamber of Commerce. 
 

 
 
 
Chief Superintendent John Dollard informed the Members that there is a procedure in place in 
relation to drug dealing in a particular area/premises.  The Chief Supt. explained that the Gardaí 
need feedback to guide and direct them in a situation like this, the information received would be 
the basis of further action to be taken by An Garda Síochána.   
 
Cllr Michael Dollard stressed the importance of Community Policing within Mullingar Town.  Cllr 
Dollard stated that there is a greater need for Garda presence within the housing estates in 
Mullingar and this would be very effective to reduce burglaries. 
 
Cllr Dollard asked that AGS engage in a public awareness programme by way of public notices / 
flyers to inform elderly people within our communities on how to keep their homes safe during 
the dark winter months. 
 
Cllr Hazel Smyth informed the Members that she is on the Mullingar Purple Flag Committee and 
said it is a very successful initiative.  Cllr Smyth also stated that she would be very happy to help 
and discuss the initiative with Cllr Keena. 
 
Cllr Smyth asked An Garda Síochána what the response time is in terms of Gardaí receiving a 
callout. 
 
Cllr Smyth enquired about data in terms of the nature of homes being targeted, rural and urban and 
in addition, the levels of cyber crime in the county. 
 
In terms of scooters – enquired as to any increase in collisions due to scooters? 
 
Cllr Smyth informed An Garda Síochána that she received a lot of calls from the public in relation 
to Ladestown Lake, during the Summer, regarding illegal tree felling and anti-social behaviour. 
 
Cllr Smyth asked to do something further about parking on footpaths and cycle paths. 
 
In relation to domestic violence, Cllr Denis Leonard asked what mechanisms are in place to help 
increased reporting of same. 
 
Cllr Leonard supported Cllr Smyth’s concerns regarding E-Scooters, and the addressing of same. 
 
Cllr Leonard also asked what is going to be the balance in terms of distribution of the expected 
number of Gardaí Westmeath will get and how they can help isolate rural crime and working 
against it.  
 
Cllr Tom Farrell asked that the Text Alert System be put on the January 2023 Agenda.  
 
Cllr Farrell also raised concerns about E-Scooters within the rural areas of Westmeath, 
improvements need to be made in this area as soon as possible. 
 

 
 
Cllr Farrell asked for spot checks to be carried out in our villages especially at weekends in relation 
to vehicles parking on yellow lines. 
 
Cllr Frank McDermott raised concerns about the theft of heating oil from homes and asked are the 
Gardaí aware of same. 
 
Cllr McDermott appealed to An Garda Síochána or Westmeath County Council to install a CCTV 
camera temporarily at Killafree Cemetery, Castlepollard to stop anti-social behaviour taking place.    
 
In response to the questions raised above Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members that 
in relation to heating oil theft, unfortunately it happens this time of year, Supt. Nolan appealed to 
the public to be vigilant and lock their oil tanks.  
 
In relation to the CCTV situation at Killafree Cemetery in Castlepollard, Supt David Nolan said 
he would speak with Sergeant Brehan  in Castlepollard and asked that Westmeath County Council 
also follow up on this situation as the Cemetery comes under the remit of the Local Authority. 
 
Regarding the Community Text Alert System, Supt David Nolan will further discuss this matter 
with Sergeant McWalter, and he also confirmed that Sergeant McWalter is in regular 
communication with the various groups involved in the Community Text Alert System. 
 
In relation to E-Scooters in rural Westmeath, Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members 
that new legislation is currently being drafted on this matter which will address the various 
concerns raised.   
 
Regarding Garda Resources, Supt David Nolan informed the Members that Gardaí were brought 
in from various divisions in order to police Fleadh 2022.  
 
Superintendent David Nolan also informed the Members that no further issues were raised 
regarding residents at Harriers Hotel, Kinnegad, no crimes reported since the last JPC Meeting. 
Sergeant Alison McDaid visits the premises and is in contact with residents and staff on a regular 
basis. 
Superintendent David Nolan further informed the Members that a trained Ethnic Officer from the 
Community Policing Unit in Mullingar was assigned to liaise with the residents in Harriers and it 
is working very well under the direction of Sergeant McDaid. 
 
Regarding Cyber Crime, Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members that there is a 
Regional unit based in Mullingar who assist AGS in trying to investigate issues in relation to 
cybercrime.  Chief Superintendent John Dollard informed the Members that the regional data 
indicates year on year there has been a big fall in relation to cybercrime.  Chief Supt. Dollard said 
cybercrime is very difficult to solve due to the transnational nature of the crime.  Chief Supt. 
Dollard stated that the main solution from An Garda Siochana’s perspective is “awareness”. 
 
Superintendent David Nolan indicated that he would monitor the area regarding vehicles parking 
on footpaths and cycleways but also assured the Members that the Gardaí do enforce road traffic 
offences by way of fixed charged penalty notices.  

 
 
 
In response to Cllr Dollard regarding Gardai on the beat within Housing Estates, Supt. Nolan did 
agree with Cllr Dollard and stated that the Community Policing Unit have been allocated particular 
areas of the town and housing estates.  Supt. David Nolan will request that Segreant Brian Stones 
inform his staff to concentrate patrolling housing estates.  
 
In relation to visiting elderly people, Superintendent David Nolan informed the Members that the 
Gardaí do visit the elderly and will continue to do so while being careful of data being held in 
relation to a register and consent must be sought by the individual or family. 
 
In response to Cllr Smyth, Superintendent John Dollard informed the Members that there is a new 
CAD system in place to manage 999 calls and a contract has been given to a company which will 
operate from four regional centres nationally and should be up and running early 2023.   
 
In relation to burglaries Superintendent John Dollard confirmed that the Winter phase of Operation 
Thor is currently in place (October 2022 to March 2023). 
 
Detective Inspector Tom Quinn informed the Members that Longford County Council have 
recently taken over the Text Alert System where the Local Authority developed an App replacing 
the text alert groups.  Mr Quinn suggested the Members liaise with Longford County Council on 
this matter. 
 
In relation to Garda resources, Superintendent John Dollard informed the Members that the 
Government has committed to funding to recruit 1000 new Gardaí for 2023.  There is a new 
competition in place, with the first group of cohorts in before Christmas.  Chief Supt. John Dollard 
stated that it is his job to make sure the resources he has are deployed in the best fashion possible 
i.e. new staff deployed permanently to the Drugs Unit in Mullingar and Athlone.  
 
Chief Superintendent John Dollard further informed the Members that a newly appointed Policing 
Community Sergeant was assigned to Mullingar.  
 
In relation to Roads Policing Chief Supt. John Dollard informed the Members that he is looking to 
establish a third physical base such as Delvin from which Roads Policing will operate across the 
two divisions of Meath and Westmeath.   
 
Cllr Hill thanked An Garda Síochána for their very detailed report and answers to questions raised.   
 
 
PPN Report: 
 
Mr. Dave Raftis presented the “Westmeath PPN Report October 2022” to the JPC Members as 
circulated. 
 
Cllr Hill thanked Mr Raftis and the Westmeath PPN for their detailed report and for all their hard 
work and commitment.   
 

 
 
 
Correspondence: 
None. 
 
 
Date of next meeting 
The next JPC meeting was scheduled for Monday, 9th January 2023 at 10.00a.m, Áras an 
Chontae, Mullingar but is now taking place on Monday, 16th January 2023 at 10 a.m, Áras an 
Chontae, Mullingar. 
 
AOB: 
 
In response to Cllr Wallaces’ query regarding Halloween, Superintendent David Nolan advised 
the public to contact their local Garda Station if they have any concerns.  Supt. David Nolan stated 
to the Members that their is a plan in place for the Halloween holiday. 
 
Cllr Hill congratulated Cllr Frank McDermott for his long service with the AILG where he recently 
received an Award. 
 
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10/10/2022 
___________________________  
 
 
_________________ 
 
Cllr Paddy Hill 
 
 
 
 
Date 
Chairman,  
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee  
 
 
 
 
