Minutes of Inaugural Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 16th February, 2015
in the
Council Chambers, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Members:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies
Cllr Aidan Davitt, Cathaoirleach
Cllrs.Peter Burke, Sorca Clarke, Aidan Davitt,
Andrew Duncan, Tom Fanell, Ken Glynn,
Paddy Hill, Paul Hogan, Frankie Keena,
Frank McDermott, Michael O'Brien, Aengus O'Rourke,
John Shaw.
Deputy James Bannon, Deputy Gabrielle McFadden.,
Mr.Des Sheridan, Mr.Pat Grimes, Hugh McGuire, Sheena
Lawless.
Chief Superintendent Mark CulTan, Inspector Jarlath Folan,
Sergeant Andrew Haran.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Pat Keating, Athlone Municipal District Manager
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Deputy Willie Penrose, Supt. Patrick McMenamin, Supt.
Noreen McBrien.
Kathleen Grennan and Phil Brennan
1.
Introductions
The Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher, opened the meeting by welcoming the members to
the first Inaugural Joint Policing Committee (JPC) meeting for Westmeath. Having
introduced himself, Mr Gallagher invited the Members to introduce themselves.
Appointment of Chairperson (Elected Representative of Westmeath County
2.
Council)
Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, advised the JPC Members that under Section 35
of the Garda Siochana Act, 2005 the Chairperson of the JPC is an Elected Member of the
Local Authority and he sought nominations for this position.
On the proposal of Cllr. Ken Glynn, seconded by Cllr Frank McDermott, Cllr Aidan Davitt
was nominated for this position. As there were no further nominations Cllr. Davitt was
deemed elected as Chairperson of the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee and he assumed
the Chair.
3.
Appointment of Vice —Chairperson (Elected Representative of Westmeath County
Council)
On the proposal of Cllr. Davitt, seconded by Cllr Glynn, Cllr McDermott was nominated for
this position. As there were no further nominations Cllr. McDermott was deemed elected as
Vice-Chairperson of the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee.
4.
Overview on the role and operation of the Joint Policing Committee (JPC)
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, opened his address by giving the JPC Members a
summary of the Revised Guidelines and in particular he referred to the three documents
issued from the Department of Justice and Equality in August 2014 and forwarded to the JPC
members.
Mr Gallagher highlighted the following points:
The Purpose of the Joint Policing Committee (JPC):
As set out in Section 36 (2) of the Garda Siochana Act 2005, the main purpose of the
JPC is to provide a forum where the Local Authority and Garda, responsible for
policing the area, consult with Oireachtas Members and community interests who can
make recommendations on matters affecting the policing of the area to contribute to
the improved safety and quality of life of the community.
Strategic Approach:
Mr Gallagher advised the Members that the focus of the JPC's work is "strategic"
rather than "operational". He informed the Group that the JPC is required to develop
a six year Strategic Plan linked appropriately with the Local and Economic
Community Plan for the area together with annual plans which include objectives
derived from the relevant Annual Policing Plans with implementation of these plans
being published in Annual Reports.
Mr Gallagher requested that all Members familiarise themselves with the revised
Guidelines and appendices 1-3, which provides examples of the various Work Plans.
Code of Practice:
On this point, the Chief Executive advised the Members that we all have an important
role to play and that the meetings should not become a "talking shop", but focus on
delivering a partnership approach to securing safety in Westmeath.
Meeting of JPC:
Mr Gallagher further informed the Members that the media and the public are entitled
to be present at a JPC meeting unless it is resolved by the members to hold a meeting
"in-committee". He suggested the JPC meet on a quarterly basis and advised that
meetings may be held in venues other than Mullingar if so requested.
In relation to point 8 of the Revised Guidelines, which refers to "Subject Matter of
Meetings", he stressed the importance of not discussing or naming individuals during
the conduct of our meetings as per Section 36(4) of the Garda Siochana Act 2005.
Reports:
Mr Pat Gallagher further advised the Members of the requirement of preparing an
Annual Report, which should highlight at least three areas of achievement.
Steering Groups and Sub-Committees:
He informed the Members that a Steering Group consisting of the Chairperson of the
JPC, representative of the Garda Siochana and Chief Executive of the Local Authority
shall be established. He outlined the main function of the Steering Group is to
facilitate the efficient functioning of the JPC to ensure it retains a clear focus on
strategic and collaborative action. In relation to Sub-Committees, he further advised
Members that they should be set up on a "thematic basis".
Communications:
Mr Pat Gallagher outlined the importance of good communication between JPC's and
other local structures, in panicular the Local Community Development Committee
which he will liaise with himself within Westmeath County Council.
Internal Procedures:
Mr Gallagher briefed the Members on the Ethics Framework extended to JPC
Members.
He advised the JPC Members of their obligation to declare to the JPC if they have an
interest in any matter under discussion and shall withdraw from the meeting while
that matter is being discussed.
Membership of JPC:
Mr Gallagher confirmed to the Members that the new JPC Committee has been
constituted correctly as per the revised Guidelines.
Cllr Aidan Davitt thanked the Chief Executive for his comprehensive summary on the role
and functions of the JPC and asked was there any questions. No questions.
5. Preparation of Strategic Plan
Cllr Aidan Davitt introduced the Chief Superintendent Mark Curran who opened his address
by congratulating Cllr Davitt on his new role as Chairperson of the Westmeath JPC. The
Chief Superintendent gave a brief outline on the National Policing Plan 2015 which is
available on the Garda Website (as per link below):
http://www.garda.ie/Documents/User/Policin %20-
In reference to the Chief Superintendent welcoming suggestions and ideas that could form
part of the Westmeath Strategic Plan 2015, Mr Pat Gallagher advised Members to e-mail
same to Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, within two weeks of the next meeting
so that the Steering Group Committee could prepare a draft Strategic Plan for review by the
Members.
Cllr Aidan Davitt agreed this was an excellent suggestion and encouraged all Members to do
so.
The Chief Superintendent briefed the Members in respect of the following community
policing issues within Westmeath County:
•
•
Crime Prevention
Policing Communities
Supporting Victims of Crime
Anti-social behaviour
Road Policing
Property/Car Crime
In response to Mr Hugh Maguire, Cllr Davitt and Mr Billy Coughlan confirmed that all
documentation be e-mailed to him in Word Format so that same can be converted into Braille
prior to each JPC Meeting.
6.
Report from Westmeath County Council
The Chief Executive, Pat Gallagher briefed the Members on the JPC Annual Work Plan and
paid particular attention to the link between the Local Economic and Community Plan
(LECP) and the JPC Strategic Plan. He advised the members that the community element of
the LECP for the County and will be brought back in draft format to the committee for their
consideration.
Report from An Garda Siochana
7.
Chief Superintendent Mark Curran conveyed the apologies of Superintendents Patrick
McMenamin and Noreen McBrien, who were unable to attend the meeting. In their absence
Inspector Jarlath Folan and Sergeant Andrew Harran attended.
Chief Superintendent Mark Curran gave a breakdown of statistics on the various criminal
activities for the Westmeath Division for the period 01/10/2014 to 31/12/2014. (Copy to be
forwarded to each JPC Member).
Chief Superintendent Mark Curran referred to the drugs situation in Westmeath, particularly
in Athlone and how the Garda work closely with various organisations ie, Local Drugs Task
Force and the HSE to prevent drugs getting onto the towns and streets of Westmeath.
Referring to crime prevention and policing in rural areas, Inspector Jarlath Folan (Mullingar
District) stated that there was a reduction in public order offences and burglaries in
Westmeath due to the high visibility of Garda presence on the street. He stated that every
Garda is working for the same goal, to make the district safer.
Inspector Folan referred to the Purple Flag Status Mullingar which will be awarded to the
County in the coming weeks and he complemented all involved.
Cllr Aidan Davitt thanked Inspector Folan for his presentation and introduced Sergeant
Andrew Harran from the Athlone District who advised the Members of the importance of
working together with communities in rural areas.
In particular he advised the Members of the following issues:
Neighbourhood Watch Schemes
Text Alert System
Alcohol and Drug Scheme
The Message in a Bottle Emergency Information Scheme - which allows the elderly
and vulnerable people to store all their relevant personal information in a plastic
bottle, which is then kept in the fridge.
Ouestions:
Cllr Aidan Davitt thanked all three Garda Members for their contribution to the JPC meeting
and opened the floor to questions:
At this point, Cllr Ken Glynn complimented the Garda Members and the Chief Executive on
their reports and he congratulated all involved in obtaining the "Purple Flag" Status for
Mullingar Town.
In response to Cllr Ken Glynn, the Chief Superintendent Mark Curran advised the JPC
Members that the issue relating to walkways between housing estates and public lighting be
included in the 2015 JPC Work Plan.
Cllr Aengus O'Rourke welcomed all reports and highlighted the difference between crime in
Mullingar and Athlone especially the nature of repeat offenders and criminals getting
younger. He highlighted the fact that in previous years there had been a Community Policing
Regime in place dedicated to housing estates which detected early intervention. However,
policing numbers in this area have been depleted and this trend needs to reversed.
In response to this, the Chief Superintendent advised JPC Members that they continue to
work with young people and they are hoping more resources will become available shortly.
He also advised Members that an Garda Siochana work closely with the HSE in relation to
young offenders.
In response to Cllrs Aengus O'Rourke and Paul Hogan, the Chief Superintendent advised the
JPC Members that there are 20 Garda Reserves in place in Westmeath. He hoped more
Reserves would become available in the next 2/3 months when new recruits graduate from
Templemore.
Cllr Frank McDermott, complimented the Garda Siochana and Westmeath County Council
on their detailed reports and welcomed the various groups working together to make
communities safer. He emphasised the importance of technology used in relation to the "text
alert system" and recommended that this be continued in rural areas.
Cllr Frankie Keena also welcomed today's discussions and reports from Garda Siochana and
Westmeath County Council. He stated the work of Community Gardai in Athlone is excellent
and Community Policing is the way forward. He further complimented the Athlone
Christmas Dinner Party for the Elderly and hopes same will continue into the future.
Cllr Keena recommended that the issue of Traveller Feuds be placed on the new JPC Work
Plan 2015.
Hugh Maguire welcomed reports and thanked the Garda for the Athlone Christmas Party and
asked that the level of Community Gardai be increased.
In response to Cllrs Michael O'Brien, Tom Farrell and Paul Hogan, the Chief Superintendent
Mark Curran advised the JPC Members that the Garda will take the matter of boy-racers (at
B&Q, Athlone and Walderstown Area) up further with the Westmeath Traffic Corp to reduce
noise pollution and fear within communities in Athlone.
In response to Cllr Michael O'Brien, the Chief Superintendent further advised the JPC
Members that the issue relating to the delay in getting Green Cards issued for non EU
Nationals is being addressed nationally. He also informed the Members that the average
length of time to process a Garda Vetting application takes approximately 4 weeks.
Cllr Michael O'Brien commended the Garda on their work in relation to the "Text Alert
Service " and requested a "follow up text" to issue to the concerned persons.
Cllr Tom Farrell welcomed all reports and thanked Garda John Ganly for his work in his
constituency. Cllr Farrell requested a map of the "Text Alert System" for the elderly.
Cllrs Paul Hogan and Sorca Clarke complimented the Gardai on their reports and in particular
to the "Message in a Bottle" initiative, Christmas Dinner for the Elderly, Purple Flag Status
for Mullingar and Crime Prevention initiatives in Athlone.
In response to Cllr Hogan, Inspector Jarlath Folan informed the JPC Members that there is no
directive in place regarding the policing of anti-water protestors, the role of the Garda is to
prevent any breach of the peace.
Deputy James Bannon congratulated Cllrs Aidan Davitt and Frank McDermott on their new
roles and welcomed reports from the Gardai and Westmeath County Council.
In response to Deputy Bannon in relation to the inactivity of CAB in rural areas, the Chief
Superintendent stated that CAB work closely with the Garda in this regard. He further
advised Deputy Bannon and the members there is no evidence of petrol stretching in
Mullingar.
Mr Des Sheridan raised concerns regarding the supply of alcohol to underage youths and felt
suppliers names should be published in the media. He further recommended the placement of
younger Garda on our streets which would help eliminate the drug situation in our towns.
In response to Cllr Sorca Clarke's question regarding the control of dogs in housing estates,
the Chief Superintendent advised the JPC members that the Garda will liaise with the
Westmeath County Council Dog Warden and will prosecute where possible.
In response to Cllr Clarkes question regarding the installation of speed limits in housing
estates, Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher informed the Members that the Department of
Transport have written to Local Authorities recently and this issue will be considered in the
coming weeks.
Cllr John Shaw complimented the Community Text Alert Service in Rural Areas and
encouraged continuation of this service. In response to Cllr Shaw's query regarding
Community Groups installing CCTV Cameras in rural areas, Chief Superintendent Mark
Curran informed Members that this is a complex area with regard to ownership and
monitoring of data, can be very costly and there are specific guidelines to be followed under
Data Protection. He also advised the Members that this could be a topic for the JPC Work
Plan.
Deputy Gabrielle McFadden welcomed reports from the Garda and Westmeath County
Council. Deputy McFadden expressed serious concerns over anti-social behaviour in both
Athlone and Mullingar towns and the fear residents have in reporting same. Deputy
McFadden questioned the Garda on how parents can be held accountability for their children
if involved in anti-social behaviour.
In response to Deputy McFadden, the Chief Superintendent advised the JPC Members that
there is a waiting list for the Garda Juvenile Diversion Programme, their control of Juveniles
is limited. The intended outcome of this Programme is to divert young people from
committing further offences and this approach involves Juvenile Liaison Officers meeting
with parents.
8. Date of next meeting
The next meeting was scheduled for Monday, 20th April 2015 at 11.00am in the Council
Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
9.
Any Other Business
Cllr Michael O'Brien requested that some of the JPC meetings be held in the Athlone Civic
Offices. Mr Pat Gallagher advised that for now the next JPC Meeting will be held in
Mullingar.
Cllr Aidan Davitt, extended sympathy to the McGinley families on their recent tragedy.
This concluded the bus•ness of the meeting.
Cllr Aid tt,
Chairman
Westmeath Jo' t Polici
mmittee
Date
