Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00m on Monday, 16th July 2018
in Åras an Chontae, Mullingar Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Members:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn, Paul
Hogan, Emily Wallace, John Shaw, Bill Collentine.
Deputy Gabrielle McFadden, Deputy Robert Troy
Pat Grimes, Marie Reddin, Des Sheridan, Kathleen
Grennan
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff, Chief Superintendent
Patrick Clavin, Superintendent Alan Murray and
Superintendent Shane Cummins
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, Westmeath County
Council
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, Westmeath
County Council, Annette Barr-Jordan, Community
Development, Westmeath County Council, Brigid
Geoghegan, Community Development, Westmeath
County Council, Geraldine Barden, Corporate Services,
Westmeath County Council
Cllr Frank McDermott
Cllr Sorca Clarke
Mr. Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, opened the meeting and gave
apologies on behalf of Chairman, Cllr. Frank McDermott who was unable to attend
the meeting.
e To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on Mondayz 16th April
2018.
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Mr. Des Sheridan, the Members
approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on Monday, 16th April 2018 in Council
Chambers, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar.
1
Report from Westmeath County Council
o To fill the vacancy of Chair of Westmeath JPC following the
Resignation of Cllr Frank McDermott.
On the proposal of Cllr. Ken Glynn and seconded by Cllr. Tom Farrell, the Members
unanimously elected Cllr. Paddy Hill as Chair of Westmeath Joint Policing
Committee.
Cllr. Hill thanked his proposer and seconder for their nominations and all the JPC
Members.
Cllr. Hill took the Chair and welcomed Chief Superintendent Patrick Clavin to the
meeting.
On the proposal of Cllr. Hill, the JPC Members approved that Chief Superintendent
Patrick Clavin's presentation to the Members be taken first to facilitate his
attendance at Laois County Council JPC meeting at 12.00 p.m.
Chief Superintendent Clavin gave the Members a presentation on the operation of
the Criminal Assets Bureau.
o Presentation from Detective Chief Superintendent Patrick Clavin
Criminal Assets Bureau
Chief Superintendent Patrick Clavin gave the Members a presentation on the
Criminal Assets Bureau.
In response to Cllr Hogan, Chief Superintendent Patrick Clavin advised that
Criminal Assets Bureau (CAB) have not targeted organised fist fights but this could
be a possible target. He advised that there is a range of criminality considered and if
wealth is being generated, then C.AB is open to investigating such issues.
In response to Mr. Des Sheridan, Chief Superintendent Patrick Clavin advised that
an individual doesn't necessarily have to have convictions, the CAB can use
intelligence available to them to consider taking action, and there are other types of
assets seizures, namely non-conviction based assets seizure.
Chief Superintendent Patrick Clavin further advised that if a member of the public
gives information, they will not be required to go to court to give evidence in respect
of any case taken by CAB.
In response to Cllr. Farrell, in relation to Assets Profilers, Chief Superintendent
Patrick Clavin advised that asset profilers are selected by the local Chief
Superintendent and initiated by way of a three day training course and then
2
allocated to one of the teams. They are then encouraged to set up a profile early on.
If extra asset profilers are needed, CAB will facilitate same.
Chairman, Cllr Hill thanked Chief Superintendent Patrick Clavin for his
presentation to the Members and the entire work CAB do.
Report from Westmeath County Council
o The Policing Authority Meeting
Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher advised the Members that for the third year in
succession, the Policing Authority organised a seminar in Dublin and the Chair of
each Joint Policing Conunittee was invited to attend along with the Chief Executive
or representative.
The purpose of the seminars is consultation as part of the Policing Authority and
consultations with Joint Policing Committees on the priorities they take on board.
The most recent meeting, held at the start of July was attended by Chair Cllr. Frank
McDermott, who intended giving a brief report at today's meeting but unfortunately
was unable to attend. This report will be deferred to the next JPC meeting in
October 2018. Billy Coughlan also attended on behalf of the Chief Executive.
• Reoort from An Garda Sfochäna
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff presented the following report to the Members.
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff advised the Members that a greater emphasis on
intelligence lead policing has led to a 65% reduction in the number of burglaries in
Westmeath over the last five years. Chief Superintendent Duff further advised that
while there was a slight rise in reported burglaries in 2017 after five years of
decreases, the increase occurred in the second half of the year and the downward
trend in burglaries has resumed in the first half of 2018. The main reason for the
significant drop over a five year period, Chief Superintendent Duff said, is primarily
due to an increased use of crime analysis.
In response to Cllr. Duncan, Chief Superintendent Peter Duff advised that the level
of crime has been reduced by using the crime analyst's services and the increase of
analysts. He further advised that the Gardaf work in conjunction with neighbouring
divisions including CAB.
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff further advised that the Gardai have a combined
operation called Operation Thor, which is nationwide and run by a tasking unit in
Dublin but they also have their own units in Westmeath.
They identify people who might be committing crime in Westmeath and then
Longford and then in Wicklow. People are identified who are involved in burglaries
3
or fravelling gangs. They are being targeted in a co-ordinated approach across the
country.
Checkpoints are there to target groups of criminals to try and prevent rather than
detect the crime.
In response to Senator McFadden, Chief Superintendent Duff confirmed that An
Garda Sfochåna is targeting areas that have seen a spike in crime.
Superintendent Shane Cummins advised the Members in relation to the Greenway
in Athlone, that crime on the Greenway has reduced due to ongoing patrols on the
Greenway.
In relation to the re-development of Athlone Garda station, Superintendent
Cummins advised the Members that the building is going according to plan and the
full build will be complete in eighteen months.
In response to Senator McFadden, Superintendent Cummins advised that there is a
plan in place for parking spaces for Garda vehicles at Athlone Garda Station.
Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher advised the Members in relation to the
Greenways, advising that the Greenways have been very successful and well used
and regularly monitored. He furLher advised Lhat the Transportation and Planning
Strategic Policy Corm-nit-tee brought a proposal to prepare Bye Laws for the Old Rail
Trail from Athlone to Mullingar as some issues have arisen, such as, unauthorised
camping, horses on the greenway and the use of quads on the greenway.
Mr. Gallagher further advised, that the Members of Westrneath County Council, at
the June Council Meeting, approved putting the Draft Bye Laws for the Old Rail
Trail from Athlone to Mullingar out for public consultation.
In response to Cllr. I logan, Superintendent Murray confirmed that there had been a
couple of spikes in crime due to the Body & Soul and Life Fest festivals. These two
spikes occur annually and there was a slight increase on the previous year with the
main type of crime in relation to these festivals being possession of drugs.
In relation to bogus callers in Athlone and elsewhere, Superintendent Cummins
advised the public to seek identification from any unexpected callers and call the
Garda station immediately who will deal with these issues appropriately.
In relation to the Youth Awards, Chief Superintendent Peter Duff advised the
Members that the people who win at this year's awards, will be nominated for a
National award. Chief Superintendent Duff further advised that it is not just people
who excel at sports; it could be carers who take on the primary carer role in the
home or others who perform selfless acts for the good of others.
4
In support of Superintendent Murray's comments in relation to bogus callers in
Athlone recently, Mr. Billy Coughlan advised the Members that Council staff were
made aware of three estates in Athlone that had been targeted. Midlands 103 were
contacted in relation to bogus callers in the area and the public were advised to look
for I.D. and to note that Council staff and the vehicles they travel in are easily
identifiable with logos on their transport and attire, identifying them as Council
employees. If the public have any concerns they should contact the Gardaf
immediately and note the registration number of the vehicle involved.
In response to Cllr. Shaw, Chief Superintendent Peter Duff advised that the level of
criminality at the Body and Soul and Life Fest festivals was not particularly high. In
comparison to the festival in Marlay Park in Dublin, the levels pro-rata are much the
same. The decision to hold these festivals and the licensing of Life Fest lies with the
Council.
Superintendent Murray advised the Members that Life Fest was easier policed than
the previous year. There had been two assaults, one minor, one serious. There had
been some stolen mobile phones and possession of drugs had been on par with last
year. Superintendent Murray further advised that a strong drugs unit was in place
and this kept crime figures down.
Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher advised the Members that these types of events
are subject to licensing and members of the public can have their say. Event planning
in advance by Westmeath County Council is undertaken from a number of
perspectives: roads, traffic, Fire and Emergency, Garda, HSE. Under the public
consultation process, the public can engage with the organisers of the events. Mr.
Gallagher clarified that the Licensee in both cases is not the Council. Mr. Gallagher
agreed with Superintendent Murray that there was better organisation and an
improvement in engagement with the operator of Life this year.
Superintendent Cummins advised the Members that in relation to fires in the recent
warm spell, it is the responsibility of the Chief Fire Officer to take charge of dealing
with the fire incident. Superintendent Cummins further advised that there had been
no increase in drinking in public areas during the warm spell.
In response to Cllr. Glynn, Superintendent Murray advised that there was a standby
taxi service available at the main gate of Belvedere House for the public and two
Gardaf were present at the main gate to manage people walking along the main road
intoxicated.
In response to the Members, Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher advised that it is
normally the case that the Belvedere Committee review Life Fest after the festival
takes place.
In response to Cllr. Wallace, Mr. Gallagher confirmed that the issue in relation to
bogus callers in the Athlone area was published on social media channels.
5
Chief Superintendent, Mr. Peter Duff agreed with the Members that numbers of
assaults are up. Night time patrols are working to target these offenders. Assaults in
schools have been recorded and Gardaf have called to schools in relation to assaults
and talked to students involved.
Chairman, Cllr. Paddy Hill thanked Chief Superintendent Peter Duff for his report
and for all the work the Gardaf do on a daily basis.
PPN Report
Ms. Marie Reddin welcomed the new Chairman of the Joint Policing Committee,
Cllr. Paddy Hill and then presented the Westmeath PPN Report to the Members.
Chairman, Cllr. Hill and Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher thanked the Westmeath
PPN Members for their report.
In relation to mobile camera units, Chief Executive, Mr. Gallagher advised the
Members that the protocol in relation to these cameras is being revised and that
Westmeath County Council is part of a national audit by the Data Protection
Commissioner. Depending on the outcome of evidence in relation to compliance
with Data protection legislation in relation to CCTV, Westmeath County Council
will have to review policies and protocols in relation to same.
In response to Mr. Des Sheridan in relation to speed limit signage in a number of
housing estates in Athlone and Mullingar, Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher noted
this issue and advised that such matters should be reported to the Council's district
office.
In relation to Item 5 of the PPN Report, Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher advised
that it would not be possible for Westmeath County Council Io lake on a Data
Controller role and the way to go forward at National level would be to remove thc
requirement of the Local Authority to be data controller, stating the community
CCTV scheme will not progress unless attended to nationally.
Mr. Gallagher thanked the RAPID programme in relation to the clean up days held.
Mr. Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, advised the Members in relation to
item no. 8 of the PPN Report. Mr. Coughlan advised that the Tenant's handbook has
been updated and issued to all tenants.
Mr. Coughlan further advised that formal tenancy training is obligatory for new
tenants prior to receiving tenancy of a property and failure to attend this training
results in the tenancy offer being withdrawn.
Mr. Coughlan also advised the Members of an additional document, the " Anti-Social
Behaviour Strategy" which has also been issued to each Council tenant and that
6
Westmeath County Council is very efficient when dealing with anti-social
behaviour.
In response to the Members, Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher advised that the
littering issue referred to is an issue of persistent dumping and one of a number of
sites that the Council is aware of. Mr. Gallagher confirmed that the Council make
continued efforts to impose litter fines. Mr. Gallagher further advised that the
question of penalties is currently being examined by Minister Naughton's
department.
In response to the Members, Chief Superintendent Peter Duff advised that the
Gardaf use intelligence and targeted operations to reduce crime. Patrols were used
on the Greenway in Athlone and this helped in relation to reducing crime on the
Greenway.
In relation to speeding on the Ballymahon Road, Chief Superintendent Duff advised
that patrols on this road are increased in areas where accidents have occurred. The
Gardai have recently introduced "Operation Life Saver" which involves checking for
seat belts, speeding, etc. with the aim of reducing fatalities.
In response to Ms. Marie Reddin (Ashdale/Woodlands Grove Resident's
Association) in relation to Garda checkpoints, Chief Superintendent Duff advised
that the Gardai have checkpoints in place for road safety and to prevent criminals
from using the road network for criminal activity, stating there is no set pattern for
checkpoints, these are random. Chief Superintendent Duff further advised that "Go
Safe Van" locations can be looked up in advance.
In response to the Members concerns, Chief Superintendent Duff advised that the
Gardai are aware of the drugs issue on social media and steps are being taken to
tackle this issue and it is currently being addressed.
Deputy Troy complimented the PPN on their report and the work they are doing.
Deputy Troy also thanked the Environment Section of Westmeath County Council
for their work on illegal dumping and he also thanked the Housing staff of
Westmeath County Council and the Gardai for their work on anti-social behaviour
issues.
In response to Deputy Troy, Chief Executive, Mr. Pat Gallagher advised in respect of
mobile CCTV to combat illegal dumping, that he was unable to confirm whether all
Local Authorities have made their views known to the Minister to support it. Mr.
Gallagher further advised that Westmeath County Council will continue to operate
Mobile CCTV, but policies and procedures to do so may have to change in relation
to revising protocols on foot of the current audit. Westmeath County Council will
continue to operate mobile CCTV on litter black spots.
7
In relation to anti-social behaviour, Mr. Gallagher advised that policies have been
implemented to deal with this. Staff from the housing section have attended the Joint
Policing Committee meetings on a number of occasions and has confirmed that
people can make anonymous reports to the Council and if people are breaching their
tenancy agreements, Weshneath County Council can take further action under the
anti-social behaviour policy of Wesmeath County Council which was revised last
year and is implemented.
Ms. Annette Barr-Jordan, Administrative Officer, advised the Members in relation to
Intimidation (Drugs) training which is available to the public with the support of An
Garda Si6chåna and Westmeath County Council. She further advised that there will
be an information evening taking place on 9th October 2018.
Ms. Barr-Jordan further advised that there will be Drugs Related Support Training
also held on 25th September 2018.
• Date of next meeting: Monday, 15th October 2018
Chairman, Cllr. Paddy Hill advised the Members that the next Joint Policing
Committee meeting is scheduled to be held on 15th October 2018 at 10 a.m. in Åras
an Chontae, Mullingar.
This was unanimously agreed by the Members.
Cllr. Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
(5
Date
10
19
Paddy • 11,
Chairman,
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee