Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 17th October 2016
in the
Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Oireachtas Members:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Frank McDermott, Chairman
Cllrs. Sorca Clarke, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn,
Paddy Hill, Paul Hogan and Emily Wallace.
Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, Kathleen Grennan and Sheena
Lawless.
Chief Superintendent Kevin Gralton, Superintendents Alan
Murray and Patrick Murray.
Deputy Robert Troy
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Pat Keating, Athlone Municipal District Manager
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Cllrs Frankie Keena, Michael O'Brien, Aengus O'Rourke, John
Shaw, Senators Paul Daly, Gabrielle McFadden, Aidan Davitt
and Deputy Peter Burke.
The Chairman, Cllr McDermott opened the meeting and firstly welcomed the new Chief
Superintendent Kevin Gralton to County Westmeath and to the Westmeath Joint Policing
Committee. Cllr McDermott on behalf of all the JPC Members thanked outgoing Chief
Superintendent MS Lorraine Wheatley for her very helpful and construction work in
Westmeath during her term in office. Cllr McDermott wished Ms Wheatley and her family
well in her new role in Dublin.
On behalf of the staff of Westmeath County Council, Chief Executive Mr. Pat Gallagher also
welcomed Chief Superintendent Kevin Gralton to the Westmeath JPC and extended best
wishes to outgoing Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley. Mr Gallagher thanked Ms
Wheatley for all her help and support during her time in Westmeath County.
To approve the Minutes of the .JPC Meeting held on 18th .July 2016:
On the proposal of Cllr Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr Emily Wallace, it was agreed to
approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on the 18th July 2016.
o Matters arising
Cllr Sorca Clarke requested that the following items be placed in the October JPC Minutes as
they were not included in the July 2016 JPC Minutes:
My congratulations to the Gardai on their award and apologises for not being in
attendance.
The Health Nurse Initiative- My question as to the inclusion of Domestic Abuse
information and the inclusion of local support services contact details.
Crime Analysis: My question relating to the level of repeat offenders included in the
figures and the Chief Super. comment that the figures would be made available.
Allocation of Gardai: My question on the current staffing levels and how it compared
to previous years. The Chief Supers comment that the figures were not to hand but
that they were definitely less.
Drugs Seizures: My questions as to the valuation of the seizures and Pat from
Athlones reply that it is based on National Data and Forensic Science Ireland
Guideline.
Water Safety: My question as to the long term effectiveness of the Samaritans stickers
on the life buoy boxes and Enda's reply that they deteriorate quickly over time.
Enda's comment that there has been a 30% reduction in buoy boxes being vandalised
and that Pipers Boreen life buoy had been vandalised 2/3 times in the previous
months. My question on the possible sponsorship of life buoys and Enda's reply that
the process is not easy as it IWS have examinations to carry out with a potential lead
time of 6-12 months.
Slipway inspections: My question as to the number of slipways and any history of
incidents at them. Enda's reply that of our 29 slipways none have a history of
incidents.
Electronic tagging of life buoys: My question that members be kept updated on the
potential scheme and Enda's agreement to same.
To seek nomination to fill the vacancy on the Westmeath JPC following
Ms Phil Brennan resignation.
Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator informed the Members that Mr Dave Raftis,
Kinnegad Combined Community Employment Scheme Ltd was nominated by the Public
Participation Network (PPN) to fill the vacancy on the Westmeath JPC following Ms Phil
Brennan's resignation.
To seek nomination to fill the vacancy on the Westmeath JPC following
the recent death of Mr Hugh McGuire, RIP.
Mr Billy Coughlan informed the Members that Ms Marie Reddin, of Ashdale/Woodlands
Grove Residents Association was nominated by the Public Participation Network (PPN) to
fill the vacancy on the Westmeath JPC following the recent death of Mr Hugh McGuire, RIP.
On the proposal of Cllr P Hogan and seconded by Cllr K Glynn the JPC Members
unanimously approved the appointments of Mr Dave Raftis and Ms Marie Reddin to the
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee.
Report from Westmeath County Council
The Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher presented his Report to the Members which was
circulated to all Members at today's meeting.
Mr Gallagher informed the Members that the JPC's Working Group on "Design of the Built
Environment" is preparing its final report for the consideration of the Working Group in the
coming weeks and it will then be forwarded for the attention of the JPC Members.
Ms Sheena Lawless, (Community Representative) thanked Mr Gallagher for his detailed
report and appreciated the Public JPC Meeting recently held in Battery Heights, Athlone. Ms
Lawless thanked the staff of Westmeath County Council and An Garda Sfochåna for setting
up such an informative meeting.
Ms Lawless referred to Item No.2(i) of Mr Gallagher's report with regard to the
Establishment of a Pilot Action / Development Group. Ms Lawless suggested that
Westmeath JPC set up a "Sub Committee Group" including representatives from Westmeath
County Council, An Garda Sfochäna and Community Forums as she felt it would be a more
appropriate forum to discuss such issues. In response, Mr Gallagher informed the Members
that a group already exists in both Mullingar and Athlone known as the 'RAPID Area
Implementation Team'. Mr Gallagher requested that he meet with Ms Lawless to discuss her
suggestion further.
Cllrs P Hogan and S Clarke supported Ms Lawless's suggestion.
In response to Cllr Clarke, Mr Pat Gallagher informed the JPC Members that all housing
complaints are logged on a customer complaints management system called "I-House". Mr
Gallagher also stated that complaints in relation to Anti-Social Behaviour are dealt with
separately and are recorded in a new IT System in the Housing Section of Westmeath County
Council. Mr Gallagher advised the Members that this new system is "password protected"
and access is limited to three senior staff in the Housing department who deal directly with
anti-social behaviour.
Mr Gallagher further highlighted to the Members that all Anti-Social Behaviour complaints
are dealt with in a highly confidential manner and will remain confidential subject to the
requirements of the Freedom of Information Act.
In further response to Cllr Clarke regarding the new Tenants Handbook, Mr Gallagher
informed the Members that same will be brought before the full Council for consideration in
the coming weeks. Once approved by the Members, this I--landbook will be issued to all of
Westmeath County Council Tenants.
Cllr Clarke requested that the Chief Executive's Report dated 14th October 2016 be circulated
to Members not present at today's meeting. Mr Billy Coughlan agreed to same once he
received contact details for the two newly appointed JPC Members, (Mr Dave Raftis and
Marie Reddin).
Cllr F McDermott thanked Mr Gallagher for his Report.
Report from An Garda Sfochåna
Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton introduced himself to the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
and outlined his own extensive policing experience. He paid tribute to the professionalism of
the Members of the Garda force within County Westmeath and stated since coming to
Westmeath he had been more than impressed with the work ethic within Westmeath County.
Chief Supt Kevin Gralton gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath Division
under the following headlines as circulated at today's meeting.
Report was noted as circulated.
Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton highlighted the following:
Operation Thor — will be refocused to include High Visibility Crime patrols and
checkpoints in the Westmeath Division during winter months.
National Property Recovered Day — 2 success stories, identifying the owners of 2
power tools from the Westmeath Division property catalogue. It is intended to make
improvements when conducting this initiative going forward, ie extended hours to
include evening times for working people and to have property on the Garda Website
in advance of scheduled date.
Retirements of Gardai in Westmeath — Garda John Daly, Kinnegad Garda Station,
Garda Hugh Gilsenan, Castlepollard Garda Station and Garda Martin Down,
Mullingar. Garda Paul Ravenhill, Moate Garda Station set to retire in the coming
months.
Garda Station Refurbishment: - significant progress made on the provision of a new
Garda Station on the existing site in Athlone. Upgrades to internal works are planned
for Mullingar Garda Station to add to the Cell refurbishment programme.
In addition to the Garda Sfochåna Report circulated, Chief Supt Kevin Gralton informed the
Members of the following additional items:
Theft: Significant detections were made in August 2016 in relation to the theft of
Ride on Lawnmowers, the value recovered was very high.
Athlone Burglaries —increase in burglaries in the Athlone area, charges will follow
on some incidents.
Drugs find: Significant drugs find were made in: Kinnegad Area in Sept of this year,
Mullingar Area — Cannabis worth €40,000 detected, Moate Area: Grow House found
to the value of €150,000 of plants.
Serious Domestic Assault: - in the Athlone Area, 4 people arrested and currently
before the Courts.
Organised Crime Gang — of eastern European origin detected in Coosan Area, 4
people arrested and currently before the courts.
Cllr Frank McDermott welcomed and thanked the Chief Superintendent Kevin Gralton for his
comprehensive Garda Report and the following issues were raised.
Tributes were made by the JPC Members to the retired Gardai of Westmeath and also to
outgoing Community Garda Blåithfn Moran who has transferred out of Mullingar with
promotion to the rank of Inspector.
Cllrs P Hill, S Clarke, P Hogan and Deputy Troy raised concerns in relation to the number of
Gardai retirements within the Westmeath Division and asked if they would be replaced. In
response, Chief Supt Kevin Gralton informed the Members that he would be to the forefront
of calls to increase numbers for Garda Stations across the county. In response to concerns
raised regarding Garda figures for the Rural Areas such as Delvin and Killucan, Chief Supt
Gralton stated that as new recruits graduate from Templemore, it is high on his priority list to
get new Gardai appointed to Westmeath. Chief Supt Gralton confirmed that he will give
further details on recruitment figures at the next JPC Meeting in January 2017.
In response to Cllr Glynn's concerns regarding "theft" taking place in businesses throughout
Mullingar town, Chief Supt. Gralton advised the Members that he would discuss same with
Crime Prevention Officer Mr John Connolly to see what further measures could be put in
place. In relation to speed limit enforcement within Housing Estates, Chief Supt Gralton
stated that the policing force cannot cover every road and traffic measures are currently in
place. Cllr Glynn also raised concerns regarding illegal car parking at taxi lanes at Church
Avenue, Mullingar. In response, Chief Supt Gralton confirmed that he would investigate this
issue with Supt Alan Murray.
Cllr Glynn stated that a number of lights were out of action in Mullingar Business Park in
particular near the Dog Track area. He also asked could something be done for premises not
covered by CCTV? In response, Chief Supt Gralton stated that people have to take on certain
responsibilities for their own premises.
In response to Cllrs Glynn and Dolan, Mr Pat Gallagher informed the Members that the
previous grant scheme from the Dept. of Justice for community based CCTV has been closed
for a number of years and he confirmed that he will investigate same. There are also issues
relating to data protection to be considered.
In response to Cllr Glynn and Cllr Clarke, Chief Supt Gralton confirmed that he would
investigate concerns raised in relation to regular criminal damage being carried out at Grange
Playground, Mullingar.
Deputy Troy raised concerns about County Boundary alignments not being aligned to Garda
Divisional areas and asked could a revision of boundaries be reviewed.
Deputy Troy also asked if any application was made to the OPW for much needed funding
for a Building Programme for Mullingar Garda Station (ie new station for additional space)
and other stations in the County that require renovation.
Cllr S Clarke expressed concerns about the number of thefts from vehicles within the County
and Chief Supt Gralton suggested that vehicles owners should place their goods/purchasers in
the boot of cars rather than on full public display.
Cllr P Hogan commended the Athlone Garda force for their swift response to a very serious
knife point robbery which took place in Athlone recently and also to the significant drugs
find in Athlone. Cllr Hogan and Deputy Troy asked if all "crime reporting" is recorded, Chief
Supt Gralton stated that this is highly unlikely and encouraged all members of the public to
report any suspicious activity within their area as a culture of awareness is so important.
In response to Cllrs Dolan and Hogan, Supt Pat Murray informed the Members that Athlone
Garda Station will be a "universal access building".
Cllr E Wallace requested that the Community Text Alert system be extended to the Business
Communities within Westmeath. Chief Supt Gralton undertook to review the situation.
Mr Des Sheridan, Community Member, commended our young Gardai— they are the future,
but stated that the only disadvantage is the local Gardai do not live in our Communities
anymore. Mr Sheridan made reference to the Policing System in France, whereby local police
live within their communities.
Chief Supt Kevin Gralton welcomed and thanked all Members for their comments and
suggestions.
Mr Pat Gallagher on behalf of the Staff of Westmeath County Council also paid tribute to the
retired Gardai of Westmeath and their families and also to outgoing Community Garda
Bläithfn Moran.
o Correspondence
There was no correspondence.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 16th January 2017 at 11.00a.m in the Council
Chambers, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar, Co Westmeath
Proposed Public Meeting — Mullingar Municipal District
Mr Gallagher informed the Members that following a meeting of the JPC Steering Group
held on the 12th October 2016, it was recommended to hold a Mullingar Municipal District
Public Meeting in the afternoon of Monday, 16th January 2017.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Frank Mc ermott,
Chairman
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
ate