Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00m on Monday, 17th July 2017
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
in the
Athlone Civic Offices, Athlone.
Cllr Frank McDermott, Chairman
Cllrs, Sorca Clarke, Tom Farrell, Paul Hogan, Frankie Keena,
Emily Wallace, Bill Collentine, Michael O'Brien
Deputy Gabrielle McFadden
Pat Grimes, Marie Reddin and Kathleen Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Kevin Gralton, Superintendent Patrick
Murray and Superintendent Alan Murray
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, Westmeath County Council
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, Westmeath County
Council, Amanda Nulty, Corporate Services, Westmeath
County Council
Helen Hall, Chief Executive, Policing Authority
Cllr's. Ken Glynn, Paddy Hill, Aengus O'Rourke, John Shaw,
Andrew Duncan, Senator Paul Daly, Senator Aidan Davitt,
Deputy Peter Burke, Des Sheridan, Dave Raftis, Sheena
Lawless, Pat Keating, Declan Leonard Terry McCague
The Chairman, Cllr Frank McDermott opened the meeting and welcomed the Members, press
and Chief Executive of the Policing Authority, Ms Helen Hall.
Ms Hall thanked the Members for the opportunity to attend the meeting and advised the role
of the Policing Authority in relation to JPC's is to establish supporting guidelines.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 10th April 2017:
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr Michael O'Brien the Members
approved the minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 10th April 2017 in the Council Chambers,
Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
• Anti Social Behaviour Strategy
Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher advised the Members that following further consideration
by the Council's Housing, Community, Corporate, and Culture Strategic Policy Committee
(SPC), the Elected Members of the Council unanimously adopted the revised Tenant
Handbook (on 28/11/16) and Anti-Social Behaviour Strategy (on 27/3/17). It is intended the
adopted documents will be circulated to Tenants in September 2017.
• Report of Working Group on Design of the Built Environment
Mr Gallagher advised the Members no response has been received to date from the Minister
for Housing, Planning, Community and Local Govemment in relation to recommendation
No. 2 which was communicated to the Minister on behalf of the JPC.
Water Safety
Mr Gallagher informed the Members that Westmeath County Council's Water Safety
Development Officer (Mr. Enda Hanniffy) 2017 Report to the JPC has been deferred,
pending receipt of the IWS report, as that report will contain the information and relevant
statistics and he assured the Members that the busy annual Water Safety Development
Programme is being implemented.
• Road Safety
Mr Gallagher advised the Members that Westmeath County Council has reconvened its Road
Safety working group who are developing a new Road Safety Strategy. He furthered that a
presentation on same will be given at the next JPC meeting.
• Annual Report
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell, seconded by Cllr Michael O'Brien, the Members
approved the JPC Annual Report 2016.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath Division
as circulated at today's meeting.
Chief Supt. Gralton advised Members the decrease in burglaries figure should state 57% and
not 131% as the circulated report states.
This report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Gralton highlighted the following:
• Crime Analysis 1/04/2017 to 30/06/2017 inclusive — as per Report circulated.
• Confronting Crime: The increase in property crime is mainly attributable to the rise
in thefts from MP V's and thefts from shops. Theft from MP V's which accounts for 36
of the 45 incident increase in the Division with 103 incidents of Theft from MP V to
the end of June 2017 compared with 67 incidents during the same period in 2016.
There is a 26% detection rate for this crime type in the Westmeath Division and
prolific offenders are targeted for this offence in both Districts.
Chief Supt. Gralton noted there has been a notable increase in the number of
detections for the sale and supply of drugs and simple possession of drugs in the
Westmeath Division. He furthered that this is mainly attributable to the detections at
festivals.
Roads Policing - Operation Taitneamh which was a Crime and Road Policing
Operation run over the June Bank Holiday weekend was hugely successful and plans
are afoot to deliver a similar operation over the course of the August Bank holiday
weekend.
Community Policing:
Gardai from across the Division and took part in a charity cycle from Mullingar to
Enniscrone a distance of 100 miles to raise for funds for the Mullingar Lions Club.
The lions club who are a great supporter of the Annual Mullingar District Senior
Citizens party were this year's recipients of the monies raised which totalled
approximately €4,000
Allocation of newly attested Gardai: Mullingar Garda Station - Five new Gardai
allocated following their attestation at the Garda College in May 2017. A further five
(5) Gardai are due to be allocated to Mullingar Garda Station in late July 2017.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Gralton for the comprehensive Garda
Report.
Cllr McDermot complimented the Gardai on their work and stated that it was great to see that
the level of crime detection had increased in both rural and urban areas of the county.
In response to Cllr O'Brien's comments regarding reporting of crime, Chief Supt Gralton
advised every effort is made to ensure correct reporting of crime. He advised daily meetings
occur to review the previous 24 hours to ensure reporting accuracy.
In response to Members positive comments regarding Operation Taitneamh Chief Supt
Gralton advised a similar operation over the course of the August Bank holiday weekend.
Cllr Clarke raised concerns regarding the issue of children being groomed to shoplift. She
also asked what are the most common objects reported stolen from shops. In response, Chief
Supt. Gralton informed the Members that where as it may be a possibility in isolated cases, he
has seen no trend emerging of children being used to shoplift. He advised the most common
objects shoplifted is alcohol
In response to Cllr Keena, Supt. Patrick Murray advised the Members that the refurbishment
project of Athlone Garda Station is at an advanced stage.
Cllr Keena raised concems about jamming devices used to override locking mechanisms on
cars. Superintendent Murray advised the Members the Gardai are aware of such devices and
have detected one such case in Athlone and particular gangs are associated with these types
of crimes.
Senator McFadden raised concerns about the potential for burglaries of homes near the
geenway in Athlone and the installation of CCTV cameras. Supt. Murray advised the
Members the Greenway is patrolled by an Garda Siochana on bicycles regularly. There is
huge use of the facility and it is a very positive amenity. Reports of anti social behaviour
were reported in January 2017 and a group from Roscommon apprehended. There have been
no reported incidents since.
The Gardai are currently engaging with Westmeath County Council about CCTV cameras on
the Greenway.
In response to Cllr Clarkes query regarding the new national drug detection laws and the use
of pain killers, Supt Gralton advised he will seek clarity on the matter and advise the JPC
Members accordingly.
Ms Marie Reddin welcomed the possibility of community CCTV in RAPID areas of
Mullingar and Athlone but stated community groups are concerned about raising the 60%
funding needed for the cameras installation. Ms Redden also requested clarity on who owns
the footage from these cameras.
Ms Reddin requested training in the event of finding drugs or paraphernalia in their
conununities.
In response to Ms Reddin concerns regarding community CCTV, Mr Pat Gallagher advised
clarification is needed on who the data controller of the footage is and with new data
protection requirements due in 2018, legal requirements will be heightened further. He
further stated if the onus is shifting to the community group that is a huge responsibility.
Mr Gallagher thanked an Garda Siochana for their ongoing support to Westmeath County
Council on a range of topics on an ongoing basis.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 16th October 2017 at 11.00a.m in the Council
Chamber, Åras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Any other Business:
In relation to the minute of the April Joint Policing Committee Meeting, Senator McFadden
raised dissatisfaction regarding questions asked by Cllr Clarke in relation to Supt. Pat
Murray's appointment by the Commissioner to conduct an investigation into a national
policing matter. Senator McFadden requested further clarity and an apology from Cllr Clarke.
Cllr Hogan supported Senator McFadden's request and stating Cllr Clarkes questions were
outside the remit of the JPC.
In response to Senator McFaddan and Cllr Hogan, Cllr Clarke responded that meeting
minutes are verbatim.
Chairman, Cllr McDermott advised the Westmeath JPC Members they unanimously ageed
absolute and total support for our Garda team and confidence in their ability at the April JPC
Meeting.
s concluded the business of the meeting.
&Adø <
Cllr Frank McDermott;-
Chairman, Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date