Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 11 April 2022
in Athlone Civic Office and b MS Teams Meeting
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Introduction:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs John Dolan, Tom Farrell, Frankie Keena, Hazel Smyth and
Paul Hogan.
Deputy Sorca Clarke
Joyce Furlong, Kathleen Grennan, Marie Reddin, Michael Mulvey,
and Pat Grimes.
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy, Superintendent David Nolan
and Superintendent Michelle Baker.
Barry Kehoe, Deputy Chief Executive, WCC, Anne Galvin, A.O,
Brigid Geoghegan PPN, Breda Daly, WCC, Sheila Healy, SEO,
Mullingar-Kinnegad Municipal District and Ms Karen Shelly, The
Policing Authority.
Cllrs Michael Dollard, Ken Glynn, Andrew Duncan, Denis Leonard,
Frank McDermott, Emily Wallace, Liam McDaniel and Bill
Collentine. Senator Paul Daly and Aidan Davitt. Deputies Peter
Burke, Robert Troy. Community Rep. Dave Raftis.
Cllr Paddy Hill opened the JPC MS Teams Meeting and welcomed all JPC Members, Ms Karen
Shelly from The Policing Authority and the Media (online). Cllr Hill also extended a warm
welcome to newly appointed Superintendent Michelle Baker (Athlone District) and
Superintendent David Nolan (Mullingar District).
Cllr Hill informed the Members that Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive was unable to attend the
meeting and that Mr Barry Kehoe, Director of Services was deputising for him.
Cllr Hill extended his sympathies to the recent passing of Cllr Hogan' s mother Breda Hogan, RIP
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 10 January 2022:
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr John Dolan, the Members approved the
Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 10 January 2022.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
• To consider and approve Westmeath JPC Annual Report 2021
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr John Dolan, the Members approved the
Westmeath JPC Annual Report 2021.
Ms Anne Galvin advised the JPC Members that the approved JPC Annual Report for 2021 is
submitted to The Policing Authority, Minister for Justice and Garda Headquarters.
Report from An Garda Sfochåna:
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy welcomed newly appointed Superintendent Michelle Baker to
Athlone Division and Superintendent David Nolan to Mullingar District.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy outlined in his presentation, the following crime statistics for the County.
Property crime had increased from 211 in 2021 (QI) to 317 in 2022 (QI), divisional totals.
In Athlone, figures were up from 112 (QI) in 2021 to 146 (QI) in 2022.
For Mullingar, they were up from 99 in 2021 (QI) to 171 (QI) in 2022.
In terms of burglary, the rate also increased from 36 in QI 2021 to 60 in QI 2022, a 67% divisional
increase.
The number of thefts from vehicles increased from 25 in QI 2021 to 32 in QI 2022, a 28%
divisional increase.
The rate of theft and unauthorised taking of vehicles at divisional level decreased from 12 in QI
2021 to 10 QI in 2022, a 17% divisional decrease.
There was a 50% increase in the number of reported thefts from shops, 88 in QI 2021 to 132 in
QI 2022. (Divisional totals).
There was an increase in the number of reported thefts of other property, 28 in QI 2021 to 61 in
QI 2022. (Divisional totals).
In relation to Drugs figures:
In the Athlone Division, incidents of Section 3 (possession of drugs for personal use) violations
went from 29 in QI 2021 to 19 QI in 2022, a decrease of 34%, while incidents of Section 15
(possession of a drug with intent for sale or supply) went from 12 in QI 2021 to 6 in QI 2022.
In the Mullingar Division, incidents of Section 3 violations went from 56 in QI 2021 to 35 in QI
2022, a decrease of 38%, while incidents of Section 15 went from 16 in QI 2021 to 3 in QI 2022,
a decrease of 81 %.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Community Engagements:
• Operation Faoiseamh commenced on 1 April 2020 Io offer support and protection Io
victims of domestic abuse during these extraordinary times. The Westmeath Garda Victim
Office is identifring domestic abuse victims within the Westmeath Division and has
initiated contact.
An Garda Sfochåna continue communication and joint co-operation with local groups,
housing estates, local council and the HSE.
Members of An Garda Sfochåna in the Mullingar District are assisting with plans for the
Fleadh in Mullingar in August 2022 and festivals in Belvedere and in Ballinlough Delvin.
An Garda Sfochåna are celebrating their Centenary Year and to mark this the District
Headquarters in Athlone & Mullingar are planning an open day for members ofthe public.
Chief Supt. Fergus Healy informed the JPC Members of the following Resources — Divisional
Overview:
•
•
•
•
256 Swom Garda Members (All Ranks)
123 Mullingar District
92 Athlone District
41 Divisional Garda Members, (Roads Policing, DPSU, CPD,PSV, CIO, cpo, Scene of
crime, Telecommunications)
10 Reserve Members
38 Garda Staff
13 Garda Stations
73 Vehicles in Divisional Fleet
Chairman Cllr Paddy Hill and JPC Members thanked Chief Supt. Fergus Healy, Supt. Michelle
Baker and Supt. David Nolan for their presentation.
Members raised the following queries which were responded to by An Garda Siochåna (AGS) and
officials present:
Cllr Tom Farrell asked An Garda Siochåna if there was a new Drugs Unit in place within the
county? In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the members that AGS have
reconfigured their current Drugs Unit to work across the county as opposed to working in the two
separate towns, Athlone and Mullingar. Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy also informed the
Members that An Garda Siochåna are currently running a recruitment campaign to replenish the
staffing levels in this unit.
Cllr John Dolan asked if An Garda Sfochåna in Westmeath were engaging with the Criminal Assets
Bureau (CAB). In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy stated that CAB is active in
Westmeath and he added that An Garda Siochåna have had some significant arrests of major
players in the drugs industry in the county.
Cllr Paul Hogan wished newly appointed Superintendent Michelle Baker well in her new role in
the Athlone division.
Cllr Hogan queried the drop in Garda numbers locally and asked for an explanation.
In response Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that some new Garda
recruits had been based in Westmeath during the pandemic but when the training college in
Templemore reopened, they had to return to continue their training. Chief Superintendent Healy
further advised that other factors which contributed to the decreased number in Athlone were
retirements and Gardai being appointed to the force's Protective Services unit in the town.
Chief Superintendent Healy also informed the Members that there is a recruitment campaign
ongoing to recruit an extra 800 Gardai and that Westmeath will benefit from that in due course.
Cllr Hogan asked An Garda Sfochåna if it was known how many of the 800 additional recruits
would end up in Westmeath. In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy stated that
Westmeath would be competing for resources with the rest of the country.
Cllr Hogan also asked An Garda Sfochåna for the number of Adult Cautions issued last year and
requested an overview of the policy regarding the Adult Caution Scheme and what it sets out to
do.
In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that the Adult Caution
Scheme is run by the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP) to divert people out of the Criminal
Justice Process, in specific circumstances. It is designed to to afford a person an opportunity to
put things correct and deal with their mistake in a responsible way. Chief Superintendent Fergus
Healy also stated that such a Scheme is there to assist people who are suited to being diverted away
from the Criminal Justice System rather than having a criminal record and the person will learn
from their mistakes. Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy further informed the Members that this
System is effective throughout the country.
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy explained to the Members that part of the decision making
process in every prosecution is that a person has to be considered for the Scheme at the outset and
then you graduate to the next level of the Scheme if a person is not suited. Chief Superintendent
Fergus Healy informed the Members that there is a hierarchy of decision making with regard to
making a decision around a prosecution.
Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed Cllr Hogan that he would get figures for him
regarding Adult Caution Schemes in Westmeath.
In response to Cllr Frankie Keena regarding the official opening of the newly refurbished Garda
Station in Athlone, Superintendent Michelle Baker informed the Members that no official date is
confirmed as they are awaiting confirmation on a date from Garda Commissioner Mr Drew Harris.
Cllr Frankie Keena informed the Members that there are approximately 180-190 Ukrainian
refugees in Athlone town and asked An Garda Siochåna if there was a Community Liaison Officer
available through the Gardai to help and assist the Ukrainians in Athlone town?
Cllr Frankie Keena also informed the Members that bicycles were made available to the Ukrainian
people in Athlone and asked An Garda Siochåna if they could give an induction on the rules of the
road to the Ukrainian people?
Cllr Frankie Keena explained his intention with the help of the Community Response Forum to set
up a One Stop Information Hub to support the Ukrainian people
In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy welcomed Cllr Keena's suggestion and informed
the Members that Superintendent Michelle Baker would investigate the request of providing a
Garda service to the Ukrainian people.
Cllr Hazel Smyth asked An Garda Siochåna about the increase in domestic violence, what efforts
are being made by local Gardai to monitor and safeguard the refuge spaces we have in Westmeath.
In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that AGS have a "call
back" system in place and a policy where a Garda is required to make a call back within a statutory
period of time. These calls are monitored and managed daily.
Cllr Smyth asked that the public spaces within Westmeath be "audited" by both An Garda
Sfochåna and Westmeath County Council.
Cllr Smith asked about the policing of scooters around pavements within Westmeath and how An
Garda Siochåna plan to tackle this issue. In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed
the Members that there is a grey area in the legislation. He informed the Members that the Road
Traffic Act must be amended and that the Department of Transport are looking at amending the
legislation accordingly. Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy advised the JPC that using a scooter
on a footpath is an offence under the Road Traffic Act and people have been prosecuted.
Cllr Smyth raised the question regarding new hate crime legislation recently introduced and how
is this crime monitored? How can victims of hate crime work with AGS to ensure their rights are
upheld? In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that the Minister
is introducing new legislation on hate crime and it will be going to the Oireachtas. Chief
Superintendent Fergus Healy stated that he is looking forward to dealing with the new legislation
when it comes on board and informed the Members that the Protected Services Bureau currently
deal with people in vulnerable situations.
Cllr Smyth asked An Garda Siochåna about the upcoming Fleadh in Mullingar this Summer and
the risk of some potential anti-social behaviour and the role of Community Wardens. Cllr Smyth
asked for an increased presence of Gardai and Community Wardens in the public spaces around
Mullingar town during this time. In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the
Members that Superintendent David Nolan is organising the policing of this event. Superintendent
David Nolan informed the Members that there will be public order patrols in place during the
evening time and the event will be policed. In relation to the community policing around scenic
areas within Mullingar town, Mr Nolan confirmed that regular policing patrols take place in these
areas.
Mr Nolan also confirmed that audits are ongoing and An Garda Siochana are looking at increasing
visibility in these areas during the Summer months.
Jn response to Cllr's Smyth query regarding illegal dumping and the installation of more cameras
to prevent and detect illegal dumping, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members
that this and the issue of cameras is a matter for the Local Authority to address.
Cllr Smyth raised the issue of Animal and Wildlife Crime - who is responsible for reporting of
animal and wildlife crime that might occur within our county. In response, Chief Superintendent
Fergus Healy informed the Members that the National Parks and Wildlife Service is the primary
agency for the enforcement of this legislation and An Garda Siochåna are secondary enforcers.
However, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy stated that if any member of An Garda Siochåna
come across this type of crime in the nature of their duty, AGS would work with the National Park
and Wildlife service who are the primary enforcers.
In response to Cllr Smyth ' s question regarding gun crime within Westmeath, Chief Superintendent
Fergus Healy informed the Members that An Garda Sfochåna do monitor same but it is not
categorised by way of gun crime. An Garda Siochåna would have certain categories of crime
where guns may have been used such as "aggravated burglaries" or armed robberies and monitor
same, and that levels are low in Westmeath.
Deputy Sorca Clarke highlighted the increasing issue of intimidation regarding the collection of
"drug and illegal money lending" debt. Deputy Clarke informed the JPC that she had seen a
substantial rise in the number of calls to her constituency office in relation to this problem in recent
months. Deputy Clarke stated that some of the people who were reporting these issues were
reluctant to speak to the Gardai. In response, Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy acknowledged
that there was a growing problem of intimidation in communities and that it is not just in Athlone
and Mullingar, it is a national issue. Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy encouraged anyone
affected to come forward to An Garda Siochåna and report this type of crime so it can be dealt
with.
Deputy Clarke also paid tribute to Sergeant Roger Nicholson on his retirement at the end of this
month. Deputy Clarke asked if there was a timeframe for when his successor would be appointed.
In response Chief Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that a temporary
replacement for Sergeant Nicholson had been put in place and the process of appointing a
pen-nanent successor was underway.
Deputy Sorca Clarke raised concems regarding domestic and gender-based violence. Deputy
Clarke would like Westmeath JPC to extend an open invitation to the local Domestic Violence
Service Provider based in Athlone and Mullingar to take a seat at the JPC table. In response, Chief
Superintendent Fergus Healy said gender based violence is a concern and An Garda Siochåna will
endeavour to work with a view to dealing with these particular issues and he stated that he openly
welcomes any suggestions in respect of these particular issues in society.
Cllr John Dolan asked An Garda Siochåna if CCTV was installed on certain parts of the Greenway
in Athlone, would An Garda Siochåna be the host to monitor same? If this is not possible, could
An Garda Siochåna increase the Garda bike patrols on the Greenway. In response, Chief
Superintendent Fergus Healy informed the Members that in relation to CCTV Schemes there is a
national process in which CCI'V schcmcs need to bc approved. Chief Supcrintcndcnt Fergus Hcaly
did state that there is an issue around who the Data Controller would be on CCTV schemes.
Superintendent Michelle Baker did confirm that AGS would increase patrols of the Greenway
during the Summer months.
Mr Michael Mulvey, PPN representative requested that more Community Gardai be made
available in Athlone town. In response, Superintendent Michelle Baker added that community
policing was a priority and that she would consider ringfencing Garda resources for community
policing where possible.
PPN Report:
There was no PPN Report for the April 2022 JPC Meeting.
Correspondence:
None.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 11 July 2022 at 10.00 a.m.in the Council
Chambers, Mullingar.
AOB:
Cllr Tom Farrell asked for an update on the "text alert" system. In response Chief Supt Fergus
Healy agreed to follow up on this request.
Cllr Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Paddy Hill
Chairman,
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date