Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 16th January 2017
in the
Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Frank McDermott, Chairman
Cllrs, Sorca Clarke, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Paul Hogan,
Frankie Keena, Emily Wallace, Bill Collentine.
Deputy Robert Troy
Mr. Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, Marie Reddin, Dave Raftis,
Sheena Lawless and Kathleen Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Kevin Gralton and Superintendent Alan
Murray
David Hogan, Director of Services, WCC
Martin Murray, Director of Services, WCC.
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, WCC.
Terry McCague, Senior Planner, WCC.
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Pat Keating, Athlone Municipal District Manager
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Mr Pat Gallagher, Supt. Pat Murray, Cllrs Ken Glynn, Paddy
Hill, Michael O'Brien, Aengus O'Rourke, John Shaw, Senator
Paul Daly, Senator Gabrielle McFadden, Senator Aidan Davitt,
Deputy Peter Burke
The Chailman, Cllr Frank McDermott opened the meeting and welcomed the Members. Cllr
McDermott further welcomed our two new JPC Community Representative Members, Mr
Dave Raftis and Ms Marie Reddin. He also gave apologies on behalf of Mr Pat Gallagher,
Chief Executive, Supt. Pat Murray, Cllr Ken Glynn, Aengus O'Rourke and Senator Gabrielle
McFadden.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 17th October 2016:
On the proposal of Cllr. Sorca Clarke and seconded by Cllr Paul Hogan, it was agreed to
approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 17th October 2016 in the Council Chambers,
Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
Matters Arisin :
There were no matters arising.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
Schedule of JPC Meetings for 2017.
Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator informed the Members that 4 JPC Meetings are
held annually (normally occurring on the third Monday of the month).
The following dates were agreed by the Members:
Meetin dates for 2017:
Monday, 10t April 2017
Monday, 17th July 2017
Monday, 16th October 2017
- Council Chambers, Mullingar at I lam.
- Athlone Civic Centre at I lam.
- Council Chambers, Mullingar at I lam.
o Progress Report on Working Group on Design of the Built Environment
Mr Terry McCague, Senior Planner, Westmeath County Council presented the following
Report: "Report of Wesfrneath Joint Policing Working Group in relation to Crime and
Ann-Social behaviour in the Built Environment" to the Members, (as circulated by e-mail
prior to today's meeting and hard copy given out at the Meeting).
Cllr Frank McDermott thanked and complimented the Working Group and Mr McCague for
the detailed presentation and asked that the Members note and approve the Report.
On the proposal of Cllr. Paul Hogan and seconded by Cllr Frankie Keena, the Members noted
and approved the "Report of Wesüneath Joint Policing Working Group in relation to Crüne
and Anti-Social behaviour in the Built Environment" and the recommendations contained
therein.
ACTION:
Mr David Hogan, on behalf of the Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher stated that
recommendation No. 2 of the Report would be referred for the attention of the Minister of the
Environment Community & Local Government. This recommendation (No. 2) reads as
follows:
The Garda Siochåna should be afforded the opportunity to comment on larger scheme
applications. Thresholds for referral could include location (such as town centre),
type (such as nightclubs, take-aways) and scale (such as number of new homes). This
will require an amendment to primary legislation and regulations by the Department
of Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government which the JPC would
support.
o Update — Rapid Area Implementation Team
Mr David Hogan, on behalf of the Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher gave an update to the
Members on the Rapid Area Implementation Team (Athlone and Mullingar) as circulated to
the Members prior to today' s meeting.
Ms Sheena Lawless acknowledged and thanked Mr Gallagher for this report and
communications with her on this matter, however, Ms Lawless remained unconvinced that
the existing RAPID AITS were the appropriate vehicle for dealing with the issues in areas
such as Battery Heights ie, (dumping of rubbish in Green Areas, tenants dumping rubbish in
their own area, then both Environment and Housing sections involved). Ms Lawless strongly
feels that a Sub-Committee of the JPC should be set up.
Cllr Hogan agreed with Ms Lawless and proposed that such a sub-committee be established
to deal with the issues raised previously by Ms Lawless including anti social behaviour in
estates. This was seconded by Cllr F Keena.
Cllr Hogan raised concern that there was no Public Representative for Rapid AIT —
Mullingar. In response, Mr David Hogan advised the Members that this matter will be
addressed at the earliest opportunity.
Following discussions, Mr Hogan requested that the RAPID AITS would be given an
opportunity to determining their effectiveness and it was agreed that the issue would be
reviewed at the next JPC meeting in April 2017. Cllr Frank McDermott asked that the
Executive address the issues raised by Ms Lawless in relation to dumping at Battery Heights.
The PPN representative's, Ms Marie Reddin, stated that Councillors were not attending the
existing RAPID AIT meetings and forming another committee was not a solution.
Cllr Hogan agreed to the Cathaoirleach's recommendation to withdraw his proposal and
review the position at the next JPC Meeting scheduled for
Report from An Garda Sfochåna:
Chief Supt Kevin Gralton gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath Division
as circulated at today's meeting.
Report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton highlighted the following:
Crime Analysis 1/10/2016 to 31/12/2016 inclusive — as per Report circulated.
Crime Prevention Initiatives: Oct/Nov/Dec 2016 An Garda Siochana in the Westmeath
Division established and conducted over 900 checkpoints throughout the County.
Roads Policing -
o
o
321 Mandatory Intoxication Testing Checkpoints were conducted in the
Westmeath Division during the months Oct —Dec 2016.
Major Motorway Checkpoints were conducted targeting speed, drink driving,
revenue offences and driver behaviour.
Divisional Drugs Unit for Westmeath Division — very proactive unit, 12 seizures
over €10,000 for 2016
Crime Prevention: - the Crime Prevention Officer for the Westmeath Division is
involved in a number of initiatives including media campaigns, business watch and
community text alert.
Community Policing:
o The Community Policing Unit hosted their 2nd Annual Mullingar & District Older
Person Christmas Party, there was over 260 attendees from the different active age
and older persons groups
o Athlone Community Policing Unit — will host their Annual Old Folks Party on 22nd
Jan 2017 in the Radisson Hotel.
Allocation of newly attested Gardai: Athlone Garda Station — being allocated six new
Gardai following their attestation at the Garda College in late February 2017.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Superintendent Mr Kevin Gralton for the
comprehensive Garda Report.
Deputy Robert Troy complimented the Gardaf on their work and stated that it was great to see
that the level of crime detection had increased in both rural and urban areas of the county.
In response to Deputy Troy's question in relation to having adequate Garda manpower going
forward, Chief Supt. Gralton informed the Members that while there can never be enough
manpower, things are improving, it will take time but that the ship has "steadied". Mr
Gralton advised the Members that he fully intends to provide a pro-active approach to
policing within the County.
Chief Supt,.Gralton further informed the Members that six student Gardai have been
allocated to the Athlone area for a 34-week training period, following that, a decision will be
made on where the Gardaf will be allocated. He also advised the Members that the
Westmeath Division will receive five Sergeants. One Sergeant will be appointed to the
Kinnegad Area and a new Garda is being appointed to Delvin next week.
Deputy Troy raised concerns that there was no Sergeant for the Kilbeggan Area, in response,
Mr Gralton informed the Members that Supt. Pat Murray had devised a new plan to see
Moate and Kilbeggan policed jointly. He stated that the "administrative work" will be dealt
with at Moate Garda Station and Moate will become a headquarters for both Kilbeggan and
Moate. He also informed the Members that both areas will be split into six separate zones and
each zone will be allocated one Garda.
In response to Members questions regarding the high number of uninsured drivers on our
roads, Chief Supt Gralton stated that it was very serious and concerning and he stressed the
importance of having a vehicle insured. Mr Gralton also stressed that the serious effects of
uninsured drivers would not be seen until a serious accident occurred. Mr Gralton stated that
it is his intention that everyone who was caught would be prosecuted and checkpoints will
continue in 2017.
In response to Cllr Keena, Chief Supt Gralton advised the Members that the refurbishment of
Athlone Garda Station is at an advanced stage and that the 2nd quarter of this year could see
the project finished.
In response to Mr Des Sheridan regarding what happens to seized cars, Chief Supt Gralton
informed the Members that the vehicle owner has the right to have someone collect the
vehicle by truck or have an insured driver take it.
Cllr Clarke complimented Chief Supt Gralton and his staff on the Multi Agency Checkpoints
carried out within the County. In response to Cllr Clarke regarding property seizures, Chief
Supt Gralton stated that the Gardaf do their best to get as much back to their rightful owners
as possible.
Cllr Clarke asked the Chief Supt. if there were any material changes made to Reports in
respect of Joint Policing Committees. In response, the Chief Supt stated that there were no
material changes to statistics.
Cllr Hogan complimented the dedicated Garda Drugs Unit for the Athlone Area and
welcomed that drug seizures were up 55%. He further complimented the initiative of the
Christmas Parties for both Athlone and Mullingar areas.
Cllr Hogan raised concerns that a convicted child abuser made a new home opposite a Youth
Centre and asked what was the level of communication between the Gardai and the Probation
Service. In response, The Chief Supt. informed the Members that the Gardaf do not generally
have any say on such an issue.
Date of next meetin
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 10th
Chamber, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
An other Business:
None.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Frank McD ott
Chairman
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
April 2017 at 11.00a.m in the Council
Date
