Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 18th January 2016
in the
Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies
Cllr Aidan Davitt, Chairman
Cllrs. Peter Burke, Sorca Clarke, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell,
Ken Glynn, Frankie Keena, Michael O'Brien, John Shaw.
None Present
Mr. Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, Kathleen Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley, Superintendents Alan
Murray and Patrick Murray, Sergeant John Connolly and
Sergeant Patrick M Conway (Garda National JPC Monitoring
Office).
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Cllrs, Ken Glynn, Paddy Hill, Frankie Keena,
Aengus O'Rourke, Mr. Hugh Maguire, Phil Brennan, Deputies
McFadden, Bannon, Toibin and Penrose.
The Chairman, Cllr Aidan Davitt opened the meeting by welcoming all the members and in
particular Sergeant Patrick Conway from the Garda National JPC Monitoring Office and
Sergeant John Connolly, Crime Prevention Officer for Westmeath County.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 19th October 2015:
On the proposal of Cllr. Paul Hogan and seconded b Cllr Frank McDermott, it was agreed to
approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 19t1 October 2015 in the Council Chambers,
Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
Matters Arising:
There were no matters arising.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
Mr. Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, informed the Members of two updates:
• Public Safetv - Working Group Established:
Mr Gallagher, advised the Members that under the Westmeath Strategic Work Plan 2015 -
2020, Westmeath County Council set up a Working Group to examine the design of the built
environment in respect of crime prevention and anti-social activity. This Working Group
consists of Local Authority, Garda and Community Nominees (as elected at our JPC Meeting
in October 2015). Mr Gallagher informed the Members that Mr Terry McCague, Senior
Planner, Westmeath County Council will Chair this new Working Group.
He further informed Members that the first meeting of this Working Group will take place
within the next two weeks. Mr Gallagher informed Members that this Working Group will
bring together new ideas, good planning and implement agreed recommendations by all
involved in regard to planning and urban design.
• Anti-Social Behaviour Strategy and Tenants Hand Book:
Mr Pat Gallagher welcomed and thanked all the Members for their input and views in
relation to Westmeath County Council's Draft Anti-Social Behaviour Policy and Tenants
Hand Book at our last JPC Meeting in October 2015. He advised the Members that their
views are being given consideration by the Housing Section and both revised documents will
be presented at the February 2016 Monthly Council Meeting for approval.
In response to Cllr Paul Hogan, Mr Gallagher advised the Members that eviction powers had
increased with revised legislation that was passed last year in relation to tenants causing
difficultly within their communities.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Superintendent Ms L0ffaine Wheatley gave a summary of the Garda Report for the
Westmeath Division which was e-mailed to all Members prior to the Meeting.
Report was noted.
Chief Supt. Wheatley highlighted the following:
• The success of the first Mullingar District Christmas Party for older persons
• Athlone Old Folks Party — taking place on 24th January 2016.
which commenced in November 2015
• Main objectives of "Operation Thor "
• Crime Prevention Officer: - presentation given by Sergeant John Connolly.
• Traffic Policing — weekly targeted operations aimed at providing motorist with
education and awareness of the Key Lifesaver offences.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked the Chief Superintendent Ms Lorraine Wheatley for
the comprehensive Garda Report.
In response to questions raised by Cllrs Hogan and Farrell regarding the ongoing drug
problem in Athlone, Superintendent Mr Pat Murray infonned the Members that additional
staff has been made available to the Athlone Drugs Unit to focus on this area.
Supt. Mr Pat Murray also informed the Members that the refurbishment and extension of
Athlone's Garda Station is going out to tender in February and is expected to get commence
in mid September 2016.
In response to Cllr Clarke, Supt. Mr Alan Murray informed Members that there is an active
dedicated Drugs Unit based in Mullingar. He further advised Members that all 999 calls are
recorded and any member of the public who wishes to report a crime can ring the Garda
Confidential Telephone Number 1800 666111.
In response to Cllr McDennott, Supt. Alan Murray advised the Members that there is
adequate Garda transport mobility within Westmeath County.
In response to Cllr Burke's concerns regarding the recent Travelling feuds in Mullingar,
Chief Supt. Ms Wheatley infonned the Members that it is not appropriate to discuss "specific
public order incidents" but arrests were made and brought before the Courts.
In response to Cllr Duncan, Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher, advised the Members that
there is a "Mediation Service" available between the Traveller Community and the Local
Authority with is dealt with in a confidential manner.
Action — Mr Gallagher to anange for a report to be provided from Housing on this Mediation
Service.
In response to Cllr Shaw, Mr Gallagher further advised the Members that there is ongoing
interaction between the Local Authority and the Gardai regarding management of council
dwellings.
e Crime Prevention Presentation
Sergeant John Connolly, Crime Prevention Officer gave the Members a presentation on
Crime Prevention.
Chief Executive Mr Gallagher welcomed and thanked Sgt John Connolly for his presentation
and in particular the section on "Crime Prevention through Environmental Design '
(CPTED), and said that same will feed into the new Working Group for the County so that a
"joint approach" can be established at design stage.
Action - In response to Cllr Hogan, Sgt John Connolly confirmed he is willing to meet with
the Local Authority to examine possible residential security issues and crime prevention
initiatives if required along the new Cycleway from Athlone to Mullingar. Both
Superintendents Pat Murray and Alan Murray confirmed no crimes have been reported to
date for this area.
Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher, informed the Members that it is intended that public
lighting will be provided for on the section of the Cycleway from Garrycastle to Athlone
Marina.
Mr Gallagher expressed his gratitude to the Gardai, Community Groups, Civil Defence,
Local Authority Staff, Volunteers and all involved in the recent flooding problems in
Athlone.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 18th April 2016 at 11.00a.m in the Council
Chamber, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Meetin dates for 2016:
Monday, 18t April 2016
Monday, 18th July 2016
Monday, 17th October 2016
Any other Business:
- Council Chambers, Mullingar
- Athlone Civic Centre (to be confirmed).
- Council Chambers, Mullingar
Cllr Peter Burke requested the possibility of holding a "Public Community Meeting" in the coming
months — Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher advised that this can be considered.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Aidan Davitt,
Chairman
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Dat