Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 20th April, 2015
in the
Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Aidan Davitt, Cathaoirleach
Cllrs.Peter Burke, Sorca Clarke, Aidan Davitt,
Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn, Paul Hogan, Frankie Keena,
Frank McDermott, Michael O'Brien, John Shaw.
Deputy James Bannon, Deputy Gabrielle McFadden, Deputy
Willie Penrose
Mr. Des Sheridan, Hugh McGuire, Sheena Lawless, Kathleen
Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley, Superintendents Alan
Murray and Patrick Murray.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Hugh O'Reilly, Senior Executive Officer
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Pat Keating, Athlone Municipal District Manager
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Cllrs Andrew Duncan, Paddy Hill, Aengus O'Rourke.
Pat Grimes and Phil Brennan
The Chairman, Cllr Aidan Davitt opened the meeting by welcoming all the members and in
particular Westmeath's new Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley who further introduced
her new team, Superintendent Alan Murray (Mullingar Area) and Superintendent Patrick
Murray (Athlone Area).
1.
To approve the Minutes of the Inaugural JPC Meeting held on the 16th
February 2015.
On the proposal of Cllr. John Shaw and seconded by Cllr. Frank McDermott, it was agreed to
approve the Minutes of the Inaugural JPC Meeting held in Åras an Chontae at 1 1.00 am on
16th February 2015.
Matters Arising
2.
Mr Hugh McGuire further requested that all documents be forwarded to him in Word format
so that same can be converted into Braille prior to each JPC Meeting. This was noted by An
Garda Siochåna.
In response to the Members, Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive confirmed that Westmeath
County Council would write to the Department of Justice to obtain details of trainin
available, alternatively local training will be provided to all JPC Members.
3.
To consider the draft Strategic Work Plan
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive outlined the purpose of the draft Strategic Work Plan and
thanked all JPC Members for their submissions.
Mr Hugh O'Reilly, Senior Executive Officer gave a presentation of the draft Strategic Work
Plan which issued to the Members and he gave an overview of the Strategic Goals and Core
Values contained in the Plan.
On the proposal of Cllr Paul Hogan and seconded by Cllr Michael O'Brien the Members
approved the Draft Strategic Work Plan.
Ouestions:
Cllr Aidan Davitt thanked Hugh O'Reilly for his presentation and at this point he opened the
floor to questions:
All Members welcomed the new Strategic Work Plan and suggested the following items be
addressed by the Committee:
Cllrs Hogan, Glynn, O'Brien and Deputy Penrose suggested holding JPC Meetings in
Community Centres on a county wide basis. In response, Chairperson Aidan Davitt advised
the Members that all needs would have to be considered in choosing a venue.
All Members stressed the importance of Community Policing within our towns and villages
and requested more foot/cycle Garda presence where possible. In response, Chief
Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley advised the Members that community policing is a very
important role and the Gardai are on the ground as much as possible to prevent crime
happening on our streets.
Deputy Willie Penrose raised concerns in relation to item 3.3 of the Draft Strategic Work
Plan, and suggested that CCTV cameras be installed where large crowds gather i.e.
Cemeteries and public areas.
In relation to Item 2.3 of the Draft Strategic Work Plan, Cllr Sorca Clarke requested that
further Lead Agencies and groups be included and involved with the Schools and Youth
Groups in combating crimes against children.
Cllr Frankie Keena and Deputy Gabrielle McFadden suggested that Item 2.2 of the Plan
should include the HSE and Gardai in relation to anti-social behaviour within Local
Authority Housing Areas. In response to this, Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive advised the
Members that the Gardai are an active part of the process and work with the Council in this
regard.
Mr Hugh McGuire requested that the CCTV camera at Burgess car park be repaired as it does
not adequately cover Burgess's Car park. In response, Superintendent Mr Pat Murray
advised the Members that there is a major cost factor prohibiting installation of a further
camera at Burgess Car Park at present.
Report from Westmeath County Council
4.
As per Agenda Item 3, Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher thanked all for their contribution
towards the Draft Strategic Plan and on behalf of the staff of Westmeath County Council he
wished to extend his appreciation for the ongoing co-operation and work the Gardai carry out
on a daily basis in securing safety within Westmeath County.
Reportfrom Garda Siochåna
5.
Chief Superintendent Lorraine Wheatley gave a summary of the Garda Report up to 31 st
March 2015 which divided crime by category. It was agreed that a copy of this report be e-
mailed to all JPC Members after today's meeting.
Ms Wheatley expressed the importance of Crime Prevention Initiatives such as:
• Safer Intemet Day
• Message in a Bottle
• Community Alert/ Neighbourhood Watch Forum
• Garda Text Alert System
• Public Order and High Visibility Policing Initiatives
Chairman Aidan Davitt welcomed the Report on behalf of all the Members and the following
issues were raised by the Members.
Cllrs Bourke, Hogan and Deputy Bannon — raised concerns over anti-social behaviour
occurring on a regular basis in Dominick Street, Mullingar and how this matter can be
resolved.
Cllr McDermott — requested that "low visibility policing initiatives" i.e. (unmarked
Garda presence) needs to be provided at The Cut, Collinstown on a regular basis to
reduce high speed bikers.
— raised concerns over Traveller Community feuding in Mullingar and
Cllr Farrell
Athlone.
Cllr Keena — raised concerns over underage drinking in Athlone, particularly on St
Patrick's Day and how Burgess Car Park was taken over by youths. He requested that
the Gardai liaise with the Business people of the towns in how to deal with theft
crime.
Deputy James Bannon queried the working order of camera on the N4 coming out of
the city.
Cllr Hogan — complemented Gardai on the recent drugs seizures in Athlone and
expressed further concerns in relation to boy racers on the Motorway in Athlone.
Cllr Glynn — requested more Garda presence on the ground in areas such as Parks,
Housing Estates and laneways to prevent crime and intimation.
Deputy Willie Penrose — agreed that high visibility Garda presence is good but
undercover Garda activities should be focused on more to prevent criminal activities.
Road Policing — fully in favour of same but requested that the Gardai should interact with
Private Speed Camera companies who park their vans a short distance from Churches,
schools and graveyards. He pointed out that speed cameras are for Safety and should not bp
for grabbing money or statistics.
• Des Maguire — expressed the importance of having victim support initiatives in place,
importance of all groups working together in relation to crime prevention.
In response to the above items raised, Superintendent Pat Murray and Alan Murray advised the
Members that they would take on board the issues raised and in particular traffic issue at The Cut,
Collinstown, boy racer activity in Athlone and speed camera issues at certain locations.
In response to Deputy Bannon, Superintendent Alan Murray expressed the importance of cameras on
the N4 and how they help solve crime problems in the area.
6.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting was scheduled for Monday, July 2015 at 11.00a.m in the Athlone Civic Offices.
7.
Any Other Business
Cllr Michael O'Brien requested that the Gardai investigate the ongoing problem with boy racers in
Athlone, (Silver Quay Area), the problem is escalating all the time, locals cannot sleep at night due to
noise levels. He also requested that the Garda ensure the installation of a credit card facility in
Athlone Garda Station to assist in payments of fines etc.
Hugh Maguire supported by Cllr Paul Hogan requested that the Athlone Garda Station be made
wheelchair accessible.
In response to the above, Superintendent Pat Murray advised the Members that significant progress
had been made in relation to boy racers in Athlone. He also advised Members that Athlone Garda
Station will be made wheelchair accessible by late summer 2015. Credit Card facility is still an
ongoing issue and Superintendent Pat Murray hoped this matter would be resolved soon.
Cllr Frank McDermott advised the Garda Siochåna in relation to illegal taxi drivers operating in the
North Westmeath Area and requested that same be investigated.
Cllr Burke requested that the Garda enforce speed limits in the Ardmore Road area.
In response to Cllr Frankie Keena, Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive advised the Members that he
will liaise with Enda Hanniffy, Health and Safety Officer for Westmeath County Council, in
preparing a Water Safety Message for the July JPC meeting and update the Westmeath County
Council website with this detail.
In relation to concerns over Traveller feuding in Mullingar and Athlone, Cllr. Tom Farrell proposed
that Pavee Point be written to with a view to engaging on policing matters relating to ethnic
minorities.
This concluded th
Cllr Aidan Davit
Chairman
Westmeath Joint
usines
the meeting.
o
cing Committee
Date