Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 18th July 2016
in the
Civic Offices, Church Street, Athlone
Presiding:
Local Authority
Members:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Frank McDermott, Vice Chairman
Cllrs. Sorca Clarke, Tom Farrell, Frankie Keena, Emily
Wallace
Mr. Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, Kathleen Grennan.
Chief
Wheatley,
Superintendent
Lorraine
Superintendents Alan Murray and Patrick Murray.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Enda Hanniffy, Health and Safety Officer
Amanda Nulty, Graduate
Cllrs Aengus O'Rourke, Paul Hogan, Ken Glynn, Andrew
Duncan, Michael O'Brien, John Shaw, Paddy Hill,
Deputies Toibin and Penrose
The Vice Chairman, Cllr Frank McDermott opened the meeting and invited the JPC
Members to Athlone.
To approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 18th April 2016:
On the proposal of Cllr Tom Farrell and seconded by Cllr Sorca Clarke, it was agreed
to approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on approve the Minutes of the JPC
Meeting held on 18th April 2016.
Matters Arising:
To fill the vacancy of Chair of the Westmeath JPC following the
resignation of former Councillor, Aidan Davitt.
Meetings Administrator, Mr. Billy Coughlan advised the Members that only
Councillors would be allowed vote on this matter.
On the proposal of Cllr Tom Farrell, and seconded by Cllr Frankie Keena the
Members approved the appointment of Cllr Frank McDermott to fill the vacancy of
Chair of the Westmeath JPC arising from the resignation of Cllr Aidan Davitt.
> To seek nomination to fill the vacancy on the Westmeath JPC following
Ms Phil Brennan resignation.
> To seek nomination to fill the vacancy on the Westmeath JPC following
the recent death of Mr Hugh McGuire, RIP.
Mr Billy Coughlan advised the Members that he is awaiting a decision from the
Public Participation Network (PPN) in relation to filling these two vacancies. He will
advise on this matter at a later date.
Re ort from Westmeath Coun Council:
Chairman Cllr Frank McDermott introduced Mr Enda Hanniffy, Westmeath County
Council's Health and Safety Officer to the JPC Members who then gave an update on
Westmeath County Council's 2016 Water Safety Programme.
All Members welcomed Mr Hanniffy's presentation and complemented the work of
the Health and Safety Section of Westmeath County Council.
Mr Hanniffy addressed the following issues/ points raised by the JPC Members:
The placement of Samaritans helpline stickers at waterside locations to help
people who may need to talk to them.
Information on the electronic tagging of Ring Buoys to decrease vandalism.
In relation to vandalism of Ring Buoys, it is a case they are stolen or just
removed?
Are Westmeath County Council happy with this number of Ring buoys in
Westmeath?
How many Slipways are in Westmeath?
Is there a colour scheme Westmeath County Council could use to alert the
public if a particular location is safe to swim in?
National Water Safety Week - Could it be moved to an earlier date in the year
as opposed to when school children are possibly on their holidays?
Could a Water Safety campaign be designed for secondary school pupils?
What percentage of drownings is caused by suicide?
In response to the above questions and issues raised, Mr Hanniffy informed the JPC
Members the following:
Samaritans stickers are at most Ring buoy boxes but on inspection it has been
noticed that after sometime the condition of the stickers deteriorate and fade. Mr
Hanniffy advised the Members this is a matter he will discuss with Mr John Leech,
Chief Executive of Irish Water Safety (IWS).
In relation to electronic tagging of Ring buoys, Mr Hanniffy informed the Members
the tags have been successfully tested in the UK and Westmeath County Council will
be the first Local Authority area in Ireland to receive the electronic tags. Tagging will
be on a trial basis to gauge interest in the hope of rolling out tagging across Ireland.
Vandalism of Ring buoys has reduced thankfully and is confined to mostly urban
areas. He informed the Members the number of Ring buoys in Westmeath has
increased and Westmeath County Council are happy with the amount currently in
operation but are always seeking to install more where necessary.
In relation to slipways in Westmeath, Mr Hanniffy stated there are 29 at present. No
incidents have been reported at a slipway in the County to date. Westmeath County
Council is currently working with Limerick County Council to develop a National
slipway inspection check list.
In response to Cllr's Farrell and Wallace, Mr Hanniffy advised that Irish Water
Safety have to examine and carry out risk assessments of bathing areas in order to
determine if it is safe for public swimming. Educating the public is the best approach
to water safety in areas where there is no lifeguard resource.
In terms of colour schemes to inform the public if a bathing area is safe, the Members
were advised there is a colour scheme system in place but it is mostly used in coastal
bathing areas. Mr. Hanniffy stated the system could be put in place in high risk areas
of Westmeath and is a matter for further discussion with Irish Water Safety.
Referring to the date of National Water Safety week, Mr Hanniffy stated that it is a
matter for Irish Water Safety. He advised the Members that the Junior Aquatics
Water Safety (J.A.W.S) is in place for Secondary school students. Unfortunately this
programme is not as successful as the Primary students programme (P.A.W.S). He
further advised the Members of the Junior Lifeguard course for teenagers which are
quite successful in Athlone and Mullingar swimrning pools. Mr Hanniffy stated he
will seek to obtain information specifically for secondary school pupils from Irish
Water Safety and distribute them to schools in Westmeath.
Cllr. Frank McDermott, commended Mr Hanniffy for the hard work and dedication
of the Health and Safety Department of Westmeath County Council.
Re ort from An Garda Siochäna:
Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher brought the Members attention to a letter
circulated in April regarding certain revisions in the legislative framework
governing JPCs arising from the enactment of the Garda Siochåna (Policing
Authority and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2015.
Mr Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator advised the Members a request has been
made to the Policing Authority to make a presentation to JPC Members regarding
changes in framework. He further advised a draft policy is currently being prepared
and it is expected all JPC's will have the means to subrnit suggestions on same.
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the Members that the Policing Authority see JPC's as
an important forum and a clearer overview of the relationship between both will be
established in the new policy.
Crime Analysis:
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the JPC Members that the number of Theft from
Shop incidents recorded in Westmeath during the three months (April - June) was
up 18% on the same period last year. She advised a Crime Prevention Officer was
working with the Retail Forum on this matter.
Chief Superintendent Wheatley informed the Members that the number of cases of
Possession of Drugs for Sale or Supply recorded in Westrneath during the three
months (April - June) were up 30% on the same period last year.
Crime Prevention Initiatives:
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the JPC Members Community Policing is preparing
150 Crime Prevention Packs for distribution to Public Health Nurses in North
Westmeath. The packs contain crime prevention/ security advice and useful contact
numbers and will be distributed to the older/ vulnerable persons when visited by the
Public Health Nurse. The initiative will be reviewed in July 2016 to identify any
additional priorities that can be achieved before the initiative is rolled out to South
Westmeath during the rest of the 2016.
She further informed that Athlone Garda Station will benefit from the allocation of
five new Gardai following there attestation at the Garda College in late July 2016.
Traffic Policing:
Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the Members that Traffic Policing will be to the
forefront of policing initiatives in the Westmeath Division.
A number of Road Safety initiatives are to be under taken including:-
o Operation Pedestrian/ Pedal Cycle
o Operation Motorcyclist
o Operation Learner Permits
o Tispol Operation Seat Belt
The objective of the campaigns will be to highlight key areas for road safety and
driver awareness where there has been a marked increase in fatalities on our road
nationally
Cllr Frank McDermott welcomed the Garda Report on behalf of all the Members and
welcomed the allocation of five new Gardai to Athlone. The following issues were
raised by the Members.
Cllr Emily Wallace:
Commended Mullingar Garda Station open day.
The high number of notable detections of Possession of Drugs for sale or
supply in Mullingar compared to Athlone is worrying.
e Age profile of those detected in possession of Drugs. Should we be educating
schools and colleges?
Will An Garda Siochana have a stand at the National Ploughing
Championships to provide rural home owners with crime prevention
information?
Pat Grimes
o Targeting of known Drug Dealers.
Cllr Sorca Clarke:
Increase of thirty percent in the Sale and Supply of Drugs alarming.
Welcomed Health Nurse Initiative. Could this be expanded to include those
with Newborns also?
The type of Drugs being found in Westmeath
The street value placed on Drugs. Who determines this?
Logging of phone calls and the liaison between An Garda Siochana and Local
Authority Housing Department in relation of Anti Social Behaviour.
Cllr Frankie Keena:
o Commended An Garda Siochana on their recent Blue Light Award from
Westmeath County Council.
o The proposal of controlled Drug Injection Rooms coming to Ireland
In response to the Members, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the two music festivals
that took place in the Mullingar District caused the number of drug offences in the
area to rise. Of the thirty eight offences in the Mullingar Area, ten were concert
related. Off the five hundred and twelve simple possession offences detected, three
hundred and ninety nine were concert related.
In response to education in schools and colleges, Chief Supt. Wheatley advised the
Members that the Community Gardai will visit schools/ colleges during the new
term to brief students on the dangers of drug use. The age profile of typical users
spans from eighteen to forty year Olds.
In relation to the National Ploughing Championships, Chief Supt. Wheatley
informed the Members it is a major event for An Garda Siochana. Community Safety
Week is also being ran in conjunction with the Ploughing Championships. The
priority for this week will be primarily focused on reducing and preventing burglary
in the home.
In response to Cllr Clarke, Chief Supt. Wheatley informed the Members that all calls
are logged into their I.T system. Every interaction An Garda Siochana has with a
member of the public should be recorded.
In relation to Crime Prevention Initiative in association with the HSE, she advised
that it is a pilot scheme and all comments will be taken on board. An Garda Siochana
are striving to become more consistent in getting crime prevention messages to rural
homes and the scheme is something they intend to expand on.
Superintendent Alan Murray advised the Members that the demand for drugs is
high amongst people of all ages and classes. Undercover, covert operations have
resulted in an increase in detection. Demand reduction through education is a key
priority. Supply reduction is enforcement based.
Superintendent Murray advised the Members that drug valuation is based on
international standards. Anything valued over €13,000 carries a mandatory sentence.
In relation to changes in legislation to allow the introduction of controlled use of
drugs, currently there is a zero tolerance policy for the use or supply of drugs which
will continue to be enforced.
Superintendant Murray further advised Heroin, Cannabis and Cocaine are the most
common drugs detected in Westmeath.
Cllr. Frank McDermott, comrnended Chief Supt. Wheatley for the hard work and
dedication of the Community Gardai in Athlone/ Mullingar.
Public Meeting Request:
Meetings Administrator, Mr Billy Coughlan advised the Members that the second
Public JPC meeting is scheduled to be held in the Mullingar area at the end of
September/ early October. Date and venue to be agreed.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting was scheduled for Monday, 17th October 2016 at 11.00a.m in the
Council Chamber, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Frank McDermott,
Chairman
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date
