Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 11.00am on Monday, 10th April 2017
in the
Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Member:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Frank McDermott, Chairman
Cllrs, Sorca Clarke, Andrew Duncan, Tom Farrell, Ken Glynn,
Paddy Hill, Frankie Keena and Michael O'Brien.
Deputy Peter Burke
Mr. Des Sheridan, Pat Grimes, Marie Reddin, Sheena Lawless
and Kathleen Grennan.
Chief Superintendent Kevin Gralton and Superintendents Alan
Murray and Patrick Murray.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, WCC
David Hogan, Director of Services, WCC.
Billy Coughlan, Meetings Administrator, WCC.
Declan Leonard, Mullingar Municipal District Manager
Annette Barr Jordan, Community Development, WCC
Breda Daly, Assistant Staff Officer
Senators Paul Daly, Gabrielle McFadden and Aidan Davitt,
Deputy Robert Troy, Cllrs Paul Hogan, Emily Wallace, Bill
Collentine, John Shaw, Aengus O'Rourke, Mr Dave Raftis and
Mr Pat Keating.
The Chairman, Cllr Frank McDermott opened the meeting and welcomed the Members.
To approve the Minutes of the .JPC Meeting held on 16th January 2017:
On the proposal of Cllr. Sorca Clarke and seconded by Cllr Frankie Keena, it was agreed to
approve the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on 16th January 2017 in the Council Chambers,
Mullingar, Co Westmeath.
Matters Arising:
Chief Superintendent Kevin Gralton advised the Members that seven student Gardai have
been allocated to the Athlone Area for a 34-week training period as opposed to the six
advised of at the January 2017 Meeting of the JPC. He also advised the Members that the
Westmeath Division will receive four Sergeants as opposed to the five previously advised at
the January 2017 JPC Meeting.
The Chief Superintendent also advised the Members that the refurbishment of the Athlone
Garda Station is now due to commence in the second quarter of 2017.
Report from Westmeath County Council:
Policing Authority Correspondence:
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive informed the JPC Members of correspondence he
received from The Policing Authority dated 25th January 2017 regarding Code of Ethics for
the Garda Siochåna which was noted by the Members. A hard copy of this letter was
circulated out at the Meeting.
• RAPID Report (or Westmeath Joint Policing Committee:
Following on from the January JPC Meeting, Mr David Hogan, Director of Services
introduced Ms Annette Barr Jordan, Rapid Co-ordinator for Westmeath County Council who
presented an update to the Members on RAPID.
Following the presentation, Cllr Frank McDermott complemented Ms Jordan and her team on
the excellent work in which RAPID provides within the County.
Cllr Sorca Clarke further complemented and thanked Ms Jordan for her presentation and
asked how often RAPID meet and has attendance to RAPID Meetings improved since the last
JPC Meeting in January 2017. In response, Ms Jordan advised the Members that RAPID
meetings are held at least on a quarterly basis. Ms Marie Reddin, (Community
Representative) informed the Members that attendance by both Members and Councillors had
improved.
Cllr Clarke sought clarification on the number of Representatives on the Athlone RAPD
Area Implementation Team, as there is I Councillor sitting on the Mullingar RAPID Area
Implementation Team. In response, Ms Jordan advised the Members that the Mayor of
Athlone at the time requested to join as Ex Officio of the Team.
Report from An Garda Siochåna:
Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath Division
as circulated at today's meeting.
Report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton highlighted the following:
• Crime Analysis 1/01/2017 to 31/3/2017 inclusive — as per Report circulated.
• Drug and Alcohol abuse Initiatives: The Divisional Drugs Unit for Westmeath based at
Mullingar Garda Station have been given responsibility for establishing a platform for
tackling drug related issues in the County.
o Initiatives: - The Divisional Drugs Unit provide their presentation on Drug
Awareness by way of talks to Community groups / schools
•
o Visits to local drug treatment clinics / groups — are conducted to offer assistance in
working together in an effort to prevent the spread of drug use.
Recent Detections: - Chief Supt., Kevin Gralton informed the Members of number of
significant detections and progress in significant investigations in recent days by Gardai
in Athlone and Mullingar Districts.
Crime Prevention Initiatives:
o
o
Crime Prevention Day of Action 30/3/2017: The Crime Prevention Officer (CPO)
along with the Community Policing Unit in Athlone organised the first of four Crime
Prevention Days of Action in Athlone.
Ongoing Initiatives and Community Projects — Community Policing Unit have been
attending community alert / neighbourhood watch meetings giving advice to the
resident especially the elderly on resources available to them.
Crime Prevention Officers Report: Sergeant Connolly, CPO for Westmeath attended
a number of meetings with businesses in Athlone and Mullingar Districts where he
gave advice on security and crime prevention
• Community Alert Neighbourhood Watch Forum — scheduled for early
May 2017.
Public Order and High Visibility Policing Initiatives — Gardaf are regularly
patrolling key areas in both Athlone and Mullingar Districts where key night time
economies exist. Additional beat patrols are carried out at peak hrs mainly at
weekends.
Allocation of newly attested Gardai:
o Athlone Garda Station — benefitted from the allocation of seven new Gardaf
following their attestation at the Garda College in late Feb 2017.
o Mullingar Garda Station — an additional five Gardaf are due to be allocated to
Mullingar Garda Station in May 2017.
At this point, Chief Supt., Kevin Gralton invited Supt., Pat Murray, Athlone Division to
outline recent significant investigations by Gardai in the Athlone and Mullingar Districts
which occurred on the following dates:
3rd April 2017 — Checkpoint at Garrycastle. Athlone — Supt., Patrick Murray informed the
Members that Cannabis Herb, an unlicensed firearm and a number of rounds of ammunition
were recovered from the boot of a Black Ford Focus during a checkpoint at Ganycastle,
Athlone. Two males were arrested. One male was charged with offences contrary to Firearms
and Offensive Weapons Act, The Misuse of Drugs Act and the Road Traffic Act. The second
male arrested was released pending a file to the DPP.
6th April 2017 — Burglary in the Clonbrusk Area. Athlone — Supt., Patrick Murray
informed the Members that three offenders were arrested in relation to burglary which took
place in the Clonbrusk Area and several thefts from vehicles which occurred earlier. Two
members of An Garda Siochana were injured during the arrest of one of the culprits. One of
these, a female Garda is currently off duty as a result of her injury. Supt. Patrick Murray
further informed the Members that this was the fourth time this Garda had been assaulted in
the course of her duties. The three offenders were arrested and brought to Athlone Garda
Station.
All JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Superintendent Mr Kevin Gralton for the
comprehensive Garda Report.
At this point, Cllr Frank McDermott opened the floor for questions.
Ouestions:
Cllr Sorca Clarke thanked the Chief Supt., Kevin Gralton for his report. Cllr Clarke wished
the two injured Gardai a speedy recovery and commended An Garda Siochana's recent
community project initiatives and drug seizure detections. Reflecting on the ongoing National
Statistics controversy she asked was Westmeath part of the Eastern Region. In response,
Chief Supt., Kevin Gralton confirmed that this was the case.
Cllr Clarke referred to Supt., Pat Murray's appointment by the Commissioner to conduct an
investigation into current national revelations and the Commissioner's statement that "he
dipped his toe into the investigation" and two days later was replaced.
Having regard to the above, Cllr Clarke posed the following questions:
Was Supt. Pat Murray appointed in any particular capacity?
Why was there a change, was it an internal Garda decision?
Was past or current events in the Westmeath Region a reason for, or contributory factor to
this change?
Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton advised the JPC Members that Supt. Pat Murray was appointed to
conduct an investigation and assured the Members this had nothing to do with issues within
the Westmeath Region.
Supt. Patrick Murray strongly rejected any suggestion that his appointment to lead the
investigation related to anything other than his integrity, experience and qualifications to do
so, particularly in examining matters which may be difficult for Gardai and he asserted his
absolute long established personal and professional integrity in this regard.
He also said that he took grave exception to anyone who, in an opportunistic way, would try
to associate him with alleged incidents said to have occurred in Athlone District several years
prior to his transfer there.
The Cathaoirleach of Westmeath County Council, Cllr Frank McDermott, advised Cllr
Clarke to consider her response carefully and invited her to withdraw her remarks to which
she declined, stating she apologised if anything in her questions was taken up the wrong way.
Cllr McDermott concluded by stressing that the Westmeath Joint Policing Committee has
absolute support for and confidence in our Gardai.
On the proposal of Cllr Frankie Keena, seconded by Cllr Andrew Duncan, the Westmeath
JPC Members unanimously agreed absolute and total support for our Garda team and
confidence in their ability to protect us.
Cllr Clarke requested that Superintendents work closely with the Housing Department of
Westmeath County Council in relation to Anti-Social Behaviour.
Cllr Michael O'Brien also commended Chief Supt., Kevin Gralton and his team and wished
the two injured Gardai a speedy recovery. Cllr O'Brien asked Chief Supt, Kevin Gralton if
the Garda force saw a time when an armed force would be the only feasible way forward on
the face of rising violence and (in light of a terrorism threat).
Cllr O'Brien also raised concerns regarding the recent National Statistics controversy (for
Westmeath) in relation to breath tests and fixed notice charge prosecutions.
Cllr Tom Farrell wished the seven new Gardaf recruits all the best within the Athlone District
and raised concerns regarding Willow Park Estate in Athlone. Cllr Farrell said local residents
are living in fear.
Cllr Ken Glynn asked Supt. Alan Murray to monitor traffic movements at the Green Bridge,
Mullingar. Cllr Glynn stated that he and Cllr Bill Collentine are concerned about the
sequencing of traffic lights in this area. Cllr Glynn asked for more Garda presence for this
area.
Cllr Glynn also raised concerns regarding intimidation of youths in public areas within
Mullingar. Cllr Glynn informed the Members that parents are very concerned that their
children will be attacked / intimated in certain public areas. Supt. Alan Murray confirmed
that he would meet Cllr Glynn in private to discuss the issues further.
Cllr Frankie Keena raised the issue of policing the new Greenway from Athlone to Mullingar.
He asked if a Garda presence could be introduced along parts of the Greenway. Cllr Keena
also raised concems regarding injection rooms for drug addicts/dealers and what is the Garda
role in this regard.
Cllr Paddy Hill complemented the great work carried out by our local Gardaf and stated that
we owe our Gardai a great debt of gratitude and we should never forget the work they do on a
daily basis. Cllr Hill did state that he was disappointed that the Delvin / Castlepollard
received no extra Gardai. Cllr Hill asked Chief Supt Kevin Gralton if it was an offence to
upload Garda Checkpoints on social media?
Mr Des Sheridan also complemented the work carried out by our Garda force and
sympathised with Gardaf being injured while on duty and asked if this should be highlighted.
He stressed that our Garda force need to be protected.
Cllr Andrew Duncan also underlined the admiration felt in all corners of society for the work
of the Gardai. He stated that it must be soul destroying to build a case against criminals and
see them emerge through the revolving door of the justice system. Cllr Duncan raised
concerns regarding the protection of our Gardai, in particular the Garda member who was
recently assaulted 4 times in the Westmeath Division. He stated that this should not be
happening and that the Gardaf need more resourcing. Cllr Duncan also raised concerns
regarding the recent National Statistics controversy (for Westmeath) in relation to breath
testing figures.
Cllr Frank McDermott thanked Chief Supt., Kevin Gralton and his team for their detailed
Garda Report and dedicated service to Westmeath Division.
Cllr McDermott asked the Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton does every Garda carry a tazer for
protection? Cllr McDermott also stated that more Garda help is required for the
Delvin/Castlepollard area.
In response to the questions raised regarding the National Statistics controversy (for
Westmeath), Chief Supt., Kevin Gralton informed the Members that he too was shocked and
appalled by the emergence of breath test figures and stressed that he wants to see clarity on
how instances of over reporting came to happen, what's in them and how they actually go to
these figures. Chief Supt Kevin Gralton explained to the Members that he read everything in
the papers and had listened to the programmes and that he squirms when he hears this sort of
thing going on. Chief Supt Kevin Gralton did confirm that the figures for roadside breath
tests for Westmeath were exaggerated to an extent that was "on par" with the level of
inflation of regional figures.
Chief Supt Kevin Gralton informed the Members that he gives every hour to his job, he said
he viewed his 37 year career as a vocation and not as a job.
Chief Supt Kevin Gralton explained the Checkpoint Process to the Members and stated that
approximately 20 — 22 checkpoints are set up in Westmeath over any average 24-hr period.
Mr Gralton stressed to the Members that the perception of the Checkpoint being there is
where you get the benefit from it. It is about prevention and education.
In response to Cllr O'Brien question relating to an armed force, Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton
informed the Members that his personal view is not to carry a gun, they are there if we need
them. That's what you sign up to..its part of the job.
In relation to minor crimes, Chief Supt. Kevin Gralton encouraged Members and the general
public to repon minor crimes and the importance of doing same.
In response to queries raised relation to having extra Gardai in rural areas, Chief Supt Kevin
Gralton advised the Members that in time, "bit by bit" more Gardai will start coming back to
rural areas.
In response to Cllr Keena's query regarding safety measures on our Greenway, Mr Pat
Gallagher, Chief Executive informed the Members that it is Westmeath County Council's
intention to have discussions with An Garda Siochana to consider safety measure on the new
Greenway.
Date of next meeting
The next meeting is scheduled for Monday, 17
Offices, Church Street, Athlone.
July 2017 at 11.00a.m in the Civic
Any other Business:
Cllr Tom Farrell raised the issue of CCTV at Willow Park, Athlone and Supt. Patrick Murray
informed Cllr Farrell that he would issue Cllr Farrell a copy of correspondence recently sent to
Athlone Municipal District to assist him on this matter.
is concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Frank McD
Chairman
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
Date
