Minutes of Meeting of Westmeath Joint Policing Committee,
held at 10.00am on Monday, 14th January 2019
in Åras an Chontae, Mullingar Co Westmeath
Presiding
Local Authority
Members
Oireachtas Members:
Community Members:
Garda Officers:
Officers Present:
Apologies:
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman
Cllrs Sorca Clarke, Cllr Andrew Duncan, Cllr Tom
Farrell, Cllr Paul Hogan, Cllr Frank McDermott, Cllr
Emily Wallace
Deputy Robert Troy and Senator Gabrielle McFadden.
Marie Reddin, Dave Raftis and Des Sheridan
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff, Superintendent Alan
Murray and Superintendent Shane Cummins, Sgt Paddy
Guinan, Crime Prevention Officer.
Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive, Westmeath County
Council, Billy Coughlan, Administrative Officer, Annette
Barr-Jordan and Brigid Geoghegan, Community
Development, WCC and Breda Daly, Corporate Services,
wcc.
Cllr Ken Glynn, Cllr Frankie Keena, Cllr Aengus
O'Rourke, Cllr John Shaw, Cllr Bill Collentine, Cllr
Michael O'Brien, Pat Grimes, Sheena Lawless, Kathleen
Grennan, Senator Paul Daly, Senator Aidan Davitt and
Deputy Peter Burke,
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman, opened the meeting and welcomed all present. Cllr Hill
also welcomed newly appointed Crime Prevention Officer, Sgt Paddy Guinan to the
meeting.
• To approve the Minutes Uf the JPC Meeting held on Monday, 15th October
2018.
On the proposal of Cllr. Frank McDermott and seconded by Cllr Paul Hogan, the
Members approved the Minutes of the JPC Meeting held on Monday, 15th October
2018 in Council Chambers, Aras an Chontae, Mullingar.
1
Report from Westmeath County Council
• Schedule of JPC Meetings for 2019
Cllr Paddy Hill, Chairman of the JPC informed the Members of the schedule of JPC
Meetings for 2019 as set out below.
January 2019:
April 2019:
July 2019:
Oct 2019:
(Monday, 14th January 2019), Mullingar at 10am
(Monday, 15th April 2019), Athlone at 10am.
Followed by Public Meeting - Venue to be confirmed.
(Monday, 15thJuly 2019 , Mullingar at loam).
(Monday, 14th October 2019), Mullingar at 10am.
Followed by Public Meeting - Venue to be confirmed.
The JPC Members unanimously approved the schedule for 2019.
Report from An Garda Siochäna
Sergeant Paddy Guinan, Crime Prevention Officer gave the Members a presentation
on Crime Prevention.
Cllr Paddy Hill and the JPC Members welcomed and thanked Sgt Paddy Guinan for
his presentation and his willingness to meet and help Communities and various
groups regarding Crime Prevention.
Mr Pat Gallagher, Chief Executive further welcomed and expressed his gratitude to
Sgt Paddy Guinan and offered his assistance alongside the staff of Westmeath
County Council, the JPC Members and the Community Representatives.
Mr Pat Gallagher stated that he would e-mail Sgt Paddy Guinan the Report of
Westmeath Joint Policing Working Group in relation to Crime and Anti-Social
behaviour in the Built Environment.
In response to questions raised by the JPC Members, Sgt Paddy Guinan informed the
Members that a member of the public can join up individually or as part of a group
to the Text Alert System.
In response to a query raised by Cllr Paul Hogan, Sgt Paddy Guinan informed the
Members subject to appropriate training it is expected that the Westmeath Garda
Facebook Page will be set up by April 2019.
Cllr Emily Wallace asked if there was an option on carrying out an audit on farmers
regarding theft? In response, Sgt Paddy Guinan offered to meet with farmers on
their farms to carry out inspections and advise farmers regarding farm security such
as CCTV systems working properly, having their equipment marked and labelled
2
correctly and permanently. Sgt Paddy Guinan encouraged farming groups to come
together and contact him directly on the matter.
In response to Cllr Wallace and Cllr Hogan, Sgt Paddy Guinan did inform the
Members that he would like to set up a Westmeath Farm Alert Text system.
Cllr Frank McDermott raised concerns about members of the public putting their
eircodes at the end of death notices and felt this was an open invitation to criminals.
Sgt. Paddy Guinan took Cllr McDermotts comments on board.
In response to Cllr Clarke's query regarding the restoration of stolen property in the
Westmeath Division, Sgt Paddy Guinan informed the Members that he will be
holding a "Property Recovery Day/' in 2019 in an effort to reunite stolen and recovered
property with its owners and relevant advertising of this will be published.
Annette Barr Jordan, Community Development Officer (WCC) also thanked Sgt
Guinan for his presentation and they agreed to meet in the coming weeks.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff gave a summary of the Garda Report for the Westmeath
Division as circulated prior to the meeting.
This report was noted by the Members.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff highlighted the following:
• Crime Analysis 01/01/2018 to 31/12/ 2018 inclusive —
as per Report
circulated.
Chief Superintendent Peter Duff informed the Members that the number of
burglaries in the Westmeath Division in 2018 was significantly lower than the year
2017, 366 in 2017 compared to 248 in 2018. Chief Supt Peter Duff stated that the
reduction can be attributed to the increase in policing visibility on national and
secondary road networks in an effort to detect / deter travelling criminals. Chief
Supt Peter Duff further stated that the monitoring included calling to the homes of
burglary suspect at night to see if they were there and complied with the curfews
that are often part of their bail conditions.
Chief Supt Peter Duff further informed the Members that there was a significant
reduction in lhe number of reported thefts from vehicles, 210 in 2017 and 96 in 2018
in the Westmeath Division.
Chief Supt Peter Duff also infouned Lhe Members LhaL lhere was a reduction in the
number of public order detections, 331 in 2017 and 249 in 2018 in the Westmeath
Division.
3
The number of reported sexual offences fell from 51 in 2017 to 39 in 2018 and that the
number of people arrested for drink driving dropped from 230 in 2017 and 175 in
2018.
Chief Supt. Peter Duff further informed the Members that there was an increase in
the number of phone calls received regarding domestic incidents, 446 in 2017 and
508 in 2018.
In response to Senator Gabrielle McFadden's query, Chief Supt. Duff informed the
Members that all Gardai receive continuous professional development training in
relation to dealing with domestic violence on an ongoing basis as and when
legislation changes.
Chief Supt. Duff advised the Members that Community Gardai in the Westmeath
Division have the support in place when dealing with domestic violence issues and
they will offer every help available to the victim in question.
Deputy Robert Troy welcomed the reduction in the number of burglaries in the
Westmeath Division and asked that there be more Garda patrols put in place in
Ballymore due the current burglaries in the area.
Deputy Troy also asked if a scheme could be introduced to encourage drivers to test
themselves at home before driving after a night out. In response, Chief Supt. Duff
did state that readings from home breathalyser devices would not be as accurate as
the readings from the specialist equipment used by An Garda Sfochåna as they are
calibrated every 4-6 weeks and he also stated that each drink driving detection is
followed up with blood and urine tests after the arrests.
Chief Supt Duff stated that the responsibility lies solely with the driver and his
message to the public was very simple "if in doubt, do not drive".
In response to Deputy Troy's and Cllr Andrew Duncan's query regarding the
upgrade and re-configuration of the CCTV System in Mullingar Garda Station, Chief
Supt. Duff informed the Members that the monitoring of CCTV will continue at
Mullingar Station and he stated that while the number of screens was being reduced,
the new monitors will have a multi-screen facility that will be able to perform the
same functions as the screens being replaced.
Deputy Robert Troy and Cllr P Hogan asked why public lights were unlit at a
number of local motorway junctions on the M4 and M6 and said they should be
working as it put motorists at risk. In response, Chief Executive Mr Pat Gallagher
advised the Members that motorway maintenance is not the responsibility of
Westmeath County Council but of Transportation Infrastructure Ireland (T 11). Mr
Gallagher informed the Members that TII have reviewed their lighting standards
and have reduced lighting on slipways.
4
In response to Cllr Paul Hogan's question regarding the completion date for the re-
development of Athlone Garda Station, Chief Supt. Duff informed the Members that
he met with the builders and all is on track and it is hoped to move into the new
building in April 2019.
The JPC Members welcomed and thanked Chief Supt. Duff for his comprehensive
Garda Report.
PPN Report
Ms Annette Barr Jordan presented the PPN Report to the JPC Members as circulated
prior to today's meeting.
Ms Jordan explained to all the Members present that the six Westmeath PPN
representatives on the Westmeath JPC made a collective presentation to the JPC on
the 16th April 2018 on issues for consideration by the Westmeath JPC in 2018. The
submission contained 10 actions. Ms Jordan informed the Members that significant
progress was made on the work plan during 2018. Out of the ten actions submitted,
only two are still ongoing:
Action No. 5
Clarification on the National CCTV Scheme
and if this Scheme will be implementable in
Westmeath
Action No. 9
An increase in the selling and buying of
drugs through Social Media has been cited
by the Community as an ever increasing
including online payment
problem
methods i.e. paypal. WPP requested
information on how this can best be
addressed
Res onse
Ongoing — Future updates to WPPN as they
become available to Westmeath County
Council.
Res onse
Developments are being
Ongoing
investigated by an Garda Sfochåna, WPPN
will be kept m_formed with updates.
Ms Jordan acknowledged the support of Westmeath County Council, An Garda
Sfochåna, Elected Members, Oireachtas Members and the PPN Members in helping
them make their communities a safer and healthier place to live in.
The PPN report was noted by the Members.
In response to Cllr Tom Farrell regarding Community CCTV, Chief Executive Mr Pat
Gallagher advised the Members that there is a number of difficulties with the current
Scheme subject to the Code of Practice and Guidelines. Mr Gallagher informed the
Members that for the record Westmeath County Council did not receive any
application under the current scheme from any group.
5
Following up from our previous JPC Meeting held on the 15th October 2018, Mr Pat
Gallagher advised the Members that Westneath County Council does engage a
service of locating the Westrneath Mobile Camera Unit in littered/ black spot areas in
order to obtain evidence for prosecution. Mr Gallagher asked members of the public
to report issues of littering / black spots to the appropriate Municipal District Offices
where it will be discussed between the District Office and Environrnent Section.
Cllr Sorca Clarke asked the Chief Supt. Mr Peter Duff if speed checks were carried
out within Housing Estates in Westmeath now that all housing estates have a
30km/hr signage in place. Chief Supt. Mr Peter Duff is to revert back to Cllr Clarke
on this matter.
Chief Executive, Mr Pat Gallagher further advised the Members that a number of
housing estates were taken in charge by Westmeath County Council recently and the
30km speed limit signage process will be commenced within these estates.
AOB
Cllr Emily Wallace raised concerns over speeding and general bad driver behaviour
on the Ardmore Road, Mullingar and asked for more Garda presence in the area.
Date of Next Meeting;
Monday, 15th April 2019, Civic Offices, Athlone, Co Wesmeath.
Cllr. Hill thanked all attendees at the meeting for their reports and contributions.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Cllr Paddy Hill,
Chairman,
Westmeath Joint Policing Committee
6
Date