Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held in the Council Chamber, City Hall and Online via MS Teams
on Monday 14th October 2024 at 3.00p.m.
Presiding
Cllr. P. Keane, Mayor of the City of Galway
Present
Councillors: A. Burke, A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M. Cubbard, A.
(Elected Members)
Curran, J. Forde, S. Forde, F. Fahy, E. Hoare, D. Lyons, J.
McDonagh, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty, E. Seoighthe
Present (virtually)
Councillors: H. Ogbu
Present (Executive)
Mr. L. Cleary, Chief Executive
Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Services
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services
Ms. H. Kilroy, Director of Finance
Mr. D. Pender, Director of Services
Ms. L. Fanning, A/Director of Services
Ms. F. Holland, Senior Engineer .
Mr. M. Cormican, Senior Engineer
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
Ms.A. Kenny, Administrative Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda items are recorded in the order of
their consideration.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of
intent to conduict the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed
by a moment of silent reflection.
1. Disclosure of Conflict of Interest (Section 177 of the Local Government Act
2001 as amended:
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item 1 and invited comments. There
were no conflicts of interests declared.
2. Confirmation of Minutes
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on gth September 2024.
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item 2(a) and invited comments.
There were no matters of accuracy or matters arising.
Proposed By: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded By: Cllr. F. Fahy
2(a) Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway.City Council held on gth
September2024
The minutes of the September ordinary meeting were agreed and adopted.
Page 1 of 8
In favour: 17
Against: 0
Abstain:0
Absent: 1
The nominations to SPCs were considered and unanimously agreed.
4.Reports of Committee Meetings
(a) Draft note of Corporate Policy Committee meeting held on 23rd September
2024.
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item 4(a) and invited comments.
Proposed By: Cilr. D. Lyons
Seconded By: Cllr.D.McDonnell
4(a) Draft note of Corporate Policy Committee meeting held on 23rd September
2024.
Noted and agreed by Council.
(b) Draft note of Corporate Policy Committee meeting held on.7th October 2024.
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item 4(b) and invited comments.
Proposed By: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded By: Cllr.D. McDonnell
4(b) Draft note of Corporate Policy Committee meeting held on 7th October 2024
Noted and agreed by Council.
Cllr. D. Lyons referred to the recent briefing with the NTA, and to questions submitted
through Mr. D. Pender and that no response has been received to date. Mr. D.
Pender agreed to follow up with the NTA on this matter.
Cllr. D. Lyons added that it was a council meeting.that he initially proposed the NTA
invite the NTA to a council meeting. This was Seconded by Cllr. J. Connolly and
agreed.
Ms. A. Rohan briefed Members on the new Corporate Planning process and
informed Members that the consultation period is now open for submissions.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to the information briefings/workshop and asked if they
can take place in the afternoon rather than the morning to accommodate Members.
Mayor P. Keane agreed to include this issue on the agenda for the next CPG
meetingfordiscussion.
Page 3 of 8
6. Notice of Motions
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item 6 and to NOM Ref. 37/2024 and
invited comments.
Mr. L. Cleary welcomed this motion and informed Members that the executive is very
much insupportofthismotion.
Mayor P. Keane proceeded to a vote and called for a show of hands in favour of
NOM37/2024.
NOM Ref: 37/2024 Submitted by Cllr. J. Connolly on 12/09/2024
Seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell
GalwayCityCouncil fullyimplement theobjectiveofthePublicService
Apprenticeship Plan 2023 that local authorities recruit at least five craft apprentices
annually, to commence the process of reestablishing an appropriate baseline of
craft apprenticeship in the public service aligned with current need and service
delivery models.
In favour: 16
Against: 0
Abstain: 0
Absent: 2
This motion was unanimously carried.
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to NOM Ref. 39/2024 and invited comments.
Cllr. J. Connolly referred to the bike rental scheme located outside City Hall and
queried how often they are used. He proposed that this bike rental area be looked at
to see if it could be changed to an ebikes rental scheme. Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded
this proposal.
Cllr. A. Curran suggested that this be an agenda item at the next Project
Development SPC meeting. Mayor P. Keane asked Cllr. M. Cubbard, Chair of the
Project Development SPC, to include this as. an agenda item at the next SPC
meeting. This was agreed.
Mayor P. Keane proceeded to a vote and called for a show of hands in favour of
NOM39/2024.
NOM Ref: 39/2024 Submitted by Cllr. J. Connolly on 18/09/2024
Seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell
Galway City Council calls on the NTA to support the development of an ebike
rental scheme in the city.
In favour: 16
Against: 0
Abstain: 0
Absent: 2
This motion was unanimously carried.
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to NOM Ref.41/2024 and invited comments.
Page 5 of 8
Ms. L. Fanning briefed Members on this motion. .Following the briefing from Ms. L.
Fanning, Cllr. N. McNelis withdrew this motion:
NOM Ref: 43/2024 Submltted by Cllr. N.McNelis on 07/10/2024
That this council will disregard the half-rate Carer's Allowance in full and the
Disability Alowance received by children aged between 16 and 18 in full when
calculating the rent of Council.tenants under the Differential Rent Scheme (DRS)
The Council notes that there are plans for a national review of the DRs, however,
this has yet to commence. In the interim, the Council will implement changes to its
DRS based on this motion. These can be updated pending publication of the
national review of the DRS.
This motion was withdrawn.
7. Questions
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item no. 7 and to Q6/2024 and invited
comments.
Mr. P. Greene informed Cllr. J. Connolly that a response to Q6/2024 has been
prepared and is ready to issue to Members.
8. Correspondence
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item no. 8 and invited comments.
Proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. S. Forde
a. Resolution passed by Roscommon County Council, received on 16/09/2024, 
regarding reduction in match funding.
b. Resolution passed by Roscommon County Council regarding illegal. dumping.
received on 16/09/2024. :
c. Resolution passed by Roscommon County Council regarding VAT rate
hospitality sector, received on 16/09/2024.
d.
Correspondence from the CCMA regarding the Galway Wastewater Strategy -
Public Consultation, received on 27/09/2024.
e.
Correspondence from the Disability Federation of Ireland (DFl), received on
23/07/2024.
f. Correspondence received from Minister of Transport in response to NoM
25/2024.
Correspondence was noted.
10.Conferences & Training
Mayor P. Keane referred Members to agenda item no. 10 and invited comments.
Page 7 of 8