Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 13th April 2026
CEANTAR BARDASACH BHAILE LOCHA RIACH
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF LOUGREA
Minutes of Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea
held in the Council Chamber, Civic Offices Loughrea, on 13th April 2026
ILATHAIR:
Cathaoirleach:
Cllr.P.Killilea
Baill:
Cllrs. I. Canning, G. Donohue, L. Harney, G. Finnerty
D. Kelly, M. Kinane (online), M. Maher, J. McClearn, M.
Regan.
Oifigigh:
Mr. C. Harley Senior Engineer, Mr. G. Haugh Senior
Executive Engineer, Mr. N. Kennedy Executive
Engineer, Mr. D. O'Loughlin Executive Engineer, Ms.
M. McGann Meetings Administrator, Ms. O. Cloonan
StaffOfficer.
As Lathair:
Ms.E. Ruane, Director of Services
1.
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETINGOF THEMUNICIPAL
DISTRICT OF LOUGHREA HELD ON gth MARCH 2026
LMD2475
The Minutes of the monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 9th March
2026 were approved by the Municipal District Members and signed by the Cathaoirleach on
the PROPOSAL of Cllr. G. Donohue and SECONDED by Cllr. L. Harney.
Matters arisingfrom the Minutes:
Cllr. Donoghue requested an update on the works at Kinvara Pier due to concern that it
would impact on the local festival. In response, Cllr. Killilea confirmed that he was advised
it won't have a direct impact.
Cllr. Regan requested an update on staffing levels in the Loughrea Municipal District and in
response, Mr. Harley stated that discussions are ongoing with the Human Resources
Department to resolve the short-term absences. Mr. Haugh confirmed that the Human
Resources Department is following the recruitment process to fill the permanent vacancy.
Cllr. Harney sought clarification on how Members can apply to get a speed camera at a
location, and in response, Mr. Haugh confirmed that the Council County can make
application to An Garda Siochana who subsequently carry out a Risk Assessment at the
proposed location to determine its suitability. Mr. Haugh advised that any proposed
locations can be referred to the relevant Engineer.
1
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 13th April 2026
responded that, to his knowledge, the road in question was not classified as a public road,
however, he would consult with the Taking in Charge (TiC) Section to verify and provide
confirmation.  Clr. Canning expressed his gratitude to Superintendent Baker and
complimented An Garda Siochana for organising regular patrols in the Woodpark area in
staff for the prompt response in installing road markings near the Primary and Secondary
Schools in Portumna and welcomed these safety improvements. Cllr. Kililea also thanked the
Roads staff for works completed at Kinvara N.S.
Cllr. Maher enquired whether the road surveys for Gort Road and Lake Road had been
responded that the survey results had already been shared with An Garda Siochana, albeit not
within the last month, and confirmed that they would be circulated again following this
meeting.
Cllr. Maher requested clarification regarding the status of the Part 10 Application for
Longpoint vis-a-vis the provision of a coffee shop facility as he now understood this was a
standalone project. Cllr. Regan expressed his disappointment about hearing this and stated
Cllr. Regan proposed referring the matter directly to the Chief Executive to seek clarification,
and this proposal was seconded by Clr. Maher. Mr. Haugh queried if confusion had arisen
pue uoeodde gujuueid ot ped ayt u! papnpui suiaq eane duspen penser pateuaisap e ot anp
clarified that he had discussed this with the Director of Services previously.  Cllr. Donohue
also confirmed that recent correspondence received from Ms. Ruane, Director of Services, on
20th January indicated that the Concession Licence for the Long Point had not yet been
advertised.
Cllr. Kinane sought an update regarding Tawin Island Bridge and Cllr. Killilea indicated that he
had received correspondence on this matter indicating there was no fundamental structural
issue and would forward the information to Cllr. Kinane. in response to Cllr. Kinane's query
whether a full review and investigation had taken place to identify any issues to be resolved,
Mr. Harley stated that he would ask Mr. Prendergast to issue a formal response to her.
Cllr. McClearn enquired about correspondence issued to An Post concerning Loughrea Post
Office and Ms. McGann replied that no response has been received to date.
2.LPT (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) NOTICE OF MOTION:
LMD2476
The allocation of 13,000 from the Local Property Tax Discretionary Capital Fund for supply
and installation of public lighting on the R352 at St. Joseph's Road Portumna to Oakwood View
Housing Estate was agreed by the Members.
2
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of theMunicipal Districtof Loughrea held on13thApril 2026
3.
NOTICE OF MOTION:
LMD2477
Cllr.MartinaKinane:
I propose the installation of a speed ramp / raised table approaching Oranhill Estate,
Maree Road, to increase pedestrians and cyclists' safety at this busy intersection.
Reply:
Galway County Council will carry out a Traffic Volume and Vehicle Speed Survey at
this location to validate the concerns raised.We would also note the existence of a
traffic calming ramp adjacent to this junction.
Cllr. Kinane thanked Mr. Haugh for the reply and clarified that the raised table is on the
approach from Oranmore side and queried when the survey information would be available.
Cllr. Kinane also advised that Nom funding would be made available for the project. In
response, Mr. Haugh stated that fulfilling the request will take some time and he will confirm
by email once the information is available.Mr.Haugh clarified that if a major issue is
identified, funding will be pursued through the Low-Cost Safety Improvement Scheme 2027
or, if unsuccessful, through NOM or LPT funding. The earliest projected completion date
would be 2027, dependent on resources and an evidence-base supporting both the need for
action and the suitability of a raised table as a traffic calming measure.
4.
PRESENTATIONONWESTBRIDGEJUNCTIONLOUGHREA-SYSTRALIMITED
CONSULTANTS:
LMD2478
proposed by the members for the Westbridge junction and stated that they were an
internationally recognised consultancy who had worked with Galway County Council on a
number of projects including the modelling of various phasing options at the Westbridge
traffic lights. A report was presented by Systra Limited, with the Consultants outlining their
engagement history including traffic surveys, microsimulation modelling, forecasting and
phasing options feasibility assessments.
They then advised that their latest work to assess the feasibility of implementing a mini-
roundabout (with a similar arrangement to the Barrack St. mini-roundabout) or a small
compact roundabout, including upgraded pedestrian facilities at the Westbridge junction
and Traffic Signals Optimisation was complete. They outlined that the report had considered
the space available, junction visibility, vehicle tracking, existing issues including traffic delays,
conflicting movements and pedestrian safety concerns. The Options Development and
Assessment report was then presented.
The Consultants outlined three potential design options with both the compact and mini
roundabout options found to be unworkable due to safety risks, impacts on large vehicles,
and significant cost implications. The preferred third option identified by the Consultants
was outlined as traffic signal optimisation incorporating revised signal staging, one-way
traffic arrangements, and improved pedestrian facilities. The Consultants advised that this
option is expected to reduce delays at the junction, improve safety for vulnerable road users,
maintain all pedestrian crossings, and deliver the required improvements at a lower cost and
3
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 13th April 2026
with minimal disruption. Mr Haugh clarified that this third option was not being formally
proposed but was included in the report to provide clarity on the type of alterations that
would be required to achieve any significant improvement in waiting times.
A discussion took place amongst the Members with concerns expressed regarding
malfunctioning of the lights and delays at the lights, noting that local businesses fear
potential closures as a result and they could not support measures which did not protect
local businesses. Additionally, the Members stated their opposition to converting “Old
Galway Road" to one-way traffic and enquired if a smart system of lights which adjusted
according to traffic demand could be investigated.
In response to queries from the Members regarding on-site assessments, Mr. Haugh
confirmed that there was a wider team from the Consultants involved in the project who had
carried out site visits and assessed the situation on the ground.Mr.Haugh confirmed that
the existing traffic control system was a "smart" system known as MovA - Microprocessor
Optimised Vehicle Activated, but the system is reliant on inputs from in-ground detection
loops and makes decisions in relation to phase sequencing and timings based on these inputs.
Where these inputs are compromised, e.g. vehicles do not move on green, leave a space for
other vehicles to exit from parking or side lanes etc. the system can temporarily misinterpret
accordingly, with most issues being resolved within 1 or 2 cycles. He stated that he would
explore any alternative solutions to minimise disruptions caused by the existing detection
loops being out of order or power outages. Mr. Haugh suggested that as an example, a
and this approach might facilitate quicker resolution of issues as they arise. Additionally, Mr.
Haugh proposed considering a service contract to ensure proactive management, rather than
waiting for problems to occur before taking action and stated that these are options that may
be evaluated moving forward but would obviously come with a cost implication which the MD
may not be able to accept. In response to a query from the Members regarding public
consultation on the project, Mr. Haugh advised that any viable reconfiguration of the junction,
supported by the Members, could be developed further and then put forward for public
consultation.
Cllr. Kelly requested a costing of these options for the next MD meeting and stated that if
there was a way to upgrade the technology that it should be costed and evaluated as a fourth
option.
Mr. Harley stated that the report demonstrates clearly that a mini roundabout is not a viable
solution, as it confirms articulated trucks failure to manoeuvre around it and it raises
further noted that although the current system is somewhat outdated, it remains adaptable,
providing all necessary elements to allow the junction to function effectively. Vehicle
congestion occurs due to specific failures; under normal, steady-state conditions, the junction
operates adequately. However, when disruptions occur, dissatisfaction arises, highlighting
the need to minimise the frequency of such failures.
Mr.Harley stated that the team will
4
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 13th April 2026
review the existing traffic lights to identify potential improvements, including remote access,
to try to maintain it in steady-state conditions. Mr. Harley stressed that this was a discussion
now facilitate further discussions with locals by the Elected Members and if further options
arose from this local knowledge, then further discussions could take place.
Cllr. Regan noted that it was preferable for any presenters to be present at Municipal District
Meetings for optimum audio and visual quality, and that it was also preferable to have a hard
copy of thepresentation onthe day.
LMD2479
5.  MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF LOUGHREA CATHAOIRLEACH'S BUSINESS
Cllr. Killilea expressed his commitment to advancing the Traffic Management Plan for Kinvara
and ensuring all deadlines are met and would collaborate with Mr. Harley to move the plan
forward.
LMD2480
6. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
A discussion took place amongst the Members regarding road maintenance and vehicular
damage from potholes vis-a-vis constituents being unable to file claims for vehicle damage. It
to maintain or repair a road, unless in the case of malfeasance or misfeasance, meaning active
wrongdoing or negligence by the authority can be proven. Mr. Harley clarified that changes
by Roads staff before being forwarded to the IPB; now, claimants submit their claims directly
to 1PB through an online portal.
Cllr. Canning reported that the pedestrian lights at Finn's Filling Station are currently
malfunctioning and Mr. Haugh advised he would follow up on this.
Clr. Canning requested an update regarding the reeds at Portumna Bathing Area and Ms.
McGann stated that health and safety documentation is being finalised with the contractor
and works are on target to be carried out prior to the bathing season.
Cllr. Canning requested information regarding potential funding options for the Portumna
Playground Committee and Mr. Haugh responded that matters related to playground funding
are handled by the Corporate Services Section and Community Department and he advised
CllrCanningtocontactthesesectionsdirectly.
Cllr. McClearn asked if Uisce Eireann had made contact about plans to extract water from the
River Shannon and whether they could be asked to attend a meeting of the Municipal District.
Ms. McGann stated that, according to recent protocols circulated to Members, Uisce Eireann
would only send representatives toPlenaryMeetings.
5
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 13th April 2026
Cllr. Kinane requested an update on taking-in-charge of the Rinville Point walkway and Mr.
Haugh advised that the issue is currently being reviewed by the Director of Service, Mr. Finn,
and several factors required consideration prior to any decision, including coastal erosion
protection measures and the ongoing maintenance costs associated with the walkway. He
agreed to raise this matter again with Mr. Finn.
Cllr. Kinane sought an update on the Part 8 Pedestrian Crossing at Clarinbridge and Mr. Haugh
replied that he would seek an update from the National Roads Project Office.
clarified that funding for footpaths must come through a budgetary process and whether
Meeting discussions.
Cllr. Regan referred to a previous proposal put forward by the late Cllr. Pat Hynes for
any land, could be developed in stages, and boardwalks used in areas where land is not made
available by landowners. Cllr. Kelly supported this proposal and in response, Mr. Harley
acknowledged that the suggestion and proposal were very worthwhile and he would present
them to management but noted that there may be significant environmental and ecological
issues.
Harley advised he was not aware of any further progress but would check with the NRPO and
revert to Cllr. Regan.
Cllr. Harney stated that he is currently in discussions with Mr. O'Loughlin regarding providing
NOM funding for sign cleaning and kerb painting at the traffic calming measure in Labane and
also raised the possibility of placing lighting on Craughwell's east side, pointing out that the
island near the traffic calming measures become much harder to see after nightfall.Mr.
m paueys Auanau pue panoas uaag pey uoeionb suua! e guou Aa papuodsau yaneg
Members, requesting their support for funding via NoM or LPT.
CHRIOCHNAIGH AN CRUINNIU ANSIN.
Kolilee
Cathaoirleach:
2026
ay
7
Date:
6