MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at CLAREGALWAY HOTEL, CLAREGALWAY, CO. GALWAY
Monday.25thMay2026
CATHAOIRLEACH:
Cllr. D. Collins
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
I LATHAIR FREISIN:
Baill:
Comh. /Cllr. S. Broderick, I. Canning, J. Charity, D.
Connoly, M. Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. O Curraoin,
G. Donohue, P. Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty,
T. Grealish, A. Harney, L. Harney, M. Hoade, C.
Keane, D. Kelly, D. Killilea, M. Kinane, M. Lee, P.
Mac An lomaire, M. Maher, E. Mannion, J.
McClearn, K. McHugh Farag, S. McHugh Ryan, M.
McNamara, E. F. Parsons, A. Reddington, M.
Regan, O. Turner, S. Walsh and T. Welby.
Baill ar line:
Oifigh:
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr. L.
Hanrahan, Director of Services, Mr. Michael
Owens, Director of Services, Ms. E. Ruane,
Director of Services, Mr. D. Mitchell, Director of
Services, Ms. K. O'Connor, Director of Services,
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer, Ms. J. Brann
Meetings Administrator, Ms. L. Keady, ASenior
Executive Officer, Ms. U. Ni Eidhin, Administrative
Officer, Ms. H. Riordan, Staff Officer, Ms. L.
O'Donnell, Assistant Staff Officer, Ms. T. Costello,
Assistant Staff Officer.
Page 1 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
Thosnaigh an cruinniu leis an paidir.
Expressions of sympathy were expressed to Cllr. Geraghty on the loss of his mother
in law Mary Smyth and to Comh. Mac an lomaire on the loss of his sister-in-law
Barbara Joyce and to Cllr. King on the loss of his brother-in-law George Yelvington.
The Cathaoirleach, the Elected Members and the Chief Executive congratulated
Councillors Thomas, Keane and Welby on contesting the recent bye-election and
extended their congratulations to newly elected TD Sean Kyne.
ITEM NO.1 CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE FOLLOWING MEETINGS
4734
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. Finnerty the minutes of the
Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 27th April 2026 were AGREED.
ITEM NO.2 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
4735
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish the minutes of
theCorporatePolicy Groupheld on20thApril 2026wereN0TED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Cllr. Geraghty It was
Galway County Council would hold a Civic Reception to honour Glenamaddy
Players, All treland Confined Drama Winners.
ITEMNO.3 TO CONSIDER REPORT UNDERSECTION 183 OF THE LOCAL
PARKMORE, TUAM, CO. GALWAY.
4736
Statutory Notice issued in accordance with Section 183(1)(b) and report dated 2nd
April 2026waspublishedon the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Page2of26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
Mr. Prendergast, Senior Engineer, informed the Members that the section 183 refers
to a small piece of land at Parkmore that was owned by Galway County Council and
was transferred to Uisce Eireann. A further transfer of land is now required to facilitate
essential upgrade works that are required to enhance the reliability, efficiency and
Elected Members approve the proposed disposal of land under Section 183.
   o   aoo  '   oo  o
AGREED to dispose of 0.05067 hectares of land at Parkmore, Tuam, Co. Galway in
accordance with the Statutory Notice dated 2nd April 2026.
ITEM NO.4 TO CONSIDER REPORT UNDER SECTION 183 OF THE LOCAL
DEMESNE, GORT, CO.GALWAY.
4737
April 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
    s     s 
disposal from an engineering perspective, subject to the following: reservation of
u! paaibe bujaq slanew Aepunoq pue buiddew 'jebal lle pue spuel buunoqybiau
consultation with the Council's Law Agent. It was recommended that the Elected
Members approve the proposed disposal of land under Section 183.
to dispose of 1,149 m? of land at Raheen Demesne, Gort, Co. Galway.
Page3of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
ITEM NO.5. TO CONSIDER REPORT UNDER183 OF THE LOCALGOVERNMENT
ACT 2001 TO DISPOSE OF 798 (m?) OF LAND AT THOOR, BALLYLEE, CO.
GALWAY.
4738
Statutory Notice issued in accordance with Section 183(1)(b) and report dated 10th
March2026waspublished on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Mr. Prendergast, Senior Engineer, explained that the purpose of this Section 183 is
to rectify a long-standing discrepancy between registered tities and the physical
layout of the lands. There are no operational issues preventing the correction and it
was thereforerecommended that theElected Members approve under Section 183
the proposed Rectification by Agreement to regularise the titles of the folios and to
formally correct the Council's registered interest in the Thoor Ballylee car park.
Cllr. Finnerty raised the following points and queries:
Clarification was sought regarding the ownership of, and responsibility for
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Prendergast:
·The office of Public Works (OPW) own the carpark.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Hanrahan:
·The Council's Regeneration Team are working with the OPW and National
committed to discussing this matter with them.
to dispose of 798 m2 of land at Thoor, Ballylee, Co. Galway.
Page4of26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheid25thMay2026
ITEM NO. 6 FILLING OF A CASUAL VACANCY ON THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE
LOCAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE (LCDC). 
4739
Report dated 13th May 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Comh. Mac An lomaire it
Development Committee (LCDC).
Clr. Michael Connolly thanked outgoing member Mr. Donal Walsh for his work on
the LCDC.
ITEM NO. 7 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPROATE, APPROVE
HOUSINGBORROWING REQUIREMENTS.
4740
Report dated25thMay2026waspublishedon theExtranet prior to the meeting
Director of Services, Mr Mitchell, provided Members with background to the request
for their consideration. He noted that approval was granted by the Elected Members
by way of formal resolution in November 2024, to proceed with borrowing of up to
E25 million to support and accelerate the delivery of affordable purchase housing in
Galway. Approval is now being sought for an increase of E10 million to the
E35 million. This additional funding will support the expanded programme, address
inflationary cost pressures and ensure the continued delivery of local authority own-
build affordable housing schemes. He drew attention to the fact that there are no
projects identified for the Ballinasloe area in the report, as only projects located on
lands under the control of Galway County Council are currently included. However,
he reassured Members that locations within Ballinasloe will be considered in future
reports
The programme of affordable housing that is being proposed consists of the
following:
1. Claregalway (Droim na Gaoithe)
66
Page 5 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
2. Loughrea, Cosmona - Phase 1
44
3. Loughrea, Cosmona - Phase 2
18
4. Athenry, Raheen
28
5. Tuam, Sun Street
62
6. Bearna, Tobar Na Luarcha
20
7. Oughterard, Station Road
70
8. Loughrea, Cosmona - Phase 3
50
9. Athenry, Pairc na hAbhain
16
10.Portumna, St. Joseph's Road
12
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn it was AGREED to
approve an increase of ∈10 million to the previously sanctioned borrowing. bringing
the total authorised borrowing ceiling to E35million, to enable the delivery of
Affordable Housing Purchase, in accordance with Section 106 of the Local
Government Act 2001 (as amended).
Cllrs. / Comh. Maher, McClearn, Regan, D. Connolly, Hoade, Cunniffe, Welby,
Canning, Geraghty, A. Harney, McHugh Farag, Reddington, L. Harney, O
Curraoin, Kinane, Lee, M. Connolly & McNamara raised the following points
and queries:
This funding will allow for the delivery of affordable housing schemes in each
Municipal District (MD).
The housing borrowing requirements have been discussed extensively at
Housing Strategic Policy Committee (SPC).
The demand for affordable housing is exceptionally high.
The affordable housing plans were warmly welcomed and the housing staff were
complimented for their work.
There must be a balance between social, affordable and cost rental housing.
Houses which cost between ∈425,000 and 475,000 are not affordable houses.
The government are moving in the right direction with the upcoming Critical
Infrastructure Bill.
Page 6 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
· There is also a clear need for affordable housing in outlying areas of the county.
Provision of social housing places a significant financial strain on local
authorities.
The government subsidy provided for affordable housing is inadequate.
 The government subsidy has not made allowances for increases in inflation. The
2021 Statutory Instrument governing this is outdated.
Has there been any indication from Government that the Affordable Housing
Scheme will be reviewed.
 Is the same scheme in operation in every local authority.
Appreciation was expressed to the Executive for incorporating a diverse mix of
housing types in Portumna.
Building specifications are overly prescriptive, this increases construction costs
and, in turn, makes homes less affordable.
 A request was made for the delivery of a scheme in Ballinasloe at the earliest
opportunity. Affordable housing is also needed in rural towns and villages where
schools and services have capacity, in contrast to urban areas where such
services are under pressure. It was emphasised that supporting people to live
within their own communities is essential.
It was noted that the Affordable Housing policy requires review, as current
asking prices are not considered affordable. Concerns were also raised that
 Is there provision for the Council to construct homes for applicants on their own
sites?
 It was asked if water services will be provided in Craughwell, Clarinbridge and
Ardrahan. Serviced sites are required to build houses.
 To allow the proposed wastewater plant to proceed in Clarenbridge and
Craughwell, the Council are required to provide E2.6 funding.
 A water treatment plant is required in South Connemara.
The Council are underfunded.
?
The cost of materials has increased.
apprenticeships.
Page 7 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
 Clarity was sought on the definitions of 'bridging loan' and 'overdraft' used in the
meeting documentation.
 The Council should be looking for increased funding from government to fund
these schemes and not applying for loans to provide affordable housing.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
The Council work within the parameters of the subsidies provided in the
Affordable HousingScheme.
 The Council may construct housing on land owned by social housing
applicants in certain circumstances. Approval is contingent on the suitability of
existing social housing in the area and the intended long-term use of the
dwelling. Applicants also have the option to apply for a Local Authority Home
Loan.
 Uisce Eireann are introducing a policy document on Developer Led
Infrastructure.
There are currently no plans for treatment plants in An Spideal or
Lettermullen. The existing private schemes will be evaluated to assess their
capacity for potential use to advance schemes.
The Department have shown some flexibility in the Affordable Housing
Scheme and assess each proposal on a case-by-case basis.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
. Committed to providing affordable housing in each of the 5 MDs.
 The council are currently seeking to acquire sites and are working with
developers in each MD.
ITEMNO. 8 UPDATE TO PLENARY ONIMPLEMENTATION OF THE CORPORATE
PLAN 2025-2029.
4741
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Page 8 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
Director of Services Mr. Owens introduced the quarter one progress report on the
implementation of the Corporate Plan 2025-2029, as progressed through the Annual
Service Delivery Plan (ASDP). The report sets out the strategic goals, supporting
actions, timelines, National Oversight and Audit Commission (NOAC) performance
indicators, goals, KPl targets and quarter 1 status updates. The report was considered
at Corporate Policy Group (CPG).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Finnerty the update on the
Implementation of the Corporate Plan 2025-2029 was NOTED.
Cllrs. / Comh. D. Killilea, D. Connolly, Maher, Geraghty, Parsons, Finnerty & A.
Harney raised the following points and queries:
 It was asked that the contract for the Council Out of Hours call answering
service bereviewed.
Are the Council out of hours staff fully trained.
Homeless accommodation is required in County towns. The Council should
not be reliant on services provided by CoPE.
It is not suitable for homeless families to be referred to Galway City, when
their family supports and schools are located in the county.
The units to shelter the homeless on Vicar Street, Tuam are being
progressed.
St. Brigid's Hospital in Ballinasloe should be acquired to provide homeless
services.
There needs to be a broad discussion around homelessness as it is a
complex issue with many contributing factors.
A wide range of accommodation options are required.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
There has been an increase in homelessness. CoPE which operates the
homeless services for Galway County Council is at capacity.
Page 9 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
Homeless people tend to migrate to larger urban areas where they can avail
of back up services.
Back up facilities will be required for the facility in Vicar Street, Tuam.
The Council are looking to provide services in Oranmore and Ballinasloe. He
welcomedsuggestionsof locationsfrom theElected Members.
He wouid welcome a representative from CoPE to make a presentation to the
Housing SPC Members.
The out of hours service will be assessed.
Cllrs. / Comh. D. Killilea, Parsons, Donohue, Cunniffe & McHugh Farag raised
the following points and queries:
It was asked what Elected Members and the Council can do to assist COPE
in their work.
That supporting actions for homeless services be included in the Annual
Service Delivery Plan.
 It was asked if cOPE could make a presentation to the full Council at plenary.
COPE provided Domestic Abuse training recently to Members, it was
encouraged that all Members should undertake the training.
It was asked if non-SPC members can attend SPC meetings as a guest.
Elected Members may attend an SPC they are not a member of, where they
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
·Homeless services are a complex issue as additional wrap around services
are required in addition to food and shelter.
The current Out of Hours service will be reviewed.
inform policy.
If the Members wish to undertake COPE training this will be facilitated.
.Workshops can aiso be arranged if the Members wish.
Page 10 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
actions,ifagreedatSPC.
Confirmed that Elected Members where they are bringing a motion to a SPC
that they were not a member of, they could attend for that purpose however,
they cannot vote at these meetings.
The Cathaoirleach confirmed that it was agreed that COPE will be invited to attend the
SPC.
ITEM NO. 9 TO FIX A DATE AND TIME FOR THE ANNUAL MEETING OF
PlenaRY CouNCIl.
4742
It was agreed to hold the Annual Meeting of the Plenary Council on Friday 19th June
in Aras an Chontae at 2.30pm.
ITEMNO.10TOCONSIDERANDIFDEEMEDAPPROPRIATEAUTHORISETHE
ATTENDANCE AT TRAININGIN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5A) OF
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4743
Report dated 14th May was published to the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. Maher it was AGREED to
authorise Cllr. M. Hoade to attend AlLG Women's Regional Caucus Network at
Retrospective approval.
AGREED to authorise Cllr J. Mc Clearn, Cllr. S. McHugh Ryan, Cllr. G. King, Cllr. M.
  be   t      a 
2026 - Module 3 - "Supporting Councillors: Responding to Mental Health, Suicide
Page 11 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
and Addiction Issues" in Hotel Kilmore, Cavan on 21st May 2026. Retrospective
approval.
ITEM 11. TO NOTE THE SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS OF CONFERENCES
ATTENDEDINACCORDANCEWITHSECTION142(5F)OFTHELOCAL
GOVERNMENTACT2001(ASAMENDED).
4744
Report dated 14th May 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. Lee the Summary of
Proceedings at conferences attended were NoTED.
ITEM 12. TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT -MAY 2026 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 136(2) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT
2001 (AS AMENDED).
4745
ReportdatedMay2026waspublishedon theExtranetprior to themeeting
Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) was NoTED.
Cllrs. McHugh Ryan, Kinane, McHugh Farag, Mannion, D. Connolly,
Reddington, Lee & Grealish raised the following points and queries:
The Tuam Women's Shed was praised for the positive impact that they have
had in their community and were congratulated on their Inclusive
Communities' award at the Cathaoirleach Awards.
The recent community event at the Palace Grounds, Tuam opening the
Michael McGrath Sensory Garden, new basketball courts and the raising of
the Green and Green Hertitage Site Flag by Tuam MD Cathaoirleach Cllr.
McHugh Farag was congratulated.
Play equipment in Palace Grounds, Tuam requires upgrading.
The commencement of works on a section of new footpaths connecting Tuam
Rugby Club was warmly welcomed.
Page 12 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
The provision of playground Inspector Training was welcomed.
Capital funding under the Capital Grant Scheme for Play and Recreation to
support works at Renville playground was welcomed.
Feedback was sought following a recent meeting with members of the
Oireachtas on the Craughwell-Clarinbridge wastewater scheme. The Council
must provide the 2.6m match funding for the scheme to proceed.
A session of the Local Community Safety Partnership public consultation
should also be held in Clifden.
Are the provisions for the Summer Ready programme in place in advance of
the bank holiday weekend. Has engagement taken place with the Gardai
regards parking at beaches.
There should be a dedicated budget for works to footpath.
It was asked if the Council's anti-dumping initiatives are adequately
resourced.
The Cathaoirleach was complimented on the recent Cathaoirleach Awards
and praised for the presentation of the Cathaoirleach's Special Recognition
loans could be provided for applicants.
The solar panels provided in Leitir Meallain and Pobal Tir Fhia Community
Centres were welcomed.
Works on the pedestrian crossing at An Spideal National School was
welcomed.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
·A report on the Wastewater Treatment for Craughwell and Clarinbridge will be
presented to the Members.
le busyidde ale am pue 'abualieyo jueoy!ubis e sunewai buidwnp jebal!
availablemechanismsandresourcestoaddressit.
Acknowledged that payments under the Croi Conaithe should be processed
promptly.
Page 13 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Prendergast:
are delivered through the roads programme, encompassing maintenance,
upgrades, safety improvement schemes, and active travel initiatives.
If the Members have specific areas of concern, he invited them to contact the
specific MD.
·The Summer Ready programme will be operational.
Cllrs. Regan, D. Connolly, Keane, Cunniffe & Lee raised the following points
and queries:
· E200,000 should be allocated every year per MD for footpath works.
· A budget code for footpath works should be included in the 2027 budget.
The completion of theSection 38consultation for Oranmore TrainStation
Active Travel Scheme was welcomed. An update on the timeline for
completion of the project was requested.
It was asked that the Athenry/Oranmore MD Members be updated on the
Loughrea MD flood reviews that relate to Oranmore.
The Craughwell-Clarinbridge wastewater treatment plant should have been
required to provide match funding for the project, which service areas would
be impacted. The current situation, whereby wastewater from Clarinbridge is
being discharged to the sea, is not acceptable.
The Council does not receive an equitable share of the Equalisation Fund.
 The announcement of funding for piers in Connemara and the work of Council
staff in securing it was acknowledged.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Prendergast:
· The Section 38s in Oranmore for bus shelters are going to tender shortly, the
MDs will be updated.
Page14of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
 RPS are preparing an interim report on the flooding review. The final report
will be completed in the next few months and the MDs will be updated.
ITEM13.CHIEFEXECUTIVE'SBUSINESS&CORRESPONDENCE.
4746
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NOTED:
Letter dated 26.11.2025 from Galway County Council to Department of
Transport - Resolution letter - Traffic Calming Speed Ramps.
Brien TD -Reply to Resolution letter dated 26.11.2025.
Letter dated 02.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister James
Browne, Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage - Resolution
letter - Modular Housing Guidelines.
State John Cummins - Reply to Resolution letter dated 02.03.2026.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Department of An
Taoiseach-Resolution letter-Increaseprovision of IrishMediumEducation
-circulated to Minister for Education.
Letter dated 21.04.2026 from Hildegarde Naughton, Minister for Education
and Youth - Reply to Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026.
Letter issued post Council Meeting of 09.04.2026 in Waterford City & County
Council - Resolution -Disability Act 2025.
Letter dated 16.04.2026 from Waterford City & County Council - Resolution -
Expressway Services.
Letter dated 20.04.2026 from Carlow County Council - Resolution Letter -
Dedicated Local Representative Service fromESB.
Letter dated 21.04.2026 from Monaghan County Council - Resolution Letter -
Business Grant for Rate Payers in Monaghan.
Letter dated 24.04.2026 from South Dublin County Council - Resolution
Letter - Bessborough Mother and Baby home.
Page15of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
·Letter dated 30.04.2026 from Michael McCarthy Chair, National Oversight and
Audit Commission -NOAC Annuai Report.
Letter dated 05.05.2026 from Roscommon County Council -Resolution letter
- Independent Commission for Validation of Planning objections.
Letter dated 11.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Department of
Housing, Local Government & Heritage -Resolution Letter - Grants for
domesticWasteWater Treatment.
Email dated 13.05.2026 from Megan Woods Private Secretary to Minister
Browne - Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 11.05.2026.
Letter dated 11.05.2026 from Galway County Council to National Transport
Authority - Resolution Letter - Additional Services on 424 Route.
Letter dated 11.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister for Public
Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform & Digitalisation -
Resolution Letter- Critical Infrastructure Development.
Email dated 11.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Local Authorities in
the wider West/North West Region - Circulation of Resolution letter dated
11.05.2026.
Email dated 13.05.2026 from Corporate Services Section Sligo County
Council - Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 11.05.2026.
- Congratulations on winning All Ireland Senior Scor in Set Dancing.
Congratulations on work contributed to Joyce Country Western Lakes
Geopark Status.
Heritage Officer - Congratulations on work contributed to Joyce Country
Western Lakes Geopark Status.
Letter dated 11.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Joyce Country &
Western Lakes Geopark Project - Congratulations on work contributed to
JoyceCountryWestern LakesGeoparkStatus.
Letter dated 12.05.2026 form Clare County Council - Resolution - Cost of
living measures.
Page 16 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
Email dated 14.05.2026 from Cavan County Council - Resolution -
Awareness campaign on Sepsis.
Letter dated 18.05.2026 from Longford County Council - Resolution letter -
Just Transition Tourism Activators
The Chief Executive informed Members that a Training session will be delivered on
the morning of the 3rd September 2026 in respect of Public Sector Duty & Members
Conference/Training Expenses.
ITEM 14. QUESTlON Cllr. Geraldine Donohue
4747
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following question to the meeting:
ThatGalwayCountyCouncil Chief Executive and DirectorofServicesprovide
confirmationhowmuchhasGalwayCountyCouncil writtenoffonDerelictSites
Levies in the last 10 years"
The following reply issued:
I can confirm that Galway County Council has not written off any Derelict Sites levies
in the last 10 years.
ITEM 15 QUESTlON Cllr. Andrew Reddington
4748
Cllr. Andrew Reddington submitted the following question to the meeting:
"How many streetlamps there are in Galway County Council's administrative area?
How manystreetlamps havebeenreplacedwithmodernLED lamps to date?
What plan Galway County Council has to replace the remaining lamps?"
The following reply issued:
County Council administrative area.
Page 17 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeeting held25thMay2026
It is confirmed that there are a total of 13,116 public lighting lanterns in the Galway
County Council administrative area.
Of these it is confirmed that 12,553 are LED lanterns. This represents 95.71% of the
public lighting system.
The remaining 563 non-LED lights will be replaced through the existing Public Lighting
Maintenance contract. It is projected that the majority of these lights will be replaced
within the next three years.
The Chief Executive spoke on the motion and emphasised that meeting carbon
thresholds is an important element in Our Climate Action Plan. Work is ongoing in
this area to reach 100% completion.
ITEM 16. NOTICE OF MOTION
4749
Cllr. Thomas Welby submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
"This Council agrees that the Comprehensive Economic Trade Agreement(CETA)
providingadditionalrightstomultinationalcorporations tosue thestateoutsideof
ordinarylegalsystemswecurrentlyhavewill undermineEU social,health and
environmental standards.This Council acknowledges that many of the trade
elements are already in place and does not need the addition of corporations being
able to sue the Irish government through the Investor Court System (ICS) when any
new laws affect their profits. This council stands against the Investor Court System
(ICS) and calls this constituency a CETA-Free Zone.
This Council resolves to write to the Minister for Trade, the Minister for Local
government and the Taoiseach to outline this position. It further resolves to publicise
thecouncil's concerns aboutCETA and tocirculate thismotionwithother Councils
as correspondence for consideration".
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr.Weiby SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish the above motion
Was AGREED.
Page 18 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld25thMay2026
ITEM 17.NOTICEOFMOTION
4750
Cllr. Michael Regan submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
That we write to electric Skyline, to clarify the lights they have replaced on allpoles
within the County,are ofwhat wattage.
It appears all these newlight LED fittings are not throwing out the same light as the
old light fitting.
In betweenpoles there is a huge black spot, dark area which means they need to put
in astronger light fitting, if notwewould havetolook atputting in a newpole and
The following reply issued:
I refer and reply to your Motion relating to the Public Lighting LED Retrofit
Programme.
With regard to the concern that the new LED fittings do not appear to provide the
same level of lighting as the previous lanterns, it is important to note that the earlier
LED retrofit designs were developed to provide compliant lighting levels while also
improving energy efficiency, reducing maintenance requirements, reducing upward
The designs across the Galway County Council area have been carried out in
accordance with the relevant public lighting standards, including IS EN 13201-2:2015
and BS5489-1:2020.
In some very limited locations, achieving ideal lighting uniformity can be challenging
within the constraints of the existing public lighting infrastructure. As a result, some
reviewed and addressed on a case-by-case basis where feasible.
If there are specific locations which members consider to have inadequate lighting
levels or to present a potential safety concern for pedestrians or road users, details
can be forwarded to the Roads Section for inspection and further assessment.
Page 19 of 26
MinutesofPlenaryMeeting held25thMay2026
In relation to the query regarding wattage, replacement LED fittings are selected on
a design basis having regard to the applicable lighting standards and the
requirements of each individual location, including road classification, column
spacing and mounting height. In general, the LED wattages installed across the
public lighting network range from approximately 8 watts to 137 watts.
Cllr. Regan asked for further information on the locations of the different watt bulbs.
Mr. Prendergast, Senior Engineer clarified that the response should have stated 18
watt and not 8 watt. He added that the wattage of bulb used is determined by the
 l o s s     s  s s n  
conventional bulbs, as they are more focused, they are also more efficient. Dark
spots occur where the lighting is situated on network poles. The Council is
addressing this as part of the retrofit process, which is subject to available budget.
He asked that he be informed if the Members have any areas of particular concern.
Cllrs. McClearn, McHugh Ryan, Hoade, Regan, M. Connolly & Keane raised the
following points and queries:
· The concentration of light from the LED bulbs is creating blackspots, the fitting
and design needs to be examined. Local roads are not suitable for these
types of lights.
·Sensor lights only come on once you have passed the area. Lighting is vital
for women to feel safe.
Repairs to lights are not being carried out.
There is an issue of lights being erected but not connected for a year or more,
which is not acceptable.
·An enquiry was made regarding the timeframe for repairing lights.
Page20 of 26