MinutesofPlenaryMeeting held27thApril2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OFMONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Heid at ARAS AN CHONTAE, PROSPECT HILL
Monday, 27th April at 1.00pm
LEAS CATHAOIRLEACH:
Cllr. M.Hoade
Leas Cathaoirleach of the County of
Galway
ILATHAIR FREISIN:
Baill:
Comh. /Cllr. S. Broderick, D. Connolly, M.
Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. O Curraoin, P.
Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty, T.
Grealish, L. Harney, C. Keane, D. Kelly, D.
Killilea, P. Killilea, M. Lee, M. Maher, S.
McHugh Ryan, A. Reddington, M. Regan, N.
Thomas, O. Turner and T. Welby.
Baill ar line:
Comh. /Cllr. I. Canning, J. Charity, G.
Donohue, A. Harney, P. Keaveney. M.
Kinane, G. King, M. Leainde, E. Mannion, J.
McClearn, K. McHugh Farag, M. McNamara,
E. F. Parsons and S. Walsh.
Oifigh:
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr.
Michael Owens, Director of Services, Mr.
Uinsinn Finn, Director of Services, Ms. E.
Ruane, Director of Services, Ms. K.
O'Connor, Head of Finance, Mr. D. Mitchell,
Director of Services, Ms. V. Loughnane
Moran, Senior Planner, Ms. J. Brann
Meetings Administrator, Ms. L. Keady,
ASenior Executive Officer, Ms. U. Ni
Eidhin, Administrative Officer Ms. H.
Page 1 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
Riordan, Staff Officer, Ms. C. Connolly Staff
Officer.
Thosnaigh an cruinniu leis an paidir.
The Elected Members contesting the upcoming bye-election were wished every
successby the LeasCathaoirleach.
ITEM NO.1 CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE FOLLOWING MEETINGS
4715
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Comh. O Curraoin the
minutes of the Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 23rd March 2026 were AGREED.
ITEMNO.2CONSIDERATIONOFREPORTSANDRECOMMENDATIONS
4716
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Regan the minutes of the
Corporate Policy Group held on 16th March 2026 were N0TED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington the minutes
of the Economic Development, Enterprise & Planning Strategic Policy Committee
Meeting held on 3rd December 2025 were N0TED.
Cllr. Donohue raised the following point and query:
Further to item 6, an update was requested on the County/City Economic
Development Strategy, as consultants were due to be confirmed following the
December meeting.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Grant Thornton are the appointed consultants for the County/City Economic
Development Strategy. Stakeholder engagement is taking place with the
Page 2 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril 2026.
(NWRA). The draft document will be brought before the Elected Members.
On the PROPOSAL of Comh. O Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. Broderick the
Strategic Policy Committee Meeting held on 10th December 2025 were NOTED.
Cllr. Donohue raised the following point and query:
to inform landowners of their responsibilities in relation to roadside trees.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
·Leaflet drops in targeted areas will be carried out. He will ask the Senior
Engineer to contact Cllr. Donohue directly on this matter.
·Ares of specific concern may be raised at Municipal District level.
ITEM NO.3 TO CONSIDER AND ADOPT THE UNAUDITED ANNUAL FINANCIAL
STATEMENTFOR2025.
4717
TheUnauditedAnnualFinancialStatementforGalwayCountyfor theyearended
31st December 2025was published to theExtranet prior to the meeting.
Ms. O' Connor, Director of Service Finance spoke on the Unaudited Annual Financial
Statement (AFS) for 2025 that was circulated to the Elected Members in advance of
the meeting. The statement has been presented to the Audit Committee and Corporate
Policy Group (CPG). The Statement was prepared within the Accounting Code of
Practice and Accounting Regulations for Local Authorities in lreland, and under the
directions of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The primary
financial statements which make up the AFS are the Statement of Accounting Policies,
Statement of Comprehensive Income, Statement of Financial Position, Statement of
Page3of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril 2026.
Auditor will examine the accounts, however significant change is not expected. The
Unaudited AFS will be brought before the Members in September as the Audited
Annual Financial Statement.
The Executive is requesting that the Elected Members:
a) Adopt the enciosed figures to formally close the accounts for 2025.
b) Approve the transfers to / from reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the accounts.
c) Approve the over / under expenditure by division as noted in Note 16 of the
accounts.
Cllr. Regan raised the following points and queries:
Clarification was sought on the amount of rates outstanding from the previous
year.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. O'Connor:
Uncollected rates have reduced, and the rate base has increased.
 The Council is working with Tailte Eireann to ensure accurate property
valuations for rating purposes.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
·The Council's collection rates are above national average.
TheCouncil ismindful of theneed tobalanceeffectiveratecollectionwith the
sustainability of local businesses.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington it was AGREED
Galway County Council for the year ended 31st December 2025 to formally close the
accounts for 2025.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan it was AGREED
to approve the transfers to / from reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the accounts.
Page 4 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026
AGREED to approve the over / under expenditure by division as noted in Note 16 of
theaccounts.
ITEM NO.4 TO CONSIDER A REPORT TO AN COIMISIUN PLEANALA UNDER
SECTION 37(E)(4) OF THE PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT ACT 2000, AS
AMENDEDONTHEFOLLOWING-PROPOSEDDEVELOPMENT:
CONSTRUCTIONOFANOPEN-CYCLEGASTURBINEPOWERPLANT.
PRIMARILYFUELEDBYNATURALGAS,ABOVEGROUNDINSTALLATIONAND
ANCILLARY_DEVELOPMENT,LOCATEDWITHINCOLLNAGROAGHAND
RATHMORRISSY(TOWNLANDS),ATHENRY,CO.GALWAYACP-324113-26.
4718
Reportwaspublished on theExtranetprior to themeeting.
Ms. Loughnane Moran, Senior Planner spoke on the report. The proposed
development of the Cashla Peaker Plant is for the construction of an open cycle gas
substation and connection from the substation to the existing Cashla substation. The
Development Act. The report contains a description of the proposed development, site
location, planning policy, relevant planning history, enforcement information relating
to the subject site, designated sites, Environmental lmpact Assessment (ElAR), Water
Framework Directive, planning considerations, recommended conditions and includes
a Road and Transportation Report. The report also includes a recommendation that it
implement a community gain proposal.
A presentation has already been made to the Athenry Oranmore Municipal District
(MD), the chair of which has prepared a statement on the proposed development
which will be included in the report to be submitted to An Coimisiun Pleanala. She
 o a o  bu s  ap s u u o on
submitted report also.
Page5of32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheid27thApril2026.
The Chief Executive informed the Elected Members that Galway County Council are
not the decision-making authority for this application.
Municipal District:
'As Members of Galway County Council representing the Athenry Municipal District,
we are awareof theimportance of our area in thecontextof infrastructure investment,
industrial development and balanced regional development. We are aware of the need
for a sustainable, secure energy supply and a robust electricity grid network.
To that end, Galway county has played a significant part in developing our energy
supply. We host a number of wind and solar farms with more in the pipeline. We have
possibility of offshore wind development remains, despite recent decisions.
Regarding the present proposal, the Cashla Peaker Plant, SID Case Ref 324113 we
have a number of serious concerns regarding its development.
Environmental Concerns
The proposed site is in close proximity to Athenry town. Prevailing winds would direct
3,500 in five schools. There is a significant residential zoning in the adjacent townland
ofBallygurranewhichwill have theeffectofextending the town towardsthePeaker
Plantsite.
2) the substation and pipeline and 3) the gas pipeline. We request that An Coimisiun
Pleanala considers the cumulative impact of the entireproject in making its decision.
We also request that AnCoimisiun considers the emission levels in thecontext of the
700ha of land earmarkedforindustrialdevelopmentwithin a10kmradiusof thesite.
Will the operation of thePeakerPlant restrict development on these lands in the future
underthecumulativeeffectprovision?TheselandsarelocatedatBallygurrane
(Athenry), Tubberoe (Athenry) IDA and Department of Defence (Oranmore),Galway
Airport site (Carnmore).
that thisdecision betaken into account in theconsiderationof this application.
Economic Corridor
Page 6 of 32
Minutes ofPlenaryMeeting held 27th April 2026.
The site is located in the Galway - Athenry economic corridor (Galway County
Development Plan) which has had major investment over the decades in transport,
industrial developmentsites and housing.We areconcerned that siting one of the
largestpowerplantsofitstypeinthecentreofthiscorridor willdimmishthe
attractiveness of this nationally important area to significant projects and investments.
IDASite
Some of the closest lands to the Peaker Plant site is owned by the IDA. There has
subjectofaE30ommultinational investment.Wehaveconcernsthatthiswiderland
holdingwill have itsvalue and attractiveness eroded by theproximityofthepower
station.
Local Services
We have concerns that thelevel of emergency services in the area are inadequate to
dealwith anyemergencies on-site.The storage of6.2 millionlitres ofdiesel in
conjunctionwithamajor gas main creates a considerable fire risk andwouldchallenge
greatly the local fire services. This site will be a Lower Tier COMAH site under the
SevesoDirective,resulting in a higher requirement for both emergencyplanning and
Impacton LocalRoadsandRoadSafety
While the site is adjacent to the motorway it is served by local roads only. We have
concerns around the construction and operation of theplant and the impact it will have
on the L roadsserving thesite, the HGVs using theroute and the increased road and
safetyissueswhichwillarise.
We request that an Coimisiun Pleanala take the above concerns into account in
arriving at its decision on a project which would have a significant impact on the local
area, local residents and the economic development of this key area of Galway.'
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Keane SECONDED by Cllr. Feeney it was AGREED to
approve the report to An Coimisiun Pleanala under Section 37(E)(4) of thePlanning &
Development Act 20o0, as amended on the following - Proposed Development:
Rathmorrissy (townlands), Athenry, Co. Galway ACP -324113-26
Page 7 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril 2026.
Cllrs. Feeney, Broderick, McNamara, Grealish and Cunniffe raised the
following points and queries:
·The proposed development site is located on the edge of Athenry town and
had been previously earmarked for development. It was questioned whether
the site was selected solely on the basis that it is currently for sale.
While there is recognition of the need to move away from fossil fuels, it is
large power plant in close proximity to a town was not considered suitable.
It was emphasised that community concerns must be fuly considered.
There is unanimous agreement among the Members of the Municipal District
in respect of this submission.
·Athenry town is growing and expanding. Concern was raised that the pipes may
prohibit future potential development.
·The suitability of the site was questioned and concerns were raised regarding
site access and regress to the site.
 The current zoning of the land was enquired of. Lack of national guidelines or
energystrategywascriticised.
the area could be included in the report.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Loughnane:
· It is national policy to support development in the move away from fossil fuels.
·The decision on the application will be made by An Coimisiun Pleanala.
The report outlines the governing national, regional and local guidelines.
· There exists some confusion between wind, solar and natural gas guidelines.
· The site is unzoned and it is within the economic corridor.
·The previous application that was mentioned was from 2009, although it was
stage. She agreed that it would be referenced in the report to be submitted to
An Coimisiun Pleanala.
Page8of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
The Members agreed that reference to the previous proposal in 2009 be included in
the report that is to be submitted to An Coimisiun Pleanala.
ITEM NO. 5. TO FIX A VENUE FOR THE MAY ORDINARY MEETING OF PLENARY
Council.
4719
that the May Ordinary Meeting of Plenary Council will be held on 25th May at 11am in
this meeting will be an in-person meeting and it would not be possible to attend
remotely.
ITEM NO.6 TO CONSIDER AND ADOPT THE ANNUAL REPORT 2025 IN
2001
4720
TheAnnual Report 2025waspublished to the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Mr. Owens, Director of Services introduced the Draft Annual Report for 2025 which
was previously considered at Corporate Policy Group (CPG). He gave an overview
of the contents of the report which is now before the Elected Members. He asked
that it be considered and approved by the Members. Once approved, the report will
be translated, published to the Council website and available in public libraries.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington the Annual
Report 2025 in accordance with section 221(1) (A) of the Local Government Act
2001WaSAGREED.
ITEM NO.7 TO CONSIDER ANDIF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCEATTRAININGINACCORDANCEWITHSECTION142(5A)OF
Page 9 of 32
MinutesofPlenary Meetingheld 27thApril 2026.
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4721
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Turner SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan it waS
AGREED to authorise Cllr. Parsons to attend‘Association of Irish Regions Training
Seminar 2026' at Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal on 25th & 26th
February 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish it was AGREED
to authorise Cllr. Maher to attend 'AlLG Elected Members Training Programme
March 2026 Module 2 - “Overview of New Housing for all Action Plan and Tenancy
Rights Implications for Local Authorities and Councillors' at Radisson Blu Hotel, Sligo
on 21st March 2026 (Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Cllr. Regan it was AGREED
to authorise Cllrs. Turner, Maher & Mc Hugh Ryan to attend 'AILG Annual Training
Conference 2026' at Hotel Minella, Clonmel, Co. Tipperary on 22nd & 23rd April 2026
(Retrospective Approval).
ITEMNO.8 TONOTETHESUMMARYOFPROCEEDINGSOFCONFERENCES
ATTENDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142 (5F) OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4722
Report dated 16th April 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Clr. Reddington the Summary of
Proceedings of conferences attended were NoTED.
ITEMNO.9TOAPPROVETHEATTENDANCEOFADELEGATIONFROM
GALWAYCOUNTYCOUNCILTOATTENDTHEUNESCOGLOBALGEOPARKS
Page10 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026
CERTIFICATECEREMONYANDASSOCIATEDBUSINESSMEETINGSAND
EVENTS.
4723
Reportdated20thApril 2026waspublishedon theExtranetpriortothemeeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish it was AGREED to
authorise Cathaoirleach Cllr. D. Collins to attend UNESCO Global Geoparks
Certificate Ceremony in Paris, France on 27th April 2026. The Director of Service Mr.
Liam Hanrahan and Heritage Officer Ms. Marie Mannion will accompany the
Cathaoirleach to the ceremony.
ITEM NO. 10. TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT - APRIL 2026 IN
ACCORDANCEWITHSECTION136(2)OF THELOCALGOVERNMENTACT2001
(AS AMENDED).
4724
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
The Management Report - April 2026, in accordance with Section 136(2) of the Local
Government Act 2o01 (As Amended) was NoTED.
the Galway Association Coventry 5gth Annual Dinner and Dance with Ms. Katie
O'Connor, Director of Services. She spoke of the importance of maintaining
connections with those that have emigrated from Galway.
Cllrs. Donohue, D. Killilea, D. Connolly, Geraghty & A. Harney raised the
following points and queries:
Compliments were extended to the Gort Area Office staff for the repairs that
were carried out to the road verge and culvert at Cappard, Gort.
Thanks were extended to the organisers of the recent official opening of the
Michael McGrath Sensory Garden in Palace Grounds, Tuam.
The serious level of anti-social behaviour in Ballinasloe was highlighted. The
first meeting of the Anti-Social Behaviour Taskforce has taken place. It was
Page 11 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
asked that resources be allocated to the taskforce to deal with the anti-social
problems.
It was asked that a second Housing Liaison Officer (HLO) be appointed to
Ballinasloe.
 The Council must play its part in remedying the situation in Ballinasloe.
It was asked if those causing anti-social behaviour in Ballinasloe can be
removed.
·A co-ordinated approach to dealing with anti-social behaviour is required.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
·The official opening of the Michael McGrath Sensory Garden in Palace
Grounds, Tuam, will be included in the May Management Report.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
·Assured the Members that the Executive are intensely aware of the problems
in Ballinasloe. The Elected Members were the driving force behind setting up
the Task Force.
The HLOs work on the ground and there is a close relationship between them,
the Tenancy & Estate Management Team and the Gardai.
If tenants do not conform with the conditions as set out in the Tenancy
Handbook this may lead to eviction.
It is difficult to resolve problems that originate from outside Ballinasloe town.
He assured the Members that the Council are aware of and are engaging to
resolve the issues as soon as possible.
ITEM NO. 11 UPDATE ON THE N6 GALWAY CITY RING ROAD
4725
Report was published on theExtranet prior to the meeting.
Mr. Finn, Director of Services gave the Elected Members an update on the N6 Galway
 to    s () o     o a
Page 12 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
decision was subsequently quashed under Judicial Review and An Coimisiun
Pleanala, after reassessing the scheme including assessment of updated and
additional further information have now approved the scheme and the making of the
CPO. The Chief Executive and Director answered questions from Elected Members
including clarification on the respective roles of the County Council, the City Council
and Transport Infrastructure Ireland (Tll). It was clarified that under a Section 85
agreement made between the City Council and County Council, Galway County
Council were appointed the lead authority for the project. The steering group consists
of Tll, Galway City and Galway County Councils.
The Chief Executive expanded that this is the most important piece of infrastructure
for Galway City and County. The 18km road will remove Heavy Goods Vehicles
(HGVs) from the city which will allow the city to grow. This in turn will benefit the
commercial, retail and residential sectors in the wider Galway Metropolitan Area. He
welcomed the positive decision from An Coimisiun Pleanala. He hopes that the ring
procurement and construction.
Cllrs./ Comh. D. Killilea, O Curraoin & Mannion raised the following points and
queries:
· The positive response from An Coimisiun Pleanala was widely welcomed.
The timelines for the project were asked.
Members expressed disappointment with the selected route, citing the
potential displacement of a significant number of families. It was asked
whether the impacted households would be granted planning permission for
alternative accommodation.
Homeowners along the agreed route must be engaged with.
Appreciation was expressed for the work and commitment of Council staff
over the lifetime of the project.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
·Any Judicial Review must be lodged within eight weeks of the notification of
the ACP decision in the local papers
Page 13 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
commence in theperiod 2028to2031.
There has been continuous consultation between landowners and the NRO.
 The GCRR is only part of the solution to traffic congestion in Galway City.
along with BusConnects, Active Travel and public transport.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
on the final route was made by Reserved Function by both City Council and
County Councils. These decisions allowed the process to move forward with
the chosen route.
Cllrs. Welby, Leainde, & Thomas raised the following points and queries:
·People affected by the GCRR were encouraged to contact the Council.
Resolution must be reached with those opposed to the GCRR.
Attention must now be given to addressing the shortcomings of the R336.
The decision has provided clarity for the homeowners affected and this is
welcomed. They must be assisted by the Council.
It was asked what the timelines would be should an appeal be lodged.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
·The Council will be in direct communication with homeowners.
assessment, including consideration of the Climate Act.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
. Letters will issue shortly to property owners impacted by the decision.
· The public are invited to make contact with the Project Office.
·We will seek a mutually agreed pathway forward.
Page14of32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril 2026.
Cllrs. Feeney, Regan & Keane raised the following points and queries:
It was asked if a special unit will be established to carry out engagement with
property owners.
The GCRR will create capacity for other transport solutions.
Those impacted should be accommodated close to their current homes.
It was asked what supports will be offered to ensure that those affected may
remain in their communities.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Two additional senior staff members have been allocated to the National
Roads Office and additional resources will be allocated to this office.
Any subsequent planning applications will be considered on their merits but e
Planning Departments which is a separate statutory process.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
Upgrade works on the R336 were delayed until a decision was made on the
N6 GCRR.
The GCRR will allow Galway to develop sustainably and improve walking and
cycling routes, making it a safer place.
Cllrs./ Comh. Walsh, O Curraoin, King & Hoade raised the following points and
queries:
The decision from An Coimisiun Pleanala is welcomed.
While the Ring Road is needed, the selected route serves only South
Connemara.
It was asked if the N59 to Clifden road is fit for purpose.
Page 15 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
 The key message from the Council is that it maintains an open-door policy for
all those impacted by the ring road.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Expressed his thanks to the Members for their contributions.
The GCRR will allow the city to grow which will facilitate community and
economic gain.
The ring road has the financial support of government.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
There has been a lot of engagement with landowners, especially through oral
hearings. The Project Office will work with them. There is a dedicated website
and the office welcomes engagement from homeowners.
This project represents the collective efforts of many people over the last two
decades.
Work on the design and procurement elements of the project will continue
even if a Judicial Review is lodged. Any subsequent Judicial Review should
not delay the project, as work will proceed in parallel.
ITEM NO. 12 CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE.
4726
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NOTED:
Letter dated 16.12.2025 from Galway County Council to Commission for
Communication Regulation - Resolution letter - Issues with Mobile Phone
Coverage.
Reply to Resolution letter dated 16.12.2025.
Page 16 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld 27thApril 2026.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Jean Brann, County Secretary, Galway County
dated 16.12.26.
Reply to Letter from Jean Brann, County Secretary dated 04.03.2026.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 to An Taoiseach Micheal Martin - Resolution Letter -
Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Letter dated 11.03.2026 from Department of An Taoiseach -
 s
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 to An Taoiseach Micheal Martin - Resolution letter -
Increase provision of Irish Medium Education.
Letter dated 11.03.2026 from Department of An Taoiseach -
Medium Education.
Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory - circulated to
Oireachtas Members.
of Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 - Israeli Setlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Letter dated 10.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Bord Bia -
Resolution - Urgent Meeting to instigate dialogue.
Email dated 15.04.2026 from Michelle Jordan, Senior Agri Food
Communications Executive, Bord Bia - reply to Resolution letter dated
10.03.2026.
Letter dated 10.03.2026 to Minister Martin Heydon - Resolution letter -
Urgent Meeting to instigate dialogue.
Email dated 19.03.2026 from Maria Rigney, Private Secretary to Minister
Heydon - Reply to Resolution letter dated 10.03.2026.
Letter dated 26.01.2026 from Tanya Whyte, Assistant Director/Senior
Planner, Planning and Economic Development, Northern & Western Regional
Page 17 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
forNWRA2020-2032.
Letter dated 07.04.2026 to Mr James Browne, Minister for Housing Local
Government & Heritage - Resolution letter - Short term letting.
Email dated 09.04.2026 from Megan Woods, Private Secretary to Minister
Browne - acknowledgement of Resolution Letter - Short Term Letting.
Letter dated 07.04.2026to Coillte -Resolution letter - CoillteFinancial
Contribution.
Cllrs. L. Harney & Regan raised the following points and queries:
Council correspondence on poor network coverage. A consistent level of
service is required.
3 unsatisfactory responses have been received from ComReg.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
The drafted response to ComReg will be given to Cllr. Regan and Cllr. L.
Harney in advance of it being issued to ComReg.
ITEM 13. QUESTION Cllr. Donohue
4727
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following question to the meeting:
'To ask the Chief Executive to outline for the Council how the new Complaints
Procedure developed by the County and City Management Association in
conjunction with the Ombudsman will be implemented by Galway County Council'.
The following reply issued:
The new Customer Complaints Procedure and Protocol will be implemented through
its inclusion in the Customer Service Action Plan, adopted by the Members on 26th
Page 18 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27thApril2026.
January 2026, which underpins the organisation's commitment to delivering good
customer service. Rollout will take place in 2026, led by the Customer Services
Officers Group, a cross-directorate group ensuring consistent implementation across
all Units. A standardised complaints-tracking system is already in use
organisation-wide, with quarterly reporting to Management Team underway.
are liaisingwith the Ombudsman's Office to enable this module tobehostedwithin
our network so that all staff can complete the training. Galway County Council will
alsoparticipate in the Ombudsman's quarterly ComplaintsStandardsNetwork to
support best practice and strengthen complaint handling across the organisation
ITEM 14. QUESTION CIlr. Cunniffe
4728
Cllr. Cunniffe submitted the following question to the meeting:
To ask the Chief Executive for a detailed updateon negotiations between
Government and Galway County Council to correct the systematic inherent
deficiency in funding we receive and to achieve a commensurate amount of LPT
Equalisation Funding or other monies to allow Galway County Council toprovide a
baseline of services given our geographic area, population, local road network and
otherserviceneeds.
Pleaseincludeinformationonmeetingsheldsubsequentto24thMarchand the
participants, can you also provide a copy of the information GcC presented in any
meetings held.'
The following reply issued:
As the Elected Member is aware, Galway County Council has engaged with the
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH) over a number of
years in relation to the persistent and systemic funding deficit facing the authority.
Page 19 of 32
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld27tnApril2026
In the period up to and including 2026, a number of reports and correspondence
have been issued by Galway County Council to the DHLGH outlining the scale and
implications of this funding deficiency.
More recently, a number of further actions have been undertaken, including the
following:
·Following correspondence issued to the Assistant Secretary (AS) in the
DHLGH on 10 December 2025, a further letter was issued on 16 February
2026 at the request of the Members. This correspondence reiterated the
ongoing funding challenges facing Galway County Council
In this letter, it was highlighted to the DHLGH that at both the Budget 2026
meeting and the January 2026 Plenary meeting, Councillors expressed
resources is "systematically failing County Galway".
On 30 March 2026, a Joint Oireachtas Meeting was convened in the Council
Nineteen Oireachtas Members were invited.
The principal agenda item for the meeting was "to correct the underfunding
allocated to Galway County Council by Central Government".
The presentation focused on
othe extent to which Galway County Council is structurally underfunded
relative to comparator local authorities and national benchmarks,
the impact of ongoing funding shortfalls on the Council's ability to
deliver services; and
key recommendations and the critical next steps required to address
the funding imbalance.
·It was agreed at this meeting that Minister Sean Canney TD would arrange a
meeting with the DHLGH Minister James Browne TD, to further progress
these matters. We await confirmation of this meeting date.
·In addition, the Chief Executive followed up the above correspondence
through a telephone engagement with the Assistant Secretary in the DHLGH.
Page 20 of 32