Minutesof PlenaryMeeting held23rdFebruary2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at ARAS AN CHONTAE, PROSPECT HILL
Monday, 23rd February 2026
CATHAOIRLEACH:
Cllr. D. Collins
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
I LATHAIR FREISIN:
Baill:
Comh. /Cllr. S. Broderick, J. Charity, D. Connolly, M.
Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. O Curraoin, G. Donohue, P.
Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty, T. Grealish, A.
Harney, L. Harney, M. Hoade, C. Keane, D. Kelly, D.
Killilea, P. Killilea, M. Kinane, M. Lee, E. Mannion, J.
McClearn, S. McHugh Ryan, E. F. Parsons, A.
Reddington, M. Regan, N. Thomas, O. Turner, S.
Walsh and T. Welby.
Baill ar line:
Comh. / Cllr. I. Canning, P. Keaveney, M. Leainde, P.
Mac An lomaire, M. Maher, K. McHugh Farag, M.
McNamara,
Oifigh:
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr. L. Hanrahan,
Director of Services, Mr. Michael Owens, Director of
Services, Mr. Uinsinn Finn, Director of Services, Ms.
E. Ruane, Director of Services, Ms. A. Fenton,
Financial Accountant, Mr. D. Mitchell, Director of
Services, Ms. J. Brann Meetings Administrator, Ms.
L. Keady, A/Senior Executive Officer, Mr. M. O
Donnchadha, Oifigeach Forbartha Gaeilge, Ms. H.
Riordan, Staff Officer, Ms. L. O'Donnell, Assistant
Staff Officer.
Page 1 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
Thosnaigh an cruinniu leis an paidir.
The meeting commenced with the Members expressing their sympathies to Cllr.
Gerry King on the passing of his sister Anne, to Cllr. lvan Canning on the passing of
his Uncle PJ Lynch, the family of the late Michael O'Neill former Galway County
Councillor, remembered as a trailblazer for his lifetime of community service and to
the family of the late Harry Collins, Galway County Council employee, who gave 55
years of service to the Council.
As a mark of respect, the meeting was adjourned for 5 minutes.
ITEMNO.1CONFIRMATION OFMINUTES OF THEFOLLOWINGMEETINGS
4675
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Kelly SECONDED by Cilr. McHugh Ryan the minutes of
the Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 26th January were AGREED.
Members raised the following points and queries:
and not in front of the Chamber.
The Council were called upon to act to address a rat infestation in a derelict
house in Loughrea.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane
Committed to discussing the derelict house matter with Cllr. Regan following
the meeting.
ITEMNO.2CONSIDERATIONOFREPORTSANDRECOMMENDATIONS4676
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Comh. Mac An lomaire the
minutes of the Corporate Policy Group held on 1gth January 2026 were NOTED.
Page2of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeeting held23rdFebruary2026
ITEM NO.3 TO CONSIDER THE AUDIT COMMITTEE'S 2025 ANNUAL REPORT
UNDER SECTION 15 LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AUDIT COMMITTEE)
REGULATIONS 2014.
4677
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Feeney SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn the Audit
Committee 2025 Annual Report under section 15 Local Government (Audit
Committee) Regulations 2014 was NoTED.
ITEM NO.4 FILLING OF A CASUALVACANCY ON THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE
REGIONALHEALTHFORUMWESTANDNORTHWEST.
4678
Report dated 10thFebruary 2026was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. P. Killilea it was AGREED
to appoint Cllr. Laurie Harney to the membership of the Regional Health Forum West
and North West.
Cllr. L. Harney thanked the Members for the nomination and looked forward to serving
on the committee, he confirmed his commitment to restoring maternity services at
Portiuncula Hospital.
ITEM NO. 5. TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5A) OF THE
LOCAL GOVERNMNET ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED)
4679
Report dated 16th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
AGREED to authorise Cllrs. Regan, Parsons & Welby to attend LAMA Spring
Training Seminar at The Connaught Hotel, Old Dublin Road, Galway on 28th & 29th
January 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
Page 3 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23"dFebruary2026
authorise Cllrs. Mc Clearn, Hoade, Mc Hugh-Ryan & King to attend AILG February
Training Module - "From Policy to Practice: What Local Authorities in Ireland can
offer to support disabled people and an ageing population" at The Fairways Hotel,
Dundalk on 19th February 2026 (Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Walsh SECONDED by Cllr. Lee it was AGREED to
authorise Cilrs. Kinane & Maher to attend AlLG February Training Module - "From
Policy to Practice: What Local Authorities in Ireland can offer to support disabled
people and an ageing population" at the Hotel Kilkenny on 21st February 2026
(Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn it was AGREED
to authorise Cllrs/ Comh. Cunniffe, O Curraoin, McHugh-Ryan, Kinane, D. Killilea, L.
Harney, King & Welby to attend the Association of Irish Regions Training Seminar
2026 at Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal on 25th & 26th February
2026.
On the PROPOSAL of Comh. O Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. P. Killilea it was
AGREED to authorise Clrs. Hoade & Donohue to attend AILG Annual Training
Conference 2026 at Hotel Minella, Coleville Road, Raheen, Clonmel, Co. Tipperary
on 22nd & 23rd April 2026.
ITEM NO.6TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMEDAPPROPRIATE TO AUTHORISE
THEATTENDANCEATCONFERENCE,MEETINGS,OTHER EVENTSIN
2001 (AS AMENDED).
4680
Report dated 16th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Page 4 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
AGREED to authorise Cllrs. Donohue, Parsons, Mannion, Hoade, Turner & L.
Harney to attend COPE Galway - Domestic Abuse Seminar at Galway County
Council Chambers on 12th February 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
ITEM NO.7 TO NOTE THE SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS OF CONFERENCES
ATTENDEDINACCORDANCEWITHSECTION142(5F)OFTHELOCAL
GOVERNMENTACT2001(ASAMENDED).
4681
Report dated 16th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Comh. O Curraoin the
Summary of Proceedings at conference attended were NoTED.
ITEMNO.8TO APPROVE THE ATTENDANCE OF ADELEGATIONFROM
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL TO_ATTEND THE ST.PATRICK'S DAY
ENGAGEMENTSIN NEW YORK AND BOSTON AND ASSOCIATED BUSINESS
MEETINGSANDEVENTS.
4682
Report dated 17th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Geraghty it was AGREED
to authorise the attendance of a delegation from Galway County Council to attend the
St. Patrick's Day engagements in New York and Boston and associated business
meetings and events.
ITEM NO. 9 TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT -FEBRUARY 2026 IN
ACCORDANCEWITH SECTION 136(2) OF THELOCALGOVERNMENT ACT 2001
(AS AMENDED).
4683
Report dated February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Page 5 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
Cllrs. Kinane, Keane, Reddington, McHugh Ryan, Cunniffe, Mannion & L.
Harney raised the following points and queries:
·Further information and clarity were sought on the proposed wastewater
treatment plant for Craughwell and Clarenbridge.
Clarity was sought regarding the Active Travel works in Oranmore. Safety
concerns were raised around vehicular entry and exit of the estate.
It was asked that the National Transport Authority (NTA) be contacted to
review their specifications relating to Active Travel projects.
·Alternative methods of informing the public of Section 38works were
requested.
. It was enquired if there is a plan and a budget for pothole maintenance.
·It was asked if extra staff will be provided to manage the new 'Vacant Above
the Shop Grant.'
The Inclusive Triathlon Programme' and its partnership with Ability West and
the‘Her Moves Schools Programme'were welcomed.
The Equalisation Fund and Galway County Council's lack of funding must be
addressed to progress projects.
·It was asked when the Active Travel scheme will be re-opened, as there are
noschemes inNorthConamara.
·An update was requested on the progress of the Ballinasloe Fire Station.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
·A meeting was held last week between the Department of Housing & Local
Government, Uisce Eireann and the Council regarding the proposed
wastewater plant in Craughwell and Clarenbridge. It was a positive meeting
and an update on the project is included in the Management Report. He
information.
Extensive hedge cutting works have been carried out.
As far as he is aware, the Safe Routes to School Scheme was opened last
Page 6 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeeting held23rdFebruary2026
Council with the list of works to be carried out. He undertook to follow up with
Cllr. Mannion.
While the contractor may not be on site in Oranmore at the moment, the
Active Travel works are still progressing. He will follow up with the Active
Travel Team.
 The Council goes beyond statutorily requirements in carrying out Section 38
projects. The Council's online consultation portal receives a high volume of
submissions.
 Loughrea Fire Station has been brought to tender for construction. The
Athenry Mechanics Workshop is progressing to Part 8 planning consent.
Galway City Fire Station is included in the capital programme and is currently
at the site selection and preliminary design stage. In addition, upgrade works
for the fire stations at Ballinasloe, Inis Mor and Portumna are included in the
current capital plan and will progress subject to funding approval.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
Additional staff in the housing unit to administer the 'Vacant Above the Shop
Grant' will be sought. It will be looked at in the context of the workforce plan.
Cllrs./Comh. Geraghty, Mac An lomaire, Feeney, D. Killilea, Hoade & Welby
raised the following points and queries:
 It was asked that leniency be shown by the Environment section, to farmers
spreading slurry, due to the recent heavy rain.
Issues relating to road conditions, repeated potholes, and speeding outside
schoolswerehighlighted.
The introduction of stage payments under the Croi Conaithe grant was called
for.
The Part 8 planning notices for 2 affordable housing schemes in Athenry was
warmly welcomed.
Page 7 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
More Affordable Housing schemes are needed, and the grant must be
increased. Neither Letterfrack nor Clonbur have Local Area Plans, rural areas
must not be forgotten.
The works at Kilbannon National School were welcomed.
The launch of Seachtain na Gaeilge and upcoming programme of events was
welcomed.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
·At the Galway Housing Taskforce the Executive has sought increased
discretion within the Affordable Housing Scheme.
 Discussions are taking place between the Department and Local Authorities
on introducing phased payments for the Croi Conaithe grant.
There will be Affordable housing schemes in each MD.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane:
·The Environment section works closely with farmers on a local level. She took
on board the comment on the amount of recent rain and added that water
quality must be maintained.
Cllrs. Regan, Parsons, Leainde, Donohue, D. Connolly, McClearn, Keaveney &
Kelly raised the following points and queries:
·Funding for the repair of footpaths was called for.
·Road pavements should be lower than the footpaths.
Installation of speed ramps at Kilrickle and Carrabane national schools was
A Domestic Abuse refuge is required in the County.
The lack of Elected Member representation on the newly formed Outdoor
Recreation Team was noted. It was asked how Elected Members can engage
with the team.
Page8of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeeting held23rdFebruary2026
The change in the structure of the Regional Health Forum was highlighted.
This change will lead to the diminishing of local powers.
The recent COPE Domestic Abuse training was complimented.
Staffing levels in the Ballinasloe MD must be restored.
The Executive were congratulated on being one of only 3 Local Authorities
nationally to rezone land for residential development.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
 Acknowledged the urgency of providing a domestic refuge and confirmed that
the issue is being examined.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
National Oversight and Audit Commission indicators show that Galway
County Council performs above the national average in road condition
surveys. Our investment in hot-mix pothole repairs has contributed
significantly to this improvement.
The recent wet and cold weather has affected the condition of the roads. We
will write to the Department for an increase in funding for discretionary
spending for roads and footpaths.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
 In line with our strategic workforce plan we are seeking to increase staffing
numbers, which have increased by over 90 from last year.
He thanked the Planning Team and Elected Members for passing of Variation
1 of the County Development Plan.
The Council is doing significant work in the provision of social, affordable and
cost rental housing and the CE acknowledged the work of the Housing Team.
ITEM NO. 10 CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE. 4684
Page9of30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NoTED:
·Letter dated 25.06.2025 from Galway County Council to Department of
Education and Youth - Resolution - Guidelines for Bus Drivers.
Letter dated 26.06.2025 from Niamh Kelly, School Transport Section,
Department of Education and Youth - Reply to Resolution letter dated
25.06.2025
Email dated 05.02.2026 to Niamh Kelly, School Transport Section,
Department of Education and Youth - Follow up email to Resolution Reply
dated26.06.2025
Letter dated 24.09.2025 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne,
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage - Resolution Letter -
Renewable Energy Development.
Letter dated 28.01.2026 from Eoin Colleary, Private Secretary to Minister of
State John Cummins - Reply to Resolution Letter - Renewable Energy
Development.
Letter dated 26.11.2025 to Minister Darragh O Brien, Department of Transport
- Resolution Letter - Dedicated Funding for Footpath Repair.
Email dated 21.01.2026 from Gordon Ryan, Private Secretary to Minister O
Brien, TD - Reply to Resolution Letter - Dedicated Funding for Footpath
Repair.
Letter dated 02.12.2025 from Galway County Council to all TDs - Resolution
Mercosur Trade Deal.
Email dated 20.01.2026 from Deputy John Connolly, TD - Reply to Resolution
Letter to all TDs - Mercosur Trade Deal.
Email dated 23.01.2026 from Aisling O Boyle Private Secretary to Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade Minister McEntee - Reply to Resolution - Mercosur
Trade Deal.
Letter dated 16.12.2025 from Galway County Council to Commission for
Communication Regulation - Resolution - Issues with mobile phone
coverage.
Page 10 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
· Letter dated 30.01.2026 from Garrett Blaney, Chairperson, Commission for
coverage.
 Letter dated 16.12.2025 from Galway County Council to Mr. Patrick O
Donovan, Minister for Culture, Communications & Sport - Resolution - Issues
with Mobile Phone Coverage.
Culture, Communications and Sport - Reply to Resolution letter - Mobile
phone issues.
 Letter dated 15.01.26 from Sligo County Council - Resolution - ratify CETA
and the Investor Court System.
Letter dated 22.01.2026 from Offaly County Council -- Resolution - Oppose
Mercosur Trade agreement.
scooter and E-Bike Legislation
Letter dated 30.01.2026 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne,
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage - Resolution - Housing
for Older Person Grant.
Email dated 04.02.2026 from Jack Savage, Private Secretary, Department of
Housing, Local Government and Heritage - Acknowledgement of Resolution
letter - Older Persons Grant.
Letter dated 03.02.2026 from Galway County Council to Rural Water Unit,
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage - Resolution - Extend
Deadline in funding for Measure A8.
Email dated 04.02.2026 from Jack Savage, Private Secretary, Department of
Housing, Local Government and Heritage- Acknowledgement of Resolution
letter - Extend Measure A8 Funding.
Letter dated 03.02.2026 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne,
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage - Resolution - Increase in
Additional needs payment.
Email dated 04.02.2026 from Jack Savage, Private Secretary, Department of
Housing, Local Government and Heritage - Acknowledgement of Resolution
letter - Additional Needs payment.
Page 11 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
·Letter dated 10.02.2026 from Clare County Council - Resolution - Irish
Beekeepers.
Letter dated 10.02.2026 from Wexford County Council - Resolution - Outlaw
the use of anonymous social media accounts.
Email dated 10.02.2026 from Wicklow County Council - Resolution - CETA
and the Investor Court System.
Letter dated 17.02.2026 from Wexford County Council - Resolution - Irish
Public Bodies - Provision of Insurance.
Letter dated 20.02.23 from Galway County Council to Ms. Fiona Quinn,
Assistant Secretary, Local Government, Department of Housing, Local
Government and Heritage - Resolution - Request for increased Baseline
Funding for Galway County Council (GCC).
The CE and Mr. Owens reminded the Members that the deadline for submitting
Ethical Framework, Annual Declarations is Friday 28th February 2026.
Cllrs. L. Harney, Regan, Reddington, Geraghty, Cunniffe, McHugh Farag,
Welby & Hoade raised the following points and queries:
Disappointment was expressed at the correspondence received from
ComReg in response to a Notice of Motion from the Members, which is
included in the correspondence. There is a lack of accountability from the
sector.
Disappointment and lack of accountability from ESB was spoke of.
The condition of roads and footpaths following utility works was raised. The
responsibility and cost of repairs should not rest with the Council.
 It was asked if any requirements, such as road opening licences, are placed
on utility companies when carrying out works.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
· Undertook to revert to ComReg on their response.
Page 12 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
Where possible Galway County Council will assist the ESB to improve
network provision.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
· The Road Opening Licence system is fully online. It provides a level of
income. There is a new NOAC indicator for the number of inspections for road
opening licences. Currently, approximately half the licences are inspected.
There are exemptions for state agencies, however Uisce Eireann are included
in the system.
ITEM 11. QUESTION Cllr. Geraldine Donohue
4685
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following question to the meeting:
To ask the Chief Executive has Galway County Council applied to Central
Government for the funding required for the purchase, restoration and reopening of
Dunguarie Castle and to provide a copy of same.
The following reply issued:
Galway County Council has sought support from Central Government for the funding
required for the purchase, restoration, and reopening of Dunguaire Castle. The
Council has been in active contact with Government Departments, Ministers, the
OPW, Failte Ireland and the NPwS to progress the project, and a comprehensive
and evidence-based case was prepared highlighting the scale of restoration needs,
relevant public and State bodies have been formally contacted, and the required
correspondence, including the Chief Executive's submissions, has been issued.
Galway County Council now awaits a positive response from the respective
Departments and agencies.
Page 13 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23'dFebruary2026
Overview
Galway County Council has undertaken extensive engagement with Government
Departments, Ministers, Failte Ireland, OPW and NPWS regarding the transfer,
restoration, and reopening of Dunguaire Castle.
Financial support has been sought by the Chief Executive from Central
prepared across Corporate Services, Tourism and Finance.
2. Comprehensive Timeline of Communications, Engagements and Key Actions
2023 - Initiation of Feasibility Work
·Galway County Council commenced formal consideration of Dunguaire Castle
as a potential acquisition and public tourism asset.
Initial engagement took place with procurement and technical advisers to
safety andviabilityof the assetprior toanytransfer.
2024 - Technical Due Diligence, Statutory Engagement and Early External Queries
January -February 2024
Galway County Council commissioned a comprehensive suite of external
technical reports, including building condition surveys, structural and
engineering assessments, fire safety reviews and preliminary cost estimates.
 These reports confirmed that significant capital investment would be required
to address structural, safety and compliance issues prior to any reopening.
February-March2024
regarding the reopening of Dunguaire Castle, confirming that the Castle
diligence, securing funding and resolving ownership matters.
Page 14 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23'dFebruary2026
Engagement took place with external tourism bodies and local authority
counterparts to inform operational and comparative assessment.
April - June 2024
Galway County Council initiated engagement with planning, heritage and
conservation stakeholders, including internal heritage and planning functions,
to confirm statutory obligations associated with works to a protected structure
and national monument.
Early consideration was given to requirements for Ministerial Consent and
engagement with National Monuments authorities.
Late 2024 -Development of Funding Case and Government Engagement
November 2024
Galway County Council engaged Grant Thornton to prepare a Funding
Requirement Memo, setting out:
Capital restoration costs
Operational projections
Cash-flowrequirements
Long-term sustainability considerations
This document formed a core element of the evidence base supporting
requests for State funding.
December 2024
Galway County Council prepared briefing materials and draft correspondence
for engagement with Government Departments, outlining:
oThe national and regional significance of Dunguaire Castle
0
The scale of deterioration and risk associated with continued closure
The inability of the Council to proceed without Government capital
μoddns
2025 - Escalation of External Engagement and Political Support
May - July 2025
Page 15 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23'dFebruary2026
Galway County Council engaged directly with Shannon Group / Shannon
Airport Group, the current owners of Dunguaire Castle, regarding:
The conditions and feasibility of transfer
0
The urgency expressed by Shannon Group in progressing a resolution
O
The risks associated with delay or alternative disposal
A site visit was undertaken involving senior GcC officials to assess access,
safetyandcondition issues.
July 2025
Galway County Council issued formal correspondence to Central Government
seeking capital funding support for the restoration and reopening of Dunguaire
Castle.
Galway County Council would not be in a position to proceed with acquisition
or works.
November 2025
A full schedule of records was compiled, including all external
correspondence, technical reports and funding documentation.
Elected members were provided with factual updates and, where appropriate,
access to due-diligence material on a confidential basis.
December 2025
Galway County Council attended a Ministerial-level meeting with the
Department of Enterprise, Tourism and Employment.
The meeting acknowledged the strategic importance of Dunguaire Castle and
the scale of capital funding required.
Follow-up actions included preparation of formal submissions and requests for
inter-agency support.
Post-meeting correspondence issued by Galway County Council thanked
Ministers and officials and reiterated the Council's funding position.
Page 16 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
2026 - Formal Chief Executive Submissions and Democratic Reporting
January 2026
The Chief Executive of Galway County Council issued formal correspondence
to:
The Office of Public Works (OPW)
O
The National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS)
These letters sought formal support for the acquisition, restoration and
reopening of Dunguaire Castle and requested engagement on potential
funding and statutory pathways.
3. Detailed Review of External Correspondence Seeking Support
Dunguaire Castle project. All correspondence was grounded in technical, financial
and operational evidence and issued at senior management or Chief Executive level.
Support sought included:
Capital funding for restoration and compliance works
Political and departmental support to progress inter-agency coordination
Statutory and technical engagement with OPW and NPwS
4. Table of External Correspondence Issued by Galway County Council
Purpose of
Response /
Date Issued
Issued By
Recipient
Correspondence
Current Status
Draft finalised
Preparation and circulation
Jacqueline
Government
and prepared
of formal funding request
Carroll,
Departments
for issue;
letterseekingStatecapital
13 Nov 2024
Director of
(via draft
subsequent
support for the acquisition,
Services,
"Letter to
CE-level
restoration and reopening
GCC
Government")
issuance
of Dunguaire Castle
followed
Page 17 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
Direct request for An
Jacqueline
Taoiseach's support to
Email issued; no
Carroll,
Office of An
secure5.18mState
written
Director of
Taoiseach (via
funding for Dunguaire
response on
17 Dec 2024
Services,
John Kelly)
Castle;submission offull
record at time
GCC
funding documentation
of review
and invitation tovisit site
Drafting and
recommending formal
CE approval
Jacqueline
Chief
submissiontoAnTaoiseach
process
Carroll,
Executive (for
following confirmation that
referenced;
Director of
onward issue
13 Dec 2024
theDepartmentof
subsequent
Services,
to An
Housing,Local Government
submission
GCC
Taoiseach)
and Heritage had no
issued
availablefundingstream
Request for political
Email issued;
Jacqueline
support and assistance in
meeting sought;
Carroll,
securing Government
no positive
Sean Canney,
Director of
funding; attached business
funding
19 Feb 2025
TD
Services,
casepreviously submitted
response
GCC
to relevant Departments;
recorded at
request for meeting
time of issue
Formal acknowledgement
that GCC is seeking
Jacqueline
national funding;
Position
Government/
Carroll,
confirmation that transfer
articulated; no
Failte lreland
Director of
cannot proceed without
confirmation of
17 Feb 2025
context (reply
Services,
State capital support;
funding support
drafted for CE)
GCC
referenceto potential
recorded
FailteIreland capital
programme as fallback
Formal requestforcapital
Acknowledged;
Central
Galway
fundingsupport toenable
matter
Government /
July 2025
County
acquisition,restorationand
progressed to
Relevant
Council
reopening of Dunguaire
further
Departments
Castle
engagement
Page 18 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
and Ministerial
meeting
Positive
Minister for
engagement;
Galway
Enterprise,
Presentation of funding
support
16 Dec 2025
County
Tourism &
case and strategic
acknowledged;
Council
Employment
justification
follow-up
(meeting)
actions agreed
Department of
Director of
Written follow-up
Awaiting formal
Dec 2025
Enterprise,
Services,
confirming funding request
written
(post-meeting)
Tourism &
GCC
and agreed actions
response
Employment
Chief
Director
Request for support for
Issued;
22 Jan 2026
Executive,
General,
acquisition and restoration
response
GCC
NPWS
of Dunguaire Castle
awaited
Chief
Office of
Request for OPW
Issued;
22 Jan 2026
Executive,
Public Works
engagement and support in
response
GCC
(OPW)
progressing the project
awaited
Indicative
support
Galway
Engagement regarding
Ongoing 2024-
expressed; no
County
Failte lreland
potentialvisitorexperience
2025
financial
Council
and tourism supports
commitment
confirmed
5. Current Position
Galway County Council has completed extensive due diligence and external
engagement in relation to Dunguaire Castle.
Formal requests for State funding and agency support have issued.
The Council is awaiting formal responses from Government Departments and
State bodies.
Galway County Council will continue to engage proactively to progress the
project, subject to securing the necessary funding.
Cllr. Donohue asked why there was no correspondence between 2021 and the
closure of Dunguaire Castle in 2023. She noted that the Dunguaire Castle website
Page 19 of 30
MinutesofPlenaryMeetingheld23rdFebruary2026
references Galway County Council. No funding has been set aside in the National
DevelopmentPlan for theCastle.
Cllr. P. Killilea added that he attended a recent meeting with Minister Burke, Failte
Ireland, the Chief Executive, Director of Services Mr. Owens and Oireachtas
Members, at which Minister Burke gave a commitment on the future of the castle.
The Chief Executive stated that the correspondence as provided by Mr. Owens
shows the work that has taken place to date. The Members will be notified as soon
as there is an update.
ITEM12.NOTICEOFMOTION
4686
Cllr. Karey McHugh Farag submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
GalwayCountyCouncil callson theGovernmenttoamend theIsraeli Settlements in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Prohibition of Importation of Goods) Bill to
include theprohibitionof trade inservice.
The inclusion of services is in accordancewith the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice and the Resolution which Ireland co-sponsored at the
UnitedNationalGeneralAssembly.
Furthermore, this Council urges the Government to enact the legislation in full before
the end of Spring 2026.
Cllr. McHugh Farag spoke on her motion, thanking the Local Palestinian Action
Group for the work they have carried out. She explained that trade in services should
be prohibited along with that of goods.
Cllrs. Kelly, McClearn, Leainde, D. Connolly, Geraghty supported Cllr. McHugh
Farag's motion. Cllr. D. Connolly outlined that while Comh. O Curraoin had left the
meeting momentarily, he had also indicated that he was in support of the said
motion. It was asked that the delegation travelling to New York raise this issue during
their trip and that the motion be copied to the Oireachtas Members.
Page 20 of 30