Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16u February 2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY
COUNCIL
Monday 16th February 2026 at 11.00 a.m.
CATHAOIRLEACH:
Cllr. David Collins
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
Baill:
Comh./Cllr. , S, Broderick, I Canning, D. Connolly, M.
Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. O Curraoin, G. Donohoe, P.
Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty, T. Grealish, A.
Harney, L. Harney, M. Hoade, C. Keane, P. Keaveney,
D. Kelly, D. Killilea, P. Killilea, M. Kinane, M. Leainde,
M. Lee, E. Mannion, J. McClearn, K. McHugh Farag,
S. McHugh Ryan, M. McNamara, Dr. E. Parsons, A.
Reddington, M. Regan, N. Thomas, T. Welby
Oifigh:
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Ms. E. Ruane,
Director of Services, Mr. M. Owens, Director of
Services, Mr. U. Finn, Director of Services, Ms. V.
Loughnane, ADirector of Services, Mr. B. Corcoran,
A/Senior Executive Planner, Ms. R. Wilson, Graduate
Planner, Ms. R. Dowd, Graduate Planner, Ms. J.
Brann, Meetings Administrator, Ms. A. Power, Senior
Staff Officer, Mr. S. Keady, Assistant Staff Officer
Apologies:
L. Hanrahan, Director of Services; Comh/Cllr. G. King, J.
Charity, P. Mac an lomaire, O. Turner & S. Walsh
Cllr. D. Collins welcomed everyone to Meeting.
Votes of Sympathy
Cllr. M. Hoade wished to extend her sympathies to Cllr. Gerry King on the
bereavement of his sister Anne in New York.
Cllr. J. McClearn wished to express his sympathies with the family of the late Michael
O'Neill, who was a former member of Galway County Council from 1991-1999.
An Comh. T. O Curraoin wish to extend his sympathies to the Kearney Family on the
death of Patrick.
Minutes ofSpecial Council Meeting held on 16thFebruary2026
All Members wished to be associated with the expressions of sympathy.
Cllr. M. Regan wished to highlight that the speakers were not working on their side
of the chamber, and it was something that he had raised previously.
Cathaoirleach D. Collins reminded the Members that they were here today for
Special Meeting to consider Chief Executive's (CE) Report on submissions received
on Variation No. 1 of the County Development Plan 2022-2028. He referred to
Workshop held on 06th February 2026 which was very beneficial for the Members.
He reminded the Elected Members of the provisions of Part 15 of the Local
Government Act and the Code of Conduct for Councillors that provides the Ethical
Framework for local government including provision for the disclosure of pecuniary
or other beneficial interests or conflicts of interest. It was noted that Councillors must
disclose at a meeting of the local authority any pecuniary or other beneficial interest
or conflict of interest (of which they have actual knowledge) they or a connected
in the discharge of its functions, and which comes before the meeting. The
Councillor must withdraw from the meeting after their disclosure and must not vote
aspect influence the decision making of the Council. Cllrs. A. Reddington and M.
Regan advised that they may have a Conflict of Interest during the proceedings and
Members noted comments on Conflict of Interest.
CE. L. Conneally expressed thanks to the Forward Planning team for work done to
date on Variation No. 1. He stated that the Members would be aware that housing
was the Government's no. 1 priority and as such a very clear indication and direction
was given that Local Governments must act to ensure that Development Plans have
identified sufficient land for housing development purposes. He noted that the
Variation process was instigated on receipt of Section 28 Guidelines and revised
       b  
amendment of County Development Plan to give effect to same. He noted that this
Variation was specifically focused on residential development only.He noted the
as part of initial County Development Plan process, which would allow for the
actioning of the Minister's July guidelines and direction.
Ms. Loughnane, Senior Planner advised the Members that they had received CE
Report on 19/01/2026 and referenced a workshop which was held on 06/02/2026.
Variation was on public display from 20/11/2025 - 23/12/2025. During that time, 46
no. valid submissions were received, and all the submissions were available to be
viewed online. She advised that there were 3 no. appendices appended to the CE
Report asfollows:
2
MinutesofSpecial Council Meeting heldon 16thFebruary2026
Appendix A - Settlement Capacity Audit
Appendix B - List of valid submissions
Appendix C - List of late submissions
To consider the Chief Executive's Report on the
Submissions received to Variation No. 1 of the Galway
County Development Plan 2022-2028
4674
Ms. Loughnane advised that they would be going through the OPR Submission first.
GLW C200-40 - OFFICE OF THE PLANNING REGULATOR
Pgs 5-7
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in these submissions and
read CE Response and Recommendation.
Summary
The Office of the Planning Regulator has provided comments on Proposed Variation
No.1 to the Galway County Development Plan 2022 - 2028. The submission notes
that that Recommendations issued by the OPR relate to clear breaches of the
relevant legislative provisions, of the National or Regional policy framework and/or
of the policy of Government, as set out in the Ministerial Guidelines under Section
28. As such, planning authorities are requested to implement or address
provisions.
Overview
The submission outines that Variation includes changes to the CDP following the
publication of the section 28 NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements
(2025) (Housing Growth Guidelines) and welcomes the approach to facilitate the
immediate development of Residential Phase 2 lands with regard to the Galway
Metropolitan Area, the Key Towns and tier 2 and tier 3 towns. The submission also
sets out that recommendations are made in relation to the Settlement Capacity Audit
(SCA) and to ensure residential standards in Garraun, in particular in the vicinity of
          
recommendations are then made under the following themes.
1.
Implementation of the Housing Growth Requirements
The submission outlines that the approach taken by Galway County Council provides
buisnoh aui jo z pue l sesoalgo pue Kollod ylim aus u! puel pauoz Auaions
Growth Guidelines, while also ensuring a pipeline of land for development well
beyond the lifetime of the plan but raises concerns with the SCA and lack of details
regarding capacity of Residential Phase 2 lands in lower tiers and settlements. In
this regard, the Ofice recommends a focus on lands within the MASP or lands in
higher tier settlements which are accessible to public transport and active travel
3
MinutesofSpecial Council Meeting held on16thFebruary2026
modes, and which are without infrastructure or flood risk constraints, deliverable
during the lifetime of the plan.
The submission calls for provision of additional information including extent of zoned
lands (Residential Phase 1 and Phase 2); housing yield; infrastructure capacity and
constraints. The submission states that this will enable the prioritisation of
infrastructure investment and delivery for all settlements with Residential Phase 2
lands inclusive of Phase 2 lands in the five small growth towns and seven small
growth villages. While some of this information was indicated previously within the
CE's Report, it would benefit from being drawn together in a revised core strategy
tableandSCA.
u u! palielap jauny ae asaul 'sdew vos au joy buipeus snoo pue puabal
recommendationbelow.
Recommendation 1-Core Strategy table and Settlement Capacity
Audit
Having regard to the statutory requirements for the preparation of a core
strategy and the implementation of the housing growth requirements, and in
particular to:
Section 10(2A) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended
(Act) for the preparation of the development plan core strategy:
the Development Plans, Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2022);
the NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements (2025) (Housing
Growth Guidelines), including policy objectives 1,2 and section 2.4 to
incorporate the objectives of the Housing Growth Guidelines into
development plans; and
NPO 101, 102 and 103of the NPF to consider the serviceability of land
zoned for development,
thePlanning Authorityisrecommended to:
i.
Plan 2022-2028 (County Development Plan) to ensure all statutory
requirements under section 10(2A) of the Act are included;
ii.
provide details of on the quantum (ha), housing yield (units), and
density of Residential Phase 2 lands for each settlement, including
the lower tier towns and villages;
ili.
reviewthe Settlement Capacity Audit (SCA) tables to ensure the
legend and commentary is consistent and accurate in terms of 
accessibility to water and wastewater network, all transport modes
and active travel network, road access and proximity to public
footpaths and necessary social infrastructure; and
iv.
review the Residential Phase 2 lands in the proposed Variation to
ensure the strategy prioritises serviced or readily serviceable lands in
areas of high demand such as the Metropolitan Area, Key Towns and
4
MinutesofSpecial Council Meeting held on 16thFebruary2026
larger settlements within the Settlement Hierarchy of the County
Development Plan.
Planning Authority is advised to engage with all relevant prescribed
bodies to the review of the SCA, and also to review the SCA maps to provide
clarity to legend colour codes and shading applied to all the settlement maps.
Chief Executive Response
(i) Chapter 2 Core Strategy, Settlement Strategy and Housing Strategy of the County
Development Plan sets out the Core Strategy for the County. It is intrinsically linked
to the evidence presented within that chapter, therefore it is considered that the Core
Strategy should not be updated in isolation without a comprehensive review of the
Plan and growth strategy for the County. Furthermore, the absence of an updated
Regional Strategy copper fastens this opinion. However, to give effect to the Section
28 Housing Growth Requirements, the Housing Need and Demand Assessment
(HNDA) has been reviewed and updated. As such, the Minister's additional housing
growth figures have been incorporated into this document, while preserving the
authenticity of the Core Strategy. The revised housing figures are underpinned in the
HNDA. In addition, Residential Phase 2 lands have been effectively released across
all zoned setlement tiers in the County to provide a greater degree of choice and
flexibility for the provision of housing which is in keeping with the overall objective of
the Guidelines.
Table 2.9 in Chapter 2 of the CDP has been updated in the Housing Need and
Demand Assessment. This will be updated in Chapter 2 along with the Core Strategy
during the CDP statutory review.
(i) A Table titled Residential Phase 2 lands has been included in the SCA
Appendix A.
(i) The Settlement Capacity Audit now contains additional maps to show the
Residential Phase 1/Phase 2 zonings. In addition, clarity has been provided with
respect to the existing Local Transport Plans that are in place for a number of
settlements which have a particular emphasis on Active Travel and include priority
of measures to enhance pedestrian connectivity within each settlement. Other active
travel projects have been referenced in the SCA.
Additional detail has been provided from Uisce Eireann with respect to Water Supply
andWastewater.
(iv) The SCA at Appendix A now highlights (with asterix) the most sequential
Residential Phase 2 zoned lands in each of the settlements identified within the
SCA (MASP; Key Towns; Area of Strategic Potential and Self-Sustaining Growth
Towns). This prioritises serviced or readily serviceable lands in the areas of high
demand.
Chief Executive Recommendation
(i)
No Change
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
5
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
(i)
See Table of Residential Phase 2 lands in SCA at Appendix A. This
provides clarity to the SCA.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
Hoade and agreed by the Members.
(ii)
See additional clarification to Settlement Capacity Audit at Appendix A.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. P. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
C. Keane and agreed by the Members.
(iv)
See additional clarification to Settlement Capacity Audit at Appendix A.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. L. Harney, seconded by Cllr.
J. McClearn and agreed by the Members.
2.
Residential density and integration of transport infrastructure at
Garraun
The OPR welcomes the recognition of the important role of the Galway Metropolitan
Area and notes that the SCA identifies 21 hectares of Residential Phase 2 lands in
Garraun in proximity to Oranmore train station. The submission also welcomes the
revised insertions in table 15.1 but recommends specifying a higher density which
align with the Compact Settlements Guidelines and specifically referencing lands in
close proximity to the public transport node at Oranmore train station as outlined
below.
Recommendation 2-Residential Density and land use transport
integration at Garraun
Having regard to the integration of transport orientated development
with land use planning, and in particular to:
 NPO 10 of the NPF relating to compact and sequential patterns of growth;
NPO 97 of the NPF relating to the creation of new sustainable
communities at greenfield locations in association with major public
transport investment;
section 3.3.1 of the Sustainable Residential Development and Compact
Settlement, Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2024) (Compact
Settlements Guidelines); and
the National Development Plan 2021-2030 which identifies that funding
supports for the further development of commuter rail in Galway, with
significant track and station works proposed for Oranmore,
the Planning Authority is recommended to update the residential
densities specifying appropriate ranges based on Compact Settlements
6
MinutesofSpecial Council Meetingheldon16thFebruary2026
Guidelines at section 3.3.1 Cities and Metropolitan (MASP) areas and in
particular review the lands in close proximity to the Oranmore train station.
Chief Executive Response
Table 15.1 of the Proposed Variation commits to accord with relevant guidance. In
addition, it is stated that all development proposals shall be assessed having regard
to the above residential density table and the Guidelines which provide more
flexibility in relation to density ranges. Reference to the Urban Framework Plan
(UFP) lands at Garraun and Briarhill have now also been added to the table.
Chief Executive Recommendation
Update Table 15.1 to include (Text in blue)
MASP
Town
30 or Site
Centre/lnfill/Brownfield
Specific
Outer
25--30 30 - 35
Suburban/Greenfield
(at locations adjacent
to open rural
countryside) Higher
densities may be
facilitated in the Urban
Framework Plans e.g
at Garraun and
Briarhill
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. C. Keane, seconded by Cllr.
D. Killilea and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-16 - NATIONAL TRANSPORT AUTHORITY (NTA)
Pg 9
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Local Transport Plans and Settlement Capacity Audit
The submission references the Local Transport Plans for Ballinasloe, Tuam,
Loughrea, Athenry and Gort which the NTA worked in conjunction with Galway
County Council during the LAP making process. It notes that the LTPs have informed
the LAPs for the towns setting out a framework for transport measures across all
modes and supporting the integration of land use and transport.
The submission then refers to RPO 6.2.8 of the RSES which states that policies,
objectives and measures which emerge from LTPs shall be incorporated into
Development Plans/LAPs. Submission also references the NPF Implementation
Housing Growth Requirements and to Section 2.4 Tiering and Phasing of Lands
which state:
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Planning Authorities should prepare an SCA in order to identify zoned
Undertake an SCA to identify zoned serviced/serviceable lands with
residential development potential in all relevant settlements, specifying
enabling infrastructure, for example wastewater network or treatment
infrastructure, energy infrastructure, roads or public transport capacity and in
the case of enabling social infrastructure, schools provision and community
facilities.
The submission notes that the Proposed Variation includes an updated SCA. The
NTA is of the view that the SCA should be amended and strengthened to more
closely reflect the requirements identified which look to highlight infrastructural
requirements and to specify enabling infrastructure for transport required to service
lands. Regarding the settlements of Ballinasloe, Tuam, Loughrea, Athenry and Gort
this should refer to the proposed transport measures relevant to the subject sites as
defined in their LTP's/LAPs and should be broadened to cover all modes including
cycling and public transport requirements to ensure that any assessment of transport
requirements are not solely focused on providing access by car. NTA considers that
such an approach would align with RPO 6.2.8 of the RSES as set out by ensuring
that the LTP's adequately inform planning framework documents.
NTA Recommendations
The NTA recommend, in the interests of sustainable development, in order to avoid
            
Settlement Capacity Audit be amended to more adequately 'highlight infrastructural
the Section 28 Guidelines. This should consider all transport modes.
In the case of Ballinasloe, Tuam, Loughrea, Athenry and Gort, the Settlement
sansea podsuen au a pal pue paui aa pinous odsue o na kede
set out in LTP's.
Lands at Garraun
has taken to focus growth in the Metropolitan Area, Key Towns, Place of Strategic
Potential and Self-Sustaining Towns and within existing settlement boundaries.
Submission states that additional wording to policy objective GUFP 1 of the Garraun
UFP could be at odds and that further clarity should be provided as to whether
Residential Phase 2 lands at Garraun are intended for development during the
lifetime of the plan. It is also noted that the Residential Phase 2 lands at Garraun are
assessed as ‘Orange' in the SCA against transport criteria. This implies that
transport infrastructure will be required to make these lands serviceable, however,
no requirements have been identified in the accompanying notes (note comments
above about updating SCA regarding infrastructural requirements/specify enabling
        s   s
Oranmore Train Station and the 1A BusConnects service will operate along the
northern boundary of the lands. Access to these public transport services will be
criticai to supporting sustainable development in this area.
facilitated in the Urban Framework Plans'which would apply to Garraun. It is the
view of the submission that this statement should be strengthened to state that
'higher densities will be encouraged and facilitated at Garraun' The rationale behind
8
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16t February 2026
this change is Garraun's direct access to the rail network and the road network for
access tobus services.
NTA Recommendations
Further clarity should be provided as to whether the Residential Phase 2 lands
at Garraun are intended for development during the lifetime of the
Development Plan.
The Settlement Capacity Audit for lands at Garraun should be reviewed and
amended to adequately 'highlight infrastructural requirements' and'specify
'enabling infrastructure' for transport as required under the Section 28
Guidelines. This should consider all transport modes.
Further consideration should be given to the potential to maximising densities
at Garraun. It is recommended that the following is included in Table 15.1:
'higher densitieswill be encouraged and facilitated at Garraun' given its direct
access to the rail network and the road network for access to bus services.
Chief Executive Response
The submission from the NTA is welcomed and its contents are noted.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 Recommendation 1(ii).
Noted.
The proposed wording of Policy Objective GUFP 1 inserted as part of the Proposed
Variation is considered sufficient and appropriate to satisfy the requirements of the
Section 28 Guidelines. The Variation seeks to permit appropriate development on
Residential Phase 2 lands in accordance with proper planning and sustainable
development.
The lands in question to the west of the Garraun UFP will require future road and
footpath upgrades.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
Recommendation 1(ii).
The wording of the Proposed Variation in combination with wording in the existing
Garraun UFP is considered sufficient in this instance, where a degree of flexibility
will apply.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 Recommendation 1(ili).
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-23 -TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE IRELAND (TI)
Pg 12
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Tll in their submission reminds the Council of the issues pertaining where Residential
Phase 2 lands adjoin the national road network outside the 50 - 60 kph reduced
urban zones.
9
MinutesofSpecial Council Meeting held on 16thFebruary2026
The submission notes that direct access or intensification of direct access to a
national road conflict directly with the provisions of official policy included in the
Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines around national roads as well as the Galway
CountyDevelopmentPlan.
Tll submitted previous observations on these sites during the preparation of the
County Development Plan/Local Area Plans. The submission states that the opinion
of Tll remains the same as the previous submissions. The submission notes that
there are Residential Phase 1 lands and Residential Phase 2 lands which are
adjacent to the N59 National Road, to the northwest of Clifden at a location where
Tll records indicate a 1ookph speed limit applies. According to the submission,
access to the national road to the identified lands outside the 50-60kph urban speed
limit area conflicts directly with the Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines and Policy
Objectives of the County Development Plan.
The submission states that Tll's position is that the zoning designations should be
reviewed to ensure the zoning designations and access requirements accord with
the provisions of official policy.
Chief Executive Response
The Chief Executive welcomes the submission of the Tll and notes the concerns
raised with respect to the national road network outside where reduced urban speed
limits apply.
Tl's comments with respect to the Clifden land use zoning map is noted, however,
changes to the land use zoning map do not form part of the proposed variation.
Nonetheless, the concerns highlighted are noted and the local authority will seek
further advice and guidance from Tll at the appropriate juncture.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. T. Welby, seconded by Cllr.
M. Hoade and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-42 - DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND YOUTH
Pg 12-14
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The Department of Education and Youth notes and considered the Proposed
Variation.
The submission outlines the context of future population trends and the potential of
the trends to impact on school place requirements. The submission refers to the
population growth in the current CDP and the increase from the 2016 to 2022 census
population in the Galway County area. The submission also refers to the Housing
Supply Targets proposed to be included in Section 2.3.8 of the CDP by way of the
10
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
outlined the submission notes that a significant increase in population would result
in major additional requirements for school provision in County Galway by 2040.
The submission also notes that Variation emphasises directing growth to the Galway
MASP but as no settlement-level projections are provided, the Department will
reassess school place needs once detailed future growth targets are published. The
with a preference to extend existing facilities. The Department requests that land
buffers be protected around existing schools and that sites for future schools be
Department  takes place when locations of future growth projection become
available.
The submission outlines key points in relation to new school sites, that schools
with enabling infrastructure (roads, utilities, active travel links) delivered in advance.
The submission notes that Table 15.1 has been amended, and that the variation
notes it is considered there is sufficient lands to meet the targets in the Core Strategy
and updated HNDA and Housing Strategy.
Department and National Council for Special Education (NCSE) continue to plan for
new special classes and special schoois and may need further sites in Galway. The
Department seeks explicit support in the plan for SEN accommodation.
The submission stresses the importance of ongoing engagement with the Planning
Authority to ensure adequate land is zoned for future school provision, noting that
unforeseen events (e.g., Ukrainian crisis) may require reassessment of school place
provision.
Finally, the submission welcomes the continued engagement with the Planning
Authority to ensure sufficient land is zoned for the development of new and existing
schools.
Chief Executive Response
welcomed.
The Housing Strategy and HNDA has been revised as part of this Variation. This
informs and underpins the housing requirements for County Galway. The renewed
emphasis of Residential Phase 2 lands is incorporated into the Variation to ensure
compliance with the Section 28 Guidelines. The Core Strategy remains in effect as
adopted in 2022.
It is noted that requirements for additional school places may lead to the need for
new schools or extensions to existing schools including SEN. Galway County
educational capacity. It is noted that Chapter 11 of the CDP contains Policy
Objectives and supporting narrative for educational facilities in the County.
11
MinutesofSpecial Council Meetingheldon16thFebruary2026
Any identification of lands for schools including land buffers could be addressed
through the CDP review. This has previously been raised by the Department of
Education and is noted by the Planning Authority.
It is considered that there are sufficient lands currently zoned in the County to
facilitate educational development. In addition, it should also be noted that
educational facilities are permitted in principle/open to consideration on multiple
zonings as per the County Development Plan.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. M. Hoade, seconded by Cllr.
M. Regan and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-26 - OFFICE OF PUBLIC WORKS (OPW)
Pg 14-15
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The OPW welcomes the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Variation No.1
and note the submission specifically concerns flood risk management.
MapReviewProgramme
The submission outlines that in certain areas physical changes may have occurred
since the preparation of the flood maps under the National CFRAM Programme that
would affect the watercourse and floodplains, and hence the Flood Zones. The
submission notes new evidence may become available and the OPW reviews and
updates flood maps on an on-going basis. The submission notes flood maps are
currently under review in Tuam and Gort and request Galway County Council to note
that mapping in these areas may change.
outlines the results from this review. The Submission requests the Council to review
the impact of any increase in flood extents on zonings and developments.
Oranmore
The submission notes the proposal to rezone lands from Open Space/Recreation &
Amenity to Town Centre. While these lands lie outside the updated CFRAM
present-day extents, they fall within the mid-range and high-end future flood
scenarios. Galway County Council are requested to outline how the potential risk will
be mitigated.
ClimateChange
The submission outlines that a number of residential lands in Oranmore and
Garraun could be at potential risk of flooding in the mid-range and high-end future
of flood risk, that an appropriate flood risk assessment is carried out and there is
appropriate justification for any decision as set out in the Guidelines.
12
MinutesofSpecial Council Meetingheldon 16thFebruary2026
Chief Executive Response
The submission from the OPW is noted.
Map ReviewProgramme
Noted. The lands in Oranmore subject to Variation No. 1 are demonstrated as being
situated withinFlood Zone C.
Oranmore
The lands in Oranmore subject to Variation No. 1 are demonstrated as being situated
within Flood Zone C. Parts of the subject lands are identified as being at risk under
the mid-range and high-end future scenario flood extents. Climate change
considerations have been integrated into the existing provisions of the County
demonstrate compliance with.
ClimateChange
The points raised are noted.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
Ms. Loughnane made Members aware of the existing policy objectives in the CDP
Cllr. P. Feeney stated that there was a lack of clarification for Oranmore as per
OPW's submission. He enquired as to whether the map used in the Variation was
the most up-to-date map. In response, Ms. Loughnane advised that this was the
most up-to-date map and Planning Authority work of the most updated maps
available. Cllr. P. Feeney stated that for CDP review, the high-risk scenario mapping
Oranmore would be stifled for development were these high-range scenario maps
to be proven accurate. Cllr P Feeney enquired how this potential scenario would be
managed. In response, Ms. Loughnane advised that the OPW mapping was
concerning as Climate-Change has been embedded into the High and Medium
range scenario maps. Ms Loughnane advised that the OPW flooding data are used
to determine the mapping rectification as part of the Variation.
Concerning the CDP Review point, Ms Loughnane noted that only the most up-to-
date maps from the OPW were to be used during this process, with land zoned
accordingly.
Cllr. D. Geraghty opined that the OPW were blaming Climate Change and enquired
as to what the OPW were doing to prevent Climate Change. He opined that they
reports and criticizing without doing anything tangible about it. He further added that
the onus was being squared onto Galway County Council when it is within their remit
and referred to the long-awaited flood-relief works to be installed by OPW in
13
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16thFebruary 2026
Ballinasloe. In response, Ms. Loughnane noted there were flood defense schemes
in place in parts of the county, including Dunkellin, Ballinasloe.
Cllr. J. McClearn enquired if land within Flood Zone C may be used as Open Space
for Residential Development. Ms. Loughnane advised that Flood Zone A and B is
zoned open space and, in most instances, could not be used as the only provision
of open space within a development.
An Comh. O'Curraoin opined that there were a lot of low-lying areas like Oranmore
in the county and the tides were coming in very high in a lot of places. He suggested
that barriers needed to be installed into flood risk areas to prevent future flooding
using the example of Spiddal as a place that actioned this flood-prevention effort.
He noted that the preparation for flooding needed to be improved upon and used
example of the Netherland's success with same. He further stated that he had read
recently that flood relief works at the Claddagh, Galway could not be installed until
at least 2030 due to roads issues. He opined that this was not acceptable, and that
when so many properties were at risk, there shouldn't be such trivial issues
preventing Elected Politicians from doing something about these issues in a timelier
manner.
Cllr. Donoghue queried as to the publication frequency of the OPW maps and
whether they were being updated in real-time following flood events. She opined
that in the past there was a huge amount of maintenance done on drainage systems
un paspe aueuybno 'sn 'shepmou buuaddey lou sm Kiaeunpoun yoiym
maps are updated at the OPW's discretion, as often as possible. She noted that
Claregalway's FRM had been finalized 18 months ago, while updating mapping was
being worked on for Gort and Loughrea currently. She noted that these Flood Maps
were constantly being monitored and updated, and that Galway County Council's
Flood Mapping Consultants always use the most updated mapping possible. In
response to Cllr. Donoghue's query, Ms. Loughnane advised that if there was a
significant flood event, it would take those and include them in the maps, and they
are updated constantly. Cllr. G. Donoghue sought to know whether these maps
assessed why flooding events occurred, or whether a lack of maintenance may be
a major factor for same. Ms. Loughnane advised that there were many types of
flooding, with a broader scope of variables of what may cause specific flood events.
 y n  s  r saal   i  nb   l
to be accurate. Ms. Loughnane noted that she was not aware of the details such as
sea level which featured in the modelling used by the OPW for the devisal of the
maps.
down the line and were not preparing to action any of the events that they are
predicting. Ms. Loughnane reiterated numerous flood relief schemes that were
constructed/under construction around the county, further reiterating that
environmental considerations were the factors constraining progress of these
schemes where applicable.
Cllr. C. Keane suggested that this important issue be addressed at another meeting.
14
Minutesof Special Council Meeting held on 16ihFebruary2026
Cllr. M. Connolly referred to the first meeting held with OPW in relation to flooding in
Ballinasloe which took place over 11 years ago. He stated that Engineers had
advised what the problems were at the time and 11 years on, studies were still being
carried out. He acknowledged that there were flood barriers in place and queried
the length of time it takes to carry out such studies.
CE L Conneally noted that it was a good thing to have access to CFRAMs and
mapping of FRAs, as it allows forecasting of flood events. He noted that the
Executive's perspective was very strong in ensuring that mistakes of the past
regarding flooding do not occur again, ie.avoidance of development on flood plains.
He noted that flood schemes are a key priority for Galway County Council as well as
every local authority.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Geraghty, seconded by Cllr.
L. Harney and agreed by the Members.
GLW:
C200-24
BROCK
MCCLURE
 PLANNING
AND
DEVELOPMENT CONSULTANTS ON BEHALF OF UDARAS NA
GAELTACHTA
Pg 16-24
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Comprehensive submission received which overall supports and welcomes the
proposed variation. The submission notes that Udaras na Gaeltachta are a key
stakeholder of the development plan variation process and should be addressed
accordingly. The first section of the submission outlines the key points of the
submission, which will be summarized by topic. Overall, Udaras welcome the
activation of R2 zoned lands.
Udaras na Gaeltachta
This section outlines the background, goals and objectives of Udaras na Gaeltachta.
Gaeltachta aims to achieve this objective by funding and fostering a wide range of
language, cultural and community-based activities.
The Galway Gaeltacht Areas and Language Planning Areas
This section lists the 6 Gaeltacht Areas of Galway as outlined in the County
Development Plan, alongside the 9 Language Planning Areas (LPAs) (also
identified under the Gaeltacht Act 2012. In general terms, the primary goal of these
LPAs is to increase the use and vitality of the Irish language.
Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe and Challenges Faced
This section of the submission is to be read in conjunction with Appendix 1, outlines
the detailed population change analysis in the relevant LPAs.
Popuiation Change - National & Gaeltacht Context
15
Minutesof Special Council Meeting held on 16thFebruary2026
Submission gives a brief overview of the population increase within the country as a
The submission also notes the increase of Gaeilge speakers above the age of 3
within the Gaeltacht areas. This section of the submission outlines the population
changes and demographic changes within the overall 8 No. of Gaeltacht regions,
noting a general population increase.
Population Change in the Galway County Context
This section of the submission focuses on the demographic profile in Galway County
more specifically, analysing the language planning areas and county as a whole. It
notes a higher increase in population than the national average. In the LPAs the age
profile is generally older. Breaking down the demographics, the submission argues
that the trends in the overall age profile are intrinsically linked to outward migration
of the younger population within LPAs. This submission then examines the 5
settlements which are in the County Gaiway Gaeltacht, which include: Baile Chlair;
Bearna; Maigh Cuilinn; An Spideal and An Cheathru Rua.
All of these settlements have had population increase, with the exception of An
a peninsula; therefore, it is important that the unique geographical topography,
strategic position, and land area designated by the LPA should be carefully
considered in residential forecasts, infrastructure, and spatial planning efforts. The
submission then examines the age profile of the key Gaeltacht settlements, noticing
that these setlements have a much younger age profile. The submission states that
this is likely due to a lack of infrastructure and services in these areas compared to
the wider LPA areas. To avoid outward migration of this younger generation,
increased housing and improved services are now fundamental requirements.
Housing Provision Gaeitacht na Gaillimhe
The submission then turns its attention to the housing market within the Gaeltacht.
The submission notes that housing in these areas peaked between 2001 - 2010 and
has since lagged. The submission compares the amount of housing units built post
2016 with the population increase and concludes that population increase is
outpacing housing delivery. The submission notes the continuing decrease of daily
Gaeilge usage within the Gaeltacht. The submission argues that the overall difficulty
of housing nationally, and the unique issue of holiday homes within the Gaeltacht, is
putting undue pressure on young Gaeilge speakers to emigrate from Gaeilge
speaking locations, effecting the use of Gaeilge as the community language. The
submission notes that in the 20 Year Strategy for the Irish Language 2010-2030,
support must be upheld through planning laws. The submission believes that the
issues of vacancy and dereliction in these areas requires significant attention. The
submission asserts that it is clear from the statistics analysed housing is a challenge
in the Gaeltacht, which is a critical challenge for Udaras. The submission states that
it is a fundamental goal of Udaras that all opportunities for the delivery of housing
are recognised and supported with adequate infrastructure and government support
(to include Udaras). The release of R2 lands in the 5 key settlements is welcomed
but consideration should also be given to supporting lower tier settlement in the
delivery of housing along with adequate supports in tackling vacancy in the Gaeltacht
region.
Use of the Irish Language
16
MinutesofSpecialCouncil Meetingheldon16thFebruary2026
The submission states that the Galway Gaeltacht is strategically significant in terms
of both the number and concentration of Irish speakers within this area and the high
levels of use. This is further reinforced by the fact that the south Conamara Gaeltacht
is the largest unbroken stretch of Gaeltacht. This underlines the importance of
integrating lrish language concerns in planning policy within the county. Density of
speakers is very important to maintain Gaeilge as the primary language, which is
linked to spatial planning, the submission goes on to state that this relationship
should be carefully considered so that Gaeilge speakers have realistic options to
stay within the LPAs. The submission then examines Daily Gaeilge speaker
densities. The submission seeks that particular attention needs to be given to
maintaining communities as attractive and viable places for Irish speakers to
continue living, and to mitigating the pressures which impact outward migration.
Sustainable planning and housing provision is an essential tool in addressing
this. The overall competence and usage of Gaeilge in Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe
nationally.
Relevant Planning Context
This section outlines in detail the extensive national, regional, and local policy
context for the Gaeltacht. Submission notes that the NPF recognises both the
importance of the Gaeltacht and Udaras and aims to support both for the promotion
of the lrish language. The NPF also seeks to address the rural decline and
encouraging rural growth. This submission aims to support Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe
by supporting increased provision of housing in the area. The submission notes the
additional 50% headroom required in the Section 28 Guidelines and reiterates its
support for the opening of R2 land. The settlements within the Gaeltacht are noted.
When making comments on  the Economic  Engine map found within the
Development plan, the submission notes that none of the settlements identified are
recognised as 'Service Towns' under the Gaeltacht Act, and as such, there exists a
significant gap for spatial displacement. The importance of this map demonstrates
the growth potential for compact growth aligned with the core strategy. Without
investment in the smaller towns, the submission believes that unsustainable
commuting and development patterns will continue, which will be the detriment of
the Gaeltacht. The submission states that DM standards should be adapted to an
appropriate scale when applied to residential and economic development policies
within the Gaeltacht region, with particular consideration for appropriate spatial
planning frameworks. The submission states that the Development Plan
acknowledges the promotion and protection of the Irish Language in the Gaeltacht
and as such, any change to core policy must be considered in the context of the
Gaeltacht and not looked  at  in  isolation. The submission concludes that
infrastructure must be prioritised to allow for sustainable forms of spatial
development for the Gaeltacht region.
Proposed Variation No. 1 - Galway County Council Development Plan 2022-
This section of the submission outlines the key considerations of Udaras around the
proposed variation.
Infrastructure and Services
The submission notes the importance of the delivery of plan led infrastructure and
servicesfor the development of theGaeltacht. It reiterates the need for increased
housing due to the population increase and to prevent further outward migration to
17
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
protect the language. It emphasises the importance of developing the Gaeltacht. It
requests that the Variation must bring the delivery of associated infrastructure and
services to thefore alongside thereleaseof R2 lands.Thesubmission reiterates the
objectives on a National and Regional level to improve infrastructure and services,
however the submission notes that these objectives must be realised at local plan
level. This fact bares importances for the Gaeltacht to meet housing need. The
submission states that the variation must be coupled with deliverable local policy to
provide these services and infrastructure to the Gaeltacht. The submission mentions
the Accelerating Infrastructure Report and Action Plan and seeks that this report be
given weight in local policy. The submission is of the opinion that there is a
requirement formorefocusedpolicyrelated toinfrastructureandserviceswithinthe
Development Plan for the Gaeltacht. The submission argues that current policy
(such as GlED 3) is too generic. The submission requests that the Development
Plan and Proposed Variation therefore requires further consideration in terms of
additional policies and objectives to support increased infrastructure and services
delivery specific to the settlements releasing phase 2 zoned lands. In relation to the
SCA, the submission wishes to highlight that there has been no Settlement Capacity
Audit prepared for small growth towns and small growth villages. These areas are
also in need of increased and improved infrastructure and services to ensure the
delivery of housing within the Gaeltacht. Specifically, the lands in Maigh Cuilinn, An
Spideal and An Cheathru Rua require significant investment for the housing
increasesforecastedforthesesettlementswiththepublicationofthevariation.
GaeltachtServiceTowns
This section of the submission defines of Gaeltacht Service Towns (GST) under the
Gaeltacht Act, and notes the 2 No. of GST in Galway:
Clifden
GalwayCity.
The submission notes the wide geographic area of the Galway Gaeltacht and notes
that there is only 2 GST's in this large area, causing lack of infrastructure and
services and unsustainable travel distances for residents in the middle of the
Gaeltacht. The submissions states that significant investment in roads and
infrastructure would encourage a more concentrated residential and economic
development alongside nodes/villages, potentially leading to settlements such as An
Cheathru Rua becoming a GST in the future. Due to the lack of infrastructure in An
Cheathru Rua, flexibility is suggested around housing provision. The submission
believes there is an opportunity to review the economic and core strategy for the
Gaeltacht. As Udaras has an extensive property portfolio, a collaborative approach
with the LA to support the Gaeltacht is possible. For the submission, it is imperative
with the opening of R2 land providing an opportunity to achieve this.
Core Strategy and Density Standards
This section notes the Section 28 Guidelines and the resulting increased housing
targets. The submission also notes that Galway County Council has not published a
submission, being of the opinion it is not currently clear how the additional baseline
housing allocation figures will be allocated per settlement/in the Gaeltacht. The
submission also notes the requirement for the identification of an additional 50%
headroom. There is a concern that without the core strategy, this 50% headroom
has not been provided for. The submission now urges the Local Authority to ensure
that all opportunities available to them to deliver on housing be considered at this
18
MinutesofSpecial Council Meetingheldon16thFebruary2026
time, going on to state that where the opportunity arises, consideration should be
given to the release of housing in some of the key settlements of the county
hierarchy. The submission is of the opinion that it is imperative to achieve Policy and
Objectives 1 and 2 found within the Section 28 Guidelines to help alleviate the
within the variation are much lower than those set out in the Compact Settlement
Guidelines. While noting that there is no change to density allocations for small
growth towns and small growth villages, the submission notes that the density
ranges for Baile Chlair and Bearna are subject to change within the outer
    o  o  sn   nn
consistency between the Section 28 Ministerial Guidance and the changes to density
for the Metropolitan Settlements. The final Variation published must address this.
HNDA
au Xa pajoddns pue pawoolam s! saunby uoneindod mau pue vanh aui
submission.
Gaeltacht Population Growth
In this section of the submission there is various tables outlining the speed of
population growth within the Gaeltacht. The submission reiterates the need for
increased and improved services and infrastructure within Gaeltacht. It is vital for
residential core strategy growth projection that a spatial distribution is reviewed in
the context of the Gaeltacht.
Renewed Focus on Residential Phase 2 Land
The submission states its support of Proposed Variation Section 2.3.12 and 2.4.4,
however there is a concern that the Gaeltacht areas must be readily available to
accommodate additional housing at a rate over and above the capacity of those
lands currently zoned for residential development in the area. The submission
reiterates the critical shortage of housing within the Gaeltacht as outlined in previous
sections, and that delivery needs to be realised on the ground. it is also important
for the submission to ensure this housing is built for competent lIrish speakers and it
is critical that lands within the control of Udaras be positively considered for
infrastructure upgrades to allow for residential development within this context.
The submission provides an overview of the 5 Gaeltacht settlements listed below:
Baile Chlair
Bearna
Maigh Cuilinn
An Cheathru Rua, agus
An Spidéal.
These paragraphs detail the demographics, housing make up, spatial context,
related LPA, and relevant policy. Each section seeks a final housing allocation by
way of a revised Core Table. The submission notes that lands owned to the north
the provision of infrastructure, specifically Objective SSGV3 to provide a road to
open up the residential lands for development.
Conclusion
The submission concludes by welcoming and supporting the Proposed Variation.
The increase to housing targets within the Gaeltacht specifically is considered a
19
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16thFebruary 2026
positive that will also support Udaras' main objective to preserve the lrish language
and ensure native speakers arehoused in the Gaeltacht.
The submission concludes that the variation must secure the delivery of housing to
key rural settlements. While the submission believes that the current variation does
not comprehensively address all issues raised in this submission, Udaras urges that
the preparation and recommendations of their report accurately reflect the relevant
provisions of official policy, including national and regional objectives pertaining to
spatial planning and the specific context of the Gaeltacht. It is hoped that this
submission effectively illustrates the intrinsic link between housing and economic
must be considered holistically and cannot be addressed in isolation.
ChiefExecutive Response
The contents of this submission are noted and the support in principle from Udaras
na Gaeltachta is welcomed. Galway County Council collaborate with Udaras on an
ongoing basis and are committed to doing in future to support the Gaeltacht across
County Galway.
Submission noted.
Submission noted. The Local Authority promotes and supports the use and vitality
of the Irish language.
The contents of Appendix 1 are considered and noted.
The comments with respect to the population/demographic changes are noted. The
changes proposed as part of Variation No.1 with respect to Residential Phase 2
lands apply to all zoned settlements in County Galway.
Submission noted.
The importance of An Cheathru Rua as a Gaeltacht Small Growth Village of County
Galway is noted and this has been reflected previously in the Galway County
Development Plan. The Planning Authority is keen to engage and collaborate with
relevant stakeholders to facilitate the delivery of critical infrastructure and services
to all parts of the County, including Gaeltacht settlements. The purpose of Variation
1 is to increase options for housing delivery across the zoned serviced settlements
of the County.
Submission noted. Variation No.1 seeks to facilitate the increased annual housing
allocation as set out in the Section 28 Housing Growth Requirements. The
importance of housing delivery in Gaeltacht settlements is noted and this is reflected
in supporting Policy Objectives within the Galway County Development Plan.
The scope of Variation No.1 applies to all zoned settlements within the County
including the Small Growth Towns and Small Growth Villiages. The scope of the
Vacant Homes Officer in the Local Authority includes the entire County including
The strategic importance of the County Galway Gaeltacht is recognised and noted.
20