Minutes of April 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of April 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 3rd April 2023 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
M. Howard, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Murphy, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, P. Burke,
A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman, S. Talty, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, P.J. Kelly,
B. Chambers, C. Murphy.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Margaret O’Rourke, A/Staff Officer.
Ms. Anne Haugh, Director of Social Development.
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Director of Rural Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Physical Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Ms. Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development.
Ms. Helen Quinn, A/Senior Planner.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. A. Norton, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, L. Grant, G. Keating
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Bugler family, Ennis on the death of Dr. Paddy Bugler Snr, R.I.P.
The Considine family, Liscannor on the death of Donal Considine, R.I.P.
Cllr. P.J. Kelly proposed a vote of sympathy to the Lafferty family, Lisdoonvarna on the recent death of former Councillor Martin Lafferty, R.I.P. who served as a member of Clare County Council from 1974 - 2009. Cllr. Kelly proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect. This was seconded by Cllr. G. Flynn and agreed by the members present.
Tributes were paid to the late Mr. Lafferty and it was noted that he was highly skilled and intelligent and he had a unique knowledge of local government. The members noted that Mr. Lafferty played a lead role in the power sharing agreement in Clare County Council which was introduced in 2004 and is still in existence.
The meeting resumed at 3:25 p.m.
Votes of congratulations
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien extended congratulations to Rachel Acres who won two gold medals for Hammer throwing at the World Masters Athletics Indoor Championships in Torun, Poland recently.
Cllr. P. McMahon extended congratulations to Newmarket Celtic on reaching their first FAI Junior Cup final.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the March Meeting of Clare County Council held on 13
th
March, 2023 be adopted and signed.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of Special Meeting of Clare County Council held on 9
th
March, 2023 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 27
th
March, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to funding measure announced for Multi-Annual Rural Water Programme 2022-2025.
Correspondence dated 27
th
March, 2023 from the Department of Education in relation to the Department’s School Transport Scheme.
Correspondence dated 22
nd
March, 2023 from the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications in relation to funding for bulky waste amnesties.
Correspondence dated 16
th
March, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Rent Pressure Zone (RPZ) legislation and the eviction moratorium.
Correspondence dated 22
nd
March, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the current status of approval for the wastewater pilot schemes.
Correspondence dated 15
th
March, 2023 from the Health Service Executive in relation to upgrading Ennis General Hospital to a Model 3 Hospital.
Correspondence dated 15
th
March, 2023 from the Department of Justice in relation to legislation requiring road users to be fully illuminated when light and visibility is low.
Correspondence dated 16
th
March, 2023 from the Department of Children in relation to legislation requiring road users to be fully illuminated when light and visibility is low.
Correspondence dated 16
th
March, 2023 from the Department of Transport in relation to legislation requiring road users to be fully illuminated when light and visibility is low.
Correspondence dated 22
nd
March, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Help to Buy Incentive Scheme.
Correspondence dated 22
nd
March, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Croi Conaithe Scheme.
Correspondence circulated by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Participation in the Fourth Open Government National Action Plan 2023-2025.
Resolution circulated by Tipperary County Council in relation to Apprentice Schemes within the Council.
Resolution circulated by Tipperary County Council in relation to the Mother and Baby Homes redress scheme.
Resolution circulated by Sligo County Council in relation to the availability of Cystic Fibrosis medication Kaftrio.
Resolution circulated by Wexford County Council in relation to planning legislation.
Conference entitled “Climate Action Economic Opportunities – Local Authorities Supporting Enterprise” taking place in Tullamore Court Hotel, Tullamore, Co. Offaly on 26
th
April, 2023.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 18
th
January, 2023 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Economic Development S.P.C. meeting held on 5
th
December, 2023 be noted”.
b. Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Physical Development S.P.C. meeting held on 15
th
November, 2023 be noted”.
c. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Social Development S.P.C. meeting held on 6 December, 2023 be noted”.
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 6 March, 2023 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. C. Murphy welcomed the appointment of the design team for 25 houses in Kilkee and queried the timeline involved.
Cllr. C. Murphy also asked for a timeline in relation to the Kilkee Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Cllr. C. Murphy thanked the Chief Executive and team for the detailed report on the Kilrush Maritime Training Centre.
Cllr. P. Hayes welcomed the launch of the Clare Rural Development Strategy 2030 and praised all involved in its preparation. Cllr. Hayes suggested that a workshop be held in order to demonstrate how the strategy links with other policies and strategies. Cllr. P. Hayes also welcomed the imminent appointment of two Rural Development Officers.
Cllr. P. Murphy welcomed progress on the Clarecastle Sewerage Scheme. Cllr. P. Murphy referred to the bus stop being considered at Manus Cross Clarecastle on the R458 and queried if this is a Council or NTA initiative. Cllr. P. Murphy requested an update on the Latoon cycling infrastructure.
Cllr. J. Garrihy referred to the Doolin Pier Visitor Services Building and the plan being developed for the scheme and stated that there needs to be a focus and drive to progress this project.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted the comments in relation to the Rural Development Strategy and agreed that a workshop would be beneficial. Mr. Dowling stated that the recruitment of two Rural Development Officers was made possible due to Government funding. Mr. Dowling thanked the Cathaoirleach and members for their involvement in the Clare Rural Development Strategy and acknowledged the grant aid received to date.
A. Haugh, Director of Social Development advised that the timeframe for the completion of the housing development in Kilkee is Q2 in 2025. Ms. Haugh referred to revised legislation in the context of the traditional planning and Part VIII process which should accelerate the process for the delivery of social housing.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Physical Development stated that planning documents are being prepared for the Wastewater Treatment Plant in Kilkee. Dr. Kirby advised that the bus stop being considered at Manus Cross Clarecastle on the R458 is both a Council and NTA initiative. Dr. Kirby undertook to revert to Cllr. P. Murphy in relation to the Latoon cycling infrastructure.
Reports
Item 8: Disposal of land at Clare Road, Ennis, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 13
th
March, 2023 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property Management Unit was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of lands measuring 0.012 hectares at Clare Road, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 13
th
March, 2023.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Clare Road, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 13
th
March, 2023.”
Item 9: Disposal of land adjacent to St. Patrick’s Terrace, Kilkee, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 13
th
March, 2023 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property Management Unit was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of lands measuring 0.0290 hectares adjacent to St. Patrick’s Terrace, Kilkee, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 13
th
March, 2023.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land adjacent to St. Patrick’s Terrace, Kilkee, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 13
th
March, 2023.”
Item 10: Community Recognition Fund 2023.
Report dated 27
th
March, 2023 from Jason Murphy, A/Director of Service, Ukrainian Response Team was circulated with the agenda. The report states that on 25
th
January 2023 the National Community Recognition Fund 2023 was announced by the Department of Rural and Community Development (DRCD). The fund available nationally is €50m. County Clare was allocated €2.9m based on the distribution of Beneficiaries of Temporary Protection and International Protection applicants.
A call across the communities of Clare was initiated on foot of the announcement and the process has been managed and co-ordinated jointly by Rural and Community Development and Ukrainian Services Development.
Awareness of the fund was raised through the Community Response Forum (a sub-committee of the LCDC), Municipal Districts and through mainstream and social media. 11 briefing sessions were arranged through Ukrainian Services Development and 5 walk-in clinics were delivered by the Councils' Rural and Community Development Officers as part of this process. A workshop for the Community Response Forum had also been run in November 2022 in anticipation of funding call.
The response to the call was significant with 224 expressions of interest submitted to the value of €12.6m towards projects worth €16.7m.
A total of 130 projects have been identified within the allocation available and a funding proposal has been submitted to the Department of Rural and Community Development with whom the decision rests. A decision is expected in April.
The report noted that 60% of the funding must be drawn down by Clare County Council by October 2023. This in turn places significant time constraints on any project that is approved by the Department.
A requirement of the scheme was to identify projects in communities where the highest level of Ukrainians/International Protection applicants are located. The distribution of funding followed this principle. Key settlements were identified, and regard was taken of our community structures, the reach of services/amenities and geographic distribution of host communities.
To recognise the numbers of groups across the county, their capacities and the tight timescales involved in the call (ability to develop and implement a project), the decision was taken to advertise the grant in 2 streams:
Stream 1 - Less than €2,000 for equipment (94 expressions of interest)
Stream 2 - Over €2,000 for large scale initiatives - as per the scheme outline (130 expressions of interest).
84 of the Stream 1 expressions were deemed to meet the criteria and these have been forwarded to the Department of Rural and Community Development as part of the Councils application. Details of the categories are listed in the report.
Of the 130 applications received for Stream 2, large scale funding, 120 were deemed eligible and met the criteria. 46 projects were submitted to the Department as part of the Clare County Council expression under the scheme and within the funding threshold. Again, details of the categories are listed in the report.
The report as circulated was noted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes and seconded by Cllr. J. Cooney.
Item 11: Schedule of Municipal District Works 2023.
The Schedule of Municipal District Works as previously circulated and adopted at Municipal District level was noted by the members present.
Notice of motions
Item 12: Cost of US flights to Shannon Airport.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
"That Clare County Council request the Minister for Transport to outline what factors are leading to prospective US travellers to the West of Ireland being quoted fares of €1,000/$1,000 dearer to fly to Shannon than those available to Dublin."
The elected members expressed concern in relation to fares being charged to US visitors travelling to Ireland and felt that people will fly to Dublin airport if they are offered cheaper flights. The members believed that a marketing campaign would advise people that Shannon is an international airport and ensure people are aware of this beneficial and vital route to Ireland from the USA. The members highlighted the advantages available for people when travelling to and from Shannon airport. Cllr. M. Begley suggested it would be important to hear the views of Shannon Group in relation to the more expensive fares when travelling to Shannon airport.
Item 13: County Development Plan.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly
“That a comprehensible report be made available detailing the logic and equity of a provision in the County Development Plan where owners of land in excess of 12 hectares seeking planning permission for themselves or their relatives are assessed differently to landowners less than 12 hectares when they or their relatives are seeking planning permission.”
Helen Quinn, A/Senior Planner replied as follows:
“For ease of reference I have set out below the extract from the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 which details the considerations and reasons whereby potential applicants may be assessed for a single rural house on the basis of their economic need resulting from their agricultural activity. The objectives relating to single rural housing as set out in the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 are in line with RPO19 of the Government’s National Planning Framework, with which the Planning Authority is required to be consistent as per Section 10 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended).
The making of the Development Plan is a statutory process as set out in the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended. The inclusion of specific policy objectives must be considered as part of that statutory process. This issue relating to the “12 hectares” holding was a matter for consideration by the members within the Clare County Development Plan making process, which has now concluded and which has seen the text below incorporated into the made plan. The logic and equality of this provision was considered by the members in the execution of their statutory role in making the plan.
I wish to acknowledge the comprehensive work of the members over the last two and a half years in the preparation of the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029, a document which will in the coming 6 years guide the future development of our growing communities and economic development across the county.
The following is the extract from the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 which details the considerations and reasons whereby potential applicants may be assessed for a single rural house on the basis of their economic need resulting from their agricultural activity
Cllr. P.J. Kelly stated that he wished to make a correction to the notice of motion submitted to read as follows:
“That a comprehensible report be made available detailing the logic and equity of a provision in the County Development Plan where owners of land in excess of 12.5 hectares seeking planning permission for themselves or their relatives are assessed differently to landowners less than 12.5 hectares when they or their relatives are seeking planning permission.”
Cllr. Kelly stated that the term farmer should be defined by herd number and not by acreage and felt that the County Development Plan should be amended to reflect this. Cllr. Kelly stated that legal people regard this practice as discrimination and expressed concern that it could lead to judicial review.
H. Quinn, A/Senior Planner acknowledged the concerns raised by Cllr. Kelly and stated that the County Development Plan making process has concluded and that this text has been incorporated into the made plan. Ms. Quinn stated that Clare County Council will continue with the plan as adopted by the elected members.
Item 14: Europe Day.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“Europe Day
on
9 May
is a day to celebrate peace, solidarity and unity in Europe. This date marks the anniversary of the historic
Schuman declaration
– the starting point of what is now the European Union. One year before the European elections, Europe Day 2023 will be an opportunity to bring people together to celebrate the fundamental values of the European project. The continuing war of aggression against Ukraine makes it more important than ever that we remember. This motion asks that Clare County Council takes action to remember, by
fly the EU flag from Council buildings for Europe Day
organise a guided tour of EU-funded projects in our County for Councillors
organise an EU lesson by local academic at our local Council.”
Ann Reynolds, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services replied as follows:
“Europe Day is a day to celebrate peace and unity throughout Europe. On this day, it is our collective duty to revitalize the European dream and re-invigorate European integration. COVID-19 and the Russian invasion of Ukraine has proven to us however that to protect the lives and health of citizens and preserve our economy, the European Union must take robust actions, proportionate to the dangers threatening us.
The 2022 European Year of Youth shone a spotlight on Europe’s young people and citizens’ voices were amplified by the Conference on the Future of Europe.
The theme for Europe Day 2023 is “Europe is Yours”.
To commemorate Europe Day 2023 the Council undertakes to fly the EU flag at Áras Contae an Chláir and an EU presentation by a local academic will be organised. A guided tour of EU funded projects in Clare can also be organised for members. Some examples of EU funded projects include; a number of projects at the Burren and Cliffs of Moher UNESCO Global Geopark, Shannon Town Park, New County Library.”
The elected members reflected on the transformative impact Ireland has experienced since joining the EU on 1
st
January 1973. The members noted that Ireland has become a modern, open society in terms of equality, environmental and multi-culturalism as it presents opportunities and challenges. The members welcomed the EU funding being received.
Item 15: Residential Zoned Land Tax.
In the absence of Cllr. I. Lynch this item was proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien and agreed.
“To request a breakdown of the anticipated Residential Zoned Land Tax that Clare County Council will be liable for, presented in tabular form by local electoral area indicating the location of the lands/ property by town/ town land, the size of the property/ land and the estimated Residential Zoned Land tax applicable.”
Helen Quinn, A/Senior Planner replied as follows:
“The Residential Zoned Land Tax is a new tax aimed at increasing housing supply by activating zoned, serviced residential development lands (including mixed-use lands) for housing. It also aims to incentivise landowners to use existing planning permissions for housing. The tax is being introduced as part of Housing for All, the government's housing plan to 2030. The annual tax will apply at a rate of 3% of the land’s market value. The tax will operate on a self-assessment basis.
There are two stages to implementing the Residential Zoned Land Tax:
The current stage, which requires the identification of lands that will be subject to the tax. Clare County Council published the Draft Residential Zoned Land Tax Map on 01
st
November 2022. Submissions were received up until the 01
st
January 2023. A further Supplemental Map will be published on 01
st
May 2023 with the Final Map identifying all lands in scope for the tax will be published in December 2024.
The administration of the tax, including collection of the tax, will be undertaken by the Revenue Commissioners from 2024 onwards.
Those who own lands, including Local Authorities, identified in the Residential Zoned Land Tax Maps as lands within scope for the tax and which do not have an exemption will be liable for the payment of the Residential Zoned Land Tax. The tax will first fall due on 1 February 2024, with a filing and payment date of 23 May 2024.
A cross directorate team has been established within Clare County Council to consider development options for all Council zoned lands and to also consider what the potential Residential Property Land Tax implications may be for the Local Authority in May 2024.
This team is tasked with reviewing the land parcels within Clare County Council’s ownership, looking at all options for those lands in the short, medium and long term, deciding on what parcels will require up-to-date valuations to be completed, which in turn will enable the Council to calculate its liability under the Residential Zoned Land Tax. The work of this team will be advancing over the coming months and will respond to changes that may occur to the Residential Zoned Land Tax Map on foot of the Supplemental Map which will be published in May 2023 and the Final Map which will be published in December 2023.
At this point in time I do not have access to the information requested by Cllr. Lynch, however I will ensure that the members are briefed of the key findings of the cross directorate team over the coming months.”
Item 16: Suicide awareness campaign.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That this Council requests the Minister for Health, Stephen Donnelly, to increase the spend on the suicide awareness campaign as it is becoming more prevalent in communities.”
The elected members felt that it is progressive that this conversation was taking place in the Council Chamber and observed that every community has been impacted by suicide. The members agreed that funding should be allocated for a major awareness campaign to train people dealing with the public to recognise the signs. The members felt that cognitive behavioural therapy should be available in schools whereby the tools for mindfulness techniques would be provided. The members agreed that it is a complex subject and that funding is needed in order to raise awareness, prevention and support.
Item 17. Maintenance and upgrade costs of playgrounds.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council undertake a) the research necessary to determine the future maintenance and upgrade costs of playgrounds covered by their insurance to ensure they remain viable operationally and b) an overview of the various potential funding streams available, both internally and externally, that might be used to cover those costs”.
Bernie Haugh, A/Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The analysis requested is an extensive piece of research. This will be undertaken in the months ahead as part of the ongoing inspection regime for Community Playgrounds.
Currently there are 16 Community Playgrounds covered by Clare County Council's IPB insurance schedule. These have met specific requirements. They include:
Scarriff
Cooraclare
Quin
Feakle
Lissycasey
Kilmihil
Doolin
Labasheeda
Ballyvaughan
Corofin
Ballynacally
Newmarket-on-Fergus
Miltown Malbay
Cratloe
Broadford
Lisdoonvarna
Crusheen
Seanchoill (Parteen}
These playgrounds are being inspected routinely by Rural & Community Department and West Clare Municipal District staff to manage the Council's risk. In general, it is reasonable to expect that over 50% of these 16 playgrounds will require the upgrade of one or more pieces of playground equipment in the short to medium term. The replacement of one piece of equipment can range in cost from €10,000 to €50,000. This is a significant outlay for communities who rely on local fund raising together with local and national funding streams to maintain these recreational facilities.
The following funding streams are available as potential funding streams for Community Playground Committees: -
CLAR Scheme - Grants of up to 50K to support the development of Community Playgrounds {This does not cover Ennis & Shannon areas).
Clare Local Area Grant Scheme {CLAGS) - €65k allocation for playgrounds in the 2023 scheme with a maximum grant available of €3K
Community Enhancement Programme {CEP) - This is administered by the Local Community Development Committee who focused on supports for community playgrounds in the 2021/22 scheme.
Play & Recreation Grant Scheme - €450K allocated across the country to local authorities for the refurbishment and development of playgrounds and play areas with 30 projects awarded funding of circa 15K under the Play and Recreation Grant Scheme for 2022.
A submission for funding supports for community playground was included for consideration under the new Development Contribution Scheme.
The Rural Development Department together with the Rural & Community Development Officers will continue to work with Community Playground Committees to support their invaluable role in the management and operation of these recreational facilities in communities.”
The elected members acknowledged the positive action being taken by the Rural Development team and the expertise available. The members referred to the challenges being experienced by community groups in funding the cost of upgrading playground equipment and acknowledged the funding streams available. The members agreed that ongoing assessment of each playground is necessary as these are vital outdoor amenities and important services in local communities and that continued local authority support is essential. Queries were raised in relation to the number of insurance claims processed by Clare County Council.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and outlined the importance of the review of playgrounds and undertook to revert to the members on this matter. Mr. Dowling stated that there are capital grants available to assist community groups with maintaining equipment. Mr. Dowling agreed to return to the Councillors in the context of claims made also.
Item 18: Bus Eireann services.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That senior management in both Bus Eireann and the National Transport Authority be invited to address the members of Clare County Council to (a) discuss current services and how they are operating (b) to outline their plans on the provision of public transport going forward within County Clare. Headings covered should include issues such as capacity, Public Service Obligation (P.S.O.) services and stops, connectivity between the various operators, accessible transport, integrated ticketing, bus shelters, the new Ennis town bus service, Ennis bus and rail station and Sixmilebridge rail station”.
The elected members agreed that the National Transport Authority as the statutory body responsible for providing public transport be invited to address the members of Clare County Council to explain their future plans in relation to service provision. The members requested that Bus Éireann and Irish Rail be included in this invitation. The members felt that the current services are unreliable and outlined experiences of constituents who have been affected by buses not stopping at collection points, capacity issues and connectivity issues.
It was noted that the bus service for South East Clare operates from Limerick and that the National Transport Authority has drafted a new Bus Network for Limerick for public consultation. Feedback on the proposals was encouraged as well as familiarisation of the new routes.
Item 19: Eviction notices.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
“How many people have contacted Clare County Council due to ongoing eviction notices?
How many of these people, many of whom are families are with landlords registered with R.T.B.?
What system or means has been put in place to support Clare County Council in dealing with these vulnerable people?”
Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development replied as follows:
“Clare County Council currently have 61 households who have contacted us in relation to Notice to Quits [NTQs] issued to them by their landlord. The NTQs are for a variety of reasons, including landlords intention to sell the property (27), property needed for landlords family (18) and for tenancy breaches (6). We are currently checking validity of a number of these NTQs (12) before assessing further. Its important to note that only a small number of these properties have NTQs that take effect this week and the balance have dates ranging from end of April to end September 2023 which is allowing us a window of opportunity to work with tenants to source appropriate solutions before a risk of homelessness materialises.
Approximately 50% of these tenancies appear to be registered with Residential Tenancy Board per our latest listing. However since 4 April 2022, a landlord is obliged to register a tenancy every year on the anniversary of the date that tenancy began for so long as the tenancy exists and this should ensure a far greater number of tenancies are registered into the future.
Where there are issues between the landlords and tenants in relation to breaches of tenancy the advice to both parties is that they need to engage with the Residential Tenancies Board for resolution.
For other cases there are a number of supports offered to these households. It is important that at the earliest opportunity upon receipt of a NTQ that the tenants contact ourselves and start the engagement process. Our Homeless Action Team can be contacted on 065 684 6291 or by email on hat@clarecoco.ie
Our Homeless Action Team initially engages with the household to identify the risk of homelessness with each case, and whether there may be alternative accommodation available.
Our H.A.P. Placefinder is supporting clients in efforts to secure alternative private rented accommodation.
Where it may be deemed a possible option our loans team are exploring whether clients may have potential to raise a mortgage to support the purchase of their own property, either the existing property or an alternative property.
In cases where there is a risk to homelessness which may not be avoidable through other options we are exploring opportunities around purchasing the property with the tenant in situ. We are also working with A.H.B.s in this regard and currently between us we are exploring the purchase of 14 properties.
If all of the above options fail, as a last resort we will utilise emergency bed facilities where available and our Homeless Action Team will continue to work actively with the household until such time as their need is met.
In the last week we have received a number of queries from households who don’t qualify for Social Housing Support under current income policy. These will also be assessed as per above. However, where all options have been explored and there remains a risk of homelessness we are not in a position to purchase the properties. However the Department have advised that a new scheme will be launched this week “Cost Rental Scheme for Tenants in Situ”, which is targeted at supporting a cohort of these clients and when we have full details we will make available to the elected members.
Clare County Council Homeless Team continue to work with service providers to expand our Emergency Accommodation Capacity. However, we are confident that through exploring all of the above alternative options we will identify more sustainable solutions for tenants in difficulty.”
Cllr. D. McGettigan commended Clare County Council on the work being undertaken on this matter and noted the figures provided. Cllr. McGettigan urged people to contact Clare County Council in relation to the range of schemes in place.
Anne Haugh, Director of Social Development addressed the meeting and referred to further information circulated to members at the meeting which provided an update on options available to assist people who have received a notice of termination. Ms. Haugh stated that Clare County Council will support households to try to prevent homelessness.
Item 20: Illegal dumping.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. J. Crowe agus A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council request central government to provide additional funding to combat the ongoing problem with illegal dumping and fly tipping in our county.”
The elected members acknowledged that this is an ongoing national issue and expressed disappointment that it continues. The members recognised the work carried out by the Councils Environment Section in utilising the resources available. The members welcomed the imminent draft code of practice for the purposes of setting standards for the operation of the use of CCTV being prepared by the Local Government Management Agency. The members agreed that additional funding should be allocated to local authorities to assist with this ongoing challenge. The members also agreed that offenders should be named and shamed.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive agreed with the sentiments and frustrations outlined by the members and acknowledged the hard work being done by community groups and Tidy Towns groups. Mr. Dowling stated that there is still concern in relation to recording data and undertook to keep the members updated on this.
Item 21: Community led biodiversity plan.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
"I am requesting that a community led biodiversity plan, that is realistically implementable and non-labour intensive for voluntary groups (i.e. Tidy Towns and Residents Organisations) is the initial priority for the incoming Biodiversity Officer".
Helen Quinn, A/Senior Planner replied as follows:
“Clare County Council was successful in its application to the Heritage Council for funding under the Biodiversity Officer Pilot Program in 2022. On foot of confirmation of funding for the post, sanctioning was sought from the Department and a recruitment process was initiated. It is hoped that the position will be filled in the coming months.
The Biodiversity Officer will have a cross-cutting role in the local authority and while positioned within the Forward Planning section of the Planning Department, the resource will have an impact across every functional area of the local authority. A key output in 2023 will be the development of a Clare County Biodiversity Plan 2023-2029 which it is hoped will be completed by year end and this together with the delivery of projects funded under the National Biodiversity Action Plan will form priority work packages for the new resource on entering the local authority.
A key element and requirement of this role will be stakeholder engagement, whereby the Biodiversity Officer will work with various community groups to identify their requirements, to assist them in developing plans and strategies together with assisting individuals and groups in applying for funding opportunities and to deliver on projects across the county on behalf of the local authority.
Key to the success of the Biodiversity Officer Pilot Project here in County Clare will be meaningful engagement with individuals and communities across the county and I am committed to ensuring that the Biodiversity Officer will actively work with all stakeholders in delivering implementable policies, plans and projects.”
The elected members welcomed the news that the Biodiversity Officer post will be filled. The members believed that biodiversity must be practical for community and Tidy Town groups. The members referred to “no mow May” and other biodiversity initiatives and stated that when the grass is not cut for a significant period of time, children are restricted from playing in public green areas. It was felt that there needs to be a happy medium as these areas are in place for people to enjoy. The members agreed that funding should be made available to tidy up these areas when the grass is eventually cut.
Item 22: Constitutional referendum in relation to public water services.
In the absence of Cllr. J. Flynn this item was proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney, seconded by Cllr. J. Crowe and agreed.
"In recognition of our water services as a fundamental human right Clare County Council request the Irish Government to urgently hold a constitutional referendum in relation to our public water services, to prohibit the privatisation of those essential public services."
Item 23: Support for Ukrainian Community.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council is hosting approximately 4,400 Ukrainian People and there is a need to carefully plan for long term accommodation and other necessary services in order to regularise this support. The War in Ukraine has destroyed and decimated a considerable part of the country and shows no sign of ending. I am calling on the Director of Ukrainian Services in County Clare to contact Minister Darragh O’Brien and Minister Roderic O’Gorman and request additional assistance and resources in order to put in place adequate housing to address the huge need. A number of accommodation providers are considering the cessation of the arrangements in place and individual home owners are operating on a yearly agreement. The pathway to integrated living in various communities throughout Clare can only be maintained by increased services addressing the language barrier and the provision of permanent homes in order to protect the future of children and supporting employment for Ukrainian people that already have the same rights to social support in many areas of state support. The health and well-being of the Ukrainian community will be enhanced by more support and certainty in their lives.”
Jason Murphy, A/Director of Service, Ukrainian Response Team replied as follows:
“There is no doubt that the crisis in Ukraine has had an immeasurable impact on the people of that country. The impact of the war is being felt internationally. An estimated 5.9 million people have been displaced internally with 8m recorded in neighbouring countries within Europe. In Ireland there are approximately 78,000 Ukrainian beneficiaries of temporary protection (BoTP) with almost 4,400 of those living in County Clare.
The communities, groups and a myriad of agencies in Clare have worked tirelessly to extend their supports to our new arrivals. Many people have opened their homes through the ‘Offer a Home’ and IRC Pledge schemes while communities, through their generosity and volunteerism have opened their hearts and minds to our new arrivals.
For their part the Ukrainian families now living in Ireland have begun to integrate. Approximately one third are of school going age and have begun their education here while approximately 18,000 have taken up employment – mainly working where they live and contributing to their new communities.
While there are different accommodation arrangements in place across the country, in Clare to date, the majority of Ukrainian beneficiaries have been accommodated in multi-occupancy settings through the Hotel network. There is a recognition that the range of accommodation solutions available needs to be diversified while also recognising the fluid nature of the crisis and uncertainty of the timescales.
In County Clare the ‘Offer a Home’ scheme has been embraced with 97 offers of unoccupied homes being made to Clare County Council and 151 Ukrainian’s now being accommodated in this way. A further 80 people are accommodated in hosted accommodation through the Irish Red Cross.
The OPW are currently assessing all publicly owned land nationally and while the current phasing of modular type housing is not being focussed on County Clare it is likely that this type of solution is being considered.
Hotel accommodation providers in this response are contracted directly by the Department of Children & Integration (DCEDIY) and while they have no contractual obligation to Clare County Council in that regard they have, in the main, been engaging with us over the last number of months. The team in Ukrainian Services Development have been able to get some insights into the trend and thought processes – albeit these are only insights.
Where we have been advised of the pending ending to a contract we have sought new solutions locally ourselves and have presented these solutions to DCEDIY in our efforts to enable an effective ‘move-on’ arrangement – As mentioned, Clare County Council has no remit to enter such contracts ourselves with the provision of temporary emergency accommodation in relation to migration being the sole function of DCEDIY. To that end they too are considering solutions in this space as per their function.
In making the effort to assist in finding local solutions it is our contention, with insights gained from our partners in the Community Response Forum, that it is important from a human, community and services perspective to minimise the impact of onward movement - In that regard we see that it is right and appropriate to seek alternative local solutions for people while being cognisant of the wider housing and industry sector needs.
In terms of the potential for unpredicted accommodation contract terminations, the team in Ukrainian Services Development have worked with our Emergency Services, Civil Defence and Housing Departments to put a short-term emergency accommodation response plan in place. We have reached out to the community centres across the county to seek their support if an acute emergency arises – We are grateful for their continued support.
The short-to-midterm accommodation needs for our Ukrainian beneficiaries is also being considered through the opportunity to refurbish and re-use existing vacant buildings. Throughout the course of this crisis owners of a variety of building types have contacted DCEDIY to see how those properties might meet the short-term need. Local Authorities are now being asked to consider these properties in terms of suitability for such use – this exercise may provide further solutions as this crisis continues to shift.
The provision of services to meet the needs of the increased population is central to many discussions in the Community Response Forum which has been meeting regularly since this crisis began. The engagement and dialogue has assisted in building working relationships and this has aided in identifying local responses. Our education, childcare, health and transport networks have had to flex and adapt to meet ever-changing needs to the credit to all involved.
Our school services, supported by the LCETB, REALT and Department of Education have welcomed their new children with open arms. As evidenced in the recent call for expressions of interest in the Community Recognition Fund, there appears to be an immediate need to increase funding supports for school-specific infrastructure and programme equipment while also ensuring that children can actually get to school – credit is due to REALT and Local Link in the significant efforts in this regard to date.
Local Link has increased RSS services and reacted to demand as necessary. From a childcare perspective the County Childcare committee have been running ‘stay & play’ sessions with early learning age groups at the accommodation venues and the Family Resource Centres have reached out locally to individual centres and groups through such initiatives as the Healthy Ireland Fund.
Agencies are also looking at the wider integration needs of those arriving into our communities – During 2022 some 2,300 learners engaged on 418 courses through the LCETB who also rolled out an Education information booklet in Ukrainian and who have provided guidance to over 4,000 through their Information, Recruitment and
Guidance service. English language classes such as Faillte Isteach are proving very popular which highlights the approach taken and the interest of the community in getting involved – Indeed, the Clare Volunteer Centre have raised significant interest in volunteering among the Ukrainian Community.
The linkages to the employment market have been actively supported through the DEASP and their activation teams while CLDC have a dedicated employment officer for the Ukrainian beneficiaries who, as part of a team of 6, were funded through SICAP. CLDC ran a jobs fair during the year to further assist in job activation.
All services, such as the HSE, TUSLA and An Garda Siochana are promoting their respective roles and supported in multiple languages with booklets and web information now available in multiple languages. CLDC have a team of community translators in place – a service that other service providers can draw on – and have a team member who runs a Ukrainian Telegram channel to push out notifications, information and general knowledge/cultural to the Ukrainian community.
This crisis, like COVID before it, has altered how we think and live. Our society has experienced a sudden change and our understanding of Europe and our role in the Union has been enhanced. The solidarity shown by our communities and the services is notable and resources provided to date has been matched by the energy and collaboration at community level.
The topic raised in this motion goes to the core of integration and the ever overarching objective to achieve sustainable communities – no matter how they are composed. All agencies and groups on the Community Response Forum in Clare are working together and recognise the legitimate need for additional resourcing. This motion will be brought to the attention of Minister O’Brian and Minister O’Gorman.”
The elected members paid tribute to the communities who have welcomed Ukrainain people into their communities and provided hospitality and support to them. The members noted that Ukrainian people are contributing to their communities and many have had to stay longer than anticipated and many will not leave Ireland and that a plan needs to be prepared and resources made available for this. The members expressed concern that the overall strategy for modular housing does not include County Clare and that this option needs to be explored. The members were mindful that there is a housing crisis in Clare and that the people of Clare have to be assisted and provided with accommodation as well as Ukrainian families.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and stated that the current situation remains unstable in the context of accommodating people from Ukraine. Mr. Dowling stated that Clare County Council does not have a statutory function in providing accommodation for them but will work with agencies to identify what can be progressed into the future.
Mr. Dowling acknowledged that many are integrating into schools and communities and that services have to be provided but that responsibility rests with Government Departments to provide these services.
Conferences/Training
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
Celtic Conference entitled “Modular Housing in Ireland” being held in the Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth on 3
rd
– 6
th
February, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was € 691.62 including conference fee of €100.
It was agreed that Cllr. P. Burke attend this Conference.
Association of Irish Regions Conference entitled “Shaping Ireland’s Regional Development” being held in Monaghan on 7
th
– 9
th
February, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €658.23 including conference fee of €160.
It was agreed that Cllr. M. Begley attend this Conference.
LAMA Spring Seminar entitled “Apprenticeship & Future Building Initiatives Recruitment & Training” taking place in Bantry, Co. Cork on 2
nd
– 4
th
March, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €618.96 including conference fee of €160.
It was agreed that Cllrs. M. Begley, J. Crowe and P. Burke attend this Conference.
AILG Elected Members Module 2 Training entitled “Local Authority Climate Action Plans – Building Sustainable Communities” being held in Clayton Whites Hotel, Wexford on 23
rd
March, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €513.82 including conference fee of €80.
It was agreed that Cllrs. M. Begley, P. Burke, C. Murphy, P.J. Ryan, P.J. Kelly, G. Keating and J. Cooney attend this Conference.
AILG Elected Members Module 2 Training entitled “Local Authority Climate Action Plans – Building Sustainable Communities” being held in Fairways Hotel, Dundalk, Co. Louth on 25
th
March, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €563.39 including conference fee of €80.
It was agreed that Cllr. M. Howard attend this Conference.
Suck Valley Way Conference 2023 entitled “Inspiring Rural Creativity” taking place in Roscommon on 5
th
– 6
th
April, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €600.27 including conference fee of €140.
It was agreed that Cllrs. G. Keating and M. Begley attend this Conference.
AILG Annual Training Conference 2023 being held in Hotel Kilkenny, on 19
th
– 20
th
April, 2023. 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €605.14 including conference fee of €165.
It was agreed that Cllrs. A. O’Callaghan, A. Norton, C. Murphy, P. McMahon, P.J. Kelly and J. Cooney attend this Conference.
Get well wishes
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien extended get well wishes to Cllr. Pat Daly and wished him a speedy recovery.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback