Minutes of May 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of May 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 8th May 2023 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
M. Howard, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Murphy, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan,
J. Cooney, P. Hayes, P. Burke, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe, M. Begley,
P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, P.J. Kelly, B. Chambers, G. Keating, C. Murphy, I. Lynch.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer.
Ms. Anne Haugh, Director of Service, Social Development.
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Director of Service, Tourism Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Service, Economic Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Service, Rural Development and Ukrainian Services.
Ms. Siobhán McNulty, A/Director of Service, Physical Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Councillors J. Flynn, A. Norton, L. Grant, P. O’Gorman
Absent
Cllr S. Talty
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr T. O’Brien presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Flanagan family, Mountshannon on the death of Peter Flanagan, RIP - brother of Michael Flanagan, Water Services.
The Ryan family Inagh on the death of Anna Ryan, RIP - mother of Martin Ryan, Traffic and mother-in-law of Michelle Ryan, Housing.
The Hayes family Miltown Malbay on the death of Tony Hayes, RIP - father of Maria O’Brien, Ennistymon Area Office.
The Murphy family Kilkishen on the death of James Murphy, RIP - brother of Norah Murphy, Environmental Patrol Warden.
The O’Malley family, Miltown Malbay on the death of Anne O’Malley, RIP – mother of John O’Malley, A/SEO, West Clare Municipal District.
The O’Shea family, Sixmilebridge on the death of former Clare County Council worker Michael O’Shea.
Signing of Share Purchase Agreement for Shannon Heritage
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien noted that it was a historic day for Clare Tourism and Clare County Council in Bunratty. He acknowledged that it was a long time in the making and he thanked the members and Clare County Council staff for their work regarding the legalities during the past few weeks, which he noted was central to the signing. Cllr. O’Brien also thanked the staff in all the heritage sites for the outstanding work they do.
The Chief Executive, Pat Dowling thanked the elected members for their strong show of support earlier in the day for the signing of the share purchase agreement and apologised for the delay. Mr. Dowling noted that today was a critical part of the transaction, and he stated that he will visit the Shannon Heritage staff on Wednesday morning. Mr. Dowling advised that Director of Service, Leonard Cleary, has been appointed Director of Tourism and he thanked his own team, Leonard Cleary, Noeleen Fitzgerald, Deirdre O’Shea and Donnacha Lynch for their hard work in completing the due diligence.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Councillor P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Councillor J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the April Meeting of Clare County Council held on 3
rd
April, 2023 be adopted and signed.”
b. Ar moladh Councillor M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Councillor J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Clare County Council held on 24th April, 2023 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 5
th
April, 2023 from UL Hospitals Group in relation to the delivery of healthcare in the Mid West.
Correspondence dated 31
st
March, 2023 from the Department of Transport in relation to National Driving Test service.
Correspondence dated 13
th
April, 2023 from the Department for Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science in relation to apprenticeships.
Correspondence dated 17
th
April, 2023 from the Department of Transport in regarding legislation for the requirement for road users to be required to be fully illuminated when light and visibility is poor.
Correspondence dated 2
nd
May, 2023 from the Department of Public Expenditure, National Development Plan Delivery and Reform in relation to funding to combat the ongoing problem with illegal dumping.
Correspondence dated 27
th
April, 2023 from the RSA in relation to the provision of a second National Car Test centre in County Clare.
Correspondence dated 6
th
April, 2023 from the Department of Health in relation to the provision of the drug Kaftrio to all children with cystic fibrosis.
Correspondence dated 20
th
April, 2023 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to referendum in relation to our public water services.
Correspondence dated 17
th
April, 2023 from Bus Éireann in relation to attending a meeting with Clare County Council.
Correspondence dated 13
th
April, 2023 from the Department of Mental Health and Older People concerning increased spending in the suicide awareness campaign.
Correspondence dated 6
th
April, 2023 from the Department of Health concerning increased spending in the suicide awareness campaign.
Correspondence dated 26
th
April, 2023 from the Minister of State for Disability in relation to Personal Assistance Service.
Resolution circulated by Wexford County Council in relation to the Able Disabled campaign.
Resolution circulated by Offaly County Council calling on the Government to extend the Eviction Ban for all “No Fault” tenants.
Resolution circulated by Westmeath County Council in relation to the construction of affordable housing units.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Councillor P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Councillor M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 7
th
March, 2023 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Councillor C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Councillor P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 21st March, 2023 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Councillor J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Councillor D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 17
th
January, 2023 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Councillor C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Councillor P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Rural Development S.P.C. meeting held on 21
st
February, 2023 be noted”.
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 27
th
March, 2023 as presented.
Cllr. G. Flynn informed the meeting that he has forwarded a letter of complaint to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage concerning the determinations of the Corporate Policy Group in relation to the Council agenda.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Chief Executive, Pat Dowling informed the meeting that the Chief Executives in all Local Authorities have signed a Master agreement to set in motion steps to complete the transition. Mr. Dowling advised that they are now awaiting key criteria from Irish Water, post this criterion being met an effective date will then be issued.
Cllr. G. Flynn requested an update on the status of the Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme noting that a submission from the Elected Members was sent to the Department of Housing on the 14
th
March.
Anne Haugh, Director of Service, Social Development, replied to the query raised by Cllr. G. Flynn and advised that a reminder had issued to the Department of Housing seeking feedback to the submission and that a reply is still awaited.
Cllr. P. Hayes thanked the Chief Executive for the update on Irish Water and queried if the agreement was signed by workers and Unions and sought to understand if the Local Authorities are obliged to take on staff that do not wish to transfer to Irish Water.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive responded to Cllr P. Hayes noting that Unions and Staff had signed an agreement and advised of the options available to staff.
Item 8: Disposal of property at Elton Court, Meelick, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 19
th
April, 2023 from Anne Haugh, Director of Service, Social Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of property at Elton Court, Meelick, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 19
th
April, 2023.
Ar moladh Councillor M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Councillor J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at 14 Elton Court, Meelick, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 19
th
April, 2023.”
Item 9: Disposal of property at Ballycasey, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 5
th
April, 2023 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property Management Unit was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of lands (by lease) at Ballycasey, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 5
th
April, 2023.
Ar moladh Councillor P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Councillor G.Flynn agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of lands (by lease) at Ballycasey, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 5
th
April, 2023.”
Item 10: Disposal of lands at Fodera, Kilbaha, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 29
th
March, 2023 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property Management Unit was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of lands at Fodera, Kilbaha, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 29
th
March, 2023.
Ar moladh Councillor C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Councillor G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of lands at Fodera, Kilbaha, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 29
th
March, 2023.”
Item 11: Disposal of property at Lacka, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 31
st
March, 2023 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property Management Unit was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose (by lease) of piece of ground at Lacka, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 31
st
March, 2023.
Ar moladh Councillor J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Councillor P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal (by lease) of piece of ground at Lacka, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 31
st
March, 2023.”
Item 12: Schedule date for Annual General Meeting.
It was agreed that the 2023 Annual General Meeting will take place at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, 30th June, 2023 having been proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney, seconded by Cllr. P.J. Ryan and agreed by the members.
Item 13: Memorial Committee Applications.
Report dated 28
th
April, 2023 from Mary McMahon, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services Department was circulated with the agenda. The report outlined details of applications received and considered by the Memorial Committee on 4
th
April, 2023 as follows:
Honest John Purcell memorial.
Planting of a tree in memory of Matilda Atijohn.
Memorial to honour those who served in the Great War 1914-1918
Suicide Awareness bench & tree at Miltown Malbay.
Memorial plaque in memory of Sr. Theresa Hogan at John Paul Estate, Kilrush
The applications were approved having been proposed by Cllr. P. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy and agreed by the members present.
Item 14: Ratification of new Rural SPC member.
Report dated 26th April, 2023 from Bernadette Haugh, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare PPN has nominated Mary Anne Kearns as Clare PPN’s Community and Voluntary representative on the Rural SPC to replace Eugene Crimmins.
This was approved the members present having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes, seconded by Cllr. C. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
Item 15: Statutory Audit Report to the members of Clare County Council for the year ended 31st December 2021.
The Statutory Audit Report to the Members of Clare County Council on the Accounts of Clare County Council for year ended 31
st
December, 2021 was circulated with the agenda.
The report included the Chief Executive’s responses to all comments raised by the Auditor. The report as presented was noted by the members present.
Item 16: Report from Audit Committee on Statutory Audit Report for year ended 31st December 2021.
Report from Austin Slattery, Chairman on behalf of the Clare Audit Committee was circulated with the agenda. The report states that the Audit Committee held its meeting on 13th February, 2023 to review the Statutory Audit Report for year ending 31st December, 2021.
The members noted the report as presented.
Item 17: Clare County Council Audit Committee Annual Report 2022.
The 2022 Audit Committee Annual Report was circulated with the agenda. The report states that under the provision of the Audit Charter for Clare County Council and Section 60 of the Local Government Act 2014 requires that the Audit Committee report to the Council at least annually.
The report outlines details of the Audit Committee under the following headings:
Functions of the Audit Committee
Membership of the Committee
Role and Responsibility of Internal Audit
Meetings with Chief Executive and Directors of Services
Internal Audit
Local Government Audit Report 2021
Corporate Risk Register/Risk Registers
External Assessment of Internal Audit Function by IPA
Appointment of new Internal Auditor
Work Programme for 2023
The members noted this item as presented.
Item 18: Clare County Council Annual Financial Statement 2022.
The Annual Financial Statement for 2022 together with a report was circulated in advance of the agenda and was noted by the members present, having been proposed by Cllr. B. Chambers and seconded by Cllr. J. Cooney
Ar moladh Councillor C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Councillor J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“In accordance with Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001, the approval of Council is sought for additional expenditure by Division as set out below.
Division
Euro
Housing and Building
1,367,000
Road and Transportation and Safety
3,751,000
Water Supply and Sewerage
579,000
Development Incentives and Controls
5,428,000
Environmental Protection
863,000
Recreation and Amenity
1,271,000
Ar moladh Councillor J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Councillor P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That Transfers to reserves as set out below are hereby approved:
Euro
A
Housing and Building
2,413,000
B
Road Transportation and Safety
892,000
C
Water Supply and Sewerage
177,000
D
Development Incentives and Controls
8,376,000
E
Environmental Protection
1,270,000
F
Recreation and Amenity
1,324,000
G
Agriculture, Education, Health & Welfare
0
H
Miscellaneous Services
1,270,000
I
Support Services
1,998,000
Total
17,720,000
Item 19: Clare Section 85 Agreement between Limerick City and County Council and Clare County Council - UL to Montpelier Greenway.
Report dated 24th April, 2023 from Seán Lenihan, Senior Engineer, Project Management Office in relation to the UL to Montpelier Greenway which is being advanced by the Limerick City and County Council was circulated with the agenda.
The report states that the lands on which the greenway is to be developed are yet to be decided and will lie within the functional area of the Limerick City and County Council. However, a portion of the land may lie within the functional area of Clare County Council. In any event, in the course of the route selection, design development and preparation of statutory documentation it will be necessary to undertake surveys, investigations and assessments within the functional area of Clare County Council.
In this regard, it is proposed to enter into a Section 85 Agreement with Limerick City and County Council whereby the powers, functions and duties relating to the design and construction of the greenway within the functional area of Clare County Council would be performed by Limerick City and County Council. Limerick City and County Council has confirmed that they will continue to liaise with and keep Clare County Council updated on an ongoing basis in relation to the scheme.
A draft Section 85 Agreement was circulated for the approval of Clare County Council.
Ar moladh Councillor M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Councillor J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council agrees to the entering into an Agreement, as presented to it under Section 85 of the Local Government Act, 2001 with Limerick City and County Council, for the carrying out by Limerick City and County Council of all the relevant statutory procedures, procuring the necessary design work, acquiring the land and carrying out of the construction work and any other powers, functions and duties necessary for the design, construction and completion of the UL to Montpelier Greenway.
The making of an agreement by a local authority under Section 85 of the Local Government Act 2001 is a reserved function.”
Item 20: Briefing on enhancements to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant 2:00 p.m.
The briefing was postponed due to a delay in a prior engagement. It was agreed that it will be rescheduled in the coming weeks.
Item 21: 22nd Infantry Battalion collection of historical memorabilia.
Ar moladh Councillor C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Councillor M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“In light of the long and strong connection of the 22nd Infantry Battalion Association and the 22nd Infantry Battalion with both the town Ennis and indeed the County, I am calling on Clare County Council to provide the necessary space in the new DeValera Library in Ennis for the 22nd Infantry Battalion collection of historical memorabilia, which currently has no permanent home.”
(M)
Helen Walsh, County Librarian, replied as follows:
“The library design has been finalised since late 2018/19 with all spaces allocated to various aspects of library provision. The build is 2,321 sqm over three floors with the ground floor allocated to children, teenage and adult fiction, the first floor to adult non-fiction, local studies and public study spaces. The second floor is administrative containing library Headquarters.
The allocation of space is challenging in a build of this kind as libraries become more integrated into communities, there are Government protocols in place for provision of space for many demographics such as age friendly adaptations, autism, and dementia friendly spaces, IT and Wi Fi provision as well as access to bookstock and study spaces
. It should be noted that there is no exhibition
space in the new building
– there is a separate 80sqm art gallery which will have visual arts as its focus and a 60sqm multi-purpose room. Consequently, as space is already allocated, the 22
nd
Battalion Memorabilia is best suited to display in the County Museum.
Currently, Clare Museum is unable to accept
l
arge collections for either storage or display, but contact should be made with the Museum Curator with a view to assessing the collection. A good alternative in creating access may be to consider photographing the collection and putting it online which is often the most cost-effective way of making collections available to the public.”
The elected members expressed disappointment that a solution cannot be found and reminded the meeting that the people who took up arms for this Country must not be forgotten. The members also noted that Daniel O’Connell memorabilia is also looking to be given to Clare County Council and a solution to this problem needs to be found. It was suggested that the old Library might be an option to store these collections. The members requested an update in relation to the completion date of the new County Library.
Anne Haugh, Director of Service, Social Development stated that completion of the new Library was still on track to be completed by the end of October 2023 with fit out to follow and opening early first quarter 2024.
Item 22: Planning Permission.
Ar moladh Councillor P.J. Kelly
Cuidithe ag Councillor T O’Callaghan, agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council call on the Minister for Transport to make arrangements with TII in order to facilitate planning permissions for farmers sons or daughters who take over the ownership and management of farms from their parents”.
(M)
The elected members unanimously agreed that this was an attack on rural Ireland and felt that rural communities need to be protected and supported. The members felt that it is important to facilitate sons and daughters to live on the family farm. Cllr. Kelly asked that this be brought before the Oireachtas Members to seek their support.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development confirmed that the public consultation remains open until Thursday 11
th
May and that councillors could make observations directly to the OPW.
Item 23: Fly Tipping.
Ar moladh Councillor I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Councillor D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“As fly tipping continues to blight our county, destroying the environment and encouraging additional cost on Clare County Council and landowners both financially and in resources I am requesting:
A) that Clare County Council suspend the issuing of fines for fly tipping and all cases are processed through the courts.
B) Request an update on the implications for households receiving state support, for housing, that have been identified as illegally fly tipping
C) I request that the Department of Environment implement and manage all arrangements for household waste services as part of all state assisted tenancy agreements through the weekly/monthly rental payment.”
(M)
Siobhán McNulty, Acting Director of Service, Physical Development and Pádraig MacCormaic, Acting Senior Executive Officer, Social Development replied as follows:
“The Litter Pollution Act 1997, as amended, under Section 3 and Section 28 provides for issuing of monetary fines for certain offences as well as dealing with offences through the courts system. The Waste management Acts, Section 11 also provides for management of offences through the court system. However, it is not always proportionate to deal with offences through the courts. Cases are looked at based on severity, evidence found and the likelihood of a successful outcome. The Environment Section have and will continue to take cases through the courts system where appropriate. To date we have been successful in achieving prosecutions for offences under relevant legislation. We will continue to assess the cases on an individual basis, noting that compliance with all relevant Environmental Legislation is a key objective.
Households in receipt of state support for housing are subject to the same provisions under the Litter Pollution Act 1997 as all others. The Act provides for issuing of monetary fines and follow up through the court services. In addition, for council tenants, their tenancy agreements include specific details in relation to disposal of rubbish. If the Housing unit become aware of breaches as a result of fly tipping these breaches will be followed up on by our Estate Management Team.
We will arrange for this request to be forward to the Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage.”
The elected members acknowledged the work being done by the staff in the Environmental Team and agreed that issuing fines is not an effective means of trying to curtail this behaviour. The members felt that bringing the offenders to court might be a more effective solution and that naming and shaming is the only way to deal with these individuals. It was also suggested that Council tenants should be made aware of their obligations in relation to waste disposal in their tenancy agreement. The members requested a timeline in relation to the use of CCTV being enacted as a deterrent to those carrying out these criminal acts.
Item 24: Affordable Housing.
Ar moladh Councillor P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Councillor M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That this Council request Minister for Housing, Darragh O'Brien would look at the criteria around affordable housing in Co. Clare”
(M)
The elected members sought clarification on the current arrangement and what areas it covered. The members welcomed the recent news that Ennis and Shannon have been approved under the scheme but noted that demand for middle income earners to purchase homes was huge and suggested looking at the population of local electoral areas and taking a broader and more rural approach to the scheme.
Anne Haugh, Director of Social Development advised the members that the submission made to the Department for the scheme was for the urban centres of Ennis and Shannon. Ms. Haugh advised that the housing market analysis determined that there was an affordability challenge in Ennis and Shannon and that this clearly demonstrated a case for a real need for the affordable housing scheme in Clare. Ms. Haugh also advised the members that certain flexibility has been introduced to the scheme where a distinct local need can be identified in towns that do not have a population exceeding 10,000.
Item 25: Parking throughout our county towns.
Ar moladh Councillor T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Councillor G. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to engage analysis on provision of adequate parking throughout our county towns and villages due to seasonal increase in population at different times throughout the year.”
(M)
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Roads and Transportation replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is at an advanced stage in relation to the provision of additional parking across the County.
A comprehensive countywide parking review commenced last year which includes the following:
- Review of existing pay-parking
- Proposed changes to pay-parking
- Review of parking byelaws
- Review of payment methods and IT
The delivery of these changes are at various stages of development and will take place in close consultation with elected members in advance of rollout in the various Municipal Districts.
In conjunction with the National Transport Authority (NTA) Clare County Council have commenced the process of the development of an Area Based Transport Plan (ABTA) for Ennis. This will include issues such as parking.
The Cliffs of Moher Strategy document will also deal with issue of parking deficits during the busy summer peak and it is proposed the document will include for the provision of additional parking in the vicinity of the Cliffs of Moher and Burren Geo Park in the West Clare Municipal District.
Proposed car parking projects across County Clare are at various stages of development in the General Design Office for the Municipal Districts and various departments across the Local Authority as follows:
- Offices of Clare County Council at New Road, Ennis
- Gort Road Industrial Estate (3 locations)
- Abbey Street, Killaloe (from Ballina/Killaloe Mobility Plan)
- Ballycuggeran, Killaloe
- Francis Street, Ennis
- Mountshannon Holy Island Visitor Centre
- Ennistymon
- Sixmilebridge Public Car Park – additional spaces
- School Road, Corrofin
- Corrofin – rear of OPW site
- Vandeleur Garden upgrade
- Loop Head Lighthouse
- Buttermarket, Ennis
- Market Square Scariff (RRDF funded Public Realm Project)
- Mountshannon Road, Scariff – new carpark proposed.
In recent years upgrades of existing carparks have taken place which have increased their capacity particularly at locations such as Lahinch and Ennistymon. There are proposals for 19 separate carpark developments within Clare County Council at present.”
The elected members noted the comprehensive reply and agreed that the provision of carparking has always been challenging. The members also noted the value of a car park to support local businesses to thrive while also allowing residents to live in comfort. Questions were raised in relation to the status of Francis Street and the members queried if this was proposal was now paused. Cllr C. Murphy sought clarification if a location-based assessment was being undertaken to determine the numbers of parking being used by permit holders.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development confirmed that no development will take place without prior consultation and that the Francis Street site is currently the subject of a master planning exercise.
Cllr. G. Flynn sought to understand why the Director of Economic was advising on matters relating to housing.
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Road and Transportation confirmed that the layout of existing carparks will be considered and advised that when bye laws are being developed it will form part of the review and public consultation process. He also advised that permits will be reviewed as part of the car parking assessment.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien clarified that the Director of Economic Development was asked to reply as she is also the Director of Ennis Municipal District.
Item 26: Ash Dieback Disease.
Ar moladh Councillor P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Councillor P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“Calling on the Minister with responsibility for forestry Pippa Hackett to give landowners emergency permission to remove dead ash trees from plantations affected by Ash Dieback disease as a matter of urgency”.
(M)
The elected members agreed that this is a very serious and frustrating issue that is not getting the appropriate support from Government. The members noted that investing in forestry is investing in our future and expressed frustration that it is visibly dying. The members agreed that the livelihood of people in rural Ireland is being affected by not allowing forestry owners to remove the dead trees and replant. It was also noted that this is a safety issue and could become an issue for the Local Authority in the future.
Item 27: Clare Tourism.
Ar moladh Councillor J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Councillor C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“In light of the very unique and positive role Clare County Council will play in the future direction of Clare Tourism and the potential multifaceted opportunities arising I can call on Clare County council insert a pillar and priority strategic objective with accompanying KPIs into the operating model of the various council/state owned vehicles and attractions under the control and direction of the local authority ensuring they operate in a manner that strategically creates conditions for the success and sustainability of host communities, SMEs and Towns and Villages in their immediate vicinity as a first priority and as a standing item to reference when key business decisions are being made.
Increasing business, SME enterprises, sustainable jobs, vibrant and regenerated rural towns and villages and living populations in line with our Rural Development Strategy are heavily dependent for success on proper mobility planning footfall / economic activity which can be enhanced and enabled by this focus being front and centre for Council owned and operated attractions.
The control and Governance of LA/State owned facilities and attractions / business interests with accompanying resources is a major responsibility as well as an important development opportunity for Clare County Council and the county and I ask that these vehicles set a regenerative theme, first and foremost for the communities and areas in which they operate.”
(M)
Leonard Cleary, Director of Service, Tourism Development replied as follows:
“I confirm that the Clare Tourism Strategy 2030, and its associated work programmes, and operating models of the tourism facilities, will be focused on Rural Regeneration. This will have regard to the needs of the host communities. Clare County Council is committed to a sustainable tourism model. The following extracts are relevant from the Strategy:
Sustainable Tourism
Tourism that takes full account of its current and future economic, social and environmental impacts, addressing the needs of visitors, the industry, the environment, and host communities (Pg 13)
Minimises negative economic, environmental, and social impacts;
Generates greater economic benefits for local people and enhances the well-being of host communities, improves working conditions and access to the industry;
Involves local people in decisions that affect their lives and life changes;
Makes positive contributions to the conservation of natural and cultural heritage, to the maintenance of the world’s diversity;
Provides more enjoyable experiences for tourists through more meaningful connections with local people, and a greater understanding of local cultural, social and environmental issues. (Pg 13)”
The elected members noted the work carried out by Clare County Council in acquiring Shannon Heritage. The members also noted that Clare County Council as owner of these businesses under the new Tourism Directorate must look at how they operate, use of resources and skillsets, how success can be measured, and how they can enhance and enable other local businesses.
It was agreed that Items No. 28 and 33 would be taken together.
Item 28: Croi Conaithe Vacant & Derelict Property Refurbishment Grant.
Ar moladh Councillor J. Cooney
Cuidithe ag Councillor J. Garrihy agus M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council welcomes the decision by the government to extend the Croi Conaithe Vacant & Derelict Property Refurbishment Grant to those who wish to renovate a vacant or derelict property for either permanent occupancy or long term rent along with increased funding in recognition of the costs involved. This measure will boost the supply of rental properties and options for permanent homes & will deliver on a key plank of Housing for All which is to reduce vacancy and dereliction in our cities, towns, villages and rural countryside and provide more housing options in the process.
We applaud the work being done by the team in Clare County Council on this key initiative and call on the Council to maximise support and resources for their efforts to bring this expanded scheme to the attention of everyone across the county through walk in clinics and information events in each LEA along with a revised information campaign in context of the expanded scheme.
(M)
Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property & Facilities Management replied as follows:
“The decision by Government to extend the Croí Conaithe Vacant and Derelict Property Refurbishment Grants scheme from 1st May 2023 is also welcomed by the Council Executive and I look forward to working further with the elected members and the owners of properties to bring them back into economic use with the financial support from Government. The implementation of the Vacant Homes Strategy as a pillar within the Housing for All Strategy is a key objective for Clare County Council.
In February, the team held ten information sessions across the County, supported by social media advertising for them and we also did a 20 minute interview on Clare FM. The format was by means of walk-in-clinics where property owners met one-to-one with a staff member for advice in relation to their individual eligibility and the specific details of the property. The walk-in-clinics were very well attended as they were held outside of core working hours and many of the people we met have proceeded to submit applications for the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant. We have seen a considerable increase in the number of applications made and enquiries received in the period since.
Following receipt of the details for the expanded scheme, we will work on the information campaign over a three month period to include the following:
Briefing to elected members
Media Campaign – Print and Social Media
Radio – Interview on Clare FM and other local Radio stations
Updating of Council website
Communication to Public Private Network (PPN)
Communication of the changes to all existing applicants including those who may have previously been in-eligible (80 people)
Communication of the changes to all of the individual enquiries received to date in previous clinics, phone and email over past few months (approx. 200 people)
Communication of the Grant opportunity to all properties on our Derelict Sites listing that may be eligible for the grant (approx. 160 people)
Walk in Clinics for individual consultations (up to 10 to be held)
Communication to Planning Agents, Solicitors and Auctioneers
This will be quite demanding while maintaining progress on dealing with all current and new applications, site inspections, payments and legal work.
I acknowledge your support of the work of the team in this area.”
Item 33: Initiatives to increase supply of housing.
Ar moladh Councillor J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Councillor J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“While welcoming the latest initiatives to increase the supply of much needed housing we call on Clare County Council to (A) illustrate how the various different components will enhance our housing stock (B) run workshops in the Municipal Districts to inform relevant business interests, owners of vacant/derelict properties and those who may wish renovate/ convert or build with support from these schemes.”
(M)
Pádraig MacCormaic, Acting Senior Executive Officer, Social Development and Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property & Facilities Management replied as follows:
“A] The Minister has recently announced various initiatives to stimulate further housing development and to support renovation of vacant home. We await circulars and final details on these measures in the coming weeks. A number of these initiatives could have positive outcome for the county and some nay have positive impact on the housing stock of Clare County Council
Temporary removal of Development Levies. Clare County Council benefit from development through provision of local authority housing under Part V legislation. The removal of Development Levies is expected to apply to new properties commenced with the next 12months. It is hoped that the reduction in construction costs will encourage greater private development in that period creating greater purchase and rental opportunities for private households and also providing additional local authority homes for Clare Council Council.
Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant : will be increased from €30,000 to €50,000 for vacant properties and from €50,000 to €70,000 for derelict properties, extended to cover houses built up to 2007, and will be available for properties intended for rental as well as owner-occupied. This has no impact on Clare County Council housing stock as the grant is for privately owned properties. However it is hoped that it may support provision of further rental solutions to households in the county, including many on our social housing list
B] While the Vacant Homes function moved under the umbrella of the Economic Development directorate earlier this year we still work closely together and have regular meeting around the vacant / derelict property issues in the county. The Vacant Homes Team have welcomed the expansion of the refurbishment Scheme and have already noticed an increased interest in the scheme.
In February, the team held ten information sessions across the County, supported by social media advertising for them and we also did a 20 minute interview on Clare FM. The format was by means of walk-in-clinics where property owners met one-to-one with a staff member for advice in relation to their individual eligibility and the specific details of the property. The walk-in-clinics were very well attended as they were held outside of core working hours and many of the people who attended have proceeded to submit applications for the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant. We have seen a considerable increase in the number of applications made and enquiries received in the period since.
Following receipt of the details for the expanded scheme, the Vacant Homes Team have advised that they will continue work on the information campaign over a three month period to include the following:
Briefing to elected Members and Housing and Planning SPC
Media Campaign – Print and Social Media
Radio – Interview on Clare FM and other local Radio stations
Updating of Council website
Communication to Public Private Network (PPN)
Communication of the changes to all existing applicants including those who may have previously been in-eligible (80 people)
Communication of the changes to all of the individual enquiries received to date in previous clinics, phone and email over past few months (approx. 200 people)
Communication of the Grant opportunity to all properties on our Derelict Sites listing that may be eligible for the grant (approx. 160 people)
Communication to Rate Payers
Walk in Clinics for individual consultations (up to 10 to be held)
Communication to Planning Agents, Solicitors and Auctioneers
The Housing team look forward to assisting and supporting the Vacant Homes Team as required during this information campaign.”
The elected members welcomed the replies to both motions and noted the removal of development levies as hugely important and that the public should be made aware of this. The members welcomed the inclusion of the additional provision in relation to long term/permanent rental of the property. The members noted that while apprenticeship numbers are increasing, it is still something the Government needs to focus on if they intend to make this scheme work to its full potential. The members felt that the scheme has gathered great traction and commended staff of Clare County Council on the information sessions and clinics held in recent months. The members agreed that vacant and derelict buildings need to be brought back to use and long term lets are most important.
Item 29: Macra na Feirme campaign.
Ar moladh Councillor P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Councillor T O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
"That Clare County Council supports the recent Macra na Feirme campaign, entitled "The Rural Revival, Steps for our Future". This campaign was a march that departed Athy, Co. Kildare at 7pm on Tuesday, April 25th, marching through the night, physically carrying their message, before arriving at Government Buildings circa 1pm on Wednesday, April 27
th
. The message is simple, Macra Na Feirme members want to be able remain at home, working and living in their own communities and the key components of their message are as follows:
Accessing affordable housing and cumbersome housing planning guidelines.
Disjointed and scarce healthcare services for rural communities.
The Government's definition of a family farm as 'average' and 'typical'.
No recognition or engagement by Government on a farming succession scheme.
Lack of planning for the future of our rural communities informed by rural people.
Imposition of quotas on young farmers availing of grant aid support.
Lack of public transport for rural Ireland.
Proposals to rewet large areas of rural Ireland.
I am also requesting that this Notice of Motion be circulated to all other local authorities."
(M)
Cllr P. Murphy read out the letter received from Macra na Feirme where the message was clear that they want to remain at home, working and living in their local communities. The elected members agreed that unfortunately these are the challenges facing rural Ireland today and noted that they wholeheartedly support these young people who love what they do and want to be able to remain doing it into the future. It was suggested that representatives from Macra na Feirme be invited to the Council Chamber to address members.
Pat Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged the value Macra na Feirme brings to rural communities and confirmed that Clare County Council will support their campaign and he undertook to issue the motion to all Local Authorities for support.
Item 30: Charging points for electric cars at tourism facilities.
Ar moladh Councillor P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Councillor T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That this Council provide charging points for electric cars at each of the tourism facilities operated by the Council at which a suitable location for charging points be designated in each town and village to be in conjunction with electricity suppliers.”
(M)
Leonard Cleary, Director for Tourism replied as follows:
“The Tourism Department have liaised with colleagues on a cross directorate basis, in particular the Roads department who are developing a county-wide strategy on the implementation of electric vehicle charging points.
In this regard, for each new visitor attraction that is being developed, funding measures will be sourced in order to install an appropriate amount of charging points. This process is currently underway in the Vandeleur Walled Garden and Visitor Centre.
In addition, the Director of the Cliffs of Moher Visitor Experience has confirmed the status of such installations at this location as follows:
“There is a current project in progress at the Cliffs of Moher Experience to install two charging points at the Cliffs of Moher Experience car park subject to all technical obstacles being overcome”.
In summary, we welcome this motion and will continue to progress this development and delivery.”
The elected members acknowledged and welcomed the increase in the use of electric vehicles in the county. The members agreed that it was important that ‘fast’ charging points are installed to allow people charge and move on quickly. It was also noted that people are taking up parking spaces in the charging point all day and that a management protocol may have to be introduced to prevent this.
As the time had reached 17.40 p.m. it was proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy and agreed by the members present that the meeting be extended to complete the remaining items.
Item 31: Penalties to deal with graffiti and tagging.
Ar moladh Councillor M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Councillor D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“Each week we are seeing more and more graffiti throughout our county. I request Clare County Council facilitate a meeting/ subgroup of Council staff, Councillors and retailers to discuss the sale and use of aerosol paint sprays.
The objective of this group would be to only sell these aerosols to those over 18 and that like solvents, cigarettes, alcohol and vaping equipment, that these products would be kept behind or near the cash register.
I also request that this Council write to the Minister for Justice asking them to review the penalties given to those who destroy our public spaces and properties with graffiti and tagging.”
(M)
Siobhán McNulty, Acting Direct of Service, Physical Development replied as follows:
“The Environment Section of Clare County Council administers a local scheme to provide up to 70% funding to initiatives on public education and awareness in relation to litter and graffiti. The funding for this is provided by the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications and our allocation for 2023 is €22,000. Eligible projects must meet the criteria set down; however, the funding is to raise awareness and education and is not for works.
The legislation pertaining to the sale and use of aerosols falls outside of the remit of the Council. Under the Irish Child Care Act 1991 it is an offence to sell, offer or make available solvents to a person aged 17 or under if there is reasonable cause to believe that he/she is likely to inhale them. The enforcement of this legislation falls to An Garda Síochána.”
Cllr M. Howard informed the members of an initiative called Challenge 25 where Local Authorities and Retailers have come together to enforce checking of ID for anyone under 25. The members agreed that this initiative should be broadened out to youth groups where their talent can be harnessed, and it was suggested that ‘Challenge 25’ be added to the Joint Policing Committee.
Item 32: SPC presentations.
Ar moladh Councillor C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Councillor T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That a policy be put in place to ensure key presentations, with cross directorate implications, to SPCs are offered to all councillors, irrespective of their membership”
(M)
Ann Reynolds, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services replied as follows:
“It is acknowledged that key policy issues arise at individual Strategic Policy Committee level that are relevant to the wider organisation and the county at large. It is therefore important that key presentations are identified and made available to all members of Council. The relevant Director of Service in consultation with the SPC Chair will identify as part of the meeting agenda the key presentations and agree that the secretariat to the SPC will make those presentations available either electronically or in person to the members of the council.
A separate area on the Councillor Extranet can also be arranged to make the presentations available to download.”
The elected members agreed that the more information they have the better equipped they are, and that this would be a great opportunity to keep updated and to formulate ideas.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive agreed that there was merit in the motion but given the scale of items and the fact that not everyone wants all of the information all of the time undertook to find a suitable compromise. Mr. Dowling referred to the Monthly Management Report which contains useful information that the members would benefit from.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr T. O’Brien reminded the meeting about the Europe Day presentation being held on the Council Chamber on Tuesday 9
th
May at 2.00 p.m.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
LAMA Spring Seminar entitled “Apprenticeship & Future Building Initiatives Recruitment & Training” taking place in Bantry, Co. Cork on 2
nd
– 4
th
March, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €618.96 including conference fee of €160.
It was agreed that Cllr. T. O’Brien attend this Conference.
AILG Elected Members Module 2 Training entitled “Local Authority Climate Action Plans – Building Sustainable Communities” being h
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback