Minutes of January 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of January 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 9th January 2023 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillor M. Howard, J. Flynn, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Murphy, P. Daly,
T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan,
P. McMahon, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman, S. Talty, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, L. Grant, P.J. Kelly, B. Chambers, G. Keating, C. Murphy, I. Lynch.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Margaret O’Rourke, A/Staff Officer.
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Director of Rural Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Physical Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Service, Ukrainian Response Team.
Ms. Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development.
Mr. Adrian Headd, A/Senior Engineer, Social Development.
Mr. Seán Lenihan, Senior Engineer, Physical Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. A. Norton, P. Hayes and A. O’Callaghan.
Presiding:
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Mellett family, Shannon on the death of Patrick Mellett, RIP.
The Considine family, Lissycasey on the death of Breda Considine, RIP.
The Johnston family, Shannon on the death of Aoife Johnston, RIP.
The Loftus family, Cratloe and Ennis on the death of Paddy Loftus, RIP.
The Geary family, Kilkee on the death of Kathleen Geary, RIP.
The Carrig family, Clarecastle on the death of John Carrig, RIP.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. A. Norton
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the December Meeting of Clare County Council held on 12
th
December, 2022 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
Cllr. C. Murphy referred to resolution circulated by Cork County Council in relation to the proposed Planning and Development Bill and requested that a briefing be provided to the elected members to outline the impact of this Act as it will reduce capacity of Councillors. P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and stated that there are a number of developments taking place in the context of planning legislation and agreed that a briefing for Councillors will be worthwhile when timely to do so.
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 7
th
December, 2022 from the Department of Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science regarding the inclusion of apprentices in Student Cards Schemes.
Correspondence dated 13
th
November, 2022 from Deputy Cathal Crowe concerning defective block redress.
Correspondence dated 13
th
December, 2022 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Housing Assistance Payment and legislation around anti-social behaviour.
Correspondence dated 9
th
December, 2022 from the Minister for Justice in relation to the Housing Assistance Payment and legislation around anti-social behaviour.
Correspondence dated 14
th
December, 2022 from the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine regarding support for Burren area and Hen Harrier area.
Resolution circulated by Limerick City and County Council in relation to bus shelters.
Resolution circulated by Kerry County Council in relation to homeless accommodation.
Resolution circulated by Limerick City and County Council in relation to identifying and progressing a sustainable travel solution in two locations connecting Parteen and Ardnacrusha with the city and connecting Westbury with the city.
Resolution circulated by Cork County Council in relation to the County Development Plan.
Resolution circulated by Cork County Council in relation to LIS Scheme.
Resolution circulated by Cork County Council in relation to personal health insurance.
Resolution circulated by Monaghan County Council in relation to the implementation of proper, sensitive procedures to avoid any further retention of a baby’s organs at post mortem without the express permission of the parent.
Item 4: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the of the Social Development S.P.C. meeting held on 7 September, 2022 be noted”.
b. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Economic Development S.P.C. meeting held on 5 September, 2022 be noted”.
Cllr. C. Murphy referred to the presentation provided at the Economic Development S.P.C. meeting on the Maritime Area Planning Act 2021 and suggested that all Councillors be invited to listen to presentations being given to S.P.C.s going forward. P. Dowling, Chief Executive responded and stated that Maritime legislation will affect Clare County Council, Councillors and constituents as it will have a significant impact on Clare as a coastal county. Mr. Dowling stated that it is intended to include this legislation in a future briefing.
Cllr. J. Flynn suggested that Clare County Council prepare a Masterplan on the impact of future offshore development on services, water/sewerage infrastructure, roads and population.
c. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Rural Development S.P.C. meeting held on 20 September, 2022 be noted”.
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 5
December, 2022 as presented.
Item 6: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Item 7: Applications considered at Memorial Committee meeting for approval by Council.
Report dated 14
th
December, 2022 from Mary McMahon, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services Department was circulated with the agenda. The report outlined details of applications received and considered by the Memorial Committee on 7
th
December, 2022 as follows:
Roadside memorial at Cooraclare village to remember deceased members of Darcy family
Statue to honour late Brendan O Regan at The Square, Sixmilebridge
Bench at White Strand, Miltown in memory of Antoinette Pender (McGannon)
The applications were approved having been proposed by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy, seconded by Cllr. P. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
Item 8: Clare Local Area Grant Scheme Guidelines for 2023.
Report dated January, 2023 from Bernadette Haugh, A/Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with Clare Local Area Grants Scheme 2023 guidelines for applicants (previously known as the Community Support Scheme).
The report states that the Budget for the 2023 scheme is €427,000 and reflects a decrease in overall funding of €170,500. The new Scheme for 2023 and the allocations across the grant categories were approved by the members of the Working Group for the Action Plan for Rural Ireland on the 15
th
December 2023.
The following are the approved grant categories for 2023:
Public Realm Initiatives & Amenity Projects
Maintenance of Open Spaces in Private Housing Developments
Burial Ground Maintenance
Irish Language
Best Kept Local Authority Estate
Tourism Promotion
Sustainable Tourism
Community Playgrounds
Arts
The 2023 Clare Local Area Grant Scheme was approved having been proposed by Cllr. C. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Cooney and agreed by the members present.
Item 9: Ennis 2040 DAC accounts 2021.
The Ennis 2040 (strategic Development) Designated Activity Company Abridged Financial Statements for the financial period from 8 December 2020 (date of incorporation) to 31 December 2021 was circulated with the agenda and was noted by the members present.
Item 10: Raising of loan to facilitate the issue of loans to borrowers approved under the Local Authority Home Loan Scheme.
Report from Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda. The report states that since the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan was introduced in 2018 and the subsequent changes made to the Local Authority Home Loan in January 2022 there has been a continuous increase in loan applications. Since 2018 Clare County Council has drawn down over €10m in loans from the H.F.A. It is anticipated with the rise in property prices and the changes made to the Local Authority Home Loan regarding applications from those now eligible under the “Fresh Start” principle that a further loan of €10m will be adequate to meet the needs of future loan applications.
The report continues that in October 2018 Clare County Council adopted a resolution to approve the raising of a loan of €8,000,000 (under the Local Government (No. 2) Act, 1960) from the Housing Finance Agency, to facilitate the issue of loans to borrowers to buy out the Councils equity under the Shared ownership Scheme and also to facilitate the drawdown of funds for Annuity House Purchase Loans.
As of 15
th
November, 2022 there was a balance of circa €215,000 available with the Housing Finance Agency in relation to Clare County Council’s loan drawdown facility. It is now proposed that this Council approve the raising of a further loan of €10,000,000 from the Housing Finance Agency, to facilitate the issue of loans to borrowers approved under the Local Authority Home Loan Scheme.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council approves the raising of a loan of €10,000,000 (under the Local Government (No. 2) Act, 1960) from the Housing Finance Agency to facilitate the issue of loans to borrowers approved under the Local Authority Home Loan Scheme.”
Motion for Purpose of dealing with Urgent Business.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien informed the meeting that a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business had been received and that motion may be proposed in accordance with Standing Order No. 44. This was agreed by the members present.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien informed the meeting that the request was signed by Cllrs. J. Cooney, G. Flynn and B. Chambers on behalf of their political groupings which read as follows:
“In light of the ongoing crisis at UHL, the elected members of Clare County Council call on the HSE and the Minister for Health to immediately open Ennis, Nenagh, and St. John’s as full accident and emergency departments on a full time 24 hour, 7 day week basis.
We also call on all Oireachtas members in the mid west region to support and work for same.”
The elected members were unanimous in supporting this motion and paid tribute to the healthcare staff in UHL who are working in very difficult conditions. The members agreed that it is time to stand together to fight for the citizens of Clare to get a decent health service. The members were unanimous in their demand that Ennis, Nenagh and St. John’s Hospitals be open on a 24/7 basis and called for support from the Oireachtas members in the Mid West.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien advised that this motion will be sent to Limerick City & County Council and Tipperary County Council.
Item 11: Resourcing of Rural and Community Development.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council review its commitment to focus on and resourcing of Rural and Community Development.”
(M)
Leonard Cleary, Director of Rural Development replied as follows:
“The Clare Rural Development Strategy will be renewed in early 2023 and we will work within the 2023 Council budget as adopted.”
The elected members welcomed the news that the Clare Rural Development Strategy will be renewed in 2023 and acknowledged the rural development focus in County Clare and the proven ability to deliver projects within budget. The elected members expressed concern in relation to the impact Covid-19 and the response to the emergency humanitarian crisis has had on rural communities in Clare and the threat of community burnout as a result. The members gave credit and praise to the communities who have taken displaced people into their communities and provided support for them. The members agreed that more resources need to be provided to host communities as well as community building support. Compliments were paid to the Rural Development Officers who provide a link to support communities between Clare County Council and communities. The members raised concern in relation to mis-information currently circulating which is causing fear in host communities. P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and noted that Clare County Council established a department dedicated to rural development which has been able to access funding and has been accessible and available to communities across the county. Mr. Dowling stated that the depletion of services in rural communities continues to be a challenge for the Council in promoting rural development.
L. Cleary, Director of Rural Development acknowledged national funding received to date based on strong projects supported by the elected members. Mr. Cleary stated that the Rural Development Strategy has been reviewed and that there will be a detailed focus on the strategy before it is brought before the members at the February Council meeting. Mr. Cleary informed the members that the recruitment of Rural Development Officers is coming to completion.
Item 12: Clare County Council indemnity.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That the Minister for Housing and Local Government be requested to indemnify Clare County Council against all costs and/or claims which may arise because the Council, in its County Development Plan, complied with Ministerial Directives on planning guidelines”
(M)
The members agreed that there is a need to protect our county and expressed concern regarding three issues namely population allocation, guidelines and initiative in Clare in relation to over and under 30 acres. The members felt that Clare County Council could be liable for challenge and felt it is time to take a stand and be prepared by asking the Minister to indemnify Clare County Council against all costs and/or claims which may arise because the Council, in its County Development Plan, complied with Ministerial Directives on planning guidelines.
Item 13: Programme of acquiring unused houses in towns and villages.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“We call on Clare County Council to actively pursue a programme of acquiring unused houses in our towns and villages with support from the Croi Conaithe / Town Centre First Schemes with a view to refurbishing these properties for subsequent rent.
That a pilot project be commenced with the identification of properties in each Municipal District.”
(M)
Liam Conneally, Director of Economic Development replied as follows:
“The legislative codes for the reactivation of vacant properties and derelict properties are different.
Vacant Properties
The new Planning and Development Bill will set out measures to increase the capacity for Local Authorities to utilise Compulsory Purchase Orders (CPO) in pursuance of our functions. This will include clarity on provisions to allow Local Authorities to acquire vacant or derelict properties for onward sale, for example to develop for residential use. This will support the Government’s Croí Cónaithe / Town Centre First Scheme initiatives. The relaxation of the change of use regulations will also assist the reuse of vacant properties. However, it is prudent to await the final legislation in this area before we advance on vacant properties in urban centers County Clare. The Housing Department is currently in the process of advancing a vacant property under the existing CPO legislation and we will learn from this experience.
Derelict Sites
The powers of Compulsory Acquisition of Derelict Sites are set out in the Derelict Sites Act 1990. A working group at national level is assessing if these need to be strengthened and Carmel Greene is on this Working Group. While these powers have in the past been used sparingly by Clare County Council, this has changed in 2022. To-date in 2022, the CPO of six properties on the Derelict Sites Register have been initiated under this legislation and we are advancing this work as a pilot project. More CPOs are due to be initiated throughout 2023. The details of the six CPOs to date in 2022 are as follows:
Location
Current Status
Ennis
Two completed and now owned by the Council and proposed for re-development for social housing are being pursued by the Housing Department
One further CPO commenced, and an objection has been received – Engagement with owners has now commenced
Kilrush
One CPO completed and now owned by the Council and proposed for re-development for social housing are being pursued by the Housing Department
Mountshannon
One CPO awaiting registration in the Property Registration Authority
Cratloe
One CPO commenced and objections have been received – Engagement with owners has now commenced
In 2023 internal governance structures are being changed to amalgamate our work on vacant homes and derelict sites under the property function and this unit will work closely with the Town Centre First team to advance a significant work programme on the reuse of vacant and derelict properties in our County.”
The elected members voiced constituents frustration in relation to the number of vacant properties that exist in towns and villages and agreed that every opportunity should be explored to bring those properties back into use and make them available to house people who wish to live in rural Ireland. Compliments were paid to the Property Management team who have allocated resources and time in identifying and contacting property owners. The elected members suggested that a briefing be provided to explain how property owners can make properties available.
C. Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development thanked the elected members for their support and encouragement and stated that the Planning & Development Bill has been passed and that legislation is awaited which will include clarity on provisions to allow local authorities to acquire vacant or derelict properties for onward sale. Ms. Greene stated that there are 35 live applications which will be dealt with in a positive pro-active way. Ms. Greene outlined reasons why properties fall into dereliction.
Item 14: Pricing of concerts and major events.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council would request the Consumer Protection Commission to examine pricing of high-profile concerts and major events in Ireland”
(M)
The elected members noted the extravagant prices being paid to attend major events in Ireland and felt that this situation is allowed to exist due to little competition in the market as two or three companies control the vast majority of events. The members also noted the extortionate prices being charged by hotels when major events are taking place.
Item 15: Survey of all residential property owned and rented by Clare County Council.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on Clare County Council to carry out a comprehensive survey of all residential property owned and rented by the Local Authority with a focus on older developments and assess the level of repairs and maintenance required to improve the condition of these homes, this approach should reduce the need for major renovations when the tenancies are surrendered back to the Council for future letting and insure a shorter turnaround of available residential property.”
(M)
Anne Haugh, Director of Social Development replied as follows:
“As part of Clare County Council’s Planned Maintenance Programme, Council owned properties have been comprehensively surveyed to-date. New builds and acquired Council properties are also being surveyed as they come online and currently our housing stock number is circa. 2700 properties. A €10 million loan was sanctioned by this Council and to-date €3 million has been drawn down to develop the Asset Management System and to address certain planned priority and planned statutory works items which remain on-going via multi-property tenders on a phased basis over the next two years. In addition to these planned works, the condition surveys are also used to inform work programmes for units that are surrendered back to this Council for future letting. Separately this Council continues to meet targets regarding work associated with the Energy Retrofit Scheme.
Clare County Council are to the forefront of a sector wide move to a Planned Maintenance approach to management and maintenance of the housing stock and is one of just a very few local authorities in the country that has surveyed its entire stock. At a national level a procurement exercise is underway to roll out an asset management system for housing stock across the sector similar to that which has been implemented in Clare and funding has been committed by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage towards the completion of stock condition surveys by all local authorities on a phased basis over the coming years. The progress by Clare County Council in this area which has been made possible by the local authority own borrowing has been acknowledged by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage and a commitment to recoup the costs of the condition surveys and some initial completed works under the programme has been received. As the motion indicates the benefits of works being completed to properties in a planned manner as informed by the condition surveys should in time reduce the demand for responsive maintenance as well as reduce turnaround times for re-letting.
All directly rented properties by Clare County Council are surveyed with the Minimal Rental Standards in mind and depending on the type of lease, necessary improvements works are undertaken by the party responsible. Also registered RTB properties continue to be systematically surveyed in accordance with the targets set by the LGMA”.
The elected members acknowledged the Councils move to a planned maintenance programme and requested that a pro-active approach be taken and deal with older houses. The elected members stated that the Council is regularly criticized due to the time delay in re-letting Council houses that have been vacated. The members expressed concern in relation to the in-house capacity to carry out maintenance as the apprenticeship and tradesmen within the Council has dropped and it was felt that this would provide better value for money rather than relying on private contractors.
A. Headd, A/Senior Engineer, Social Development addressed the meeting and acknowledged that older stock require more maintenance. Mr. Headd informed the meeting that a development framework is in place for plumbers and electricians and that maintenance works will proceed using the budgets available.
Item 16: Valuation Act.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Kelly agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to amend the Valuation Act to ensure rates be based on Profit rather than the area of a building in a family-run business before the Commission of Valuations Revaluation has concluded and becomes effective for Rates from 1st Jan 2024.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that small medium family run businesses keep commercial activity in communities and agreed that commercial rates based on profit would be a sensible approach in order to protect these businesses and retain them in rural communities.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive informed the members that it is planned to invite Valuation Office personnel back to the Council Chamber to provide an update on progress in the county. Mr. Dowling referred to the importance of rates income in the provision of services by Clare County Council.
Item 17. Road Safety Officer/Active Travel Officer.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council consider the appointment of a full time Road Safety Officer/Active Travel Officer to promote road safety in Co Clare”
(M)
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Physical Development replied as follows:
“Options for the promotion of road safety and active travel are currently being considered.
Discussions have also taken place with the National Transport Authority in relation to the appointment of an Active Travel Officer. Clare County Council will actively pursue this appointment with the National Transport Authority and will continue to work towards getting funding approval for this post in 2023.”
The elected members agreed that it is vital that the appointment of a Road Safety Officer takes place as it is a very important role in order to promote road safety and raise awareness. The elected members complimented the work carried out on the Active Travel Programme to date and the work being done by the Road Design Team.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Physical Development noted the points raised by the members and stated that the grants approved have doubled from €25m to €50m. Dr. Kirby stated that resources have to be prioritized as the Department do not give corresponding resources. Dr. Kirby stated that the Director of the NTA has secured agreement to provide additional resources as Clare County Council delivers the Active Travel Programme and that it is intended when this appointment occurs the employee will perform the role of Road Safety Officer also.
Item 18: Tax on residential zoned land.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That this council would request the Minister for Finance put in place a derogation for a fixed period on the tax been placed on residential zoned land, as there is a very high number of people requesting dezoning and this is going to have a detrimental effect on the provision of housing in this County”
(M)
The elected members felt that clarity is needed on this issue as land has been zoned due to its strategic location and not at the request of landowners. Concern was raised that this could result in a situation whereby there will be very little zoned land in some areas as people do not understand the process. The members voiced concern that the vast majority of the public are not aware of the situation as many active farmers with land on town boundaries have land zoned without intention to develop it and will now be liable for tax. The members felt that landowners should know the status of residential zoning and strategic zoning and its liability for land tax. It was noted that confusion exists as the land tax is based on the present County Development Plan which will be replaced in April and landowners and officials are not clear as to which County Development Plan will be used. The members agreed that the land tax should be withdrawn or a derogation should be put in place until clarification is received. It was suggested that this be discussed in the context of a Draft County Development Plan workshop.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive informed the members that the deadline has passed and that 60 submissions have been received. Mr. Dowling agreed that a prudent approach be taken and suggested that this be debated fully at County Development Plan Workshop in order to address the legitimate concerns raised.
This was agreed by the members present.
Item 19: Review of strategic regional route.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. S. Talty, I. Lynch, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
"Given the significant difficulties faced by many of our rural communities in the recent icy conditions, that an immediate review is conducted of what constitutes a “strategic regional route” under the winter service plans with a view to including extra routes under Priority 2 (Plan B)”
(M)
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Physical Development replied as follows:
“The winter maintenance plan in Clare County Council is reviewed annually and a full strategic review is completed every three years.
Currently all of the National routes, Regional Roads with higher traffic volumes (strategic regional routes) and some busy local primaries are treated.
During the recent long cold snap in December, priority 3 routes were treated twice each day. Priority 3 covers all routes on winter maintenance plan and includes both priority 1 and priority 2 routes. This comprises of 17% of the network in Clare which carries approximately 70% of the traffic volume in Clare. This is significant coverage and is above the National average. With this winter maintenance plan, Clare is operating at full capacity over its 7 winter maintenance salting routes.
A further review will take place in the coming months which will include a review of the recent cold snap and concerns raised. We will also review local arrangements and where we can make further improvement to coverage in the Municipal Districts.”
The elected members commended the roads team for their work during the recent cold spell in endeavouring to keep roads safe. The members stated that while they understand the restraints involved in budgets and equipment, it was not satisfactory to leave communities on towns and villages periphery without services. The members felt that lower population density areas were left at risk of isolation as schools and public transport could not operate. The members agreed that these areas should be part of the programme and not serviced on an ad hoc basis. The members raised concern in relation to the damage caused to roads as a result of the inclement weather. It was noted that Clare County Council are enticing people to visit our county and it is important to grit essential routes. It was suggested that supplies of sand/grit be provided at strategic locations around the county.
Dr. C. Kirby addressed the meeting and stated that requests were taken into consideration and responded to. Dr. Kirby stated that a review meeting will take place in February and that there are ideas on how to make the best use of resources going forward.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive informed the meeting that Clare County Council will always respond as comprehensively as possible and that it is not possible to grit every road and footpath.
It was proposed by Cllr. G. Flynn, seconded by Cllr. D. McGettigan and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.00 p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 20: Pyrite Remediation Scheme.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council request the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage through the Pyrite Resolution Board
a) include County Clare in the Pyrite Remediation Scheme established under the Pyrite Resolution Act 2013.
b) amend the acceptances criteria removing the damage threshold to ensure all homes identified as affected by pyrite defective concrete blocks are included in the scheme.
c) that the current scheme is amended or an equal scheme is delivered to ensure all homes identified with defective concrete blocks will have foundations remediated as part of the remediation works.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that County Clare should be included in the Pyrite Remediation Scheme as well as the defective concrete block scheme. The members felt that the damage threshold should be removed so that all homes affected would be included in the scheme. The members also agreed that the current scheme be amended in order to include foundation remediation as part of the remediation works.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive informed the members that Clare County Council have made a submission around the details of the scheme and that the views of the Council have been reflected in that submission.
Item 21: Shannondoc.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“Following several complaints about lack of access to Shannondoc over the Christmas period, knowing this is their busiest time of the year, I am calling on Clare County Council to ask the management of Shannondoc the reasons why people were left with call cancellations or phones being left unanswered.
I am asking what was Shannondocs plan if any? Why did it not work?
Can we ask management to attend a meeting with Clare County Councillors to answer questions and discuss future plans so this does not happen again.”
(M)
The elected members stated that they received several complaints in relation to Shannondoc during the Christmas period and provided details of constituents experiences which were stressful and unnecessary for the patients and families involved. The members noted that Shannondoc was established to provide out of hours access to GPs and expressed disappointment that this has not materialized and that the service has not been enhanced. The members agreed that Shannondoc should be accountable and that having one centre open in the area is unacceptable.
Item 22: Introduction of an Uber-style service.
Cllr. P. Murphy agreed to defer this item to the February Council meeting.
"That Clare County Council call on the Minister for Transport and other relevant Government Departments to consider the introduction of an Uber-style service to help in addressing the transport crisis. This should be supported by a taxi taskforce that needs to look at why people are exiting the trade and how to reinvigorate such an essential service".
(M)
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback