Minutes of June 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of June 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 12th June 2023 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors M. Howard, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Murphy, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan,
J. Cooney, P. Hayes, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon,
G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman, S. Talty, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, L. Grant,
P.J. Kelly, B. Chambers, G. Keating, C. Murphy, I. Lynch.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Margaret O’Rourke, A/Staff Officer.
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Director of Service, Tourism Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Service, Rural Development and Ukrainian Services.
Ms. Siobhán McNulty, A/Director of Service, Physical Development.
Mr. Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development.
Mr. Padraic McElwee, Head of Enterprise, Economic Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. J. Flynn, A. Norton, A. O’Callaghan
Absent:
Cllr. J. Crowe
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien presided.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien extended thanks to the Clare County Council staff involved in arranging the big screen in Tim Smythe Park to facilitate people who were unable to get tickets for the Munster Senior Hurling Championship Final on Sunday. Cllr. O’Brien stated that the team and management represented the county with pride and urged people to support them in their future games.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Bredin family, Ennis on the death of Val Bredin RIP, father of Al Bredin, Facilities Manager
The Quinlivan family, Cranny on the death of Mary Quinlivan, RIP, mother of Patricia Quinlivan, Finance and John Quinlivan, Water Services.
The Slattery family, Quin on the death of Eamon Slattery, RIP.
The Canny and Clune families, Quin on the death of Lizzy Clune, RIP.
The Roughan family Sixmilebridge on the death of John Roughan, RIP
The Coghlan family Killarney on the death of Senator Paul Coughlan RIP
The Kelleher family Clarecastle on the death of Haulie Kelleher, RIP
The Tuttle family Ennis on the death of Susan Tuttle, RIP
The Brogan family Ennis on the death of Paddy Brogan RIP
The Kearse family Ennis on the death of Eileen Kearse RIP
The Kenny family Lahinch on the death of Donal Kenny RIP
The O’Halloran family Ennis on the death of Lucy O’Halloran RIP
The Murphy family Corbally on the death of Christine Murphy RIP - mother of Jason Murphy, A/Director of Service, Rural Development and Ukrainian Services.
The Lenihan family Sixmilebridge on the death of Paschal Lenihan RIP.
Approval for travel.
It was approved that Cllr. T. O’Brien, J. Cooney, P. McMahon, P. Murphy and P. Hayes travel to Milwaukee Irish Fest 2023 from 16
th -
21
st
August having been proposed by Cllr. M. Howard, seconded by Cllr. J. Garrihy and approved by the members present.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the May Meeting of Clare County Council held on 8
th
May, 2023 be adopted and signed subject to one amendment requested by Cllr. G. Flynn on Item No. 25 to replace the word “parking” with the word “housing”.
Item 2: Matters Arising
Cllr. J. Flynn thanked the Chief Executive for the update regarding Shannon Heritage.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 25
th
April, 2023 from the Department of Transport in relation to the price of flights from the United States.
Correspondence dated 3
rd
May, 2023 from the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth in relation to Personal Assistant (PA) Services.
Correspondence dated 29
th
May, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to assistance in advancing affordable housing in County Clare.
Correspondence dated 30
th
May, 2023 from the Department of Justice in relation to graffiti.
Correspondence dated 10
th
May, 2023 from the Department of Public Expenditure, National Development Plan, Delivery and Reform in relation to fly tipping in County Clare area.
Correspondence dated 17
th
May, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to fly tipping.
Correspondence dated 10
th
May, 2023 from the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine regarding forestry.
Resolution circulated by Kerry County Council regarding changing correspondence method with elected members to a paperless, electronic system.
Resolution circulated by Kerry County Council calling on the Government to immediately initiate a National Pension Scheme for the State.
Resolution circulated by Mayo County Council in relation to the Croi Conaithe Scheme.
AILG-OPR Elected Members June 2023 (in-person) Module 3 Training entitled “Overview of existing planning legislation and policy guidance” taking place in Avalon House Hotel, Kilkenny on 17
th
June, 2023 and in Mullingar Park Hotel on 15
th
June, 2023.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 4
th
April, 2023 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 2
nd
May, 2023 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 28
th
March, 2023 be noted.”
d. Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 31
st
March, 2023 be noted.”
e. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 22
nd
March, 2023 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Physical Development S.P.C. meeting held on 8
th
March, 2023 be noted”.
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 28
th
April, 2023 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. P. Murphy requested an update on the traffic calming measures on the N85 Clareabbey roundabout. Cllr. P. Murphy referred to improvement works carried out by TII on the motorway and expressed disappointment that the land used as a yard by the Contractors was not left in the manner which they found it. Cllr. Murphy informed the meeting that the area has been secured by Ennis Municipal District staff in recent days.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive agreed to provide an update on the traffic calming measures on the N85 Clareabbey roundabout and undertook to get the area of land restored as soon as possible.
Cllr. G. Flynn referred to the affordable housing schemes in Ennis and Shannon and felt that the next steps need to be prioritized and further assessed. Cllr. Flynn stated that the process should involve engagement with people who can qualify for this scheme and that the preferential percentages need to be looked at as well as rolling it out to the rest of the county if there is excess for Ennis and Shannon.
Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development addressed the meeting and stated that Clare County Council are undertaking the next steps and are advertising for developer led expressions of interest this week. When these are reviewed they will be submitted to the Department for approval. Each proposed scheme must be approved separately and advertised for applicants separately. When schemes are advertised indicative costs will be included and discussion can take place with interested applicants. Mr. MacCormaic stated that the Council also need to prepare a scheme of priorities in the event that the number of eligible applicants exceeds available properties. The proposed scheme has been discussed at SPC level and needs to be approved by Minister in advance of being adopted by elected members. The scheme can include that where demand exceeds supply that 30% of the available properties can be retained for local applicants within County Clare.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive informed the meeting that Clare County Council has received approval for Ennis and Shannon and that if there is a strong case to be made in other locations in Clare this will be undertaken.
Cllr. C. Murphy acknowledged the tourism team visit to the motor home park in Graiguenamanagh and felt that this will encourage the drive for Clare communities undertaking similar projects. Cllr. Murphy acknowledged the work done in Clare’s coastal resorts during the recent bank holiday weekend whereby extra staff were allocated and extended due praise in relation commended the condition of Kilkee.
This sentiment was echoed by the Cathaoirleach who stated that resorts throughout the county were well catered for during the bank holiday weekend.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy referred to local authority home loans and queried if the rate of approval is acceptable. Cllr. Colleran Molloy also sought additional information in relation to the weather initiative for Laurel Lodge and Westbrook house.
Referring to the home loans Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development confirmed that 62 loan applications were received in 2022 and 13 to date this year. Approval rate is circa 50% and this would be in line with national figures.
Referring to the Homeless Weather Initiative Mr. MacCormaic stated that extra bed places are in place in some of the Councils emergency accommodation locations in preparation for extreme weather conditions during winter months. These are bed places only and not standard emergency accommodation placements. These normally finish at end of March annually. However this year they have been continued for recent months due to pressures on homeless services and it seems unlikely they will be removed.
Cllr. M. Howard referred to repair works carried out by Uisce Eireann in Drumbiggle and requested that the footpaths be inspected to establish if responsibility for their repair now lies with Clare County Council or Uisce Eireann.
Cllr. M. Howard informed the meeting that a delegation from Langenfeld are visiting County Clare in the coming days as part of the twinning arrangement. Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien acknowledged the work being undertaken by twinning committees in the county in welcoming people.
Cllr. P.J. Ryan welcomed the positive response from the Chief Executive in relation to the affordable housing schemes.
Cllr. J. Garrihy complimented the works carried out in Fanore referring to the playground and the refurbishment of the public toilets. Cllr. Garrihy acknowledged the response from Clare County Council in relation to the recent water shortage in Fanore. Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Local Economic and Community Plan 2023 - 2029 and felt that it will play a significant role in terms of how communities can respond to emergencies.
Item 8: Disposal of property (by lease) at Hastings’ Farmhouse and surrounding lands, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 17
th
May, 2023 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of property by lease of Hastings’ Farmhouse and surrounding lands, Illaunmanagh, Shannon, Co. Clare to Dúchas na Sionna CLG, c/o Carmody & Co. Solicitors, Peach House, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 17
th
May, 2023.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property (by lease) of Hastings’ Farmhouse and surrounding lands at Illaunmanagh, Shannon, Co. Clare to Dúchas na Sionna CLG, c/o Carmody & Co. Solicitors, Peach House, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 17
th
May, 2023.”
Item 9: Disposal of property at Drom Cuilinn, Bóthar an Luchra, Tullyvarraga, Shannon, Co Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 24
th
May, 2023 from Adrian Headd, A/Senior Engineer, Social Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of property at Drom Cuilinn, Bóthar an Luchra, Tullyvarraga, Shannon, Co. Clare to Electricity Supply Board subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24
th
May, 2023.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
Cudighi ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at Drom Cuilinn, Bóthar an Luchra, Tullyvarraga, Shannon, Co. Clare to Electricity Supply Board subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24
th
May, 2023.”
Item 10: Disposal of property at An Cladach, Quilty, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 24
th
May, 2023 from Adrian Headd, A/Senior Engineer, Social Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of property at An Cladach, Quilty, Co. Clare to Electricity Supply Board subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24
th
May, 2023.
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Chambers agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at An Cladach, Quilty, Co. Clare to Electricity Supply Board subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24
th
May, 2023.”
Item 11: Disposal of property at Cnoc na Scoile, Ashline, Kilrush Road, Ennis, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 24
th
May, 2023 from Adrian Headd, A/Senior Engineer, Social Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of property at Cnoc na Scoile, Ashline, Kilrush Road, Ennis, Co. Clare to Electricity Supply Board subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24
th
May, 2023.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at Cnoc na Scoile, Ashline, Kilrush Road, Ennis, Co. Clare to Electricity Supply Board subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24
th
May, 2023.”
Item 12: 2023 Clár Funding applications.
Report from Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development was circulated with the agenda. The report states that CLÁR is a targeted investment programme which provides funding for small scale infrastructural projects in rural areas which have experienced significant levels of population decline. Ennis and Shannon do not benefit from this scheme as they are not in a CLÁR area.
At a meeting of the Working Group on the Action Plan for Rural Ireland on the 11
th
May, 15 projects were selected for submission under Measure 1 – Developing Community Facilities and Amenities. The 15 projects were listed in the report.
This was approved having been proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney, seconded by Cllr. G. Keating and agreed by the members present.
Item 13: LCDC Membership.
Report dated 14
th
April, 2023 from Bernadette Haugh, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare PPN have advised of a membership change for a new Community and Voluntary Representative on the LCDC to replace Niamh O’Callaghan.
Clare PPN have nominated Eddie O’Gorman as Clare PPN’s Community and Voluntary Representative on the LCDC.
This nomination was approved having been proposed by Cllr. G. Flynn, seconded by Cllr. J. Cooney and agreed by the members present.
Item 14: Supplementary Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2023 (CLAGS).
Report dated 1
st
June, 2023 from Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development was circulated with the agenda together with the grant recommendations. The report states that supplementary Clare Local Area Grants Scheme 2023 (CLAGS) funding has become available for allocation.
The report continues that at a meeting on the 1
st
June, 2023 the elected members of the “Working Group for the Action Plan for Rural Ireland” considered the grant recommendations in relation to the allocation of the funding and recommended that Council approval be sought.
This was approved having been proposed by Cllr. P.J. Ryan, seconded by Cllr. C. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
Item 15: Draft Annual Report 2022.
The Draft Annual Report as circulated with the agenda was noted and approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. G. Keating, seconded by Cllr. P. Murphy.
Item 16: Briefing by Dr. Eamonn Murphy, Managing Director, Irish Centre for Business Excellence on the potential of the Shannon Estuary.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien introduced Prof. Eamonn Murphy, Chair of Mid-West Regional Enterprise Plan and member of Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce to the members.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive welcomed Prof. Eamonn Murphy and Paraic Rattigan, Programme Manager, Mid West Regional Enterprise to the meeting. Mr. Dowling highlighted the importance of the Mid West Steering Committee and outlined his respect for Prof. Murphys leadership and guidance in relation to his work in the development of the region. Mr. Dowling acknowledged Prof. Murphys drive forward regarding the Regional Enterprise Plan and acknowledged the role both Prof. Murphy and Mr. Rattigan have played in the Economic Taskforce Report.
Prof. Murphy addressed the meeting and thanked the members for the invitation. Prof. Murphy echoed the considerable contribution made by Paraic Rattigan, Programme Manager.
Prof. Murphy outlined the vision for Clare as a strategic location for Europe as follows:
A testbed for global innovation founded on renewable energy
A catalyst for high value-add jobs
Leveraging regional strengths- green energy, Atlantic ocean, Shannon Estuary, Shannon Airport, the Golden Vale and our technology and talent ecosystem
A vibrant, sustainable, connected digital region creating real economic value for Ireland including energy, fibre, global supply chain, workforce, infrastructure and suitable land.
Prof. Murphy stated that Clare has a very important role to play and in terms of Clare’s contribution and highlighted key points as follows:
Energy is not for export
High value ad jobs must be retained in the region
Brendan O’Regan – model and inspiration
The Economic, Environmental and Spatial Master Plan
Lead, encourage and promote AGDB DAC agenda.
The elected members thanked Prof. Murphy for his comprehensive and enlightening presentation and embraced the unique future opportunity that can be delivered off the west coast of Clare. Concern was expressed that nationally Ireland may give away rights to our waters and it was suggested that a shareholding model be considered for future projects. The members queried how Clare can prepare for the next Clare County Development Plan due to restrictions from national policy. The members felt that it is important that communities buy into the concepts and vision outlined as there is potential for development of communities and jobs in order to create and retain talent in the area.
Prof. Murphy discussed the issues raised.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien thanked Prof. Murphy and Mr. Rattigan and wished them well with their continued work.
The members approved request from Cllr. M. Howard to take Item No 27 at this point.
Item 27: Free access for carers.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council requests Minister for Arts, Culture & Heritage Ms. Catherine Martin and Minister for Disability Ms. Anne Rabbitte for clarity as regards free access for carers when accompanying those with disabilities to venues throughout Ireland”.
(M)
The members noted that some locations do not accept carers cards during the weekends and felt that this was unacceptable as in effect this denies the person with a disability access to these locations and these are important social outings for them.
Item 17: County Library.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P.J. Ryan agus P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“Several of our libraries carry unique historical names – examples being the Sean Lemass library in Shannon, Cultúrlann Sweeney in Kilkee, the William Smith O’Brien library in Newmarket on Fergus and the Dr. Patrick J Hillery library in Milltown Malbay. I propose that the new County Library located in Ennis which will open in Q1 2024 retain the name the “DeValera Library”.
(M)
The proposers felt that it was logical that the new library building would retain the name of the current library and that it was important to get clarity on the wishes of the members in relation to this. It was also felt that the decision made by the Council back in the 1970’s continue and that the new library building be called the “De Valera Library” as Eamon De Valera is recognized as a strong leader who was Taoiseach and inaugurated as President of Ireland. This was agreed by Cllrs. P. Daly, A. Norton, I. Lynch and T. O’Callaghan.
Cllr. G. Flynn stated that he was not supporting this motion and felt that the library should be called “Clare County Library” and that he did not approve calling public buildings after people. Cllr. G. Flynn suggested that it be called “Sr. Ethel Normoyle Library” as she has carried out tremendous work and made a difference to the quality of life for many people. Cllr. M. Howard felt that the consensus of the general public should be sought and that the Board of Glór should be invited to participate in this discussion. Cllrs. P. Murphy agreed with this.
Due to the variety of comments, the following proposed amendment was submitted having been signed by Cllrs. M. Howard, P. Murphy and G. Flynn.
“I am proposing that the process in naming our new public library should go out to public consultation when built.”
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien called for a vote on the amendment which resulted as follows:
In favour:
Cllrs. M. Howard, P. Murphy, J. Cooney, P. Burke, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, J. Garrihy, L. Grant and G. Keating. (9)
Not in favour:
Cllrs. J. Flynn, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon, P. O’Gorman, S. Talty, J. Killeen, P.J. Kelly, B. Chambers, C. Murphy and I. Lynch (17)
Abstained: Nil.
Not present:
Cllr. A. Norton, Cllr. J. Crowe (2)
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien declared that as the amendment was not carried and as there was overall agreement on the original notice of motion, the original motion be adopted.
Item 18: Grants for those who build their own homes.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Government be requested to provide grants of €50,000 to those who build their own houses”.
(M)
The elected members agreed that people should be encouraged to build or buy their own homes and that those building their own homes have to go through a very expensive planning process. The members noted that support is being provided to people to renovate houses and felt that it is logical that grants be available for people building or acquiring their own houses as it would help them get on the property ladder.
It was proposed that the notice of motion be amended to read as follows:
“That the Government be requested to provide grants of €50,000 to those who build their own houses for permanent occupancy”.
This was agreed by Cllr. P.J. Kelly and the members present.
Cllr. P.J. Kelly requested that this be forwarded to the Clare Oireachtas members.
Item 19: Provision of facilities at main tourist attractions.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. McMahon agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to consider providing toilet drop and coach wash facilities at main tourist attractions throughout the County”.
(M)
Leonard Cleary, Director of Tourism Development replied as follows:
“Clare County Council provides toilet drop facilities at the Bus Park in Ennis. In addition, some tourist sites have the facility. The Council are carrying out a review of all sites with a view to making such an investment.”
The elected members agreed that as Clare is being promoted as a tourism county that it is essential that facilities are available. It was noted that there has been an increase in visitor numbers to our tourist amenities and that it is important to ensure their experience is quality. The costs of maintaining and operating toilet drop and coach wash facilities was raised and it was suggested that a charge be incurred to use these facilities.
L. Cleary, Director of Tourism addressed the meeting and stated that a comprehensive review of appropriate locations will be undertaken in order to research and study a number of aspects of providing the necessary facilities.
Cllr. P. Hayes took the role of Cathaoirleach for a short period during the discussion on this item until the Cathaoirleach resumed the role.
Item 20: Retained fire fighters.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. O’Brien, S. Talty, I. Lynch, P. O’Gorman, L. Grant, M. Howard, D. McGettigan, T. O’Callaghan agus J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“In recognition of the critically important local services our retained fire fighters provide to the communities we represent; we call on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage and the Minister for Public Expenditure to provide the funding necessary to sustain and enhance the Retained Fire Service now and for future generations”.
(M)
The elected members outlined that fire fighters, are committed community members who demonstrate that commitment every time they are called out to deal with dangerous, often traumatic, situations and emergencies. They are often the first responders on scene for many of the more rural parts of the county, including medical emergencies.
It was noted that the 2,000 retained fire fighters in the country, are part time volunteers who are on call permanently, 24/7/365 and that they have to live and work within a 5 minutes response time of their station. This imposes restrictions on their daily lives, family and work life.
The members expressed disappointment that their annual stipend starts at €8,000 per annum, plus call out payments.
The members stated that they believe the government can and should make a special case for improved conditions for our retained fire fighters and expressed concern that the long term consequences of not doing so will impact negatively in the capacity of retained fire fighter manned stations across the country to recruit and retain quality members of staff as the job takes a specific and unique talent and capacity for specialised work.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive stated that he is precluded from going into detail and concurred with the sentiment regarding the role and function firefighters fulfill. Mr. Dowling stated that the LGMA are centrally involved at national level and stated that he looked forward to a resolution.
Item 21: Farm Safety Awareness Campaign.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That this Council would become involved in a Farm Safety Awareness Campaign as there have been numerous farm accidents (some fatal) in our county in recent times and it is very important that farmers and the general public are aware of the dangers on farms and on the public roads”.
(M)
Siobhán McNulty, A/Director of Physical Development replied as follows:
“The Council is available to promote the Farm Safety Awareness Campaigns run by the Health & Safety Authority (HSA), the Road Safety Authority (RSA) and Irish Farmers Association (IFA).
The RSA has a very comprehensive road safety campaign, details can be found at
www.rsa.ie/road-safety
The HSA website
www.hsa.ie/eng/your_industry/agriculture_forestry/
outlines a large range of supports available to the farming community. The HSA Farm Safety Action Plan 2021 – 2024 identifies priorities and objectives in the following key areas:
Culture, Behaviour and Education
Tractors and Quad Bikes
Livestock
Work at Height
The IFA has a dedicated resource to support and improve safety awareness amongst farmers and farm families. This resource can be found at
www.ifa.ie/farm-safety-hub/
The number of farm accidents and in particular the fatalities in our county in recent times is most regrettable and we continue to promote a culture of safety for all in our farming community.”
The elected members discussed the dangers involved in farming due to operating machinery, farm animals and the age profile of operators. It was suggested that relevant organisations should engage and devise a programme to promote safety awareness and that this should be delivered at Municipal Districts and rolled out throughout the county.
Item 22: Review national policy in relation to Irelands security.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Government and the Oireachtas to take extra threats to Irelands security seriously and to review national policy in relation to security”.
(M)
The elected members discussed national security concerns and agreed that Ireland’s National Security Policy needs to be reformed and fully resourced.
Item 23: Macra na Feirme.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P. Murphy agus J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council invite representatives of Macra na Feirme (Elaine Houlihan, National President; Liam Hanrahan, Chair of Agricultural Affairs Committee and Niamh Farrell, Chair of Rural Youth Committee) to give a report on their campaign "The Rural Revival, Steps For Our Future" and advise on what the elected members can do to help re representations to Government in advance of Budget 2023".
(M)
The elected members agreed that Macra na Feirme are a vibrant youth organization and requested that they be invited to attend the September Council meeting if possible to address the members. This was agreed by the members present.
Item 24: International Protection.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“We call on DCEDIY (Department of Children) to improve their line of communication with Oireachtas Members, Local Authority (Forum), and Councillors with regard to properties considered/chosen for use for International Protection within County Clare”.
(M)
The elected members discussed the lack of communication and clarity being provided to communities and the confusion and fear being experienced as a result of this. It was felt that there is a gap between information being provided by the managing agencies and the capacity of community groups to work together and this lack of communication can cause a breakdown in trust. The members agreed that open lines of communication are critical in ensuring resources are being well managed.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive welcomed the members comments and stated that Clare County Council as a local authority have a duty to protect the interests of all our citizens both local and indigenous and that the narrative must be around integration. Mr. Dowling noted that the Department of Children provide resources to the Council in relation to how effective and proper integration is ensured. Mr. Dowling stated that communities are welcoming but felt that planning and wrap around resources and services must be made available and this is becoming a growing function across the local authority sector into the future.
Item 25: Resources to gain maximum benefit from funding schemes.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
“Given the many funding schemes and funds that are currently available i.e. Active Travel, Rural Regeneration Development Fund, Town and Village Renewal and Community Recognition Fund; I am asking if Clare County Council has the appropriate staffing resources across all Directorates and Municipal Districts to gain the maximum benefit from all the opportunities and benefits provided by these funding streams, both presently and going forward into the future”.
(Q)
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services replied as follows:
“The Human Resources Department leads the strategic workforce planning remit and engages with each of the Directorates regularly for this purpose. The various funding schemes as mentioned above are co-ordinated by the relevant directorate and any funding announced specifically for staff resources results in the recruitment and filling of those approved positions. All funding scheme opportunities are to be welcomed and result in much needed infrastructure and supports to communities.
The Workforce Plan 2023 – 2027 was prepared having regard to the rapidly expanding nature of local government. The Management Team of Clare County Council adopted a set of guiding principles as part of the plan-making process which ensures that a re-prioritisation will be undertaken in consideration of any newly announced initiatives, programmes and schemes. The workforce plan delivery is subject to available financial resources provided as part of these new initiatives and/or the annual revenue budget process.
The introduction of new funding initiatives as seen in the expansion of the capital programme from €29.6m in 2016 to €89.7m in 2022 has brought demand for additional resources to deliver on these programmes and this is provided for within the annual revenue budget process where the additional initiatives may not provide funding for any element of staffing resource. This challenge presents itself to the Local Authority sector regularly. Since 2018, the headcount has increased by 9.5%. This is mainly due to the implementation of new Government initiatives (as listed above) and represents a significant number of newly created posts. The current payroll budget reflects this expansion in resources as adopted by elected members.
I am confident that the current staffing model and resource allocation including reprioritising is sufficient in order to deliver on the Councils corporate objectives presently. Future resourcing is constantly evolving and forms part of ongoing workforce planning.”
Cllr. P. Murphy expressed concern in relation to filling positions and referred to the number of acting positions within the Council. Cllr. Murphy stated that he felt the Council will have difficulty recruiting staff and will not attract the right candidate if contracts are limited to one or two year duration.
Item 26: Improve staffing levels in the provision of home care.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“To request the H.S.E. to initiate a recruitment campaign, to improve staffing levels in the provision of home care”.
(M)
The elected members discussed the shortage of personnel available to deliver home care as a number of home carers moved to other employment that provided a better standard of living. The members agreed that the provision of home care is a critical service as it enables people to remain in their homes and that families need support to care for elderly people and people with special needs. The members agreed that a recruitment campaign is vital to recruit home carers.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. O’Callaghan, seconded by Cllr. J. Killeen and agreed by the members present that the meeting be extended to complete the items on the agenda.
Item 28: Integration of people seeking asylum in Ireland.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on the Taoiseach Leo Varadkar, the Tánaiste Micheál Martin and the Minister’s for Justice & Integration to have consideration for the impact of placing huge numbers of people seeking asylum in Clare from a number of countries. Clare has received well in excess of 5,000 people through Direct Provision and the Ukrainian Crisis. The people in Clare have shown great generosity and hospitality in dealing with the high numbers being placed throughout the County by the Government. The impact in various communities is being felt where there is a deficiency in services to support the existing local community. Negative publicity portrays people in Clare as not being welcoming in dealing with new arrivals and this is dividing communities and causing huge stress at a time when people are struggling to deal with the high cost of living. Clare is one of the counties hosting high numbers and the constituents contacting me feel that the county of Clare has accommodated enough at this point in time, and they are of the opinion that the Government need to adequately address the deficiencies in support services available and put in place additional measures to help the integration of people seeking asylum in Ireland and the numbers placed in Clare”.
(M)
The elected members supported this on the basis that it is clear that Clare County Council are not going to say no to people. The members agreed that the people of Clare are very hospitable and helpful and that recent negative publicity portrays our county as not being welcoming. The members agreed that integration is the key point and there is gaps in the provision of support services which needs to be addressed.
Item 29: Low threshold detox centre for Clare.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“Due to an increase in drug use and services being stretched in Clare, I am calling on Clare County Council to ask the Minister for the National Drug Strategy to invest in a low threshold detox centre for Clare. People who are trying to get away from substance abuse are finding the hurdles to get help difficult and need to be almost clear of drugs before being able to enter a centre, there is also a long waiting list and costs to use these facilities meaning many of those looking for help end up not being able to avail of them”.
(M)
The elected members discussed the difficulties drug abuse can bring on families and communities. The members expressed concern in relation to the long waiting time being experienced by people who want to access detox centres. The members felt that this is sad reflection on society and that everything possible should be done to get young people back into society and live a normal life.
Upcoming events.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. T. O’Brien reminded the members that a Civic Reception is being held on Friday, 23
rd
June at 3.30 p.m. to honour Bernard Lynch and that the AGM is taking place on Friday, 30
th
June at 3.00 p.m.
Congratulations.
The elected members extended congratulations to the management and players involved in the Clare Minor hurling team who won the Electric Ireland GAA Minor All Ireland Hurling Championship recently.
The members also extended congratulations to the Clare Ladies Intermediate football team who overcame Offaly during the weekend and urged people to come out to support them when they play Wicklow in their second game, which will be played in Cusack Park on Sunday next.
Conferences
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
AILG Elected Members Module 1 Training entitled “Electoral Reform Act” being held in The Radisson Hotel, Limerick on 25
th
February, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €98.12 including conference fee of €80.
It was agreed that Cllr. J. Crowe attend this Conference.
AILG Annual Training Conference 2023 being held in Hotel Kilkenny, on 19
th
– 20
th
April, 2023.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €605.14 including conference fee of €165.
It was agreed that Cllr. P. Daly attend this Conference.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback