Minutes of September 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of September 2023 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 11th September 2023 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors M. Howard, J. Flynn, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Murphy, P. Daly,
T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Burke, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe,
M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman,
S. Talty, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, P.J. Kelly, C. Murphy, I. Lynch.
Officials
Ms. Anne Haugh, Deputy Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Margaret O’Rourke, A/Staff Officer.
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Director of Tourism Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Rural Development and Ukrainian Services.
Ms. Siobhán McNulty, Director of Physical Development.
Mr. Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development.
Mr. Adrian Headd, A/Senior Engineer, Social Development.
Ms. Caroline O’Connor, Management Accountant, Finance and Support Services.
Ms. Anne O’Sullivan, Senior Executive Engineer, Physical Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Councillors A. Norton and L. Grant.
Absent
Councillors B. Chambers, P. Hayes and G. Keating.
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney presided and noted that Cllr. G. Keating was attending the Supervalu Tidy Towns Competition 2023 South West and Mid-West Regional Awards Ceremony on his behalf.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Jones family, Wexford on the death of Alfie Jones, RIP.
The Myles family, Scariff on the death of Sarah Myles, RIP.
The Cadden family, Monaghan on the death of Mary Cadden, RIP.
The Woodhouse family, Scariff on the death of Phyl Woodhouse, RIP.
The Egan family, Kilmihil on the death of Peggy Egan, RIP.
The McManus family, Leitrim on the death of Padraig McManus RIP.
The Keane family, Sixmilebridge on the death of Donal Keane RIP.
The Kelly family, Ennis on the death of PJ Kelly RIP.
The Shannon family, Ennis on the death of Sean Shannon RIP.
The Organ family, Kilkishen on the death of Michael Organ RIP.
Approval to travel
It was approved that the Cathaoirleach, Joe Cooney and Cllr. Pat Daly travel to Canada to attend the awards ceremony for the International Communities in Bloom challenge 2023 from the 24
th
September to 2
nd
October 2023 having been proposed by Cllr. P.J. Ryan seconded by Cllr. A. O’Callaghan and agreed by the members present.
It was approved that Cllr Mary Howard travel to Langenfeld, Germany to accept the invitation by the Mayor of Langenfeld to attend the 10-year anniversary of Ennis being twinned with Langenfeld from 29
th
September to the 4
th
October, 2023 having been proposed by Cllr. P. Daly, seconded by Cllr. P. O’Gorman and agreed by the members present.
It was approved that Cllr. Ian Lynch travel to Halifax, Canada to participate in a study tour on Marine Spatial Planning for the off shore wind energy sector with a particular focus on fact finding relating to the Kilrush Maritime Training Centre from the 24
th
September to the 30
th
September, 2023 having been proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. C. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
It was approved that the Cathaoirleach, Joe Cooney accept invitation from the Clare Association to attend the Clare Association event in New York, from 12
th
to 16
th
October having been proposed by Cllr. A. O’Callaghan, seconded by Cllr. C. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh councillor P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag councillor J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the July Meeting of Clare County Council held on 10
th
July, 2023 be adopted and signed”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Letter from Bernárd J. Lynch conveying appreciation for Civic Reception awarded to him in June.
Correspondence dated 5
th
September, 2023 from ESB Moneypoint in relation to agreement signed by ESB and EirGrid.
Correspondence dated 17 August, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Multi Annual Rural Water Programme.
Correspondence dated 4
th
August, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to retained firefighters.
Correspondence dated 31
st
July, 2023 from UL Hospitals in relation to dialysis services in Ennis.
Correspondence dated 21
st
July, 2023 from the Department of Public Expenditure, National Development Plan, Delivery and Reform in relation to the issue of fly tipping.
Correspondence dated 7
th
July, 2023 from the HSE in relation to recruitment campaign to improve staffing levels in the provision of home care.
Correspondence dated 22
nd
August, 2023 from the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine in relation to ash dieback disease.
Correspondence dated 24
th
July, 2023 from the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine in relation to ash dieback disease.
Correspondence dated 18
th
July, 2023 from the HSE Mid West Community Healthcare in relation to the provision of local medical centres in strategic towns and villages throughout County Clare.
Correspondence dated 1
st
August, 2023 from the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Marine in relation to free access for carers when accompanying those with disabilities to venues throughout Ireland.
Correspondence dated 15
th
August, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage concerning retrofit scheme for older buildings and stone cottages.
Correspondence dated 31
st
July, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to addressing vacancy and increasing the pace at which properties are brought back into use.
Correspondence dated 17
th
August, 2023 from the Department of Health regarding CAMHS Services in County Clare.
Correspondence dated 18
th
July, 2023 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to stained glass image of St Brigid.
Correspondence dated 12
th
July, 2023 from the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media in relation to stained glass image of St. Brigid.
Correspondence dated 19
th
July, 2023 from the Department of Transport in regarding grass verge trimming.
Correspondence dated 18
th
July, 2023 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to funding for grass verge trimming.
Correspondence dated 18
th
July, 2023 from the Department of Justice in relation to the number of people seeking asylum in Clare.
Resolution circulated by Leitrim County Council in relation to recruitment of bus drivers.
Resolution circulated by Cork County Council requesting an awareness campaign to raise awareness of the possibility of contracting lyme disease at parks and walkways.
Resolution circulated by Waterford City & County Council in relation to Active Travel Funding.
Details of AILG 2023 Autumn Training Seminar entitled “The Future of Local Government in Ireland – Time for an Honest Conversation” taking place in Sligo Park Hotel on 13
th
- 14
th
September, 2023.
La Touche Legacy in association with Greystones Archaeological and Historical Society Conference entitled “Social Discourse of the 20
th
Century in Ireland” taking place in Greystones on 15
th
– 16
th
September, 2023.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 29 June, 2023 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 29 June, 2023 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 17 May, 2023 be noted.”
d. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Annual General Meeting held on the 30 June, 2023 be noted.”
e. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 16 May, 2023 be noted.”
f. Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Annual General Meeting held on the 29 June, 2023 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 3
rd
July, 2023 as presented.
Item 6: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. C. Murphy highlighted the message received by the Chief Executive complimenting the public realm work in Kilkee as well as the staff who kept the beach facilities in the county at a high standard during the summer and noted the positive response received.
Item 7: Disposal of site at Calluragh, Ballinruan, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 25
th
August, 2023 from Mairead Corbett, Administrative Officer, Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of a site at Calluragh, Ballinruan, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 25
th
August, 2023.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of site at Calluragh, Ballinruan, Co. subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 25
th
August, 2023.”
Item 8: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed construction of a public car park in Ballyliddan West, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare.
Report dated 4
th
September, 2023 from Linda Earlie, Town Regeneration Officer, Economic Development Director was circulated with the agenda together with the Chief Executive’s report dated 4
th
September, 2023 (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment screening), which had been prepared by Helen Quinn, A/Senior Planner, under Delegation Order HR151 dated 9
th
April 2021. The reports outline details of proposed construction of a public car park in Ballyliddan West, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare and the members were asked if there were any issues that they wished to raise in respect of the report circulated.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Item 9: Interim Financial Report to 30
th
June, 2023.
Financial Report for half year to 30
th
June, 2023 was circulated with the agenda. The report set out a financial review of the Council’s income and expenditure account for the first six months of 2023, in both the day-to-day operational services and capital infrastructure delivery. The members noted the report as presented having been proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. P. McMahon and agreed by the members present.
Item 10: Agree date for Budget meeting.
It was agreed that the Budget meeting will take place on Thursday, 30
th
November, 2023 at 3.00 p.m. having been proposed by Cllr. P. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Crowe and agreed by the members present.
Item 11: Milwaukee Review Report.
Review report on the international promotion of County Clare at the Milwaukee Irish Fest, Wisconsin in August 2023 was circulated with the agenda. The report provided a summary of the key highlights from the international promotion. The report was noted by the members having been proposed by Cllr. P. McMahon, seconded by Cllr. P. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
Item 12: Report on Utrecht Cycling Trip Visit.
Report on international study tour to the Dutch Cycling Embassy in consultation with the NTA was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare County Council has secured grant funding from the National Transport Authority to deliver Active Travel schemes throughout County Clare. To aid in the delivery of cycling schemes, the NTA requested that Clare County Council undertake an International Study Tour. Details of this were outlined in the report. The report was noted by the members having been proposed by Cllr. P. Daly, seconded by Cllr. M. Howard and agreed by the members present.
Item 13: Affordable Housing - Scheme of Allocation Priorities.
Report dated 4
th
September, 2023 from Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development was circulated with the agenda. The report states that each local authority operating an Affordable Housing Scheme is obliged to adopt a Scheme of Priorities for allocation of such properties.
Section 11 of the Affordable Housing Act, in conjunction with the Affordable Housing (No 2) Regulations 2023 (S.I. No. 21/2023), sets out the conditions of the scheme of priority for affordable dwelling purchase arrangements.
A proposal on a Scheme for Clare County Council was approved by the Social Development SPC on 7
th
June,
2023 and in accordance with regulations was then forwarded to the Mr. Darragh O’Brien T.D., Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage Minister for review.
The report continues that the Minister has reviewed Clare County Councils proposal and is satisfied that the draft scheme can be brought before the elected members. The notification of same, along with copy of the Scheme of Priority was circulated with the agenda. The report concludes that final approval of the Scheme rests as a reserved Function of Clare County Council.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That pursuant to Section 11 of the Affordable Housing Act, 2021, Clare County Council adopt the Scheme of Priority as outlined in the Draft document circulated with the agenda for the September 2023 meeting of the Council.”
Cllr. G. Flynn noted that this is a reserved function of the Council but the Minister may change the scheme.
P. McCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development stated that the proposal was approved by the SPC and then forwarded to the Minister and is now before the Council for ratification.
Item 14: Report from Standing Orders Sub Committee.
Report dated 4
th
September, 2023 from Ann Reynolds, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services was circulated with the agenda.
The report states that the Standing Orders Sub-Committee met on Monday 4
th
September and having discussed and considered the agenda items, hereby makes the following recommendations:
Remote Council Meetings
Recommendation:
The Council should continue to facilitate remote meetings and put in place best practice guidelines for the operation of remote meetings.
Motions and Questions
Recommendation:
Amend Standing Order No. 19 and No. 23 as follows:
The Agenda Paper shall not contain more than one Notice of Motion or one Question standing in the name of any Member including Notices of Motion or Questions adjourned from a previous Meeting. In addition, each member may sign one further joint motion or question with two or more other members. Each signatory on the joint motion shall have equal speaking time, i.e. 3 minutes as joint proposers. An adjourned Notice of Motion or Question may be withdrawn by the proposer on written notice to the Meetings Administrator.
No speech shall exceed three minutes. Within that general constraint a time limit of three minutes shall be allowed for the proposer of a Motion, two minutes for summing up, two minutes for the seconder or subsequent speaker, three minutes for the proposer of an Amendment and two minutes for summing up. In the case of a joint motion the first named proposer shall be allowed two minutes for summing up. A member repeating what has already been said shall be ruled out of order. Once a vote has been called, the Cathaoirleach shall allow no further discussion.
The approval of Council is sought to proceed as per the recommendations of the Standing Orders Committee as outlined at 1and 2 above.
Cllr. G. Flynn provided details of the discussion which took place at the Standing Orders Committee meeting held on the 4
th
September.
The recommendations of the Standing Orders Committee were approved having been proposed by Cllr. G. Flynn, seconded by Cllr. P.J. Ryan and agreed by the members present.
Item 15: Briefing by Barry O’Sullivan on the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce Report.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney welcomed Barry O Sullivan, Chair of the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce, Mary Considine, Chief Executive, Shannon Group and Siobhan Dolan Clancy, Chief Executive Officer, SDC Consulting to the meeting.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development addressed the meeting and stated that the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce was established in April 2022 to identify economic development opportunities for the Shannon Estuary region and produce a report for Government setting out recommended actions to realise those opportunities.
The Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce Report was formally launched in July 2023 by An Taoiseach, Mr. Leo Varadkar, TD, the Minister for Enterprise, Trade, and Employment, Mr. Simon Coveney TD, the Minister for Environment, Climate and Communications and Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan TD and Minister for Education, Ms. Norma Foley TD and other guests.
Barry O’Sullivan, Chair of the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce addressed the meeting and stated that An Taoiseach has three specific asks of the Taskforce Members namely
A vision
A practical Action Plan that can be delivered by Government
A recommendation on implementation
Mr. O’Sullivan outlined that the approach taken by the Taskforce was:
Consult widely
Protect progress made in three key areas of infrastructure, energy and tourism
Identify new opportunities in Atlantic wind
Provide practical recommendations
Mr. O’Sullivan continued by outlining the focus areas:
‘Atlantic’ wind
‘Onshore’ energy
Tourism
Transport, logistics and connectivity
In relation to Atlantic Wind Mr. O’Sullivan referred to the plan to bring power onshore and outlined the following:
Build, deploy, maintain floating turbines
Create an Agreed Plan for Power onshore in 2032 (Foynes, Moneypoint, Tarbert, Cahercon.
Infrastructure needed
Mr. O’Sullivan continued that this will attract new industries to use this Green Electricity:
Irish and FDI
High Tech manufacturing
Plants that require access to the estuary
Local towns on transmission grid: data centres, services for new industries, etc.
Enable more Irish companies to be created
Mr. O’Sullivan provided details of the timeline for power onshore in 2032 as well as details of the actions required going forward which will lead to 50,000 incremental jobs in the region by 2050.
Mr. O’Sullivan outlined that the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce now ask Clare County Council to support their recommendations by:
Supporting the case for improved roads along the estuary, Ennis to Kilrush
Supporting efforts on employment retention through addressing energy security, cost and decarbonisation: biomethane, solar and wind
Supporting development of amenities, prior to Ryder Cup
Supporting the development of the north bank of the Estuary for the harvest of Atlantic wind (SIFP2, Strategic industrial Sites, Housing, etc.)
Mary Considine, Chief Executive of Shannon Group addressed the meeting and stated that this is a once in a lifetime opportunity for the region, country and Europe and emphasised the need to capitalise on this opportunity to harvest an abundant source of green energy. Ms. Considine stated that it is an opportunity for Ireland to lead the innovation of viable alternative to energy production.
Siobhan Dolan Clancy, Chief Executive Officer, SDC Consulting addressed the meeting and asked for support to lead out on Shannon Integrated Framework Plan which is a key opportunity for the region.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney thanked Barry O’Sullivan, Mary Considine and Siobhan Dolan Clancy for the presentation and asked that questions be forwarded to Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator as there was not enough time remaining for a questions and answers session.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Economic Development thanked the team for their presentation and stated that this is a tremendous piece of work which provides an opportunity to lead on the development of offshore wind. Dr. Kirby stated that this will need Government support to drive forward and outlined the importance of receiving questions from the elected members.
The elected members welcomed the presentation and felt that this is a very important issue which the elected members should have an opportunity to engage in. The members expressed disappointment that they were not given an opportunity to have a questions and answers session. It was suggested that the Standing Orders sub committee review the Standing Orders in order to allocate sufficient time for important briefings.
Cllr. G. Flynn stated that the deputation was in breach of Standing Order no 62 and suggested that a special meeting be arranged in order engage with the speakers.
Anne Haugh, Deputy Chief Executive addressed the meeting and acknowledged that the members did not get an opportunity for a questions and answers session due to time constraints and stated that a further invitation will issue to the delegation to provide the members an opportunity to raise questions and discuss the important matters being raised. Ms. Haugh acknowledged the detail presented by the speakers.
Item 16: Public lighting and cabling issues within housing estates.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“I ask Clare County Council to urgently liaise with both the ESB and Safe Electric with a view to resolving public lighting and cabling issues within housing estates across the county.”
(M)
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Roads & Transportation replied as follows:
“Repair times of some public lighting faults will take longer than previously experienced due to additional works that are mandatory to ensure compliance with the ESB’s Public Lighting Network requirements & Safe Electric’s standards.
The public lighting network is 40 to 50 years old in many of these housing estates. These requirements address potential electrical legacy safety issues; & ESB attendance at these repair locations is required.
Meetings are on going with the ESB locally and at a national level regarding the provision of adequate ESB resources to accelerate repair times and address the current backlog of works.”
The elected members expressed concern in relation to the time it is taking to repair public lighting as many housing estates are in darkness. The members felt this is a health and safety risk as it is resulting in people being left vulnerable due to lack of public lighting, particularly coming into the winter months.
Anne O’Sullivan, Senior Executive Engineer, Physical Development addressed the meeting and acknowledged the significant delay with the level of service which may result in potential health and safety issues. Ms. O’Sullivan stated that Clare County Council personnel are working closely with the ESB local office personnel with a view to progressing these works and escalating the issues raised by the members.
Item 17: Amendments to County Development Plan.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Flynn agus glacadh leis
"That Clare members of the Oireachtas attend a meeting of the Council with a view to giving an explanation of their plan which would ensure that Minister O’Donnell would reverse his decision on his amendments to the County Development Plan and thereby undo the potential damage to the county and its people."
(M)
Cllr. P.J. Kelly expressed concern in relation to correspondence received from the Office of the Planning Regulator which states that no further planning permission can be granted on national roads. Referring to the N67, N68 and N85 in County Clare this represents 116 miles in length of road of which 105 is in the West Clare area.
The elected members in supporting Cllr. Kelly agreed that the new planning Bill will limit rural housing entirely which will damage rural Ireland. The members felt that people in Clare have continuously tried to provide their own housing and are now being obstructed by national policy as it is not possible for young people to get planning permission on their own farm if it is on a national route which is unjust.
The members expressed disappointment that land has been dezoned in Broadford and Cooraclare to the detriment of development in these villages.
The members felt that this is an attack on the reserved role of the elected members in Clare who invested time and effort in developing a plan for County Clare and its population.
The members referred to the inspirational presentation given by the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce, in relation to unprecedented investment in developing a path for future economic growth in the region and expressed concern that this could result in a missed opportunity if people cannot buy or build houses to live in.
The members requested that a briefing be provided at Municipal District level regarding the process and procedure involved in varying the County Development Plan.
The elected members agreed that the Oireachtas Members will have to take action on this concerning issue and agreed that a special meeting take place to discuss this with the Clare Oireachtas members. The members were urged to raise these issues with their representatives in the Oireachtas.
The Cathaoirleach agreed to schedule a special meeting and invite Oireachtas members at the earliest possible opportunity.
Item 18: Hidden Disabilities Sunflower.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Norton
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloyo agus glacadh leis
“I propose that Clare County Council should join and recognise the Hidden Disabilities Sunflower. This means that all offices, public facing or otherwise, all libraries, all leisure centres and all visitor attractions operated by Clare County Council will be able to announce and promote that they recognise the Hidden Disabilities Sunflower. Becoming a Corporate member of the Hidden Disabilities Sunflower at a cost of €1,500 plus VAT each year means that Clare County Council will be able to benefit from:
Locations registered on the Hidden Disabilities Sunflower website proximity map.
Organisation Logo, Contact Information and Accessibility provisions listed with each location.
Ability to upload pictures of each location.
Ability to distribute Sunflower Lanyards and other Sunflower wearables from chosen locations.
Opportunity to list accessible experiences and events taking place and reach a global audience.
Access to the Invisible Disability Index online (Useful for Department Heads and HR Teams)
Detailed overview of each non-visible disability
Workplace considerations
Videos about specific non-visible disabilities
Access to Sunflower Media Pack
Sunflower Launch Support & Featured article in Newsletter
Opportunity to receive Sunflower wearers’ feedback – useful for visitor attractions.
Submit articles for publication on the HDSunflower.com website.
Sunflower Training Videos for all existing staff and new entrants/induction. Via Embed Codes if CBT is used.
Purple365 30% discount
Sunflower live training webinar with Q&A. Ideal before a launch event. Quarterly training webinar after that.
Sector-specific implementation advice
Access to Sunflower business products
Volume Product Discounts – 15% across all items
Complimentary Corporate Starter Pack – Ideal for an HQ reception area.
Carbon Neutral Programme Membership
Opportunity to provide Hidden Disabilities Sunflower Car Parking Spaces across Clare County”.
(M)
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services replied as follows:
“The Council welcomes all initiatives that help to raise awareness, improve accessibility and impacts positively on individuals or groups to allow them to fully participate in their local Council. The Council’s Equality and Human Rights Duty Working Group will examine the implications, resources and actions required for Clare County Council to become a business member of the global Hidden Disabilities Sunflower network.”
The elected members complimented the work being done by Clare County Council in the area of disability and noted that the level of hidden disabilities has increased over the years. The members outlined the frustration being experienced by people who have hidden disabilities and felt that this initiative would raise awareness which in turn will make life easier and more comfortable in both work and social environments.
Item 19: Septic tank grant regulations.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
"In the interest of protecting ground and surface water quality (particularly drinking water sources) in the County from the risks posed by malfunctioning septic tanks, Clare County Council request the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to urgently reform the ineffective septic tank grant regulations and remove the red tape which disqualifies affected households from accessing a grant. The wide-ranging reform should include for a provision to enable householders to self-report a fault to the local authority so that they might qualify for the grant and take the necessary action to ensure the septic tank is not a water, environmental or health hazard."
(M)
The elected members outlined difficulties being experienced by people who wish to repair or replace faulty septic tanks as the current grant scheme is difficult to apply for. The members noted that people who missed the initial opportunity to register their septic tanks could incur costs in excess of €25,000 to repair them. The members called for a reform to the current scheme to enable householders to qualify for the grant and take the necessary action to ensure the septic tank is not a water, environmental or public health risk.
Item 20: Upkeep of county graveyards.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
“In light of the serious concerns that have been expressed about the upkeep and condition of some of our County Graveyards, with recent example being the condition of the old Drumcliff Graveyard and the quality of the maintenance provided at other graveyard locations such as Tulla, Ballycannon, and Ballysheehan, that the following be provided: -
What is the total number of County Graveyards within the ownership of the Clare County Council?
What is the total acreage of the graveyards within the Council’s ownership?
Over the past five years (2017-2022), what has the budget allocation been for graveyard maintenance?
For the past five years (2017-2022), what was the budget expended on graveyard maintenance?
What methods are used by the Council to maintain our graveyards? For example, subcontractor use or direct labour?
How many Graveyard Caretakers are within the employment of the Council?
Are Graveyard Caretakers designated general operative employees of the Council?
Are Graveyard Caretakers on general operative employee remuneration?
Was a review undertaken by the Council of the County graveyards. If so, what outputs did the review find?
(Q)
Jason Murphy, A/Director of Rural Development replied as follows:
(1) What is the total number of County Graveyards within the ownership of the Clare County Council?
The Burial Ground Bye-Laws provide a list of 141 Burial Grounds under the control or management of Clare County Council. Twenty-nine of these are classified as operational which means they are open to the purchase of new plots.
There are other Burial Grounds owned and managed by Communities across the County.
Most of the Burial Grounds for which the Council is responsible are registered in the Registry of Deeds rather than Land Registry.
It is worth noting that Clare County Council is responsible for all interments that occur within its jurisdiction irrespective of the ownership structure or the size of the Burial Ground involved.
(2) What is the total acreage of the graveyards within the Council’s ownership?
The table below sets out the acreage associated with 9 Burial Grounds. A further exercise is required to map/compile all burial grounds in the County.
Burial Ground
Acreage
Illaunmanagh
6
Drumcliff -New Section
10.8
Drumcliff -Old Section
5.6
Moynoe,Scariff
4.4
Ennistymon New
5.4
Lisdeen,Kilkee
3.5
Lemenagh
3.1
Carron
0.7
Knockerra
0.6
(3) Over the past five years (2017-2022), what has the budget allocation been for graveyard maintenance?
Agresso Job Description
Annual Budget 2017-2022
Drumcliff Burial Ground Maintenance (including grass cutting contractor costs)
€56,000
County Burial Grounds Maintenance – other than Drumcliff and Illaunmanagh
€20,000
Registrar's / Caretaker's Wages
€64,000
Grants to Communities
€40,000
Shannon Burial Ground Maintenance -Illaunmanagh
€6,000
TOTAL
€188,000
During the same period, €533,000 has been spent on extending the burial ground in Illaunmanagh, Shannon and €204,000 has been spent on capital improvements work in the County Burial Ground in Drumcliffe.
(4) For the past five years (2017-2022), what was the budget expended on graveyard maintenance?
The following is a summary of the budget & expenditure attributable to Burial Ground Maintenance between 2017 and 2022 incl.:
* New Burial Ground & Playground Inspector salary charged to Burial Ground Caretakers &Registrars from 2021 onwards.
(5) What methods are used by the Council to maintain our graveyards? For example, subcontractor use or direct labour?
The Council employs contractors to cut grass in three Burial Grounds (Drumcliffe/Corrovorrin, Illaunmanagh).
Of our 29 operational burial grounds 20 are maintained by Council employees i.e. caretakers. The remainder are maintained by Community Groups, partially funded through the Council’s Local Area Grants Scheme (CLAGS) and also through the local area CE schemes.
(6) How many Graveyard Caretakers are within the employment of the Council?
The Council employs thirteen people as Burial Ground Registrars / Caretakers. Some Registrars are also Caretakers. In general, Caretakers are only assigned to operational burial grounds.
(7) Are Graveyard Caretakers designated general operative employees of the Council?
(8) Are Graveyard Caretakers on general operative employee remuneration?
Those who maintain Burial Grounds are employed as Burial Ground Caretakers and their remuneration is linked to the General Operative’s pay scale.
(9) Was a review undertaken by the Council of the County graveyards. If so, what outputs did the review find?”
An Internal Burial Ground Review was undertaken in 2021/2022 to assist management of Clare County Council in the delivery of this essential service. This involved extensive consultation with key stakeholders engaged in burial ground service provision in the County. The review continues to assist Clare County Council in the provision of this service, and we will continue to work with the relevant departments in relation to Service Delivery, Workforce Planning, and Budgetary Processes to continuously improve the Burial Ground Service Provision in the County.”
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy noted that the deteriorated maintenance of graveyards is a countywide issue and noted the recent inclement weather which resulted in increased growth. Cllr. Colleran Molloy urged that Clare County Council improve the standards of graveyards in the county. Cllr. Colleran Molloy queried if the Council overspends on its allocation.
Jason Murphy, A/Director of Rural Development stated that €188,000 is the average budget and stated that the figures outlined are over the past five years. Mr. Murphy acknowledged that more work can be done and that investment in this area is ongoing.
Item 21: Housing adaptation grants.
Due to the absence of Cllr. G. Keating it was agreed that this item be deferred to the next Council meeting.
“To request Clare County Council to call on the Minister for Local Government to increase the grants for the following house adaptation:
Housing aid for older people
Mobility aid grant
Housing aid for people with disabilities
We live in an era when people are living longer and are applying for grants for home improvements. Due to increased cost of materials and labour, grants now need to be increased by 60%. These increases should now be reflected in the incoming budget.”
(M)
Item 22: Suitability study and report on roads.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Following the announcement of Minister Jack Chambers and recent tragedies we call on Clare County Council, on a Municipal District basis, to undertake a suitability study and report on - the volume of traffic using our roads, assessment of the surface quality, of required signage, and hedgerow management etc. informing the need for road upgrades, speed limit reviews, traffic calming measures, vehicle type restrictions aided with enforcement on particular roads and proactive traffic management through a mobility strategy primarily on the rural roads of County Clare.”
(M)
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Roads & Transportation replied as follows:
“As part of their road safety work, the Road Design Section carries out traffic counts and regularly liaises with the Municipal Districts in relation to implementing targeted interventions to realise improvements across the road network. This year the Department of Transport funded safety improvement works at 17 locations across the road network – 3 in the Ennis Municipal District, 4 in the Killaloe Municipal District, 3 in the Shannon Municipal District and 7 in the West Clare Municipal District. Designs were completed for these locations and forwarded to the MDs for completion in the Autumn. The total Department of Transport allocation for these safety improvements is €530,000.
In October, the Department of Transport will be taking applications for safety improvement schemes for 2024. If there are locations on the road network that are of particular concern, elected members can inform the MD offices and these locations will be put forward for consideration for funding in the 2024 application.
The surface condition of the non-national road network is updated annually using the PSCI rating index as part of the Pavement Management System (PMS). This informs and assists the Municipal Districts with the prioritisation of road improvement projects on the network. In 2023, the Department of Transport provided €12,877,000 under the Restoration Improvement Grant for road upgrades across the county (which includes signage & lining). The Department of Transport also provided a further €3.357 million, under the Restoration Maintenance Grant which is for surface dressing work. The road locations where this funding was allocated is detailed in the Roadworks Programme document – Schedule of Municipal District Works 2023. The total allocation from the Department of Transport was €38,784,600 for Clare.
Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) further allocated €2.1million for surface overlay projects on the N67 in the West Clare MD for road improvements at Doonbeg, Lisdoonvarna & Cloonbony to Rineen. The total allocation from TII to Clare County Council in 2023 is €5,869,840.
The total budget allocation for Roads in County Clare in 2023 was €52,053,750, which is a substantial investment in improving the road network across the county.
Hedgecutting is primarily the responsibility of the landowner. Clare County Council was the first Local Authority to advertise a hedgecutting grant scheme and this has operated successfully over the years, assisting landowners with hedgerow management. Where there are locations such as approaches to towns and villages, around signs or where there are safety issues, the local MD offices will intervene and carry out works within budget allocations.
In the case of locations where funding is made available for Town and Village Renewal (TVR) and Rural Regeneration funding for projects in town & villages in rural locations across the county, mobility issues are dealt with and incorporated in the design and specifications of the particular projects. The Active Travel Programme also deals with these issues at funded locations.
Traffic calming is dealt with in NOM reply 22
Speed Limit Review is dealt with in NOM reply 26.”
The elected members expressed concern in relation to the density of traffic at tourist locations in Clare. It was noted that this item was discussed at Municipal District level which has lead to a Traffic and Transport Management Plan being developed for North Clare with all directorates involved. Cllr. J. Killeen provided statistics recorded during a traffic survey carried out on a country road in rural North Clare which was monitored over a seven day period. The members felt that density of traffic should have a bearing on expenditure. The members also felt that the active travel scheme should be reviewed with a view to re-instating it in rural Clare.
Item 23: VAT rate.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council call on the Minister for Finance to a) extend the 9% VAT rate up to the end of 2024, and b) permanently reduce the VAT rate for food related businesses from 13.5% to 9%.”
(M)
The elected members outlined difficulties being experienced in the hospitality sector and the impact the increased VAT rate will have on these critical busineses. The members felt that this VAT increase may be the margin between many small family owned businesses closing or remaining open. The members agreed that there should be a separate VAT rate for the accommodation and food based businesses due.
Item 24: Traffic calming measures on approach roads to small towns and villages.
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“That this Council would consider installing traffic calming measures on all approach roads to small towns and villages in the county.”
(M)
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Roads & Transportation replied as follows:
“The Roads and Transportation Department of Clare County Council will continue to liaise with the Municipal Districts to identify where traffic calming measures are warranted. Thereafter, we will continue to utilise suitable funding streams for the delivery and implementation of the proposed measures.”
The elected members agreed that traffic calming measures are warranted on the approach roads to every town and village. The members agreed that Clare County Council should make representations to the Department for special funding for traffic calming.
Item 25: Irelands refinement for gas supply.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council call on the Government to set out Irelands refinement for gas supply over the next 20 to 50 years and to take measures to ensure that adequate supply is in place for the country’s needs.”
(M)
The elected members referred to the recent announcement that ESB has committed that Moneypoint will exit coal fired generation in 2025 and, subject to planning approval, ESB will convert Moneypoint to run on oil thereafter. The importance of continuity of supply was emphasized by the members.
Item 26: Policy on the use of herbicides/weedkiller in public places.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
“What is the current policy with regard to the use of herbicides/weedkiller in public places/footpaths etc. during the summer months?” (
Q)
Siobhán McNulty, A/Director of Physical Development replied as follows:
“Clare County Council (CCC) adheres to Biodiversity Best Practice Guidelines in relation to the management of vegetation in public places/footpaths. This guidance document was produced by CCC in 2022 and provides a procedure for management of grasslands & road verges and in relation to the use of herbicides. While this document is not policy it has been rolled out to all staff as best practice.”
Cllr. P. Burke noted that footpaths in scenic areas are covered in weeds and felt that while there is a need to adhere to biodiversity there is also a need to encourage tourism. Cllr. Burke stated that in his opinion the current policy is not the best practice.
Item 27: National Car Test Company.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on the Minister for Transport Eamon Ryan to address the chaos being caused to members of the public by the incompetent service currently in operation by the National Car Test Company. This arrangement with a company operating on a monopoly basis is not fit for purpose and should be discontinued with a view to opening up a tendering process for accredited garages in Ireland similar to the DOE process that currently provide a quality service to the public for testing commercial vehicles. The carrying out of a car test on private vehicles over 4 years is mandatory and the government have a duty of care to the public to make adequate provision in the delivery of this service. This proposal would also have the potential to provide employment at local level for many people and provide enhanced opportunities for apprenticeships.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that the current service being provided by the NCT operators is inadequate. The members felt that this service should be provided in local garages which in turn would create employment and provide opportunities for additional apprenticeships.
It was agreed that this notice of motion be circulated to Clare Oireachtas members and other local authorities.
Item 28: Speed limit review.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. S. Talty, L. Grant, C. Murphy, I. Lynch agus G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“In the interests of road safety, I call on Clare County Council to liaise with TII and the Department of Transport to immediately commence speed limit review across the country and additional reviews of road safety at towns and villages along with sensitive and vulnerable areas such as schools and community / sports facilities and in the interim work positively and with urgency alongside local communities to implement reductions and measures possible to improve road safety.”
(M)
John Leahy, Senior Engineer, Roads & Transportation replied as follows:
“Following the publication of the 2015 document “Guidelines for the Setting and Managing of Speed Limits in Ireland” by the Department of Transport, Tourism & Sport, a comprehensive review of speed limits in Clare was carried out from 2016 to 2018 by Clare County Council in consultation with Transport Infrastructure Ireland and An Garda Siochána. These speed limits came into effect in 2019 following adoption by Clare County Council.
This document is now under review as part of the Government Road Safety Strategy. The group established to carry out the review in late 2021 is comprised of representatives of the Department of Transport, the National Transport Agency (NTA), Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII), local authorities, the Road Safety Authority (RSA) and An Garda Siochána.
Clare County Council await the publication of the review from the National Committee and subsequent direction from the Department of Transport and TII.”
The elected members referred to the alarming number of fatalities that have occurred on the country’s roads and felt that this must be addressed as a matter of urgency. The members felt that there needs to be focus on traffic calming measures, speed limits, lighting, hedge cutting and active travel elements. The members felt that the behaviour of road users requires attention and that financial and physical interventions are necessary. The members welcomed the news that proposals are being brought to cabinet and agreed that national policies and guidelines should be applied locally in order to ensure our roads are safer for users.
Item 29: School transport.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“As a matter of urgency that this Council would contact the Minister for Transport Eamon Ryan and Minister Jack Chambers and overview the laws to help bus operators fulfil their role in school transport which has become a nightmare for the county.”
(M)
The elected members stated that the school bus system is in crisis as many users have paid for tickets and the service is not being provided in several areas. During discussion the members stated that this is a very stressful situation for school children and their parents and guardians who are affected as they now have to source an alternative method of travelling to and from school.
The members observed that Bus Éireann imposes an age restriction which restricts drivers over the age of 70 and that this is leading to a shortage of drivers who can operate school bus routes.
The members stated that this is not a legislative rule but a policy decision which they felt is ageist and discriminatory.
The members agreed that Bus Éireann and the Department of Education should work together and review this system and change the current criteria.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan requested that this be forwarded to the Minister for Education also and this was agreed by the members present.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. G. Flynn and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30 p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 31: Community banking models.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
"That the Government be requested to review the Banking landscape currently with a view to re-evaluate New Zealand and German Community banking models due to the cost-of-living crisis and significant interest rate increases over the past 12 months."
(M)
The elected members agreed that the community banking system should be explored and supported as the existing banking system is not working for customers due to the lack of competition in the market.
Item 32: Eradication of invasive species.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That this Council urgently seek adequate funding specifically for the eradication of invasive species (particularly Giant Hog Weed and Japanese Knot Weed), throughout the county, before this issue gets completely out of control”.
(M)
John Leahy,
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback