Minutes of January 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of January 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 8th January 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors M. Howard, J. Flynn, P. Murphy, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman, J. Killeen, P.J. Kelly, G. Keating, C. Murphy, I. Lynch, R. McInerney
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Director of Tourism Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Ms. Anne Haugh, Director of Social Development
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Rural Development and Ukrainian Services.
Ms. Siobhán McNulty, A/Director of Physical Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. C. Colleran Molloy, A. Norton, P. Burke, A. O’Callaghan, J. Garrihy, L. Grant
Absent:
S. Talty
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr J. Cooney wished the members and staff of Clare County Council and the people of County Clare a happy new year.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The O’Sullivan Family on the death of Máirín O'Sullivan, RIP.
The Cullinan Family on the death of Padraig (Paudie) Cullinan, RIP.
The Madden Family on the death of Patrick Madden, RIP.
Cllr. P.J. Ryan proposed to have a reading of the April 1899 Council minutes at the April Council meeting on Monday 8
th
April, 2024 as it is the 125
th
Anniversary of Clare County Council’s first Council meeting. This was agreed by the members present, having been proposed by Cllr. P.J. Ryan, seconded by Cllr. G. Keating.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the December Meeting of Clare County Council held on 11
th
December 2023 be adopted and signed subject to the following amendments.”
Cllr. J. Flynn sought an amendment to the minutes under Item 7 - Monthly Management Report, to accurately reflect his comments at the meeting, as follows:
Cllr. J. Flynn noted that the monthly management report is prepared under statute and is a legal document. Cllr. J. Flynn noted a couple of projects that he believes do not belong in Ennis 2040, he did, however, advise that he has full confidence in the work of the executive, but he does object to the format in page 69 as currently outlined in the Management Report.
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan sought an amendment to the minutes under Item 7 - Monthly Management Report, to accurately reflect his comments at the meeting, as follows:
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan voiced concerns over conflicts of interest and having elected members on the board of Ennis 2040, he noted that they are wearing two hats and as elected members they need to have serious input on what is being proposed, Cllr. O’Callaghan stated that the elected members concerned need to reflect on their position in the best interest of the public they represent.
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 21
st
December, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to housing support schemes.
Correspondence dated 14
th
December, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to Primary Medical Certificates.
Correspondence dated 19
th
December, 2023 from the Road Safety Authority in relation to driving test wait times.
Correspondence dated 19th December, 2023 from An Gara Síochána in relation to Clare policing model.
Correspondence dated 19th December, 2023 from An Gara Síochána in relation to Clare policing model.
Correspondence dated 14th December, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for justice in relation to Clare policing model.
Correspondence dated 21
st
December , 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000.
Correspondence dated 21
st
December, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant.
Correspondence dated 18
th
December, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the 2022-2025 Multi Annual Rural Water programme.
Correspondence dated 15
th
December, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to Cork and Shannon airport.
Correspondence dated 28
th
December, 2023 from the Office of the Minister for State, James Browne T.D. in relation to the Gambling Regulation Bill.
Correspondence dated 12
th
December, 2023 from Cathal Crowe, T.D., in relation to resolutions sent to Oireachtas members from the December 2023 meeting of Clare County Council.
Correspondence dated 12
th
December, 2023 from Senator Roisin Garvey, in relation to resolutions sent to Oireachtas members from the December 2023 meeting of Clare County Council.
Resolution dated 18
th
December, 2023 from Limerick County Council in relation to community policing.
Resolution dated 12
th
December, 2023 from Limerick County Council in relation to wind energy development guidelines.
Details of the The Association of Irish Regions Annual Training Seminar 2024, Regions in Focus 2024, taking place in Fitzgerald’s Woodlands House Hotel & Spa, Adare, Limerick on the 7
th
& 8
th
February, 2024.
Cllr. G. Flynn referred to the correspondence from the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage dated 21
st
December, 2023 in relation to Part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000 and noted his disappointment in the reply and the decision not to review Part V in the near future.
Cllr. G. Flynn noted his disappointment that there was no reply from the Minister for Justice in relation to the December motion on policing in Clare.
Cllr. M. Begley referred to the reply from the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage dated 21
st
December, 2023 in relation to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant and noted his disappointment in that the reply did not address the specific question in the motion. Cllr. M. Begley asked that a reply be written to the Minister asking him to address the specifics of the motion.
Item 4: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 6 September, 2023 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 4
th
December 2023 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. C. Murphy referred to pg. 16 of the management report and the housing construction in Kilkee which has a start date of Q2 2024, Cllr. Murphy queried the specific start date and clarification around what ‘start date’ entails.
Cllr C. Murphy referred to pg. 27 of the management report and noted the great work being done at George’s Head, Kilkee and queried if the newly resurfaced area at George’s head could be used as a helicopter landing pad.
Cllr. C. Murphy also raised two grant approvals that had been withdrawn under the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant in the December management report and queried why a grant would be withdrawn.
Cllr J. Flynn referred to pages 60 and 61 of the management report and further noted his objection to the format of these pages. Cllr. Flynn noted that the statutory record was misleading in the way it is represented and was anti-democratic in nature.
Cllr. T. O’Brien referred to the capital delivery project at Killaloe Bridge and in particular the road surfacing works being undertaken at the Shannon bridge crossing, Cllr. O’Brien acknowledged the comprehensive report and commended Sean Lenihan and his team on the great work being undertaken there. Cllr. O’Brien noted that the road is in serious need of care and maintenance and funding is needed for the road maintenance programme.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting to follow up on some of the queries raised. He noted in relation to grant withdrawals that some grants when availed of have to be spent within a certain timeframe and that’s where Local Authorities run into difficulty.
In relation to the helicopter pad query, Mr. Dowling noted there may be an opportunity there and advised the Council will examine the possibilities.
P. Dowling thank Cllr. O’Brien for his comments on the work being completed at Killaloe Bridge.
Mr. Dowling referred to comments made by Cllr. J. Flynn and assured Cllr. Flynn that his comments are noted but advised that there are many mechanisms to deliver strategies throughout the County examples being at the Cliffs of Moher and Bunratty and it is not the intention of the Council to mislead but to accurately reflect the plan. Mr. Dowling noted there is a very comprehensive strategy to grow the town centre of Ennis.
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Social Development advised that was an error in relation to the start date on page 16 of the management report and that the start date for Doonbeg is Q4, 2024 and finish date of Q1, 2025.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, Planning and Economic Development advised that in relation to the vacant property grants that every effort is being made to get properties over the line but that she will revert to Cllr. Murphy with more information on the withdrawal.
Cllr. J. Flynn noted that Ennis 2040 is a guidance and not statutory document and that projects listed in the management report fall under the statutory role of Ennis Municipal District. Cllr. Flynn questioned the role of Ennis MD if everything is to fall under Ennis 2040.
Cllr. I. Lynch referred to page 16 and sought confirmation on the start date for construction in Kilrush.
Adrian Headd, A/Senior Engineer, Social Development confirmed that Kilrush is also being pulled back to start in Q4, 2024
Item 8: Co-option to fill vacancy on Clare County Council
Report dated 2
nd
January, 2024 from Ann Reynolds, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services was circulated with the agenda. The report states that it is proposed to fill the casual vacancy on the Council arising from the resignation of Bill Chambers. The vacancy will be filled in accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, i.e. the person to be nominated by the same registered political party who nominated for election the member who caused the casual vacancy.
The report states that correspondence has been received from the Fianna Fáil Party nominating Rita McInerney, Mountrivers, Doonbeg, Co.Clare for co-option to Clare County Council. Rita provided her written consent to this co-option.
By virtue of her proposed co-option to the Council, Rita McInerney will also fill the vacant Councillor positions on the following:
West Clare Municipal District Committee
Regional Health Forum West
Joint Policing Committee
Local Community Development Committee
Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Rita McInerney, Mountrivers, Doonbeg, Co.Clare be co-opted to fill the casual vacancy in Clare County Council pursuant to Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001.”
“That Rita McInerney, Mountrivers, Doonbeg, Co.Clare be co-opted to fill the casual vacancy in
West Clare Municipal District Committee
Regional Health Forum West
Joint Policing Committee
Local Community Development Committee
Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee”
The elected members welcomed Cllr. Rita McInerney to Clare County Council and wished her well in her political career and stated that they looked forward to working with her.
The elected members acknowledged the contribution made to Clare County Council by Cllr. McInerney’s predecessor Bill Chambers and wished him well in his retirement.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive extended best wishes to Cllr. McInerney and assured her of the full support and co-operation of staff in the organisation.
Cllr. R. McInerney addressed the meeting and thanked the Fianna Fáil Party for nominating her to fill the vacancy and stated that it is a privilege to be co-opted to the seat on Clare County Council. Cllr. McInerney acknowledged Bill Chambers who retired in 2023 and noted how tirelessly Cllr. Chambers worked for Clare and West Clare and wished him every happiness in his retirement.
Cllr. McInerney undertook to work hard for rural communities knowing the challenges facing them. Cllr. McInerney acknowledged the committees she will be joining and how she can be of benefit to them. Cllr. McInerney advised she will bring a positive, practical and proactive approach to the new role.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr J. Cooney wished Cllr. McInerney well in her new role.
Item 8: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed Corofin Enhancement Plan, Corofin, Co. Clare
Chief Executive Report dated 29
th
December, 2023 from Gareth Ruane, Senior Executive Planner, Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination) and map. The reports outline details of proposed Corofin Enhancement Plan, and the members were asked if there were any issues that they wished to raise in respect of the report circulated.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
Cllr. J. Killeen and Cllr. J. Garrihy thanked Clare County Council and those involved in the public consultation and design of the Corofin Enhancement Plan. The Councillors acknowledged and welcomed the level of consultation with the community.
Item 9: Ratification of new Community and Voluntary Representative on the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee.
Report dated 19
th
December, 2023 from Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Mr. Tommy Molloy will replace Ms. Mary Leahy as the Community and Voluntary representative on the Social SPC.
This nomination was approved having been proposed by Cllr. G. Flynn seconded by Cllr. M. Howard and agreed by the members present.
Item 10: Adoption of Library Development Plan 2023-2027
Report dated 19
th
December, 2023 from Anne Haugh, Director of Services, Housing and Cultural Services, Social Development was circulated with the agenda together with the Clare Library Development Plan 2023-2027.
The report states that it is proposed to focus to three defined areas of Reading and Learning, Spaces and Buildings and Culture and Community. It was noted that an extensive public and staff consultation process took place in July/August 2023. The consultation was promoted widely in local media and online. There were 156 responses from the public and an additional 312 from children and teens.
The Library Development Plan 2023-2027 was approved having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes seconded by Cllr. J. Flynn and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. J. Flynn thanked the former Director of Service for Social Development, Anne Haugh for a very visionary plan. Cllr. Flynn noted that the report is hugely significant and the Clare County library is seen nationally as the top one or two in the Country.
Item 11: Clare Local Area Grant Scheme Guidelines for 2024
Report dated January, 2024 from Bernadette Haugh, A/Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with Clare Local Area Grants Scheme 2024 guidelines for applicants.
The report states that the Budget for the 2024 scheme is €690. The new Scheme for 2024 and the allocations across the grant categories were approved by the members of the Working Group for the Action Plan for Rural Ireland on the 12
th
December 2023.
The following are the approved grant categories for 2024
Public Realm Initiatives & Amenity Projects
Maintenance of Open Spaces in Private Housing Developments
Burial Ground Maintenance
Irish Language
Christmas Lighting
Best Kept Local Authority Estate
Tourism Promotion
Sustainable Tourism
Community Playgrounds
Arts
Community Project Development
The 2024 Clare Local Area Grant Scheme was approved having been proposed by Cllr. P.J. Ryan, seconded by Cllr. G. Flynn and agreed by the members present.
Cllr P.J. Kelly raised a query in relation to his December motion and awaiting a reply to the issue of flooding at Lough Donnell Sluice. Cllr. Kelly asked if there is a solution and asked if there isn’t a solution can focus be put on getting a solution. Cllr. Kelly did note that there may be an exaggerated situation there at the moment due to levels of rainfall in recent months.
Sean Lenihan, Senior Executive Officer, Ennis Municipal District (former Senior Engineer, Physical Development) noted that he is aware of the situation at Lough Donnell Sluice and advised that Lough Donnell is a Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and that the original model collapsed in 2007.
Mr. Lenihan noted that for many years there has been no protection to the lagoon and for the last 17 years it has been low. Mr. Lenihan confirmed that the culvert is being artificially backed up and the local authority are satisfied that it is at the correct levels. Mr. Lenihan advised that every place is saturated at the moment due to rainfall levels and it will be important to routinely monitor into the summer months and if it is still flooded then there is an issue. Mr. Lenihan confirmed that The Fisheries Department and Clare County Council are both satisfied but advised that the local authority will keep an eye on it.
Mr. Lenihan concluded by saying that a possible solution to the issue would be a supplementary overflow.
Item 12: Illegal encampments
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That a report be provided of the Council’s legal fees and costs incurred in the past five years in undertaking legal processes to address illegal encampments throughout the County.”
(M)
Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development replied as follows:
“I wish to advise that in the period 2019 to 2023 Clare County Council has incurred legal costs of €484,398 in relation to legal processes addressing illegal encampments. These costs include fees paid to our legal team, along with other costs around stamp duty, advises, consultations, engagement of barristers and senior counsel, attendance at court sittings and costs associated with same.
These costs do not include the expenditure incurred on council resources, staff and other, in dealing with these cases.
Costs relating to ongoing cases will continue to accrue.”
The elected members noted their concern as to the level of legal costs associated with illegal encampments and remarked on the ways that money could be better spent. It was noted that amount of public money being tied up in these matters is worrying. The elected members acknowledged the work that Clare County Council are doing to try deal with these matters.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy requested further information on where these illegal encampments are and where the costs lie specifically.
Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development advised that as the matters were legally privileged it is not possible to break down individual sites but advised that there are three main sites driving these costs in Ennis, Shannon and Sixmilebridge and that up to 80% could be attributed to a site in Ennis.
Mr. MacCormaic advised that they cannot predict the future costs associated with these cases, but it will be substantial.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive thanked the members for their support and noted they have a clear understanding of the challenges faced by the local authority. Mr. Dowling noted that the Council is limited legally with what they can do but advised that every effort will be made to pursue and deal with these matters.
Item 13: Crime Prevention Measures
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Kelly agus glacadh leis
“Call on Government to introduce legislation making it an offence to conceal one's face with the intent of committing a crime.”
(M)
The elected members raised concerns over the scenes in Dublin last November and noted that the Government need send a strong message to those intent on committing crimes. The members noted that people working in the retail sector need to feel a sense of security while working. The members also remarked that the use of CCTV and bodycams would be very important in the future and that this type of behaviour cannot be allowed to grow.
Item 14: Planning Permission
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That a written report be made available detailing the comprehensible reasons as to why an applicant could get planning permission for a 150m high wind turbine in an area where an applicant seeking permission for a 7m high dwelling could be denied.”
(M)
Helen Quinn, A/Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development replied as follows:
“The Clare County Development Plan, 2023-2029, sets out the landscape character areas of the county and identifies specific landscape types that are considered in the assessment of planning applications. These include ‘settled landscapes’, ‘working landscapes’ and ‘heritage landscapes’. In addition, the Plan identifies a number of scenic routes within the County, which traverse the various landscape types.
The Planning Authority has also prepared a Wind Energy Strategy as set out in the Development Plan. This Strategy identifies various areas of the county that are considered suitable for wind energy development for a number of reasons, including but not limited to, landscape impact. The Strategy identifies areas that are considered ‘Strategic’, ‘Acceptable in Principle’ and ‘Open for Consideration’ for windfarm development and recognises that there are certain areas of the County where subject to appropriate siting and layout, wind farm developments can be accommodated. It should be noted that the Wind Energy Strategy has been carried forward from various development plans since 2009 and we await the publication of the new Departmental Guidelines on windfarm developments before any new strategy can be prepared.
The visual impact of a proposed development will vary from site to site, and the nature of the proposed development. The planning report for each application sets out all the relevant issues pertaining, including those regarding visual impact. As each site and application has specific characteristics and issues, each application is assessed on its individual merits on a case-by-case basis. In assessing rural housing applications regard is had to the Councils own Rural House Design Guide. In respect of windfarm developments, regard is had to the Wind Energy Strategy and the Departmental Guidelines.
As outlined above, the considerations applied in the assessment of planning applications vary as each site and application has specific characteristics and issues. In addition, the Planning Authority is guided by the policies and objectives of the Development Plan and Ministerial Guidelines which inform the visual and other considerations of various development proposals.
The planning application process is one of the most open, transparent, and inclusive processes in government and all reports informing decisions are available to view publicly. Each planning assessment contains a detailed planning report outlining the planning consideration relevant to that application. Should any party have concerns around the planning considerations on a planning application as set out in the planners report they have an opportunity to appeal the decision of the Planning Authority to An Board Pleanala.”
The elected members acknowledged the frustrations of rural communities that can’t get planning permission due to ‘visual impact’ but wind turbines can get approved. The members noted that the planning system is not a comprehensible one and are frustrated with the inconsistencies within the system.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive advised the local authority are listening carefully to their concerns and frustrations.
Item 15: Support for Host Families
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on Minister Roderick O’Gorman to make contact with host families in County Clare that are currently providing accommodation to Ukrainian people that needed protection from the war in Ukraine and determine if the host families need additional support or assistance at this time as it is possible that some host families may be under pressure to cope with the arrangements in place. The possibility of alternative accommodation for some may have to be considered by the Minister and the Government.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the generosity of the host families in Clare and noted that they may not have been aware when opening up their homes how long it would be required. The members noted that some host families are overwhelmed and the €800 is not enough to cover their expenses and more supports are required by the Department. The members commended the Chief Executive and Director of Service on their work to date for the Ukrainian people.
P. Dowing, Chief Executive noted the comments made by the members and that there was a clear onus on Clare to assist where possible. Mr. Dowling acknowledged that waiting for a solution is not an option and that the local authority needs to be proactive and try to predict what is coming around the corner.
Item 16: Theme Park Attraction
Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“In view of Clare County Council's successful involvement in the Tourism industry over recent years, I'm asking the Executive to examine the feasibility of developing or facilitating the development of a theme park type attraction.”
(M)
Leonard Cleary, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Clare Tourism Strategy 2030 sets out the broad framework for tourism objectives in Clare. This includes tourism development objectives to be delivered in partnership with the tourism industry and state agencies. As part of this market-place intervention. the Council directly operates seven tourism attractions to support the wider tourism industry, tourism economy and Shannon Airport.
Amongst the visitor attractions operated by Clare County Council is the Shannon Heritage portfolio. It is envisaged that after one year of tourism operations there that a fifteen-year Strategy will be developed to incorporate the future vision for product development at Shannon Heritage sites. This could consider a proposed theme park attraction during that period 2025 - 2040.
In recent times, strategies were developed for the other tourism attractions. The particular learning and experience of the ‘Cliffs of Moher Strategy 2040’ is that there needs to be a process of engagement with the community, tourism and business sector, state agencies and Elected Members in preparing such a Strategy. A second key learning is that the wider regional economic strategy needs to include a site Master Plan. The proposal in this Motion could be considered as part of such a Master Plan for Shannon Heritage. The expected time frame from the date of commencement is two years to prepare the Strategy and Plan.”
The elected members acknowledged the history and current attractions in the County and noted that a theme park would give a further boost to tourism and hopefully encourage people to stay within the County and not just for day trips. The members noted that other theme park attractions in Ireland have been hugely successful and that a Viking or Game of Thrones theme park would fit in well with Bunratty Castle and Folkpark.
Item 17: Disability Services
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“We welcome the Action Plan for Disability Services 2024-2026 which is building on the Government’s commitment to the "Disability Capacity Review to 2032" from Ministers Anne Rabbitte and Roderick O'Gorman. With a total funding for Disability of €2.9 billion planned in 2024 we call for a collaborative approach including Disability Activists, representatives of the relevant departments, Clare County Council and our Oireachtas Members to ensure our County is well placed to avail of the much needed supports in Children's Disability Services, Adult Multi-Disciplinary Service's, Adult Day Services, Personal Assistance, Home Respite and Residential Services.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the challenging times faced by people with disabilities and that funding needs to be allocated appropriately. The members discussed residential services and the urgent need for them in County Clare and noted that the reliance on the voluntary sector needs to stop. The members noted that a steering committee will need to be set up to assist in delivering on this funding as outlined in the action plan for disability services 2024-2026.
Item 18: Wastewater Services
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“In light of the recent successful application for Cooraclare and Broadford under “Measure A8 - Waste Water Collection and Treatment needs for Villages and Settlements without access to Public Wastewater Services” that Clare County Council now undertake an assessment of what is required to ensure the next tier of un-sewered small towns and villages in the county are ready to avail of the scheme in the future.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“While we welcome the announcement by the Minister Clare County Council has yet to receive official confirmation on the awarding of grant aid for the villages of Broadford and Cooraclare under Measure A8 of the Multi-Annual Rural Water Programme 2022-2025.
During the compilation of the original application we have developed a good understanding of the infrastructural deficits of the unsewered towns and villages in the county. However because it is not clear if the same qualifying criteria and award marking scheme will be used in the next call for funding it is perhaps premature to carry out further assessment at this time. We will keep the situation under review and continue to liaise with the Department to ensure we are well positioned to avail of any future funding opportunities to address infrastructural deficits in the County.”
The elected members noted the frustration of communities that don’t have sufficient wastewater facilities and agreed that people won’t settle where there isn’t proper infrastructure. The members suggested that each electoral area nominate one town or village that is ready to start works and the local authority could then work off that list to apply for the grant aid. The members acknowledged that this is necessary environmental infrastructure and that it also impacts tourism if the County doesn’t have the necessary facilities.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney asked Cllr. J. Killeen to bring forward motion no. 23 that aligns with this motion.
Item 23: Wastewater Treatment Plants
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. J. Cooney, P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“We call on Clare County Council to liaise and cooperate with Uisce Éireann with a view to upgrading wastewater treatment plants across the county, and in particular the plant at Toormore to allow future housing development in Ruan Village.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council continues to work with Uisce Eireann to ensure sufficient capacity is available in both water and wastewater treatment plants to allow for the future growth of both rural and urban communities across county Clare.
The Members have been previously briefed by Uisce Eireann on the Regional Water Resource Plan Eastern and Midlands and the Regional Water Resources Plan – North West which are a strategic review of water requirements across the region including County Clare.
The Uisce Eireann Water Services Strategic Plan (WSSP) outlines Uisce Éireann’s objectives for the next 25 years and the means by which they will achieve them which is primarily through their 5 year rolling Capital Investment Programme (CIP) 2020-2024. Clare County Council has provided input in the development of those plans to ensure our strategic needs are included in their programmes.
The wastewater treatment plant at Tooremore Ruan is the subject of ongoing discussions between Clare County Council Water Services staff and Uisce Eireann as we try to find a suitable pathway to increase capacity at the plant.”
The elected members noted that the Country needs more housing and if wastewater treatment plants were up to standard then more housing developments could be built. The members noted that people are being discouraged from building in rural areas but there is no housing in urban areas, so it is frustrating for people who are looking to build. The members acknowledged the work of the local communities in Broadford and Cooraclare and suggested other communities need to get heavily involved to push for the funding. Again, the members suggested that each electoral area pick a town or village and get it shovel-ready so that there is no delay if the grant is awarded.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged the frustration of the members and noted that they are awaiting the final decision on awarding of the grant for Cooraclare and Broadford. Mr Dowling advised that the local authority is not intending on taking a back seat now that the first two towns have been successful in the scheme. Mr. Dowling advised that the Council are working on the next tranche of funding and need to be pragmatic about the scale of this as the local authority cannot solve all of the issues for wastewater treatment.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. G. Flynn and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30 p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 19: Payment for Driver License’s
Ar moladh Cllr. Mary Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“National Drivers Licence Service - Clare County Council appeals to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan and the CEO of the Road Safety Authority Mr. Sam Waide to reconsider the decision only accept electronic payments for driver’s licences.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that cash is still legal tender and needs to be an accepted form of payment by the National Driver Licence Service (NDLS). The members discussed national policy aiming to be a cashless society and raised questions as to how this would benefit communities and businesses. The members also acknowledged that companies win government contracts and then start changing policy and procedures to suit their own interests.
Item 20: Affordable Housing
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. I. Lynch, T. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, J. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“We are calling on Clare County Council to urgently carry out a County wide analysis of the demand for affordable housing and to determine the numbers that are interested in houses versus apartments. It seems evident that a substantial amount of people in employment across our County cannot access a home to purchase due to a number of obstacles in their way. Initial indicators show that the development of affordable housing in Clare has the potential to support individuals and families to establish a home of their own with adequate Government subvention measures. We would also ask that the findings of the survey would be available to the elected members of Clare County Council and that any existing analysis would also be provided.”
(M)
Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development replied as follows:
“Members will be aware that under the original eligibility criteria for Affordable Housing Clare did not qualify as the HNDA (Housing Needs and Demand Assessment) conducted by the Department of Housing Local Government & Heritage (DHLGH) for the county as a whole did not meet their affordability constraint threshold. However, following a detailed submission to the DHLGH, Clare County Council received approval in principle to submit detailed applications to the fund for specific developments. Our submission was primarily based on a Pilot Study on Housing Needs & Demand Assessment with a particular focus on affordability challenges in the towns of Ennis and Shannon. This was completed in March 2023. A copy of same can be made available to the elected members. Subsequently the Department announced that they would welcome proposals for settlements outside of the larger urban areas.
Clare County Council continues to seek expressions of interest in relation to developer led proposals. Developer proposals received will be reviewed by Clare County Council prior to submission to DHLGH. Any proposed development will require its own definitive Scheme Proposal and Business Case to be submitted to the DHLGH. While each scheme will have its own unique set of circumstances and will be assessed on its own merits, schemes as they are designed and developed must continue to meet the criteria set out in the Affordable Housing Act 2021, including meeting the affordability challenge.
To date four proposals are being progressed by Clare County Council
Proposal for 10 Affordable Houses to be delivered as part of a larger private development in Shannon.
Proposal has been approved by the DHLGH and Clare County Council will be advertising with full details re same in coming months.
Proposal for 39 Apartments at Francis Street, Ennis:
Section 179A Notice advertised. Stage 1 submission received, awaiting stage 2 which, upon review, will form part of submission to DHLGH
Proposal for 11 Affordable Houses to be delivered as part of a larger private development in Ennis:
Submitted to DHLGH and we are awaiting decision
Proposal for 10 Affordable Houses to be delivered as part of a larger private development in Ennis: We are finalising details prior to submitting to DHLGH.
Regarding the request for further surveys, our market analysis conducted in March 2023 indicated a potential demand in Ennis for up to 96 affordable units per annum with demand in Shannon for approximately 29 p.a. The analysis concentrated on the demand for homes, and did not differentiate between houses and apartments, and this is consistent with all national surveys and analysis carried out in relation to same.
It has been established through discussion with potential developers that construction costs associated with apartments far exceed those of standard housing and to this end apartment type affordable units are not suited outside of larger urban areas with higher demand and greater scope for the necessary higher density build, and potential to achieve the affordability targets.
We could conduct a further online survey in relation to Ennis and Shannon areas along lines of that conducted earlier last year. However as this is anonymous and many of those who responded the last time do not appear to meet the eligibility for affordable housing the data returned may not be wholly reflective of the actual needs that exist.
When we advertise for applications for the scheme in Shannon the results can be analysed to establish the real demand and eligibility in that area for affordable housing and we can further plan accordingly. Similarly, should the 3 proposals for Ennis be successful we will be advertising same and data gathered as part of these advertising campaigns will help inform us in relation to demand in the Ennis area, both for houses and /or apartments. These proposed schemes, which include 31 houses and 39 apartments, can be seen as pilots for Clare County Council and help us plan on demand into the future and inform ourselves and the DHLGH in relation to establishing targets for delivery of affordable housing in the coming years.”
The elected members acknowledged the reply from the Senior Executive Officer and agreed that there should be a balanced mix of social, affordable and private housing available for all. The members noted that there are limited opportunities for people who want to buy or build and it is important that the local authority do an assessment to see where the need is. The members acknowledged that vacant and derelict properties need to be looked at as opportunities to generate further housing. The members raised concern that a lack of affordable housing will push people into a situation where they can’t work so as to avail of social housing.
Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development Directorate addressed the meeting and advised that there are four schemes being progressed, two of which have the benefit of planning permission. Mr. MacCormaic further advised that the Francis Street proposal is currently advertised under Section 179A exempted development process. Mr. MacCormaic noted that the social development directorate will be submitting an affordable proposal to the Department in due course.
Mr. MacCormaic advised that the Department have granted approval in principle for ten affordable houses in a scheme in Shannon and it is expected the first three will be available this June, they will be available on a discounted price from €275,000 to €308,000, maximum income eligibility applicable for this scheme will be circa €69,000.
Mr. MacCormaic advised that based on other proposals being reviewed it appears that the main cohort availing of affordable schemes will be in the €55,000 to €70,000 income bracket. Mr. MacCormaic noted that the social development team continue to seek expressions of interest for projects across the County and in relation to apartments versus houses, construction costs for apartments are higher and so it is expected any proposals outside of Ennis will probably be for houses.
Item 21: Women’s Health Care
Ar moladh Cllr. Mary Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council calls on the government to end what the Scally report called a "Paternalistic Approach to women's health care in Ireland”.
-We are asking for the accelerated implementation of Slaintecare & the provision of universal health care
-We call on the Government to amplify the voices of women and girls in the design and implementation of all health policy and service delivery. This critical to fulfilling Vicky Phelan's wish for a healthcare system which serves the health needs of all women and girls.”
(M)
The elected members collectively agreed that it is worrying that women are still fighting for basic services like equal healthcare and noted the alarming failures of the healthcare system in Ireland. The members remembered heroic women like Vicky Phelan and Laura Brennan who spend their last days fighting for the right to equal and fair healthcare for all.
Item 22: DAC Vehichles
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
“Can I be provided with the full list of DAC vehicles operated by Clare County Council and informed if each has a clear set of Key Performance Indicators and what the KPIs for each are.”
(Q)
Ann Reynolds, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Rural Development Directorate replied as follow:
“Designated Activity Companies are companies with the capacity and power to do certain specified acts or objectives set out in their constitutions. Such companies are incorporated for a specific purpose whereby the capacity of the company is clearly defined. They act as independent companies under company law reporting to the board of directors. A listing of the Clare County Council operated DACs and their specified purpose, as provided for in their constitutions is outlined below:
Designated Activity Company
Specified Purpose
Glór Music Ltd
Glor Music Designated Activity Company was established for the purpose of advancement of the arts, culture, heritage or science through the management and operation of the arts centre for the benefit of the community of Clare and surrounding areas.
DOS Anne Haugh
Shannon Heritage DAC
Host employer for skilled tourism staff and site operations.
This host employer function is being consolidated into one single company below and the operations function is being consolidated into Clare County Council.
DOS Leonard Cleary
Kilrush Amenity Trust CLG
Host employer for skilled tourism staff. This function is being consolidated into one single company below.
Amenity development and sponsor of SOLAS social employment and POBAL social enterprise schemes.
DOS Leonard Cleary
Cliffs of Moher Centre DAC
Host employer for skilled tourism staff.
This function has been consolidated into one single company below.
DOS Leonard Cleary
Clare Tourism Development DAC
Host employer for skilled tourism staff.
(This is a staffing function).
DOS Leonard Cleary
Clare Maritime Economic Zone DAC
To establish a Maritime Training Centre which will provide the specialist infrastructure and equipment to provide maritime safety training to seafaring and non-seafaring personnel working on or near the sea. The DAC will focus on both the indigenous and non-indigenous market with a particular focus on the emerging Offshore Renewable Energy sector.
DOS Carmel Kirby
Ennis 2040 DAC
The Ennis 2040 DAC was established to promote the economic development, social integration and environmental improvement of the town of Ennis and its environs in County Clare and to deliver a programme of targeted investment and property development in order to deliver on the objectives set out in the Ennis 2040 Economic & Spatial Strategy.
DOS Carmel Kirby & DOS Noeleen Fitzgerald
Item 24: Traffic Calming Measures
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“I call on Clare County Council to assess the many accidents that are occurring in our housing estates throughout our towns and villages in Co. Clare with a view to arranging traffic calming measures where necessary, which will hopefully alleviate such accidents in the future.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is proactive in the prevention of traffic accidents in estates through a number of different measures namely:
Through our Planning and Development process where we ensure that all new developments meet Department of Transport and Transport Infrastructure Ireland technical standards which are designed to reduce speed and reduce points of conflict.
The speed limit review process allows for the Members and general public to make representations and appeals regarding speed limits in towns and villages. The government has announced a major review in 2024 which will aim to reduce the speed limit to 30km/h in urban centres and residential estates.
We develop low-cost safety schemes which are implemented in statistically significant accident areas to further reduce risks.
Our Active Travel schemes aim to ensure the safety of vulnerable road users and these schemes are being delivered through a combination of Municipal District staff and contractor resources.
Serious accidents are all reviewed with An Garda Siochana to establish root causes and any remedial measures which may need to be adopted.
Notices of Motion brought by the Members are also a valuable tool which highlight areas of concern which are reviewed and acted upon accordingly.
However, notwithstanding the work currently being undertaken it is imperative that we remain vigilant with regard to accidents in residential estates. We will be liaising with the Municipal Districts in the coming months to prepare the Schedule of Municipal District Works and we will re-emphasise the importance of identifying potential residential traffic calming works in the programme.”
The elected members collectively agreed that traffic calming measures are a very effective method of reducing accidents on the roads and that these measures need to be implemented at the planning stage for housing developments. The members noted that speed limits need to be reviewed and 30km zones need to be policed to be adhered to. The members stated that action on this matter needs to be proactive and not reactive in order to save lives.
The Leas-Cathaoirleach, Cllr. G. Keating took over as chair of the meeting at 18.23p.m.
Item 25: Housing projects
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
“To request Clare County Council supply the following information:
To outline the number of housing units currently being constructed.
How many units will be completed for occupation in 2024.
Plans for housing projects to be progressed in the future.
(Q)
Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development replied as follows:
“I can confirm that 58 units were completed via LA Construction, AHB Construction, and Turnkey solutions in the final weeks of 2023 and that these properties will be allocated early this year.
There are currently a further 140 units at construction stage which are planned for completion in 2024.
Schemes totaling 142 units are at various Department approval stages, and while not yet commenced these are targeted for delivery in 2025. AHBs also have a further 48 new units planned for delivery in 2025.
Full updated details of each scheme along with delivery dates are included in the Chief Executive Monthly Management Reports.
It is important to note that the above only includes delivery that are either already under construction or are with Department for approval following appointment of design teams. There are further projects in the pipeline, construction and turnkey, which will be added once approved and /or contracts are signed.
Clare County Council housing delivery targets for 833 new units in the period 2022 to 2026”
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Total
Target
200
149
153
164
167
833
Delivered
256
151
Cllr. G. Keating responded to the reply as follows:
“I dtosach báire ba mhaith liom a rá go bhfuil mé sásta leis an bhfreagra. Ba mhaith liom a rá freisin go bhfuil mé an sásta leis an obair atá déanta ag an Roinn Tithíochta agus ag an Stiúrthóir, Anne Haugh, agus ag foireann na Roinne le linn na blianta, go mór mór i 2022 agus 2023 nuair a shroich siad na spriocanna a bhí leagtha amach acu agus le 58 aonaid sa bhreis tógtha chomh mhaith. Molaim plean na blianta seo chugainn atá leagtha amach chun 153 aonaid a thógáil i 2024, 164 i 2025 agus 167 i 2026. Go n-éirí leis an Stiúrthóir agus foireann na Roinne ina gcuid oibre ag dul ar aghaidh.”
Cllr. Keating noted that he was happy with the reply from housing, noting they exceeded on delivery in 2022-2023 by 58 units. Cllr. Keating congratulated Director of Service, Anne Haugh and the team in housing on the work they are doing.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive advised the members that the new Director of Service, Physical Development Directorate, Alan Farrell will be starting this week.
Leas-Cathaoirleach, Cllr. G. Keating welcomed Cllr. R. McInerney and wished the members and the Executive a happy new year.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
Celtic Conferences “The Finance Act” conference, taking place in McKevitts Hotel, Carlingford, County Louth, on 12
th
– 14
th
January 2024.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €700.00 including conference fee of €130.
It was agreed that Cllr T O’Callaghan attend this conference.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback