Minutes of March 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of March 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 11th March 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors M. Howard, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Murphy, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, P. Burke, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman, S. Talty, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, L. Grant, P.J. Kelly, G. Keating, C. Murphy, R. McInerney
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Director of Tourism Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Social Development.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Councillors A. Norton, I. Lynch
Absent:
Councillors J. Flynn, J. Crowe, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney presided.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney welcomed the staff and residents of Raheen Community Hospital who were in the Gallery.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Lyons Family on the death of Bridie Lyons, RIP.
The Ryan Family, on the death of Patrick Ryan, RIP.
The Custy Family, on the death of Frank Custy, RIP.
The Kelleher Family, on the death of Seán Kelleher, RIP.
The O’Halloran Family, on the death of Sean O’Halloran, RIP.
The McNamara Family, on the death of Gerry McNamara, RIP.
The O’Grady Family, on the death of Noel O’Grady, RIP.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr J. Cooney acknowledged International Women’s Day 2024 which was celebrated on Friday 8th March. Cllr. Cooney highlighted that the Council is providing training to support women candidates in local elections by providing free online training workshops in March/April.
Cllr. J. Cooney also acknowledged Clare County Council being named winner in the category ‘Embracing New Ways of Working’, at the CIPD HR Awards held at the Mansion House, Dublin on 23rd February.
Motion for Purpose of dealing with Urgent Business.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney informed the meeting that he had received a request for a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business in relation to the earlier briefing from the IFA which read as follows:
“Clare County Council resolves to write to the President of the EU Commission, the Taoiseach and the Minister for Agriculture advising them that the Council has passed the following resolution.
Clare County Council supports the IFA ‘enough is enough’ campaign.
The Council recognises the significant contribution that farming, and the Agri-sector makes to the Irish and local economy. The Council acknowledges the income challenge on Irish farmers arising from the significant increases in the cost of doing business, regulatory costs and cuts in Basic Income support for farmers.
The Council calls on the Government to introduce no further regulations on farmers or any measures that may increase costs on farms without full negotiation and agreement with the Irish Farmers Association (IFA). The Council calls on the European Union and the Irish Government to provide additional stand-alone funding, separate to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), to support farmers to undertake climate and biodiversity measures.”
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney advised that he proposed to deal with this request before the notice of motion at Item No. 16
Cllr. P. Hayes addressed the meeting and urged those in office and politicians travelling to the United States this week for St. Patricks Day to raise concerns over the lack of intervention by the United States in the war on Gaza. Cllr. Hayes noted that the U.S. has provide $3.8 billion of ammunition support to Israel and is a key allay of Israel. Cllr. Hayes urged those travelling Stateside to strongly condemn the actions of the U.S and Israel and noted that they are not getting a resolution.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the February Meeting of Clare County Council held on 12
th
February 2024 be adopted and signed.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the adjourned February Meeting of Clare County Council held on 19
th
February 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 19
th
February, 2024 from Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media in relation to accommodation audit.
Correspondence dated 19
th
February, 2024 from Department of the Environment, Climate and Communications in relation to concerns over the Post Office Network.
Correspondence dated 29
th
January, 2024 from Department of the Chief Officer HSE Mid-West Community Healthcare in relation to a collaborative approach to supports in disabilities.
Correspondence dated 4
th
March, 2024 from the officer to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to affordable housing needs in Clare.
Correspondence dated 29
th
February, 2024 from Michael McNamara TD in relation to affordable housing needs in Clare.
Correspondence dated 8
th
February, 2024 from the Minister of Finance in relation to Primary Medical Certificates.
Correspondence dated 19
th
February, 2024 from the Minister for Health in relation to progressing women's health.
Correspondence dated 8
th
February, 2024 from the office for the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to upgrading wastewater treatment plants.
Correspondence dated 22
nd
February, 2024 from the Minister for Education in relation to tendering of 20% of existing school transport routes.
Acknowledgement dated 23
rd
February, 2024 from the Minister for Housing, Local Govenment and Heritage regarding the Crói Cónaithe scheme.
Acknowledgement dated 21
st
February, 2024 from the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine in relation to expanding the Acres scheme.
Acknowledgement dated 2
nd
February, 2024 from Uisce Éireann in relation to upgrading of wastewater treatment plants.
Acknowledgement dated 22
nd
February, 2024 from the Minister for Education in relation to tendering of 20% of existing school transport routes.
Acknowledgement dated 21
st
February, 2024 from the Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media in relation to the effects of the unhumanitarian emergency on local communities.
Acknowledgement dated 22
nd
February, 2024 from the Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs in relation to ongoing conflicts involving Israel and Russia.
Acknowledgement dated 21
st
February, 2024 from the Taoiseach in relation to ongoing conflicts involving Israel and Russia.
Acknowledgement dated 27
th
February, 2024 from the Taoiseach in relation to including mental health services as part of emergency services.
Acknowledgement dated 21
st
February, 2024 from the Taoiseach in relation to including mental health services as part of emergency services.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
February, 2024 from Cathal Crowe TD in relation to the purchase of suitable property for affordable housing and amending the Planning Act.
Resolution dated 8
th
February, 2024 from Cork County Council in relation to reduce the VAT rate for pubs.
Resolution dated 8
th
February, 2024 from Cork County Council in relation to revert the hospitality VAT rate.
Conference titled "The Rise of Loneliness on The Emerald Isle" being held on the 13th and 14th of March 2024, in Hannon's Hotel, Athlone Road, Roscommon, Co Roscommon.
Conference titled "Smart, Innovative and connected cities and regions" being held on the 18th and 19th of April, 2024 in the Theatre Royal and Tower Hotel, Waterford, Co Waterford.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Mary Howard
Cuidithe ag P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 9
th
January 2024 be noted”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a) Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 4 December, 2023 be noted.”
Cllr. I. Lynch referred to his motion from November where he had requested to have the IDA come to the Chamber for a briefing and asked that this be followed up.
(b) Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 21 November, 2023 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 2
nd
February 2024 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. C. Murphy referred to the Road Design Office update and requested further information be provided on the Ministers Place, Kilkee and Mount Charles Terrace projects.
Cllr. C. Murphy referred to the remediation of sites containing Asbestos and requested an update as to when works will commence and an expected completion date.
Cllr. C. Murphy referred to the Cultural Services update and wished Tom Corry from Culturlann Sweeney, Kilkee best of luck in his future endeavours.
Cllr. T. O’Brien acknowledged the work being carried out on the Killaloe Bridge and By-pass but noted that the road infrastructure where the works are being carried out are in disrepair and in need of investment.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy queried what is the proposed development of two housing units at Grey Gables and Laurel Lodge, Ennis, Co. Clare.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy acknowledged the excellent work being done by the Derelict Sites team in dealing with 260 properties. Cllr. Colleran Molloy queried the 7% derelict site levy and who receives this income. Cllr. Colleran Molloy also referred to the 1,700 surveys that have been carried out to date and sought clarity on the surveys and if that was 1,700 different properties or were there properties that have been surveyed a couple of times?
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Local Enterprise Week 2024 and the wide range of events taking place and queried if direct feedback is sought from those participating for future reference.
Cllr. McInerney also referred to the walk-in clinics held by the housing team in relation to the Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme and sought an update on how these clinics are progressing.
Cllr. P. O’Gorman also referred to the poor road infrastructure around the Kilalloe Bridge and By-pass.
Cllr. J. Garrihy referred to the Rural & Community Information Clinics and noted that it was an intensive period for grant applications, and the clinics were very beneficial to communities.
Cllr. J. Garrihy requested an update on the Doolin Pier Visitor Services Building and the North Clare Transport Plan
Cllr. P. Burke commended the Tourism team on all the initiatives but sought an update on the Old Rectory Building in Mounshannon.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Service, Economic Development replied to Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy’s queries in relation to derelict buildings and undertook to revert with further details.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development confirmed that there are some actions underway but that he would engage with the Councillors on their queries in relation to Doolin Pier, Killaloe Bypass Road Infrastructure and North Clare Transport Plan.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and noted that in relation to the Killaloe Bypass there will be issues arising due to the work being carried out but that the local authority will deal with the damage caused. Mr. Dowling referred to the Asbestos remediation programme and acknowledged that this has been an ongoing issue for over 10 years but that the local authority would address it within the Councils own resources subject to funding being made available.
Item 8: Report in accordance with Section 37E (4) and (5) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (As amended) for the Ballycar Windfarm, Co. Clare
Report dated 5
th
March from Pat Dowling, Chief Executive was circulated with the agenda.
The Chief Executive report is in accordance with the requirements of Section 37E (4) and 37E (5) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, and Planning and Development (Strategic Infrastructure) Act 2006, in relation to the Ballycar Windfarm.
The development consists of 12 no. wind turbines with an energy output of approximately 54MW with a 35-year operational lifespan. A 10-year permission is sought and the application is accompanied by an Environmental Impact Assessment Report (EIAR) and a Natura Impact Statement (NIS). The main components of the development are as follows:
12 No. Wind Turbines (blade tip height up to 158m). Eleven of the turbines will have a hub height of 90m and a blade length of 68m and one turbine (T10) will have a hub height of 82m and a blade length of 68m.
12 No. Wind Turbine foundations and hardstand areas.
1 No. Permanent Meteorological Mast (90m height), foundation/hardstanding area.
1 No. Electrical Substation (110 kV) including associated ancillary buildings, security fencing and all associated works.
2 No. Developed Site Entrances, one temporary entrance to facilitate construction traffic and one permanent entrance.
New and upgraded internal site access tracks.
Provision of an on-site Visitor cabin and parking
All associated underground electrical and communications cabling connecting the proposed turbines to the proposed onsite substation.
Laying of approximately 1.5km of underground electricity cabling to facilitate the connection to the national grid from the proposed onsite substation to connect to an existing 110 kV overhead line.
Temporary works on sections of the public road network along the turbine delivery route (including hedge or tree cutting, relocation of powerlines/poles, lampposts, signage, and local road widening).
1 No. Temporary construction site compound and additional mobile welfare unit.
1 No. Borrow pit to be used as a source of stone material during construction.
3 No. spoil deposition areas (one at borrow pit location).
Associated surface water management systems.
Tree felling for wind farm infrastructure
Cllr. D. McGettigan welcomed the Chief Executive report and outlined serious concerns she and the other Shannon MD members have. Cllr. McGettigan advised the meeting that the Shannon MD members were submitting a report requesting that it be appended with Clare County Councils submission to An Bord Pleanála.
The report from the Shannon MD sets out the considerations and recommended reasons to refuse permission for the proposed development:
Project splitting
Inadequacy of the current Wind Energy Strategy of Clare County Council and inadequacy of the present wind energy guidelines produced by the Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government.
Inappropriateness of the site.
Specific site sensitivities.
Piecemeal nature of the proposal.
Impact on property values.
Important archaeological area.
Prominence over a wide area.
Other environmental concerns.
Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged receipt of the report from Cllr. McGettigan and noted the points made in the report.
The elected members were in support of the concerns as outlined in the CE Report and the Shannon MD Members own report whereby the following points were outlined:
Saturation of these turbines in an area where 1200 residents live within 1.3km radius of the proposed site with the closest residence being 520m from the site.
Location of the site is highly sensitive given its location to key tourism landmarks such as Bunratty Castle and Folk Park and King Johns Castle in Limerick.
The impact these sites will have on property prices and tourism in the locality.
The high volume of windfarm applications being received, need for uniformity in any planning decisions.
Concerns that the existing 2006 guidelines were out of date and not relevant for the assessment of the current application.
That the existing Wind Energy Strategy has been carried over since 2009, is out of date and that the members have not had a chance to review same.
Focus should be on the development of offshore turbines and other technologies.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“To attach report, signed by Cllr. D. McGettigan and submitted by the members under Section 37 E (6) of the Planning Act, to the Chief Executive report, to An Bord Pleanála, in respect of proposed Ballycar Windfarm”.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive advised that Clare County Council will submit their report to An Bord Pleanála including the additional report submitted by the members and a copy of the minutes from today’s meeting.
Cllr. G. Flynn sought confirmation that the application will be submitted in the name Ballycar Windfarm and not Meelick Windfarm.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive confirmed the report will be amended to reflect the name Ballycar Windfarm.
Item 9: 2024 Council Resolution for Borrowing
Report dated 4
th
March, 2024 from Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services was circulated with the agenda. The report states that the Clare County Council Section 135 Local Government Act 2001 proposed capital programme and long-term strategic objectives in capital expenditure for the period 2024 - 2026 of €725m was presented to members as part of the statutory budget meeting 2024 held last November. The proposed projects outlined in the report would see planned investment of €725m across the five directorates of the Council, an ambitious plan that identified a forecasted shortfall in funding of €71.5m to be secured in order to deliver on the projects.
The report continues that Ministerial sanction is required to advance any loan borrowing within this council subject to council members approval. The Ministerial sanction is also subject to appropriate project appraisal in line with the Public Spending Code and will now be granted by the Minister on an annual basis with drawdown of the loan in the same year. The Minister will not sanction multi – annual borrowing applications which does challenge this Council in delivering multi–annual projects. To mitigate and plan for loan drawdown for projects while also managing interest rate risk exposure, it is planned to bring loan sanction to members on an annual basis this year and in future years as projects advance into the delivery stage when the finance is required.
The following table sets out the 2024 request for members to approve the council borrowing and financing on the delivery of these projects.
Project Title
Project Description
Total Project Value
Grant Finance Approved
Loan Finance required.
Vandeleur Walled Garden Café Development- Phase 2
Completion and fit out of the remaining wing of the stable block at Vandeleur Walled Garden and Visitor Centre to house a Bistro within the Centre.
€1.5m
€1.5m
Inis Cealtra phase 1
Purchase of the Old Rectory and 25% RRDF phase 1 funding contribution from CCC
€7.2m
€4.2m
€3m
Ennis URDF Public Realm match Funding- phase 2
25% URDF phase 2 funding contribution from CCC. Barrack Square and Old Barrack Street will be developed as a "cafe quarter" which is proposed to deliver a higher-quality civic space encouraging people to meet, relax and avail of local retail. O'Connell Square, High Street and O'Connell Street will become more attractive to pedestrians through the delivery of an expanded plaza incorporating seating and planting.
€11.7m
€8.7m
€3m
Transportation Public Realm and Car Parking .
Development of 300+ car park facilities in Ennis.
€3.5m
€3m
Affordable Housing Delivery
Bridge Finance
Provide Bridging Finance to advance the delivery of Affordable Housing Schemes. This finance is a bridge finance working capital until such time as the units are sold.
€15m
Housing Land
Bridge Finance
to acquire Land bank
Provide Bridging Finance to purchase land banks for the delivery of housing development. This finance is bridge finance working capital until such time as the land proceeds to development.
€5m
Waste Management and ACM remediation.
The remediation of seven sites in West Clare containing asbestos materials. Detailed design complete, review of statutory consent requirements ongoing.
€10m
€10m
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That pursuant to the provisions of Section 66 & 106 of the Local Government Act, 2001 for the indicated projects as outlined below for the borrowing, loan financing and bridge finance in a delivery mechanism that supports the council’s objectives.
Vandeleur Walled Garden Café Development- Phase 2 €1.5m
Inis Cealtra -Phase 1 €3.0m
Ennis URDF Public Realm match funding- Phase 2 €3.0m
Transportation Public Realm and Car Parking €3.0m
Affordable Housing Delivery Bridge Finance €15.0m
Housing Land Bridge Finance to acquire Land bank €5.0m
Waste Management and ACM remediation. €10.0m”
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services addressed the meeting and outlined the following points:
Capital expenditure of €725m as per the statutory budget meeting.
Clare County Council has been successful in getting funding through government initiatives, but match funding is required.
Process for borrowing in local authorities is a reserved function, in order to advance the borrowing, Ministerial sanction is required.
The Minister will not sanction multi-annual borrowing applications only annual applications, so this is the borrowing request for 2024.
The Ministerial sanction is subject to appropriate project appraisal and is not based on a charge against assets.
Part of the Directors role is to review the interest rate risk.
The elected members noted concern over the lack of detail in the report particularly for those who have no dealings with some of the projects. The members felt that they had not received a full and comprehensive briefing on all the projects in the reports and noted the challenge for them in understanding what they are approving. The elected members commended the Executive on the recent partnership with the GAA for carpark spaces.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged that the elected members were seeking a greater level of engagement from them on these projects and that he would speak with the Director of Service to address the gap going forward.
Cllr. G. Flynn stated that he could not support approval of this borrowing.
Item 10: Fáilte Ireland’s Festival and Events Funding 2024
Report dated 4
th
March, 2024 from Leonard Cleary, Director of Tourism Development was circulated with the agenda together with details of Local Festivals and Participative Events Funding Programme for 2024.
The report states that the Council’s Working Group for the Action Plan for Rural Ireland met on 1
st
March, 2024 and recommend the projects to the March 2024 meeting of Clare County Council to be approved for Fáilte Ireland funding.
Details of applications which had been assessed and the grant levels determined based on the evaluation criteria, the application details, and the level of funding available were outlined.
The applications were approved having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes, seconded by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy and agreed by the members present.
Item 11: Draft Clare County Heritage Plan 2024 – 2030
Report dated 4
th
March, 2024 from Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare County Council has prepared its fourth County Clare Heritage Plan 2024-2030 which sets out the vision and direction for heritage management for the next six years and when complete will delivers on an objective of the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 and give effect to its goals and objectives for heritage across the County.
The report advises that preparation of the fourth Clare County Heritage Plan commenced on the 21
st
July 2023 and outlined the various stages involved in the preparation of the Heritage:
Stage 1
– Pre-Draft Public Consultation
Stage 2
– Draft Heritage Plan Preparation
Stage 3
- Public consultation and amendments to the Draft Heritage Plan
Stage 4
– Endorsement of the Heritage Plan
The report advises that briefings on the Clare County Heritage Plan 2024-2030 were given to the elected members and at SPC's meetings throughout the process.
The report outlined the vision of the Clare County Heritage Plan 2024 – 2030 was based on four main strands of Collaboration and Connections; Sustaining and Integrating; Capturing and Sharing and Educating and Inspiring. The report listed the eight key focus areas underpinning the Heritage Plan, which are:-
It's How You Tell Them
Looking Back/ Moving Forward
Life is for Living
Changing Times
Sounds Wonderful
Keeping Track
Light the Spark, See the Light
Working Together for Sustainable Heritage
The report stated that The Clare County Heritage Plan 2024-2030 is a county-wide plan with many partners responsible for its implementation. Clare County Council is a key partner and the Heritage Officer in many cases will deliver the Plan or act as coordinator for projects. The Clare County Heritage Plan 2024-2030 sets out primarily to enable and support communities and the voluntary sector.
The Clare County Heritage Plan was approved having been proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. C. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
Item 12: Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2024
Report dated 4
th
March, 2024 from Leonard Cleary, Director of Tourism Development was circulated with the agenda together with details of the grant recommendations. The report states that a total of 497 applications were received under the Council’s Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2024. The total fund for 2024 is €690,000.
The report continues that at their meeting on 1
st
March, 2024, the elected members of the ‘Working Group for the Action Plan for Rural Ireland’ considered the grant recommendations under the following support schemes:
Support Scheme for Public Realm Initiatives & Amenity Projects
Support Scheme for Maintenance of Open Spaces in Private Housing Developments
Support Scheme for Community Playgrounds
Support Scheme for Burial Ground Maintenance
Support Scheme for Best Kept Local Authority Estate
Support Scheme for Christmas Lighting
Support Scheme for the Arts
Support Scheme for the Irish Language
Support Scheme for Tourism Marketing & Promotion
Support Scheme for Sustainable Tourism
Support Scheme for Community Project Development
The elected members approved the Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2024 (CLAGS) having been proposed by Cllr C. Colleran Molloy, seconded by Cllr. T. O’Brien and agreed by the members present.
Item 13: Annual Service Delivery Plan
The Annual Service Delivery Plan was circulated with the agenda.
The report was adopted by the members having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes and seconded by Cllr. G. Keating and agreed by the members present.
Item 14: Draft County Clare Strategy for Housing People with a Disability
The Draft County Clare Strategy for Housing People with a Disability was issued to the Councillors separately to the agenda.
This Strategic Plan has been prepared by the Clare Housing and Disability Steering Group (HDSG) in accordance with the National Housing Strategy for Disabled People 2022 – 2027 and the National Implementation Plan, published in June 2023. The Strategy has had input from individuals with lived experiences as well as all groups, agencies and representatives involved with people with disabilities.
The core goal of this Strategy is to facilitate access for disabled people to the appropriate range of housing and related support services in a timely manner, delivered in an integrated and sustainable manner, which promotes equality and human rights, individual choice, and independent living.
The draft Strategic Plan was considered and agreed by the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee at its meeting on 6th March 2024 and was approved by the elected members having been proposed by Cllr. D. McGettigan and seconded by G. Flynn and agreed by the members present.
Item 15: Briefing by John Treacy on Clare County Council’s Engagement with the County Nursery Sites and Research update.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney welcomed Dr. John Treacy and Lisa McGeeney to the Chamber and called on the Chief Executive, P. Dowling, to open the briefing.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive address the meeting and noted that that as the local authority continue to reflect on the findings on the Commission on Mother and Baby Homes, they acknowledge the deep and enduring impact of these institutions on the lives of many in the county. Clare County Council, in response to the Commission's final report, has taken significant steps towards memorialisation and understanding of the historical context that led to the establishment and operation of such institutions in our county, notably in Kilrush.
Mr. Dowling advised that in Kilrush, at Toler Street and Old Shanakyle Graveyard, memorials have been unveiled to honour the memory of the women who gave birth and the children, especially those who died, in the County Clare Nursery. These memorials, including a poignant sculpture of a mother and baby, bear the inscription "Inár gcuimhne go deo/Always remember", serving as a lasting tribute to their suffering and resilience.
Mr. Dowling advised that Clare County Council has issued a heartfelt apology for its role in the management of the County Nursery, acknowledging the council's own historical involvement and the broader societal failings of that era. Mr. Dowling acknowledged that recognising and apologising for the past is just a step towards healing and reconciliation.
Mr. Dowling advised that recognising the importance of historical research for a deeper understanding, Clare County Council has partnered with the Department of History at the University of Limerick to fund a doctoral scholarship. This scholarship is aimed at uncovering the historiography of the treatment of women in the public health context in County Clare during the early 20th century, including how institutions like the County Nursery came to be. A year and a half ago, Ms. Lisa McGeeney was selected as the successful doctoral candidate by the Department of History at UL and Clare County Council.
Mr. Dowling noted that Lisa McGeeney is a dedicated professional whose journey from being a registered nurse and midwife has led her into the realms of public health nursing and academia. Holding a Master's degree in Local History from the University of Limerick obtained in 2020, Lisa embarked on her PhD journey in September 2022, showcasing her commitment to furthering her education and contributing to historical knowledge. Her scholarly work focuses on the development and professionalisation of nursing and midwifery, particularly within the poor-law unions of Borrisokane and Nenagh in Co. Tipperary between 1882 and 1922. Mr. Dowling advised that Lisa’s unique blend of professional experience, academic background, and personal commitment to historical research makes her the ideal choice for the doctoral candidate focusing on the County Nursery project.
Mr. Dowling advised that the Council committed to identifying the places of burial of the children who passed away in these facilities. Dr. John Treacy managed a project focusing on identifying burial sites for children associated with the County Nursery. A detailed historiographical and archaeological geophysical survey at Old Shanakyle Burial Ground revealed several graves, demonstrating the council's commitment to uncovering the truth and facilitating healing. The memorial at Shanakyle, dedicated to these children, designed by Mr. Frank McCormack and his team at Irish Natural Stone, will stand as a lasting physical memory of this dark and challenging period in our history Mr. Dowling noted.
Mr. Dowling acknowledged that it is owed it to the mothers, babies, and families affected by these institutions to remember their stories and learn from them.
Mr. Dowling then invited Dr. John Treacy and Ms. Lisa McGeeney to update the members on the work completed so far.
Dr. John Treacy addressed the meeting and thanked the Cathaoirleach, Chief Executive and elected members for inviting them to the Chamber to discuss such an important period in history. Dr. Treacy discussed in detail:
Formation of a specialised working group to address the findings of the Commission on Mother and Baby Homes.
Roles and objectives of the working group – to facilitate the creation of a memorialisation policy, engage with survivors and the community, and oversee the implementation of the Commission's recommendations.
Collaborative approach involving local historians, community representatives, and family members affected by the Mother and Baby Home in Kilrush.
Toler Street Memorial
Old Shanakyle Graveyard – geographical survey and a high-resolution ground penetrating radar survey undertaken. Series of graves detected.
Memorial at Old Shanakyle Graveyard.
Lisa McGeeney then addressed the meeting to give an update on her research to date:
Closure of the workhouses on 31st January 1922 and opening of the County Nursery on 31st January 1922.
Staffing and Inmates of the County Nursery as of 1924.
Births and deaths of Children under 5 years in County Clare in 1923.
Boarding-out of Children between the ages of 2 – 15 years.
The elected members thanked Dr. Treacy and Ms. McGeeney for their work to date on this sensitive issue and for handing it with such care and compassion. the members agreed that it was a particularly sensitive matter and that the memorials were significant and poignant landmarks and welcomed them being erected. The members raised queries in relation to the overall objective of the research, disturbance of sacred ground and publishing of research material.
Dr. Treacy and Ms. McGeeney answered all the queries raised by the members.
Motion for Purpose of dealing with Urgent Business.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney informed the meeting that a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business had been received and that motion may be proposed in accordance with Standing Order No. 44. This was agreed by the members present.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney informed the meeting that the request read as follows:
“Clare County Council resolves to write to the President of the EU Commission, the Taoiseach and the Minister for Agriculture advising them that the Council has passed the following resolution.
Clare County Council supports the IFA ‘enough is enough’ campaign.
The Council recognises the significant contribution that farming, and the Agri-sector makes to the Irish and local economy. The Council acknowledges the income challenge on Irish farmers arising from the significant increases in the cost of doing business, regulatory costs and cuts in Basic Income support for farmers.
The Council calls on the Government to introduce no further regulations on farmers or any measures that may increase costs on farms without full negotiation and agreement with the Irish Farmers Association (IFA). The Council calls on the European Union and the Irish Government to provide additional stand-alone funding, separate to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), to support farmers to undertake climate and biodiversity measures.”
The elected members were unanimous in supporting the motion put before them and the motion was approved having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes and seconded by P. Burke and agreed by the members present.
Item 16: Funding for CIS and LIS
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“
We call on Clare County Council and our Oireachtas members to lobby for greater funding for the Community Investment Scheme and the Local Improvement Scheme.
We call also for extra funding to reduce dramatically the list of those waiting to be prioritised for repair.
Please provide an outline of the number on the waiting lists per MD for LIS and CIS”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The following is the number of current Applications under the Community Involvement Schemes (CIS) and Local Improvement Schemes (LIS) in each of the Municipal Districts.
Community Involvement Schemes (CIS)
– 30 No. Applications
Killaloe MD 10
Shannon MD 2
West Clare MD 18
Local Improvement Schemes (LIS)
– 146 No. Applications
2018 2023 Total
Ennis MD 1 4 5
Killaloe MD 3 10 13
Shannon MD 1 8 9
West Clare MD 85 34 119
We would welcome the provision of additional funding to address the backlog of schemes under the CIS and LIS programme which provide a critical resource in the repair and maintenance of roads infrastructure in rural communities.”
The elected members agreed that funding is critical to keep these schemes running and that without these schemes the roads would be in a state of disrepair. The members noted the volume of applications for the Local Improvement Scheme in West Clare and that to make rural living sustainable and attractive the road network in rural areas need well maintained.
Item 17: Social Housing Clinic
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council examine the possibility a clinic service targeted at individuals, couples and families who are deemed ineligible for social housing in order to provide comprehensive information and guidance on other schemes which they may quality for including but not limited to; Help to Buy, Local Authority Affordable Purchase, First Home, Local Authority Home Loan, Cost Rental and Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant.”
(M)
Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development Directorate replied as follows:
“I welcome the suggestion from Cllr McInerney in relation to a clinic service. We are currently looking at options in relation to outreach roadshows at various locations around the county in relation to the wide variety of housing options available and will keep elected members informed re same. These roadshows will include information in relation to options available to those eligible for standard social housing support, and those who are not eligible. In addition to schemes mentioned we also plan to include information around Mobility, Disability and Elderly Grants schemes, Tenant in Situ schemes for households served with Notices of Termination, Tenant Purchase Schemes, and any other new schemes which may come on stream in coming months.”
The elected members agreed that there are a lot of schemes available and a lot of information for people to take in and that a roadshow would be very helpful to give people options as to what is suitable specifically for them. It was noted by the elected members that whilst a lot of the information is available through the Clare County Council website it may not be user friendly for some who do not have great technical skills or ability. The elected members noted that a roadshow was done prior to COVID and that it was a great success and looked forward to hearing more on what the housing team had planned for a future roadshow.
Item 18: Rail Link Service
Due to the absence of Cllr. J. Crowe this item was deferred to the April Council
meeting.
“I am calling on Clare County Council to arrange for a viability study to deal with a view of the possibility of a rail link service to link Ennis and Limerick with Sixmilebridge, Bunratty and Shannon Airport, to include Shannon Town Centre and the Industrial Estate.
In turn this will give connectivity to many holiday makers and business, people not alone in the mid-west region but throughout Ireland, especially with the growth that is taken place at the Airport. This will help to maintain and drive same.
It will benefit workers from Ennis, Limerick and surrounding areas to travel to Shannon. It will also help our environment to reduce cars and busses from our roads.”
(M)
Item 19: Bathing waters
Ar moladh Cllr. L. Grant
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“Call on Clare County Council to reopen the public participation process in identifying bathing waters across the county. I would ask the Council to investigate if any work could be done to bring up the score of submitted locations so that they may reach the criteria set out in the EPA framework.
With more and more people sea swimming, there is a clear desire for more bathing water locations across the county. Many people were disappointed that several sites were not designated a bathing area, particularly Doolin Pier. The county would benefit greatly if we could get additional bathing areas.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
Local authorities are required under the Bathing Waters Directive 2006/7/EC and the Bathing Water Quality Regulations 2008 (SI No 79 of 2008) to identify bathing waters on an annual basis. The Directive requires that water quality at all designated bathing waters meets stringent microbiological standards to protect the health of people who choose to bathe there.
Section 4(4) of the Regulation states that
“A local authority shall take appropriate measures in accordance with Regulation 17 for public participation in the identification of bathing waters”
and Section 4(1) states that
“A local authority shall, in accordance with this Regulation, on or before 24 March in each year identify all bathing waters in relation to the bathing season in that year and shall notify the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in such form and in such manner as may be specified by the EPA, of the bathing waters so identified including the reason for any change compared to the previous year.”
The process for identifying bathing waters has already been completed for the 2024 bathing season. In addition, considering the timescales involved in the advertising and review of submissions it would not be possible to complete a second review prior to March 24
th
2024.
The Municipal District Offices in conjunction with the Environment section can analyse the “Proposed Bathing Water” report to see if works can be carried out which may satisfy the criteria in the EPA Guidance document which would allow for their submission in next years review.
It is important to note that there are currently 8 Blue Flag Bathing Areas, with an additional 4 Green Coasts Flags in Clare. In addition to monitoring water quality at the 12 Blue and Green flag locations, we also monitor bathing water quality at 2 additional locations. In total we currently monitor 14 locations for bathing water under the Bathing Water Quality Regulations (see Table below).
Current Beach Flags and Monitoring locations
Ref
Blue Flag
Green Coast
Monitored Locations
1
Ballycuggeran
Bishops Quarter
Cappagh
(Blue Flag up to 2022)
2
Fanore
Ballyallia
Quilty (front beach)
3
Kilkee
Carrigaholt Beach
4
Lahinch
Seafield
5
Mountshannon
6
Spanish Point
7
Whitestrand Doonbeg
8
Whitestrand Miltown
The elected members noted that people are perplexed as to why Doolin Pier hasn’t been designated a bathing area and looked for solutions or changes that can be made so that it can pass the EPA guidelines. It was acknowledged by the members that sea swimming is very popular, and groups are meeting up in a number of different locations across the county to swim. It was noted that the mental health benefits are evident and there is a sense of community within these groups. Cllr. L. Grant sought confirmation on the wording in the legislation regarding launching of boats and the effect it has on water quality.
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development addressed the meeting and noted that the local authority is governed by the Bathing Waters Directive and the EPA guidelines for assessing proposed bathing water locations. Mr. Feeney noted that a water safety audit was carried out on Doolin Pier and also acknowledged that the old Doolin Pier is still a working pier, and the safety of people is paramount. Mr. Feeney noted that the local authority applies the structure that the EPA has outlined and Doolin Pier does not meet the criteria threshold.
Item 20: Planning Permission on National Roads
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That TII be requested to inform the Council of the circumstances in which it would not formally object to decisions of Clare County Council to grant planning permissions for houses adjacent to N68, N85 and N67.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that given the current housing crisis more needs to be done to accommodate those who can and want to build near their homes and farms to do so. The elected members noted that making farmers travel longer distances to get to their farms, particularly if travelling at unsocial hours would be more dangerous than building along the N68, N85 or N67.
Item 21: Funding for road infrastructure
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney
Cuidithe ag Cllr.G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“Due to the unprecedented weather conditions experienced over the last number of months and the subsequent effect it has had on the county’s road infrastructure, I am calling on Clare County Council to seek emergency funding to tackle the current road disrepair and bring the road network back to an appropriate standard.”
(M)
Michael McNamara, A/Senior Executive Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council, as directed by the Department of Transport are required to monitor and assess the condition of the Regional and Local Road Network on an ongoing basis through the Pavement Surface Condition Index (PSCI). Such surveys are undertaken locally through Municipal District Engineering Staff and Technical Staff, with additional surveying undertaken through a 3rd party in 2023. At present approximately 95% of the network has been surveyed in the past 12 months.
On Regional Roads, Local Primary and Local Secondary Roads condition survey ratings are required every 2 years with Local Tertiary requiring assessment every 5 years. These surveys form the basis of the compilation of the Roadworks Programmes, with a multi annual programme for Restoration Improvement and an annual programme for the Restoration Maintenance Programme. The programmes are formed locally within each Municipal District for their respective areas of responsibility.
As recommended by the Department of Transport, to protect and maintain the network, restoration interventions should be undertaken on 10% of the network annually, with 5% surface dressed and 5% in receipt of strengthening annually. Based on the current schedules as identified in the Schedule of Municipal District Works for 2024, it is estimated that 6% of the Road Network shall be strengthened or surface dressed over the course of the programme.
In addition to the Restoration Maintenance and Restoration Improvement Programme, grant funding sources in respect of Former National Roads (FNR), Climate Change Adaption and Resilience (CCAR), Local Improvement Schemes (LIS) and Community Involvement Scheme(CIS) allow for additional works on the road network throughout the county. Drainage Funding provided also allows for Municipal Districts to undertake necessary drainage works on the road network which form an essential part of the longevity of the road network.
In respect of national roads, priority schemes in the form of pavement overlays are selected by Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII), based on condition surveys undertaken by the National Authority. Such schemes are advised to the LA who then procure and deliver the overlay through an appointed contractor. 3 schemes on the national network are forming part of the 2024 allocation and Clare County Council shall look to seek an additional allocation as the year progresses.
The Road and Transportation Section is committed to working with the Department of Transport in seeking additional funding for the betterment of the road network in Clare. Ideally, any additional allocation would be made at an early date as this will assist the management of the delivery of additional works, bearing in mind the available resources in both the Municipal Districts and the market.”
The elected members acknowledged that weather conditions have had a detrimental effect on the roads. The members noted that funding went to regional roads with all other roads being forgotten about. The members agreed that it is a serious issue and if more funding isn’t received some roads will be in complete disrepair. The members also noted that Clare has a high volume of traffic coming from the tourist industry and a large volume of buses entering and leaving the county everyday which is impacting the road infrastructure, and this should be a factor when seeking further funding.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted the concerns of the elected members and agreed that there is a lack of funding and resources, and it is a huge challenge for the local authority. Mr. Dowling noted that the council can only do what they can do with the money they have.
Mr. Dowling acknowledged that this is particularly challenging for the members at this time of year when they are out meeting constituents regularly.
Item 22: Shannon Airport Group
Due to the absence of Cllr. P. McMahon this item was deferred to the April Council
meeting.
“I will ask the Taoiseach and all the relevant Ministers to give the Shannon Airport Group the relevant economic “push”, to sustain the economic projection of the airport, to relieve Dublin Airport and sustain the Airport into the future.”
(M)
Item 23: Shannon Estuary Economic Task Force Report
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“With regard to the implementation of Shannon Estuary Economic Task Force report, that CCC undertake a) an assessment of the specific opportunities it presents to the people of Clare, b) the skills involved and numbers of personnel that may be required in its implementation here in Clare, c) an assessment of the housing need within the proximate Municipal Districts to support that implementation and d) an assessment of the quantity of zoned land in those MDs to determine whether we have capacity to ensure these opportunities provide the maximum benefits at the most local level.
(M)
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Service, Economic and Planning Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is fully committed to working with all stakeholders to implement the “Actions” arising from the Shannon Estuary Economic Task Force Report which sets out recommendations for the delivery of up to 30GW of Offshore Floating Wind, facilitated through the Operational and Maintenance phases within the Shannon Estuary by 2050 together with measures to maximise the industrial development opportunities that will accompany offshore wind development. The Report also sets out a vision for the Shannon Estuary to become Ireland&rsqu
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback