Minutes of April 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of April 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Minutes of the April 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 8th April 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillor M. Howard, J. Flynn, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, P. Burke, A. O’Callaghan, J. Crowe, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman, S. Talty, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, P.J. Kelly, G. Keating, C. Murphy, I. Lynch, R. McInerney
Officials
Mr. Leonard Cleary, Deputy Chief Executive.
Ms. Mary McMahon, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Ms. Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Social Development.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. A. Norton, P. Murphy, L. Grant
Absent:
Cllrs. T. O’Brien
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney presided. The Cathaoirleach, Cllr J. Cooney congratulated the Clare Senior Hurling Team on winning the National Hurling League Final and the Clare Ladies Football Team on winning the National Football League Division 3 Final at the weekend. Cllr. Cooney wished both teams well in the forthcoming Championship.
The Cathaoirleach advised of an error on the numbering of the agenda items from after item number 31 and noted the correct numbering of for items number 32 to 37.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr J. Cooney also requested, given current weather conditions, that Item 37 on the agenda be dealt with after Item 20. This was agreed by the members present.
Votes of sympathy
Votes of sympathy were extended to the following:
The Chaplin Family, on the death of Jim Chaplin, RIP.
The Coyne Family, on the death of Sheila Coyne, RIP.
The Maloney Family, on the death of Jack Maloney, RIP
The Walsh Family, on the death of Liam Walsh, RIP
The O’Donoghue Family, on the death on Canon Brendan O’Donoghue, RIP.
The Ryan Family, on the death of Pat Ryan, RIP
The Killeen Family, on the death of Gerry Killeen, RIP.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the March Meeting of Clare County Council held on 11
th
March 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Cllr. G. Flynn noted his objection to the minutes of the March meeting being adopted as presented due to an item raised by Cllr. P. Hayes not adhering with standing orders.
Cllr. P. Hayes clarified that he had raised the item in reference to the minutes of the March meeting whereby the members approved the attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the St. Patrick’s Day Parade in New York.
It was agreed to adopt the minutes, noting Cllr. G. Flynn’s objection.
Item 2: Matters Arising
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan sought clarity on when the first repayment is due to be repaid on the loan advanced for Ennis 2040 DAC.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney advised that this information will be provided in due course.
Cllr. J. Flynn welcomed the report in the previous meeting for the development of 300 plus car park spaces in Ennis and believes it addresses half of the car parking deficit that was outlined in 2017.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 29
th
February, 2024 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Development Contribution Scheme Waiver.
Correspondence dated 6
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Planning and Development Bill 2023.
Correspondence dated 28
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Rural and Community Development in relation to the regulation around burial grounds.
Correspondence dated 11
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment in relation to Irelands gas supply.
Correspondence dated 6
th
March, 2024 from Transport Infrastructure Ireland in relation to a service station on the M18 that passes through Clare.
Correspondence from Cathal Crowe T.D., in relation to funding for the CIS and LIS schemes.
Correspondence dated 27
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media in relation to the tourism sector and issues concerning temporary accommodation.
Acknowledgement dated 20
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to affordable housing applications.
Acknowledgement dated 26
th
March, 2024 from Office of the Taoiseach in relation to the IFA ‘enough is enough’ campaign.
Acknowledgement dated 26
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Transport in relation to funding for road infrastructure.
Acknowledgement dated 19
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media in relation to short-term lets and Airbnb’s.
Acknowledgement dated 27
th
March, 2024 from the Commission for Communications Regulation in relation to broadband service of delivery.
Acknowledgement dated 15
th
March, 2024 from Michael McNamara T.D., in relation to funding for the CIS and LIS schemes.
Acknowledgement dated 15
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Health in relation to the regulation of vaping.
Acknowledgement dated 25
th
March, 2024 from the Department of Agriculture in relation to the IFA’s ‘enough is enough’ campaign.
Resolution dated 19
th
February from Louth County Council in relation to the abolition of the Joint Policing Committee.
Resolution dated 2
nd
April from Westmeath County Council in relation to the IFA’s ‘enough is enough’ campaign.
Conference titled “Metrics of Success, securing real progress towards sustainable buildings”, being held on the 8 – 10 April 2024 in the Riverside Hotel, Enniscorthy, Co. Wexford.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 6
th
February, 2024 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 5
th
March, 2024 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 17
th
January, 2024 be noted.”
d. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 23
rd
January, 2024 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a) a. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 6 December, 2023 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 4
th
March 2024 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. C. Murphy noted that previously there was a breakdown in the Management Report of water outages but since transferring to Uisce Éireann those updates have ceased and queried if the updates could be reinstated.
Cllr. J. Garrihy referred to the Community Recognition Fund and the work being done by local communities and volunteers and noted that it was a transformative investment.
Cllr. Garrihy acknowledged the work of the Climate Action Team and noted that the local authority has received over €2,500,000 worth of applications for the Community Climate Action Programme.
Cllr. Garrihy also acknowledged the Municipal District works carried out in Lisdoonvarna and Doolin Pier. Cllr. Garrihy raised a query around timelines for the North Clare transport plan.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the West Clare Railway Greenway and highlighted the importance of consultation with landowners.
Cllr. McInerney also referred to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant and sought an update on progress to date and if it was comparable with 2023.
Cllr. P. Burke acknowledged the works being carried out at Inis Cealtra and noted the hoarding at the entrance was impressive. Cllr. Burke also acknowledged the works being carried out in Killaloe and progress being made on kerbing and roundabouts.
Cllr. J. Flynn acknowledged the great work being done by Healthy Clare and noted the progress being made on the County Library was great to see.
Cllr. Flynn did note concern around the demolition works carried out on Francis Street and believes it was knocked before the judicial review was finalised and queried how this was done and what contractor carried out the works.
Cllr. D. McGettigan commended the Homeless Action Team for the great work they are doing, Cllr. McGettigan noted that the team are under a lot of pressure but are working hard to try assist as many people as they can.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to the TII road safety projects and requested the Director of Service to provide an update on the Tulla and Barefield junctions on the motorway noting it is a serious and ongoing issue.
Cllr. P. O’Gorman commended the new gym equipment on the Shannon Loop walk and acknowledged the remembrance piece on Paddy Ryan.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney requested an update on the junctions at the Killaloe by-pass.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, Economic and Planning Development advised that in relation to the vacant property refurbishment grant numbers are similar to that of last year.
Dr. Kirby noted in relation to Francis Street that the site is subject to court proceeding and as such she is prohibited from commenting on the queries raised by Cllr. Flynn.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development noted that in relation to the North Clare Transport and Traffic Plan that the cross-directorate team were progressing this. He advised that there had been a number of meetings including with the Elected Members of West Clare MD and with the community representatives under the Chair of Tom Barrett. He said that the teams in physical, tourism and the MD were taking on board the input received as part of the meetings/consultation process and that this has informed how the process would be moved forward. He advised it was intended to brief the West Clare Elected Members and that contact will be made with the Chair representing the community representatives to arrange a further meeting, advising that work was taking place in advance of this.
In relation to the Motorway Junctions, Mr. Farrell advised he would liaise with the Senior Engineer on the issue.
Mr. Farrell acknowledged and noted that they are addressing some issues raised in relation to junctions on the Killaloe by-pass.
Item 8: Disposal of land at Bearnafunshin, Ballyline, Crusheen, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 8
th
March, 2024 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 0.20 hectares at Bearnafunshin, Ballyline, Crusheen, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 8
th
March, 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Bearnafunshin, Ballyline, Crusheen, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members 8
th
March, 2024.”
Item 9: Disposal of land at Dromellihy West, Cree, Kilrush, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 13
th
March, 2024 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of land at Dromellihy West, Cree, Kilrush, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 13
th
March, 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Dromellihy West, Cree, Kilrush, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 13
th
March, 2024.”
Item 10: Disposal of land at Enagh, Newpark, Kilkishen, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 20
th
March from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 0.24 hectares at Enagh, Newpark, Kilkishen, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 20
th
March, 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Enagh, Newpark, Kilkishen, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 20
th
March, 2024.”
Item 11: Disposal of Derelict Site at No. 4 An Garrán, Mountshannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 20
th
March, 2024 from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of a derelict dwelling on site measuring 0.19 hectares at No. 4 An Garrán, Mountshannon, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 20
th
March, 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of a derelict dwelling on site measuring 0.19 hectares at No. 4 An Garrán, Mountshannon, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 20
th
March, 2024.”
Item 12: Disposal of property (by lease) at Quin Water Tower, Quin, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report dated 20
th
March from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the property (by lease) measuring 0.0037 hectares at Quin Water Tower, Quin, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members DATED 20
th
March 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, to dispose of the property (by lease) measuring 0.0037 hectares at Quin Water Tower, Quin, Co. Clare, subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 20
th
March 2024.”
Item 13: Report in accordance with Section 37E of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, in respect of the proposed Moneypoint SID application.
Report dated 2
nd
April from Pat Dowling, Chief Executive was circulated with the agenda.
The Chief Executive report is in accordance with the requirements of Section 37E (4) and 37E (5) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, and Planning and Development (Strategic Infrastructure) Act 2006, in relation to the Moneypoint Security of Supply Project.
The proposed development would comprise the transition and conversion of the existing coal fired power station's primary fuel to Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO), with limited run hours for a period of five years until the end of December 2029, when it is stated that the Moneypoint electricity generating station is to cease generation.
The main components of the proposed development are as follows:
Transition and conversion of the existing coal fired power station's primary fuel from coal to Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) for limited hours of operation and a temporary period of five years until the 31 December 2029.
Construction of 2no. HFO tanks each with a capacity of 25,000 tonnes (approx. 48.7m diameter x 15m H) and associated bund walls (approx. 5.0m high). These would be located centrally within the site and to the north of the existing HFO tanks.
Construction of a new boiler house (approx. 24m L x 18m W x llm H) to house 2no. auxiliary boilers (lno. electric and 1.no distillate, each 22.7MW (thermal output), including:
lno. Blow down vessel (approx. 4.Sm wide x 13m high)
lno. Exhaust Stack (approx. l.0m diameter and 30m H)
lno. Annex structure (approx. 10.0m L x Sm W x 4m H)
The new boiler house would be located to the immediate west of the existing generator buildings and to the south of the westernmost onsite chimney.
Construction of an extension to each of the existing 3no. Flue Gas Desulphurlsatlon Absorbers (FGD) - units 1, 2 and 3, to provide additional reclaimed ash unloading facilities (ash injection plant extension), comprising of lno. conveyor enclosure (approx. 7.0m L x 2.Sm W x 22m H) and lno. hopper enclosure (approx. Gm L x Sm W x Gm H).
Construction of a reclaimed ash unloading facility at the existing landfill capping batching plant, comprising of a hopper enclosure adjoining the existing batching plant (approx. 14.0m L x 6.Sm W x 6.0m H) and conveyor enclosure (approx. 3.Sm L x 3.Sm W x 11.Sm H). This would be to the south of the existing HFO tanks.
Dismantling and removal of 2no. mobile stacker reclaimers and lno. coal conveyor bridge. These are located in the southeast of the site, and are adjacent to the existing open-air coal storage area.
Changes to existing permitted Flue Gas Desulphurisation (FGD) by-product and ash storage area (ASA) arrangements (Pl. Ref. 14/373) to utilise spare capacity in the existing ASA (capping layer thickness increase from 0.6m (minimum) up to a maximum of 1.6 meters) with an overall proposed reduction in height of the currently permitted ASA by approx. 1.85m. The proposed development will result in c1 reduction of ash volumes from the combustion process. Consequently, this reduction of ash volumes for deposition in the existing on-site Ash Storage Area will result in the proposed reduction in the final capped profile level. This is located in the northwest of the site and to the north of the N67 national road.
All associated ancillary site development works to facilitate the proposed development, including (a) a new lighting arrangement, (b) surface water drainage,
(c) internal roads and, (d) temporary construction compounds and laydown areas.
There would be no change to the existing generating boilers, turbines, transformers or associated equipment.
Cllr. I. Lynch referred to the CE report submitted and noted that a number of items need to be strengthened:
Traffic management, public road network upgrades and a community benefit fund. Volume of traffic needs to be addressed and it was noted that the routes through Kilrush are not suitable for Heavy Goods Vehicles. It was also noted there is a need for a traffic management assessment and plan to be undertaken.
Coal yard remediation. It was noted that the removal of coal loaders and conveyors would critically affect the remediation of the coal yard, it was also acknowledged that the remediation of the coal yard is not included in the application.
Capping the existing Ash landfill. It is felt that capping the ash storage area might hinder the future industrial use of the site.
Increased oil storage capacity. In the event of an emergency there would be significant smoke hazard, this needs to be considered as part of a compensation package.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“To attach report, signed by Cllr I. Lynch, and submitted by the members under Section 37 E (6) of the Planning Act, to the Chief Executive report, to An Bord Pleanála, in respect of proposed Moneypoint Security of Supply Project”.
Cllr. J. Flynn noted that he would support the proposal if a condition was added regarding air quality, Cllr. Flynn wished to add the following condition:
“The elected members of Clare County Council are concerned that the existing air quality problems being recorded and experienced in Ennis will be exacerbated by the proposed extension of operation of Moneypoint power station using fossil fuels.
The members require Clare County Council, the relevant bodies and the ESB to put in place a strategy for Ennis to both improve air quality and provide time sensitive public warnings of poor air quality incidents.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Flynn Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“To attach report, signed by Cllr I. Lynch, and submitted by the members under Section 37 E (6) of the Planning Act, to the Chief Executive report, to An Bord Pleanála, in respect of proposed Moneypoint Security of Supply Project”.
L. Cleary, Deputy Chief Executive advised that Clare County Council will submit their report to An Bord Pleanála including the additional reports submitted by the members and a copy of the minutes from today’s meeting.
Item 14: Draft Clare County Council Local Economic & Community Plan 2024 – 2030
Report dated 25
th
March, 2024 from Anne Haugh, Director of Services was circulated with the agenda.
The report states that the Local Government Act 2014 provides for the preparation of a 6 year Local Economic and Community Plan for County Clare, Section 44, 668 (1) and 66 C. It is a statutory requirement of the Council to adopt the plan. The purpose of the plan sets out, for a 6-year period, the high-level goals and the objectives needed to promote and support the local economic and community development of County Clare, both by itself directly and in partnership with other economic and community development stakeholders.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“In accordance with the provisions of Section 66 C (4a) of the Local Government Act 2001 as inserted by Section 44 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014, Clare County Council hereby adopts Clare Local Economic and Community Plan 2024 - 2030.”
The elected members acknowledged the work undertaken by the staff in preparing and delivering this plan. It was noted by the members what an important document this was for the people of County Clare. It was also acknowledged by the members that the document was prepared in a clear and readable manner. The members noted that the key now is the implementation of the plan.
Item 15: Clare PPN – Nomination to Joint Policing Committee.
This item was deferred.
Item 16: Schedule of Municipal District Works 2024.
The Schedule of Municipal District Works as previously circulated and adopted at Municipal District level was noted by the members present.
Item 17: Reading of the April 1899 Clare County Council Minutes.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney welcomed the past and present elected members to the Council Chamber to mark the 125
th
Anniversary of Clare County Council. The Cathaoirleach noted that following the Local Government (Ireland) Act of 1898, Clare County Council was established as the administrative local government body in the county.
The Cathaoirleach noted that in that first meeting on 23rd April 1899, which PJ Hogan from Bodyke chaired, Councillor Michael A. Scanlan from Ennis was unanimously elected as the first Chairman of the Council. Motions were adopted in support of the Irish nationalist cause. Support for nationalist resolutions was a consistent theme of the Council’s business in its early years but it was equally committed in working to secure funding for public infrastructure projects and public services, which serves as a reminder to us today that this important work is never done.
The Cathaoirleach acknowledged the efforts of that first Council, and all those that have followed in the 125 years since, to making county Clare a better place.
Cllr. P.J. Ryan, proposer of the motion to celebrate the 125
th
anniversary addressed the meeting and noted his delight and honor to be in the chamber to celebrate past and present members. Cllr. Ryan noted that a lot has happened in the 125 years since the Council was established but that we must move forward from there.
Cllr. G. Keating, seconder of the motion, also noted the change that has occurred over the past 125 years. Cllr. Keating acknowledged the support of the local authority and how important it is to the growth of the county.
The minutes of the April 1899 meeting of Clare County Council were then read out by Mary McMahon, Administrative Officer in Corporate Services.
The past members noted what a privilege it was to be elected and serve the people of county Clare. The members noted that democracy is critically important, and that local government is the foundation of democracy.
The current elected members thanked the past members for their service and noted the wisdom and knowledge they brought to the role. The members acknowledged the privilege it was to serve the people of County Clare.
Item 18: Rail Link Service
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Flynn agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on Clare County Council to arrange for a viability study to deal with a view of the possibility of a rail link service to link Ennis and Limerick with Sixmilebridge, Bunratty and Shannon Airport, to include Shannon Town Centre and the Industrial Estate.
In turn this will give connectivity to many holiday makers and business, people not alone in the mid-west region but throughout Ireland, especially with the growth that is taken place at the Airport. This will help to maintain and drive same.
It will benefit workers from Ennis, Limerick and surrounding areas to travel to Shannon. It will also help our environment to reduce cars and busses from our roads.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“
This issue was raised with the National Transport Authority (NTA) during the Limerick Shannon Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (LSMATS) process and before the final report was issued. LSMATS was led by the NTA with both Clare County Council and Limerick City and County Council as Roads Authorities on the steering committee.
The NTA informed Clare County Council that they would deal directly with Irish Rail as the Rail Authority in relation to any necessary rail feasibility reports.
Notwithstanding Clare County Council has been in discussion with Irish Rail regarding the rail link to Shannon and they are working closely with the Department of Transport in relation to airport connections by rail.
We will forward the content of this motion to the National Transport Authority.”
The elected members noted the importance of the notice of motion given the current climate change concerns. The members acknowledged that Shannon has a large number of people working and living there that would benefit from a rail link service. It was also noted that for tourist flying into and out of Shannon connectivity is key. The members also expressed concern over the Ballycar rail line and the issues with flooding, the members noted how disappointing it was that something isn’t being done to resolve the issue that happens annually. Cllr J. Crowe requested that the local authority make contact with Irish Rail and the Department of Transport on this issue.
Item 19: Shannon Airport Group
Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon Cuidithe ag Cllr.T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I will ask the Taoiseach and all the relevant Ministers to give the Shannon Airport Group the relevant economic “push”, to sustain the economic projection of the airport, to relieve Dublin Airport and sustain the Airport into the future.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the ease of Shannon airport to fly in and out of compared to Dublin. The members noted that with the heritage sites and tourism opportunities in Clare and surrounding counties it is vital that Shannon be given the opportunity to take on more passengers and routes. The members acknowledged the achievements of the Shannon Airport Group and the work they have undertaken to make the airport the success it is.
Item 20: Road Safety
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That this Council requests that Minister for Education, Norma Foley would include road safety on the curriculum at all levels of education in the county”.
(M)
The elected members expressed concern at the number of people who have died on the roads so far this year. The members noted that the best chance for prevention of road accidents is education around road safety, but agreed that this needs to start at a younger age. The members acknowledged that mobile phones and speed are the two main causes of accidents on the road and that this driver behaviour needs to addressed. The members queried if there was a Road Safety Officer appointed in the local authority currently.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development noted that there is a person currently filling that role, but the road safety element is only part time, and they have other duties as part of their role. Mr. Farrell advised that they would review this role.
Item 37: Support for Farmers
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
We call on Clare County Council, Department of Agriculture, Farming Bodies, colleagues and stakeholders to support farm families and give whatever help they can to those who are experiencing hugely increased stress levels due the persistent inclement weather we are suffering at present.
Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural and Community Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Rural & Community Directorate both understand and appreciate the difficulties being experienced by the farming community as the current inclement weather persists and equally welcome any measures that support this sector, which is integral to our rural way of life and economy here in Clare. Clare County Council recently met with the farming community in Clare through their representatives in the IFA and young farmer representatives through Macra na Feirme where issues relating to farm families were discussed.
From a local policy perspective, the Clare Rural Development Strategy and the Local Economic and Community Plan, as a statutory document, recognises the importance of the farming sector with three of the six high-level goals focused on supporting and enhancing the economic benefits to our local communities. The LECP includes specific objectives focused on supporting the agricultural sector and the LCDC, which includes representation from the sector, will continue to engage with local agencies and sectoral interests to highlight the challenges for farm families in Clare.
Members may wish to consider forwarding this motion to the Department of Agriculture and other relevant national organisations.”
The elected members acknowledged the strain felt by farmers due to the inclement weather conditions. The members noted that animals are still indoors which means there is a need for extra feed, shortages of feed, animals presenting with foot issues and pneumonia in calves increasing. The members called for respite with regards to non-essential inspections, subsidies for feed and distribution of fodder. The members acknowledged the mental and financial stress farmers are under and noted the importance of supporting farming families at this time.
Item 21: Priority Parking
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“On a Countywide basis, to demonstrate that our County is sensitive to and
progressive on older person parking needs, that:
A report be provided of the existing priority parking spaces in the County, with
quantity and their precise locations listed for each area of the County.
Indicate if the Council Executive consider that the spaces are sufficient in
quantity and are of appropriate width to accommodate their users.
Take action to adopt a COUNCIL issued car badge/sticker for Age
Friendly/Priority Parking bays to all Clare residents in receipt of the OAP, so as to
differentiate and ensure proper use by those permitted.
Erect agreed standardised signage, large enough and low enough on the poles for
each priority parking bay to accommodate their correct usage.
Adopt stiff penalties for their misuse, with similarly stiff penalties for misuse of
disability parking bays.
Adopt measures and training to ensure that County Parking Wardens
understand the significance of a “zero tolerance” approach to misusers of both the
priority and disability parking bays.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“1. There are currently 52 priority parking spaces, in the following locations:
Municipal District
Location
Quantity
Ennis
Ennis
31
Killaloe
Killaloe
1
Ballysheen
2
Shannon
Shannon
2
Newmarket on Fergus
2
West Clare
Kilrush
11*
Ennistymon
1
Lisdoonvarna
2
Total
52
*11 priority spaces in Kilrush are selected and will be marked in April
Priority parking spaces are generally standard sized parking spaces as opposed to designated disabled persons’ parking bays. There are 302 public disabled persons’ parking bays located throughout the county. The quantity of priority parking spaces can be reviewed by each Municipal District.
Priority parking spaces are not specified in any road traffic legislation and therefore the use of them by members of the public is on a voluntary basis. They are subject to parking charges in pay parking areas. The spaces were introduced initially as a Covid response measure in an effort to identify parking spaces at strategic locations that would be of benefit to vulnerable members of the public who may be elderly or of reduced mobility. As they have no statutory footing the Council are not in a position to issue permits or car badge sticker for their use.
It should also be noted that the Council does not have the personal details of all residents in Clare that are in receipt of the old age pension and we would have no legislative basis to request such information from a government department.
4.The signage and road markings used by the Municipal Districts to delineate priority parking spaces can be reviewed in order to standardise their use. However, we would caution on the introduction of additional poles and signs which can lead to a cluttered footpath landscape.
As outlined above priority parking spaces are not specified in any road traffic legislation. In effect they are standard parking spaces and are subject to the same parking regulations and charges as standard parking spaces.
The fine for parking in a disabled persons’ parking bay without displaying a valid disabled parking permit is €150 and is set nationally.
Disabled persons’ parking bays are actively monitored by the Council’s traffic wardens and fines are issued to drivers parking in these bays without displaying a disabled persons parking permit in accordance with Article 44(1) of the Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997.”
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy thanked the Senior Engineer for his reply but noted some further clarification was required on the following:
Criteria for using a priority “PP” space.
If using a disabled parking space, do you have to pay for parking.
Better signage to be implemented.
The elected members noted that it is important to have these spaces for people with additional needs who need access to essential services. The members commended the number of disabled spaces throughout the county.
Feeney, Senior Engineer addressed the clarifications sought by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy noting that disabled parking spaces are free to people with a valid badge. In relation to priority parking spaces, Mr. Feeney noted that they were introduced during COVID for vulnerable, not elderly people and the primary legislation doesn’t facilitate a scheme for free parking for people over 65.
Mr. Feeney noted in relation to parking signs that placing additional poles has a detrimental impact on mobility. Mr Feeney stated that enforcement of parking spaces is monitored thoroughly throughout the county.
Item 22: Commercial Vehicle Testing
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“With only 21 days for a commercial vehicle failing a test and the retest date, that the local authority would contact the Minister for Transportation and the RSA to extend it to 28 days, as mechanics are under pressure to turn them around in this time frame.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged that safety and road worthiness is most important but that it can be difficult to get a servicing slot with a mechanics and that mechanical parts can be hard to source and get within the required timeframe for a retest in time for the retest and therefore the RSA need to extend to 28 days to allow for these delays.
Item 23: Ennis 2040 DAC
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Kelly agus glacadh leis
“That the Chief Operating Officer of DAC in Ennis 2040 attend the April monthly meeting to allay members concerns and to provide a detailed report on all expenditure since the formation of the Designated Activity Company together with inter alia what steps are taken to protect the commercial footfall affecting existing retail units opposite both Abbey Street and Parnell Street carparks. In the interest of compliance and transparency please provide details the procedure used in appointing the current Board of Directors.”
(M)
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan requested that the notice of motion be amended to read as follows:
“That the Chief Operating Officer of DAC in Ennis 2040 attend the May monthly meeting to allay members concerns and to provide a detailed report on all expenditure since the formation of the Designated Activity Company together with inter alia what steps are taken to protect the commercial footfall affecting existing retail units opposite both Abbey Street and Parnell Street carparks. In the interest of compliance and transparency please provide details the procedure used in appointing the current Board of Directors.”
(M)
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Service, Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Chief Executive, Pat Dowling and the Director of Services, Carmel Kirby will prepare a presentation for a future meeting of Clare County Council in the context of the information sought in this Notice of Motion. It will be at the discretion of the Chief Executive who attends this meeting.”
The elected members expressed concern over the wording of the reply from the Director and noted that there was a commitment given in June 2021 that the Chief Operating Officer would report to the elected members.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Service, Economic Development noted that the Chief Executive and herself along with board members of Ennis 2040 DAC will present a report to the members.
Dr. Kirby noted that the presentation could not go ahead at the April meeting as the motion needed to be passed at the April meeting and that it would be held as a public briefing before the May meeting.
Item 24: Tús Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“I call on the Minister for Social Protection, Ms. Heather Humphries T.D., to consider extending the timeframe for the Tús Scheme, from 12 months to 3 years, similar to the Community Employment Scheme.”
(M)
The members noted that interest in this scheme has diminished significantly due to the timeframe being so short. The members noted that it is difficult to find people to go onto the scheme but by extending the timeframe to 3 years might assist in encouraging participation.
Item 25: Tourism for small towns and villages
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“In the interest of regenerative & sustainable tourism for our small towns and villages, local host communities and the SMEs/attractions who preserve their unique and authentic culture and identity I call on Clare County Council & Clare Tourism DAC to implement a system of booking to ensure a target of at least 30% of visitors to the Council owned flagship attractions are directed to local towns and villages through pre booking systems and visit the attractions through integrated park and ride shuttle bus service located in the towns and villages & an accompanying regeneration strategy for town regeneration is developed in tandem.”
(M)
Leonard Cleary, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Prebooking targets are in place for Clare visitor attractions. There is a noted increase in online pre-booking.
Sustainable transport solutions are being researched and planned for in the North Clare area to serve the Burren and Cliffs of Moher UNESCO Geopark, its towns villages and other attractions under the strategic priority of the Clare Tourism Strategy 2030, the Failte Ireland DEDP and the Cliffs of Moher Strategy 2040. Accommodation packages and combination ticketing packages are being developed and implemented to maximise the length of stay in Co. Clare. Live packages can be viewed on the relevant attraction websites.”
The elected members noted that small businesses depend on footfall and that as a tourist county we need to think outside the box as to how to get tourists to stay and visit local towns and villages. The members suggested an integrated park and ride shuttle bus service that would give a co-ordinated, integrated offering to tourists but that businesses would need to be encouraged to open all year round.
Leonard Cleary, Director of Service, Tourism Development noted that a tender was awarded but unfortunately the company couldn’t fulfil the ICT skills required. Mr. Cleary advised that it is gone back to tender again, but the system has only been developed to a certain stage and needs to be developed further. Mr. Cleary advised there is a commitment to deliver this across the county.
The members agreed to defer the remaining items to the adjourned Council meeting scheduled to take place on Monday, 15
th
April, 2024 at 3.00 p.m.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________ Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________ Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback