Minutes of May 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of May 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 13th May 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors M. Howard, J. Flynn, P. Murphy, A. Norton, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, P. Burke, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, S. Talty, L. Grant, P.J. Kelly, C. Murphy, R. McInerney
Officials
Official Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Social Development.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Councillors C. Colleran Molloy, I. Lynch, P. Daly, P. O’Gorman,
Presiding
The Leas Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Crowe presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Greene Family, on the death of Raymond Greene, former Mayor of Ennis, former Councillor of both Clare County Council and Ennis Town Council, RIP.
The Collins Family on the death of Kathleen Collins, RIP.
The Costelloe and Clohessy Families, on the death of Dylan Costelloe Clohessy, RIP.
The Killeen Family, on the death of Kathleen Killeen, RIP.
Cllr. P.J. Kelly extended a vote of sympathy to the Greene Family on the passing of Raymond Greene, RIP and proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Howard and agreed by the members present.
The meeting resumed at 3.20p.m.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney presided and welcomed the announcement earlier that day of over €8.6million in RRDF funding for the Scarriff Integrated Rural Regeneration Programme. Cllr. Cooney paid tribute to the Rural Development Officers in Scarriff for their work in securing the funding.
Cllr. T. O’Brien commended the Rural Development Team and the local authority for securing the funding for the Scarriff project.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the April Meeting of Clare County Council held on 8
th
April 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Cllrs. G. Flynn, J. Flynn and T. O’Callaghan voiced their dissatisfaction that the briefing on Ennis 2040 that was agreed to be scheduled prior to the May Council meeting had been cancelled. The three members noted that the May meeting could not proceed as an item that had been approved had been removed from the agenda.
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan noted that he had brought the amended motion to the previous meeting requesting that the presentation happen at the May Council meeting as there is a lot of genuine stress and concern amongst the public and the request was not meant to demean anyone but was for the betterment of Ennis and noted that it was about openness and transparency.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney noted the concerns of the members and advised that a new date will be scheduled, and the members will be advised.
P.Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged the frustration of the members but noted that it was he who cancelled the briefing due to the visit of the Minister Heather Humphreys and the importance of her visit. Mr. Dowling noted that it was within his power to set up Ennis 2040 DAC and it was important that he is present for the presentation and therefore the meeting needed to be rescheduled. Mr. Dowling noted that he would never seek to undermine the elected members and always respects the democratic rights of the members. Cllr. J. Flynn again noted that the meeting was out of order.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney directed that the meeting proceed and that a new date would be scheduled for the presentation.
b. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the adjourned April Meeting of Clare County Council held on 15
th
April 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
Cllr. P.J. Kelly noted his disappointment regarding correspondence received from the Department in relation to funding for the LIS scheme.
The following correspondence was circulated at the meeting:
Correspondence dated 30
th
April, 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to nicotine inhaling products.
Correspondence dated 9
th
May from Senator Robbie Gallagher, Government Chief Seanad Whip on the upcoming local elections.
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda:
Correspondence dated 18
th
April, 2024 from the European Commission in relation to IFA Campaign 'enough is enough'.
Correspondence dated 23
rd
April, 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Justice in relation to legislation regarding face coverings.
Correspondence dated 25
th
April, 2024 from Violet-Anne Wynne, T.D. in relation to housing developments and road safety.
Correspondence dated 4
th
April, 2024 from TII in relation to planning permission for houses on the N68, N85 & N67.
Correspondence dated 17
th
April, 2024 from the Department of Social Protection in relation to extending the Tús Scheme from 12 months to 3 years.
Correspondence dated 1
st
May, 2024 from TII in relation to the N85 Kilnamona Scheme.
Correspondence dated 17
th
April, 2024 from Cathal Crowe, T.D. in relation to the Local Improvement Scheme.
Correspondence dated 9
th
April, 2024 from the Department of Social Protection in relation to the Community Employment Scheme, Rural Social Scheme and Tús Scheme.
Correspondence dated 3
rd
May, 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Housing in relation to affordable housing.
Correspondence dated 3
rd
May, 2024 from Minister Rabbitte, T.D. in relation to Childrens disability services.
Correspondence dated 2
nd
May, 2024 from Violet-Anne Wynne, T.D. in relation to DMAP preparation, funding for roads and road safety officer.
Acknowledgement dated 4
th
April, 2024 from the Minister for Agriculture in relation to the IFA campaign 'enough is enough'.
Acknowledgement dated 12
th
April, 2024 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to sustaining Shannon Airport.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
April, 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to funding for grass verge trimming.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
April , 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to the N85 Kilnamona Scheme.
Acknowledgement dated 19
th
April, 2024 from the Department of Rural and Community Development in relation to the Local Improvement Scheme.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
April, 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to reviewing medical cards for over 70's.
Acknowledgement dated 18
th
April, 2024 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to DMAP preparation.
Acknowledgement dated 19
th
April, 2024 from the Minister for Education in relation to the needs of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
Acknowledgement 18
th
April, 2024 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to the needs of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
Acknowledgement 17
th
April, 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to the needs of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
Resolution dated 18
th
April, 2024 from Louth County Council in relation to the Good Friday Agreement.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 2
nd
April, 2024 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a) a. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 6 February, 2024 be noted.”
(b) Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 20 February, 2024 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 2
nd
April, 2024 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. G. Flynn referred to the social housing statistics and noted that within the last four months there has been 125 approved applications and remarked that the government are out of step with the housing crisis.
Cllr. C. Murphy commended the work done in obtaining planning approval for Loop Head Lighthouse.
Cllr. Murphy referred to the Increased Cost of Business (IOCB) Grant and sought an update on this grant.
N.Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services noted that this grant was announced last November and businesses with rates bill less than €30,000 are eligible to apply for the grant which amounts to 50% of their 2023 rates bill or a maximum of €5,000. Ms. Fitzgerald noted that 80% of businesses in Clare were eligible for this grant but only 50-60% have applied. Ms. Fitzgerald advised there is suggestion of a phase two grant coming on stream but there are no further details on this yet.
Cllr. Murphy queried if there is a percentage of who is eligible and have applied.
Ms. Fitzgerald noted that 2,200 applications out of 3,500 have been received and more information will be available in the coming weeks.
Cllr. R. McInerney commended the Town Centre First programme and queried if there is a timescale for engagement and if there was a shortlist for grants and funding.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant and commended the team for their work. Cllr. McInerney noted that a review is being undertaken by the Department and queried if elected members could feed into the submission being sent to the Department.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the Sports and Recreation update and noted disappointment that the Kilrush Aquapark is not returning to the town this year and expressed concern of the knock-on effect this would have on businesses within the town.
P.Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged that it was disappointing about the Kilrush Aquapark from a community and recreation point of view and advised that the local authority will look into it.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Economic Development Directorate noted that the new Town Teams are already in consultation, towns have been shortlisted but not announced yet.
C.Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Property Management Unit advised that they will be taking all issues into consideration for their submission to the Department and confirmed that elected members can feed into the submission.
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan referred to the Increased Cost of Business Grant and noted concern over the numbers that haven’t applied for the grant and queried if any further reliefs could be looked at.
N.Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services noted that all rate payers were written to twice and account managers phoned them to advise of the grant. Ms. Fitzgerald noted that there is a concern about the taxation of grants amongst rate payers and this maybe a reason for those who haven’t applied. Ms. Fitzgerald also noted that further relief measures are being worked on at Departmental level.
Cllr. P. Burke commended the Vacant Homes Team on their hard work and noted how positive it was to see over €11million of applications approved.
Cllr. M. Howard referred to the road safety measures completed at Barefield National School and requested an update as to the progress of the street lighting at the school.
Item 8: Statutory Audit Report to the members of Clare County Council for the year ended 31st December 2022.
The Statutory Audit Report to the Members of Clare County Council on the Accounts of Clare County Council for year ended 31
st
December, 2022 was circulated with the agenda.
The report included the Chief Executive’s responses to all comments raised by the Auditor. The report as presented was noted by the members present.
Item 9: Report from Audit Committee on Statutory Audit Report for year ended 31st December 2022.
Report from Austin Slattery, Chairman on behalf of the Clare Audit Committee was circulated with the agenda. The report states that the Audit Committee held its meeting on 19th February, 2024 to review the Statutory Audit Report for year ending 31st December, 2022.
The members noted the report as presented.
Item 10: Clare County Council Audit Committee Annual Report 2023.
The 2023 Audit Committee Annual Report was circulated with the agenda. The report states that under the provision of the Audit Charter for Clare County Council and Section 60 of the Local Government Act 2014 requires that the Audit Committee report to the Council at least annually.
The report outlines details of the Audit Committee under the following headings:
Functions of the Audit Committee
Membership of the Committee
Role and Responsibility of Internal Audit
Meetings with Directors of Services
Internal Audit
Local Government Audit Report 2022
Corporate Risk Register/Risk Registers
External Assessment of Internal Audit Function by IPA
Internal Audit Function – Staff Qualifications
The members noted this item as presented.
Cllr. P. Hayes thanked the team and in particular Karen Stackpoole and Gillian McNamara. Cllr. Hayes noted the importance of the internal audit role and acknowledged that better structures are now in place as a result of this function.
P.Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged the level of responsibility involved in carrying out duties of the audit committee. Mr. Dowling advised that this audit committee was established after the last local elections and was headed up by a new chairperson, he noted that the committee met diligently over the last five years and acknowledged they very carefully and forensically looked at all the Councils financial matters. Mr. Dowling thanked the committee for all their hard work over the last five years.
Item 11: Clare County Council Annual Financial Statement 2023.
The Annual Financial Statement for 2023 together with a report was circulated in advance of the agenda.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services addressed the members and noted that the Annual Financial Statement for 2023 was prepared in the format as required by the Local Government Act, 2001. Ms. Fitzgerald noted the following:
Expenditure of €270million (€1.6billion spent over the lifetime of this Council), significant increase over the last number of years. Challenges with this level of spending are in resourcing and match funding.
In 2023, capital expenditure peaked at €100million due to projects such as the Shannon Bridge Crossing, these projects are outlined in Appendix 8 of the CE Report.
88% collection rate of commercial rates in 2023, very positive that €8.80 out of every €10 is being collected.
Housing loans up from 60% to 88% in the last 10 years.
Housing rents stayed stable.
Taking over Clare sites such as Shannon Heritage contributed to expenditure with it attributing to over €14million in the Clare County Council books.
Ms. Fitzgerald then read out the resolutions to be approved:
In accordance with Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001, the approval of Council is sought for additional expenditure by Division as set out below.
Division
Euro
Housing and Building
2,165,120
Road Transportation and Safety
3,248,120
Development Incentives and Conto
20,108,605
Environmental Protection
666,897
Recreation and Amenity
713,312
That Transfers to reserves as set out in Note 14 in the presented AFS 2023 are hereby approved:
Loan Principal Repayments
€4,281,383
RAS/Leasing HAP
€125,000
Capital Transfers as per the table below
€18,717,432
Capital Transfers as per the table below €18,717,432
Of these capital transfers approximately €11m has been budgeted within the adopted 2023 budget as expenditure or additional income generated.
Division
Euro
Housing and Building
2,573,301
Road Transportation and Safety
2,030,000
Water Services
500,000
Development Management
10,401,339
Environmental Services
1,314,604
Recreation and Amenity
900,000
Miscellaneous Services
558,189
Central Management Charges
440,000
That pursuant to Section 66 of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended by Section 43 of the local Government Reform Act, 2014, that total assistance up to €50,000 is provided to Kilrush Amenity Trust Company Limited by Guarantee on receipt of updated 2024 budget.
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. McMahon agus glacadh leis
The three resolutions as presented were approved.
Cllr. P. Hayes commended Noeleen and the Finance team for their hard work and acknowledged that for a second year in a row they have done exceptionally well, Cllr. Hayes attributed this to good management. Cllr. Hayes requested a breakdown on how money is divided to projects.
Item 12: Annual Report 2023
The Annual Report was circulated in advance of the agenda was noted and approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. M. Howard.
Item 13: Issuing of Polling Cards – Local and European Elections 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council issue Polling Information Cards pursuant to section 27 and Section 54 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Article 55 of the Local Elections Regulations 1995 (as amended)”.
Item 14: LCDC Membership
Report dated 5
th
April, 2024 from Bernadette Haugh, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare PPN has advised of two membership changes of the Community and Voluntary Pillar representatives on the LCDC to replace Hillary Tonge and Eddie O’Gorman. Clare PPN has nominated Tracey Lynch and Bernie O’Gorman as its representatives.
This was approved the members present having been proposed by Cllr. D. McGettigan, seconded by Cllr. M. Howard and agreed by the members present.
Item 15: Memorial Committee Applications.
Report dated 2
nd
May, 2024 from Mary McMahon, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services Department was circulated with the agenda. The report outlined details of applications received and considered by the Memorial Committee on 4
th
April, 2023 as follows:
Cissy Roughan memorial
Ber Roche memorial
Mick O’Neill memorial
The applications were approved having been proposed by Cllr. D. McGettigan, seconded by Cllr. G. Flynn and agreed by the members present.
Prior to the commencement of Notice of Motions, Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J Cooney proposed that the Ennis 2040 presentation would be scheduled for Monday 20
th
May at 3.00pm and could be followed by an adjourned meeting if required. This was agreed by the members present.
Item 16: Amendment to Planning Regulators Directive
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Kelly Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council request the Minister for Local Government to amend Planning Regulators Directive which empowers TII to veto planning permission for farmers sons and daughters who inherit farms on national secondary roads.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the farming community and the need to support with this issue. The members noted that TII shouldn’t be allowed to prevent people from building on their own land. The members felt that the planners in Dublin have forgotten rural Ireland and are making people homeless on their own land. The elected members also acknowledged the time put into the County Development Plan 2023-2029 and noted that the National Planning Framework has taken over from the elected members role. The elected members acknowledged and commended Cllr. P.J. Kelly’s commitment to this issue.
Item 17: Blockade at Shannon Airport
Ar moladh Cllr. P. McMahon Cuidithe ag Cllr. P.J. Ryan
“That Clare County Council condemns the illegal blockade of passengers seeking to access Shannon Airport.”
(M)
The elected members referred to the demonstration that took place at the entrance to Shannon Airport restricting holidaymakers from accessing the airport. The members noted how unfair this was; making people late for their flights and effectively closing the airport that day. The members noted that people are entitled to protest peacefully but that obstructing access to the airport was out of order.
Cllr. D. McGettigan noted that she was against this motion as she referred to the protest on the day and noted that it was a peaceful one and the right to protest cannot be taken away from people.
Cllr. G. Flynn agreed that a peaceful protest cannot be stopped and noted that the Gardai had been warned in advance.
Item 18: Active Travel Funding
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council requests Minister Eamon Ryan to allow a portion of Active Travel Funding be used for the repair or replacement of footpaths in our towns and villages.”
(M)
The elected members noted the poor state the footpaths are in and that some paths had not been repaired or improved in 30/40 years. The members noted that under Active Travel there is funding for footpaths but not existing footpaths. The members did note that there is confusion around active travel funding and asked the Chief Executive if there is discretion within the local authority.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted that there is some mixed messaging as to how the funding can be applied and undertook to follow up with the Department to obtain clear criteria.
Item 19: Rights based Ethical Procurement Policy
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P. Hayes, L. Grant agus glacadh leis
“Calling on Clare County Council to adopt a rights based Ethical Procurement Policy.
To ethically advance how they tender and who they are affiliated in accordance with international law obligations.
We are asking that ethical Procurement policies are put in place as a framework to ensure that Clare County Council will be able to exclude businesses and companies involved in human rights and international law violations when tendering bids.
This initiative will ensure that international human rights principles and guidelines are being adhered to at a local level.
An ethical Procurement policy will clearly implement criteria in accordance with the ‘UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights’, ‘OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises’ and ‘The Global Sullivan Principles (1999)’.
The Council affirms that every endeavour is made to ensure that the Councils tendering process are consistent and with the above principles, including under the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the protection of civilian persons in time of war and under Customary International Humanitarian laws, prohibiting the importation or sale of goods or services originating in occupied territories.
Criteria within the Procurement policy will ensure the role of Clare County Council is not to be overwhelmed determining human rights violations, but to ensure during tendering processes, bidders are checked in accordance with the guidelines Principles.
We would ask that during the development of an Ethical Procurement Policy, that Clare County Council seeks legal guidelines in relation to the logistical detail of the policy being adopted and implemented in principle.”
(M)
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Service, Finance and Support Services Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council has a Procurement policy that is constantly evolving. This policy and underlying procedures are governed by National Procurement Legislation which is grounded in EU Directives – principally the EU Procurement Directive.
The Department of Enterprise and Trade advise that neither Ireland nor the EU currently have restrictive measures above and beyond the current trade sanctions in place. Ireland does not impose any unilateral sanctions regimes but implements UN and EU sanctions. The Council of the European Union adopts EU sanctions through Council decisions, which must be agreed unanimously. Ireland has given undertakings as part of its WTO membership to grant non-discriminatory access to its markets in goods and services and has joined the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA), expanding its commitments with regard to market access. The Department has previously indicated that any move by a public authority to act outside of any agreement may be seen to breach our international trade commitments and also may be seen as discriminatory in relation to goods and services, otherwise legally saleable within the Union.
Changes to how Clare County Council treat economic operators in prohibiting the importation or sale of goods or services originating in occupied territories need to be made nationally by way of an amendment to regulations, similar to the amendment made in April 2022 in relation to a prohibition on the award of public contracts with Russian nationals and entities or bodies established in Russia (EU Regulation 2022/576).
Under the current Irish and EU Procurement regime, suppliers in a country outside of the EU that has signed up to the World Trade Organisation's Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) are eligible to submit tenders for Irish public sector contracts. It would not be appropriate to interfere with contract law in the way proposed by the motion in relation to the exclusion of economic operators of sale of goods or services originating in occupied territories, above and beyond current regulations, as this could potentially leave Clare County Council open to a specific performance court action and costs.
However the motion also calls on this Council to exclude companies involved in human rights and international law violations when tendering bids. The Clare County Council Procurement Policy has guiding principles and corporate procurement values. The policy was also updated in April 2024 to expand the section on Social Considerations. We will review this policy to incorporate the discretion this Council has to exclude economic operators for involvement in human rights and international law violations. We will do this in consultation with the OGP’s Information Note Incorporating Social Considerations into Public Procurement to ensure that this council will not impact on contract law or EU Regulations or WTO agreements as outlined above.
Contracting authorities have discretion to exclude economic operators in the circumstances set out in Regulation 57(8) including for: non-compliance with environmental, social and labour law obligations (Regulation 57(8)(a)), bankruptcy (Regulation 57(8)(b)), grave professional misconduct (Regulation 57(8)(c)), distortion of competition (Regulation 57(8)(d)), and past poor performance which led to termination, damages or other comparable sanctions (Regulation 57(8)(g)) etc.
Clare County Council will also strictly enforce any future EU or National regulations that may apply to economic operators from countries occupying other territories.”
The members thanked the Director for her reply and noted the importance of ensuring that human rights are being adhered to. The members noted that people need to be informed that major suppliers are involved with Israel and that there is not enough of an international stance. The members acknowledged the significance of the situation and that it is beyond the Council’s reach to make a significant impact but agreed that it is important to do what is possible at a local level.
Item 20: Purchase of Barrington’s Hospital
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllrs. A. O’Callaghan, agus S. Talty
“While continuing to support every effort to have a Model 3 Hospital returned to Ennis to address the demands of our increasing population, that Clare County Council call on the Government and the Minister for Health, Stephen Donnelly, T.D. to immediately buy the 53 Bed Barrington’s Hospital Limerick (advertised for sale in the Irish Times on May 1st 2024) so as to alleviate the intolerable overcrowding in University Hospital Limerick and to ensure that these private
in situ
hospital beds are not lost to the public healthcare system and the people of Clare to a possible hotel, hostel, or education institution.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the Mid-West cannot afford to lose any hospital beds in either public or private hospitals. The members noted that there are other issues such as parking and resourcing that need to be addressed also. The elected members referred to Ennis Hospital and reiterated their wish to have it converted to a model 3 hospital. The members expressed concern over the numbers of people on trolleys and the length of time on trolleys and overcrowding in University Hospital Limerick.
Cllr. G. Flynn noted that he could not support the motion due to the hastiness of what was being asked. Cllr. J. Flynn noted that he agreed with the spirit of the motion while the property suggested may not be the most suitable property.
Item 21: Billboards at Blue Flag and Green Coast Bathing areas
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“Ahead of the Summer season, I call on Clare County Council to install billboards at our Blue Flag and Green Coast Bathing areas with lifeguard patrols to display the following daily updated information:
Emergency Numbers - 999/112
Date:
Lifeguard on Duty:
Air Temperature:
Water Temperature:
Wind Direction:
Low Tide Time / Height:
High Tide Time / Height:
Swimming Conditions:
Weather Conditions:
Sunburn Index:
Local Information:
Lifeguard months and hours of operation.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“
The information requested in the Notice of Motion is currently available in a detailed prescribed format following blue flag protocols at all our lifeguarded beaches. However, notwithstanding, I can see the benefit in adopting the proposal to make more concise information readily accessible and engaging in the direct vicinity of the lifeguard stations.
We will endeavour to provide this type of signage during the coming lifeguard season.”
The elected members welcomed the reply from the directorate and noted that this safety information is crucial, and that sea swimming is not just a summer activity but all year round now. The members requested that water quality and location of toilets and defibrillators be added to the list being displayed.
Item 22: Social Housing Solutions
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Murphy Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney
“In order to ensure the ongoing viability and sustainability of those coastal towns and villages identified by the CSO as having a significant imbalance in second or holiday home ownership, we request the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage would consider amending his direction to local authorities that limits their acquisition of privately owned properties by introducing a clause that allows the relevant local authorities to purchase any private housing, subject to value for money, that comes on the open market, especially former council housing, and to also consider the reintroduction of the long-term leasing agreement for social housing provision.”
(M)
The elected members noted there is a high demand for second homes or holiday homes in coastal areas and as a result of the lack of accommodation available there are only a small percentage of people residing in these areas permanently. The members noted that the housing market is broken, and the state should regulate it.
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan noted that he could not support the motion in its entirety. He noted that while more housing is required, he felt that tourism needed to be protected also. Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that it is important that investment on infrastructure in West Clare is prioritised.
Cllr. G. Flynn noted that he could not support he motion but the merits of it were understandable. Cllr. Flynn noted that the Minister would be better off to advise and encourage people on lower incomes to avail of the grants available.
Cllr. C. Murphy referred to the comment made about supporting tourism and noted that tourism is very well supported in West Clare but that people working in these coastal communities need to be able to live there to sustain tourism. Cllr. Murphy noted that the motion is aimed at locations where the market is skewed too far on short term lets.
Item 23: Social Housing purchased since 2014
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Flynn Cuidithe ag Cllrs. G. Flynn, T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Request a report be prepared outlining the location including numbers, by individual Municipal District of new or purchased social housing, including AHBs, since 2014.
The report to include the total of approved applicants for the same period.”
(Q)
Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development Directorate replied as follows:
In the period 2014 to date Clare County Council have delivered 1,527 new housing units within the county. Delivery has been through various schemes including council construction programs, acquisitions, along with strong delivery by AHBs. Delivery by AHBs has accounted for almost 50% of the delivery.
Delivery has been spread across the 4 Municipal Districts as follows:
Ennis MD
Shannon MD
Killaloe MD
West Clare MD
Total
744
158
334
291
1,527
The number of approved applicants on Clare County Councils housing changes daily. However annually we return data to the Housing Agency as part of Annual Summary Social Housing Needs Assessment and these figures are used to prepare targets for all LAs for future years. Prior to 2016 this assessment was conducted every 3 years.
To note:
There was a large drop in Nett need in Clare, and indeed nationally, in 2018 as figures for clients availing of HAP support were removed as they are considered part of our transfer lists, and already availing of social housing support.
There is a noticeable rise in numbers seeking support in 2023 and 2024 and this can be attributed in the main to increase in income thresholds in 2023 from €25,000 to €35,000 for a single person, with associated increased for larger households
01-Jan-23
0 Children
1 Child
2 Children
3 Children
4 Children
5 Children
6 Children
1 Adult
€35,000
€35,875
€36,750
€37,625
€38,500
€39,375
€40,250
2 Adults
€36,750
€37,625
€38,500
€39,375
€40,250
€41,125
€42,000
3 + Adults
€38,500
€39,375
€40,250
€41,125
€42,000
€42,875
€43,750
The elected members thanked Mr. MacCormaic for the reply and noted that the delivery of housing was very well done within the county. The members noted that there has been a good amount of funding and the Executive worked hard to deliver. Cllr. J. Flynn queried in relation to income thresholds if the figures were net or gross incomes.
P.MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development Directorate confirmed that they were net income figures and noted that there was a rise of 200 people on the list as a result of this.
Item 24: Health Service
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Flynn Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on the Taoiseach of the day Simon Harris and the coalition partners Fianna Fail, Fine Gael and the Green Party to address the huge failures in the reconfigured health services established by the Government some years ago and the establishment of the HSE for responsibility in implementing the policy.
Health services for the public in Ireland has been led by Health Ministers from Fianna Fail, Progressive Democrats and Fine Gael for over 24 years and the current model of reconfiguration has been a failure. Recent reports indicated that rural parts of Ireland have been impacted the most and have a higher risk of poor outcomes and this is borne out by the experience of people from Clare attending overcrowded emergency departments and at times having tragic outcomes. People in need of health services from Clare are suffering and there is no evidence to suggest that the reconfigured health service has delivered improved outcomes. I am calling on the Government to urgently address the serious consequences for the public in Clare from the current government’s model of health care. I would request the circulation of this motion if supported to our Oireachtas Members in Clare and other local authorities.” (M)
The elected members referred to the pending HIQA review to establish if a second emergency department is needed in the Midwest and noted how important this was and that Ennis should be a Model 3 hospital. The members referred to the “Golden Hour” in cases of medical emergencies and noted that most of Clare falls outside this parameter and that constituents have voiced their concern that they are living in the “death zone”. The elected members noted that the decision to close Ennis, Nenagh and St. John’s Emergency Departments in 2009 was the wrong decision and that the health system needs to be a priority for the Government.
Item 25: Road drainage programme
Ar moladh Cllr. P.J. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That this council would carry out an extensive road drainage programme as the amount of damage being done to the county roads due to excess water accumulating on them due to adverse weather conditions is causing major damage.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The recently adopted schedule of municipal district works includes a specific allocation for drainage works of €792,000 across the Municipal Districts. The Municipal Districts have identified a toral of 65 specific locations for drainage remediation and improvement works across the road network. In addition, a climate adaptation allocation of €726,500 has also been distributed to the Municipal Districts which will include an element of enhancing drainage provision to combat the effects of climate change. Coupled with these allocations there is also routine maintenance works on the national secondary, regional and local road network involving roadside drainage which is undertaken as part of the schedule of municipal district works. In addition, Council officials and Members met the Minister for Transport in person on the 11
th
April 2024 to highlight the adverse effects increased rainfall is having on the road network and requested additional funding to address this issue.”
The elected members acknowledged that there is not much that can be done about the adverse weather conditions but that keeping water off the roads with effective drainage will help keep the roads in good condition for longer periods. The members called for more funding and extra resources. The members noted that there is over 4,000 kilometers of road in Clare that need to be maintained but the personnel are not there to do it.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney then adjourned the meeting noting that the remaining items would be dealt with the following week.
Tribute to retiring Councillors.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive led in paying tribute to Cllrs. P.J. Kelly, P. McMahon, J. Flynn and A. Norton on their retirement as elected members. He thanked them for their contribution and support over the years on behalf of all the staff of Clare County Council.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney commended the retiring Councillors for what they have achieved in Clare during their collective service of 124 years. Cllr. Cooney noted that the elected members had worked as a team to achieve for their areas and county.
The elected members present paid tribute to the retiring Councillors and noted the wisdom, knowledge and contribution they brought to their respective roles. The retiring Councillors were thanked for their service, guidance and friendship and were wished health and happiness in retirement.
The retiring members thanked their colleagues, management and staff of Clare County Council for their support over the years and wished their colleagues well in the upcoming local elections.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________ Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________ Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback