Minutes of May 2024 Adjourned Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of May 2024 Adjourned Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Wednesday 22nd May 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors M. Howard, J. Flynn, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Murphy, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, P. Burke, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe, M. Begley, P.J. Ryan, P. McMahon, G. Flynn, D. McGettigan, P. O’Gorman, J. Killeen, J. Garrihy, P.J. Kelly, C. Murphy, R. McInerney
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Ms. Anne Haugh, Director of Rural Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, A/Director of Social Development.
Mr. John O’Malley, A/Director of Tourism Development.
Mr. Morgan Lahiffe, Climate Action Co Ordinator, Physical Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Councillors A. Norton, L. Grant, I. Lynch
Absent:
Councillors G. Keating, S. Talty
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney presided.
Ennis 2040 Presentation
Cathaoirleach Cllr. J. Cooney noted that the briefing arose from a Notice of Motion at the April meeting from Cllr. Tom O’Callaghan which reads as follows:
“That the Chief Operating Officer of DAC in Ennis 2040 attend the May monthly meeting to allay members concerns and to provide a detailed report on all expenditure since the formation of the Designated Activity Company together with inter alia what steps are taken to protect the commercial footfall affecting existing retail units opposite both Abbey Street and Parnell Street carparks. In the interest of compliance and transparency please provide details the procedure used in appointing the current Board of Directors.”
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and acknowledged that thebriefing is a good opportunity for all involved to speak plainly and to exchange their respective views on the future development of the county town. Mr. Dowling noted thatprogress is impossible without change and noted that if change does not occur, Ennis will become a large regional town whose commercial centre will simply be unable to compete with other regional towns of a similar size.
Mr. Dowling made the following points:
Inward investment is required in the commercial sector, and it would be both irresponsible and short-sighted of any local authority to not plan for the future in this regard.
Input of elected members, stakeholders and the wider public is critical to its success.
Concerns of businesses are acknowledged particularly the challenges they are facing with rising energy costs, wage costs, the rising cost of materials, and the cost of living.
These concerns make it even more important that the footfall in the town centre is increased and deliver infrastructure and economic projects that are befitting of Munster’s largest town.
Investors are attracted to locations with a track record of delivery and a ‘can do’ attitude.
Momentum has already been gained through investment in the town’s Public Realm, new Public Library, the development of the Ennis Town Bus Service, and through bringing derelict properties back into use, which shows the confidence that Central Government has in the local authority’s ability to deliver.
Clare County Council is committed to securing unprecedented investment in Ennis and for the future of the town’s citizens.
Won’t repeat the mistakes of other towns and cities where out-of-town developments have had a detrimental impact on town and city centres.
Ennis will retain its market town heritage. It’s part of the town’s identity and there will be no diminution of this unique trait.
The Abbey Street and Parnell Street developments are not going to separate the town centre from the river, the proposed projects do the absolute opposite through the development of amenity spaces and direct links to and around the river.
No groundwork will commence for at least three years.
The project will not proceed until such time as alternative parking is provided in the town centre.
There are 176 such Local Authority controlled entities across the country, including 5 in Clare – namely Ennis 2040 DAC, Cliffs of Moher Centre DAC, Glór Music DAC, Clare Maritime Economic Zone DAC, and Clare Tourism DAC. All of the DACs are wholly owned by Clare County Council.
Each of the Ennis 2040 proposals are guided by Clare County Council. The businesspeople nominated to the Board are local Ennis people who have an interest in the town’s future. Two Directors of Clare County Council are on the board along with three elected members so that the DAC is not subject to outside influence.
The numerous benefits of Local Authority controlled entities include:
Raising capital for investment purposes
A separate identity and brand to attract commercial interest.
Building commercial relationships
Reduced risk/liability
Mr. Dowling urged the members to judge each of the proposed Ennis 2040 projects on the Council’s past and current delivery in the areas of tourism and rural development:
Over the past 12 months, Clare Tourism DAC has overseen the transfer of significant assets from Shannon Airport Group and is currently implementing a multi-million-euro capital investment programme incorporating a portfolio of visitor attractions, including Bunratty Castle and Folk Park, Vandeleur Walled Graden and Visitor Centre, Knappogue Castle, Craggaunowen and the Inis Cealtra Experience.
Likewise, the Cliffs of Moher Centre DAC is in the process of completing its long-term vision for the sustainable development of the world-class visitor attraction over the next 20 years, while also extending economic benefits across the wider region including the towns and villages of County Clare.
Clare County Council has a successful track record of delivering large-scale infrastructure projects that provide a significant return for the communities in which they are located and the county as a whole. Ennis 2040 DAC is no different in terms of its ambition, scale, and the returns for the local business community, and the people of the town and the wider county.
Mr. Dowling asked that while this briefing was focusing on Ennis 2040, if people could recognise the many moving parts to the town’s development. Mr. Dowling noted that the revitalisation of Ennis is not solely focused on what is proposed under Ennis 2040. The latter complements the existing programme of integrated projects being undertaken by the local authority to transform Ennis into a town of the future.
Mr. Dowling acknowledged that with rural towns vying to remain competitive, Ennis needs to act on this opportunity now and establish it as an economic driver for the Mid-West Region
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Planning and Economic Development addressed the meeting and briefed the members on:
The development of Ennis 2040 Strategy, noting the timeline of the strategy to date.
Strategic Objectives.
Role of Ennis 2040 Strategy.
Outline of the 9 transformational sites.
Essential Infrastructure required to support a 10-minute town.
Delivery structures – Designated Activity Company.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services addressed the meeting to discuss the Expenditure in 2023, noting:
Appendix 8 in the Clare County Council accounts lists the seven companies owned by Clare County Council.
Accounts are fully audited.
Referred to other DAC structures such as Glór, Kilrush Amenity Trust, Tourism DAC and discussed how they perform.
€10million loan to Ennis 2040 DAC is working capital, €2.2million drawn to date. The Ennis 2040 2021/2022 accounts are filed and available for viewing.
Summary of the audited balance sheet as of December 2023.
Mr. Kevin Corrigan, Chief Operating Officer, Ennis 2040 DAC addressed the meeting and discussed:
Provision of Housing.
Climate Change.
Decline of Town Centres.
Air Quality.
Spend Insights, AIB Data Summary for 2022.
Other Opportunities/Competition.
Phase One – Investment.
Economic Impact Assessment.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney thanked the Chief Executive, P. Dowling, Directors of Services, Dr. Carmel Kirby and Noeleen Fitzgerald and Chief Operating Officer of Ennis 2040 DAC Kevin Corrigan for their presentation.
It was noted by the elected members that under standing orders the presentation was not in compliance with the time limits set and went well over the agreed time which was inhibiting members time for contributions. Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney proposed that the statutory adjourned Council meeting would start at 3.15p.m. and a further 30 minutes would be allocated to complete discussions on the Ennis 2040 presentation, and this was agreed by the members present.
The elected members raised the following points:
Concerns over finances, hiring of staff for the DAC without approval of elected members, drawdown of €2.2million to date and security over the loan.
Housing being a big issue within the county.
It was noted that the AIB Spend insight was interesting and helpful.
Parking is the main issue and if that got resolved it would help greatly.
There was no need to set up the DAC and that a plan for Ennis could have been put together through the relevant departments in the Council.
Francis Street site ownership, it was queried if that is owned by Ennis 2040 DAC or Clare County Council.
Notice of motion submitted by Cllr. T. O’Callaghan hadn’t received a written reply.
The DAC should not be involved in housing as it is speculative.
Some of the members were opposed to building over the post office field as it could be disruptive to wildlife.
The success of Ennis is intrinsically linked to the success of Clare.
It was acknowledged that investment is required to keep up with other towns and counties and that the presentation showed why the town isn’t thriving.
A number of members voiced support for the DAC and had seen how the structure had been a success in other parts of the county.
Better communication is required.
It was noted that a further meeting with elected members is required, and a compromise must be reached.
P. Dowling thanked the members for their comments and noted that he and the Management Team are listening carefully. Mr. Dowling confirmed that a full written reply would be provided to Cllr. O’Callaghan at the earliest opportunity and that a meeting would be held later this year with the elected members to discuss next steps.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services, Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Planning and Economic Development and K. Corrigan, Chief Operating Officer, Ennis 2040 DAC answered the queries raised by the members.
Item 26: Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr.
T. O’Brien
agus glacadh leis
“A presentation was given on January 11
th
by Banking Federation Ireland (BPFI) outlining a model of financing which would enable homeowners to access a percentage of their allocated grant to commence work. This needs a state backed guarantee. I am calling on Clare County Council to call on the Department of Housing to back this guarantee and allow it to commence. This would greatly help those living in rotting pyrite homes, who simply cannot commence, as they do not have the means to cover the shortfall in the grant to remediate their homes. I also Call on Clare County Council to call for retroactive reimbursement for foundations testing and removal.”
(M)
The elected members noted how distressing it was for families finding out that they have pyrite or defective concrete blocks and that financial institutions will still be looking for the monthly mortgage repayment regardless. The members acknowledged that this is a traumatic time for homeowners and the Department of Housing need to assist these people. The members noted that homeowners need to finance the initial stages of the rebuild and not all people have access to resources to fund this. The elected members agreed that the Department needs to streamline the process of assessments.
Item 27: Speeding and Dangerous Driving
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“To call on Clare County Council, in conjunction with An Garda Siochana, to co-ordinate a targeted joint approach to deal with speeding and dangerous driving habits in our villages and towns in County Clare.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Under various roads legislation and utilising the Design Manual for Urban Roads and Streets (DMURS) Clare County Council provide a number of different traffic interventions to assist with the reduction of speed and dangerous driving in urban areas. These works are grant funded through the Department of Transport and Transport Infrastructure Ireland. The interventions include the provision of traffic calming measures, gateway type signage, road width reductions, speed bumps, raised traffic tables at junctions and pedestrian crossings. In addition, the Department of Transport carried out a Speed Limit Review in 2023 which fulfils a Programme for Government commitment included in the Government’s Road Safety Strategy 2021-2030. The review was overseen by a working group co-chaired by the Department of Transport and the Road Safety Authority and included representatives from An Garda Síochána, the National Transport Authority, Transport Infrastructure Ireland and the City & County Management Association. The overarching objective of the review was to improve road safety, with consideration also given to driver compliance. The review recommends the lowering of default speed limits on urban, local and national secondary roads. It is anticipated that these measures will be rolled out on a phased basis commencing in late 2024. These measures should also help in reducing speed in our towns and villages.
The matter can be raised with the next Joint Policing Committee meeting to see what further integrated approaches can be developed with An Garda Síochána to reduce speed in urban areas.”
The elected members noted that speeding on roads is out of control. The members requested that the Chief Executive consider that all future housing developments include traffic calming measures as part of the planning process. The members suggested that speed cameras should also be considered to slow cars on the road. The elected members raised concern over the county not having a road safety officer and requested that the new Council convene a Road Safety Committee.
Item 28: Anti-Social Behaviour
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy
agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the government to roll-out multi-agency taskforces to tackle anti-social behaviour in regional towns in County Clare and throughout the Country.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that a multi-agency taskforce is needed at a national level, it was noted that there should be a dedicated hotline and guarantees that instances of anti-social behaviour will be investigated. The members noted that towns feel abandoned, and that anti-social behaviour is not being dealt with stringently enough. It was acknowledged that if the state does not tackle this it will lead to further demoralisation of the Gardaí.
Item 29: Town and Village Placenames
Ar moladh Cllr. L. Grant Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Flynn
agus glacadh leis
“Call on Clare County Council to write to Minister Darragh O'Brien and the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage asking them to update the regulations for changing place names. Whether it be through the means of a plebiscite or that the new regulations allow for local Councils to approve the changing of place names as reserved function, a mechanism is needed to change place names back to their commonly used spellings. We need to get the names officially changed so we can have the correct road signs for Lahinch, Ballyvaughan, Ennistymon, Miltown Malbay, Corofin, Kilnaboy, Carron, Clonlara etc.
It is embarrassing for these towns. It often confuses tourists and damages businesses that have the common spelling of the town in their business name or in their website domain.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the regulations need to be changed allowing the members to vote on placename changes. The members noted that it is important for tourism and businesses that the correct spellings are on these signs.
Cllr. L. Grant sought clarification from Corporate on the holding of a plebiscite to change the placenames.
A. Reynolds, Meeting Administrator advised that the commenced provisions under the amended Part 18 of the 2001 Act require updated Regulations to be made for the holding of plebiscites to change placenames.
The Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage is engaging with the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media regarding the interaction of the amended Part 18 of the Local Government Act 2001 and provisions contained in Official Languages legislation. At present, it remains the case that there is no legal basis for the holding of plebiscites in relation to the changing of a placename.
Item 30: Home Care Services
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
agus glacadh leis
“I propose that Clare County Council calls upon the Minister for Health, Stephen Donnelly, and the Health Service Executive (HSE) to undertake a comprehensive review of how home care services are provided in Ireland and to acknowledge the significant challenges faced by individuals and families in accessing adequate and timely home care services.
I ask that following points be addressed:
Assess the current system of home care provision, including its strengths, weaknesses, and areas for improvement.
Examine the availability, accessibility, and affordability of home care services across different regions and communities.
Consider the quality and standards of care provided, including the training and financial supports provided to home care workers.
Evaluate the effectiveness of existing policies and regulations governing home care services.
Engage with service users, their families, advocacy groups, and relevant stakeholders to gather feedback and insights.” (M)
The elected members noted that a review of homecare services is overdue and that homecare services may help alleviate a lot of the issues with overcrowding in the hospitals. The members noted that older people don’t want to be in hospital and would prefer to be in the comfort of their own home to convalesce. The elected members raised concern that the most vulnerable of our society are suffering. The members agreed that the motion be sent to the Oireachtas members also.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Cooney thanked the Executive, staff of Clare County Council and Elected Members for a fantastic five years. Cllr. J. Cooney wished all the members best of luck in the upcoming elections and congratulated Cllr. G. Flynn on his retirement.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________ Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________ Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback