Minutes of Annual General Meeting 2024 of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of Annual General Meeting 2024 of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Friday 21st June 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillor P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, D. Griffin, D. McGettigan, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer.
Ms. Anne Haugh, Director of Rural Development.
Mr. Sean Lenihan, Senior Engineer, Ennis Municipal District.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Mr. John O’Malley, A/Director of Tourism Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Presiding
The outgoing Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Joe Cooney presided.
Item 1: Return of persons elected to Clare County Council
In accordance with the requirements of Schedule 10 of the Local Government Act 2001; Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator confirmed the names of the persons elected as members of Clare County Council for each of the Electoral Areas in the order in which they were elected.
Cllr. Joe Cooney stated that it was an honour to be Cathaoirleach for the last year and acknowledged the support his fellow elected members gave him over the past 12 months and welcomed the new members. He thanked the Chief Executive Pat Dowling, Ann Reynolds and all the staff in Clare County Council for their support and guidance throughout the year and noted that Clare has benefited greatly from the hard work and commitment of staff in the local authority and their innovative approach towards the development of the county. Cllr. Cooney stated it was a privilege to represent the county overseas and he commended the Tourism Directorate on their efforts to put Clare on the map at home and abroad. Cllr. Cooney acknowledged and thanked Cllr. Gabriel Keating for his support throughout the year as Leas-Cathaoirleach. He thanked his wife and family for their support during the year.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and welcomed those in the public gallery. Mr. Dowling congratulated all the Councillors who have retained their seats for another term, and welcomed and congratulated the eight newly elected members of Clare County Council. He stated that over the last number of years there has been a very strong working relationship within the Council, and that this partnership and co-operation is pivotal to achieving objectives going forward. Mr. Dowling re-assured the members that the integrity and commitment of Council staff will continue for the next term. Mr. Dowling acknowledged the outgoing mayor and noted it was a pleasure working with him and stated that he learned a lot from him over the 12 months in how he treated and dealt with people, his incredible humility and political prowess. Mr Dowling noted that the county was glad to have him as their mayor.
The elected members thanked Cllr. Cooney for his service as mayor of the county and noted his work ethic and the adamant support he showed for his community. The members noted how Cllr. Cooney led by example when carrying out his mayoral duties both at home and abroad. The members wished Cllr. Cooney all the best in the future.
Item 2: Election of Cathaoirleach of Council for the coming year
Cllr. J. Cooney called for proposals for the election of Cathaoirleach for the coming year.
Cllr. P. Hayes proposed Cllr. A. O’Callaghan for the position of Cathaoirleach and this was seconded by Cllr. P. Burke.
As there were no other nominations from the floor, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan was deemed elected to the post of Cathaoirleach for the coming year and took up his position accordingly. Cllr. A. O’Callaghan addressed the meeting and stated that it is a huge honour to stand before this chamber as the new mayor of Clare and that it is humbling to assume the role with the full support of the Council.
He thanked his proposer Cllr. P. Hayes and seconder Cllr. P. Burke and paid tribute to his predecessor, Cllr. J. Cooney.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan stated that he was delighted to be part of a power sharing agreement which will ensure that all groups on the Council will get an opportunity to play a meaningful role during the next five years. He stated that the Council must adopt a fresh approach to how they go about their business and must work together for the betterment of the people of County Clare.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that tourism is a big driver for the County, with its potential to create and sustain jobs and to draw people to visit and spend in the county. Cllr. O’Callaghan stated that Clare County Council’s tourism directorate has done superb work in growing tourism in the county.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan referred to the Cliffs of Moher being the shining success story of tourism in Clare with the work that has been done in the likes of the Vandeleur Garden and Loop Head, and the work that is ongoing in Inis Cealtra, and he noted that the sky is the limit for what can be achieved.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan also referred to events like the World Rally Championship being crucial to putting the spotlight on the county and to attracting visitors. Cllr. O’Callaghan advised that this huge international event was touted to come to Ireland in 2025, with the potential for a stage to be held in Clare. However, Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that the Government has yet to confirm the funding to ensure the plans can proceed.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised that one of his top priorities for the year ahead is to push Ministers and Government to provide the necessary funds so that the World Rally Championship can be brought to Clare.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised that another priority is improving and upgrading the road network. He noted that there is a need for decent and well-maintained roads to facilitate economic growth and for the people of Clare to be safe as they go to work and school and as they go about their daily lives. Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that this can only be achieved through securing more funding from central government for roads projects and upkeep, as well as by progressing work programmes on the ground in every municipal district in the county. Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that the roads staff do a stellar job but more resources are needed to make real progress in improving the road network.
Cllr. O’Callaghan stated that in recent weeks, the Council has lost a number of excellent colleagues who collectively made a fantastic contribution to the workings of the Council over a long number of years. He noted that it will be hard to replace such valuable experience, but he acknowledged confidence that the incoming Councillors will deliver and make a significant contribution to the workings of this Council. Cllr. O’Callaghan welcomed each of the new members into the Council Chamber.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan stated that he looked forward to working with the Chief Executive and the staff of Clare County Council during the coming weeks and months in establishing a roadmap for the development and management of County Clare over the five-year lifespan of this Council. Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that despite the many challenges it has faced, this Council has successfully maintained and built on its core objective of providing a quality service to local communities the length and breadth of County Clare.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised that he is confident that with an excellent team of staff, a supportive Council, and continued good relations with local agencies and businesses, the Council’s work programmes will allow for the continued economic, social and cultural development of Clare and the delivery of improvements in the quality of life of those whom we serve.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan stated that he feels that the overall contribution as a Council over the forthcoming five-year-term will be judged by the investment in and working relationship with local community groups. Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that over recent years he has seen how local groups and organisations - when supported and encouraged - can take the lead in delivering real and positive change for their communities.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised not to look on the Council merely as a service provider, but also as a catalyst for increased social and economic activity in every corner of the county from Kilbaha to Whitegate and from Clonlara to New Quay. Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that Clare’s most valuable resource in County Clare is its unique sense of community and pride of place.
Cllr A. O’Callaghan advised that it is his goal as Cathaoirleach over the next 12 months that his chairing of the various meetings will contribute to this Council working as a unit in the best interests of those who have elected the members.
Cllr. O’Callaghan welcomed his wife Aideen, his two sons Liam and James and his mother Breda to Áras Contae an Chláir.
Item 3: Election of Leas Cathaoirleach of the Council for the coming year.
The Cathaoirleach called for any proposals from the floor for the position of Leas Cathaoirleach in relation to item 3 on the agenda.
Cllr. P. Murphy proposed Cllr. M. Howard as Leas Cathaoirleach and this was seconded by Cllr. P. Daly. As there were no other nominations from the floor, the Cathaoirleach declared Cllr. M. Howard elected as Leas Cathaoirleach for the coming year.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan welcomed Cllr. Howard to her new role.
Cllr. M. Howard addressed the meeting and thanked the elected members for nominating her as Leas Cathaoirleach for the coming year. She recognised and welcomed the eight newly elected members and stated that great friendships are made within group. Cllr. Howard noted that the last time she wore the chain of office it was during COVID and she acknowledged the sense of community that arose from that time and that she would like to see a return to that sense of community and that people would take a step back and be respectful of each other.
Cllr. M. Howard stated that she looked forward to working with the Cathaoirleach and the Executive of Clare County Council noting that as Councillors they are the custodians for the citizens of the county.
The elected members wished Cllr. Howard all the best in her new role and acknowledged the outgoing Leas-Cathaoirleach Cllr. G. Keating and noted how he took the role on with enthusiasm and brought a sense of joy to the role.
Item 4: Appointment of Chair Designate for each of the Strategic Policy Committees.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Daly be appointed as Chair Designate for the Economic Strategic Policy Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Burke be appointed as Chair Designate for the Physical Strategic Policy Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Hayes be appointed as Chair Designate for the Rural Strategic Policy Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Crowe be appointed as Chair Designate for the Social Strategic Policy Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. S. Talty be appointed as Chair Designate for the Tourism Strategic Policy Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and noted that the Tourism Strategic Policy Committee will be included as part of the draft SPC scheme which will be presented to the members at the July meeting. Mr. Dowling advised that this will go to public consultation and be brought back to the members for adoption at the September meeting. Once it has been adopted, nominations from the pillars will be agreed. Mr. Dowling noted that all of this process takes time and the earliest the first meeting of the new SPCs will be held is October.
Item 5: Appointment of 2 members to Regional Assembly
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. O’Brien be appointed to the Regional Assembly.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. B. Slattery be appointed to the Regional Assembly.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 6: Appointment of members to Limerick and Clare Education & Training Board.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. G. Keating be appointed to the Limerick and Clare Education & Training Board.”
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Howard be appointed to the Limerick and Clare Education & Training Board.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. R. Hartigan be appointed to the Limerick and Clare Education & Training Board.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. A. Baker Bashua be appointed to the Limerick and Clare Education & Training Board.”
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Begley be appointed to the Limerick and Clare Education & Training Board.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 7: Appointment of 1 member to Local Authority Members Association.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. O’Brien be appointed to the Local Authority Members Association.”
It was agreed that this appointment would be for the life of the Council.
Item 8: Appointment of 3 members to the Association of Irish Local Government.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. O’Callaghan be appointed to the Association of Irish Local Government.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. John Crowe/Tony Mulcahy be appointed to the Association of Irish Local Government (on the basis of 2.5 years each).”
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Begley be appointed to the Association of Irish Local Government.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 9: Appointment of 1 member to Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd.
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. Griffin be appointed to Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd.”
It was agreed that this appointment would be for the life of the Council.
Item 10: Appointment of 1 member to Board of Management of Kilkee Waterworld.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. I. Lynch be appointed to the Board of Management of Kilkee Waterworld.”
It was agreed that this appointment would be for the life of the Council.
Item 11: Appointment of 1 member to Board of Management of Lahinch Seaworld.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. S. Talty be appointed to the Board of Management of Lahinch Seaworld.”
It was agreed that this appointment would be for the life of the Council.
Item 12: Appointment of 1 member to Hunt Museum Trust.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Murphy be appointed to the Hunt Museum Trust.”
It was agreed that this appointment would be for the life of the Council.
Item 13: Appointment of 1 member to Lisdoonvarna Fáilte.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Garrihy be appointed to Lisdoonvarna Failte.”
It was agreed that this appointment would be for the life of the Council.
Item 14: Appointment of 2 members to the Board of Glór Irish Music Centre.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Murphy be appointed to the Board of Glór Irish Music Centre.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Shannon be appointed to the Board of Glór Irish Music Centre.”
It was agreed that this appointment would be for the life of the Council.
Item 15: Appointment of 1 member to Clare Sports Partnership.
This item was deferred to the July meeting of Clare County Council.
Item 16: Appointment of 6 members to Local Traveller Accommodation Advisory Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Crowe be appointed to the Local Traveller Accommodation Advisory Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Garrihy be appointed to the Local Traveller Accommodation Advisory Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. Hartigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. A. Baker Bashua be appointed to the Local Traveller Accommodation Advisory Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. O’Brien be appointed to the Local Traveller Accommodation Advisory Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. McGettigan be appointed to the Local Traveller Accommodation Advisory Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. Guilfoyle be appointed to the Local Traveller Accommodation Advisory Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 17: Appointment of members to Twinning Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Howard be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. John Crowe be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Murphy be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. A. Baker Bashua be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. O’Brien be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Begley be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. Gould be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Daly be appointed to the Twinning Committee.”
It was agreed that the Cathaoirleach of the day would also be appointed to this committee. It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 18: Appointment of 3 members to County Clare Road Safety Working Group.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. Mulcahy be appointed to the County Clare Road Safety Working Group.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. R. Hartigan be appointed to the County Clare Road Safety Working Group.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. Guilfoyle be appointed to the County Clare Road Safety Working Group.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 19: Appointment of 3 members to County Rural Water Monitoring Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Burke be appointed to the County Rural Water Monitoring Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. Hartigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. R. McInerney/Michael Shannon be appointed to the County Rural Water Monitoring Committee, (on the basis of 2.5 years each).”
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. Gould be appointed to the County Rural Water Monitoring Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 20: Appointment of 3 members to Active Ennis Sports and Leisure Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Howard be appointed to Active Ennis Sports and Leisure Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. O’Callaghan be appointed to Active Ennis Sports and Leisure Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. Guilfoyle be appointed to Active Ennis Sports and Leisure Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 21: Appointment of 2 members to the Audit Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Burke be appointed to the Audit Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Hayes be appointed to the Audit Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 22: Appointment of 4 members to the Regional Health Forum West.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. R. McInerney be appointed to the Regional Health Forum West.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. A. Baker Bashua be appointed to the Regional Health Forum West.”
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Howard be appointed to the Regional Health Forum West.”
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. McGettigan be appointed to the Regional Health Forum West.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 23: Appointment of 2 members to Kilrush Amenity Trust.
This item was deferred.
Item 24: Appointment of 3 members to the Clare Local Development Company.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Garrihy be appointed to Clare Local Development Company.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Shannon be appointed to Clare Local Development Company.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Begley be appointed to Clare Local Development Company.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 25: Appointment of 4 members to the Local Community Development Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. B. Slattery be appointed to Local Community Development Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Killeen be appointed to Local Community Development Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. R. Hartigan be appointed to Local Community Development Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. McGettigan be appointed to Local Community Development Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 26: Appointment of 5 members to the Western Inter County Railway Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. G. Keating be appointed to the Western Inter County Railway Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Crowe be appointed to the Western Inter County Railway Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Hayes be appointed to the Western Inter County Railway Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. A. O’Callaghan be appointed to the Western Inter County Railway Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. Gould be appointed to the Western Inter County Railway Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 27: Appointment of 6 members to the Standing Orders Sub-Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Cooney be appointed to the Standing Orders Sub-Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Murphy be appointed to the Standing Orders Sub-Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy be appointed to the Standing Orders Sub-Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. S. Talty be appointed to the Standing Orders Sub-Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. I. Lynch be appointed to the Standing Orders Sub-Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. Guilfoyle be appointed to the Standing Orders Sub-Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 28: Appointment of 6 members to the Memorial Committee.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Howard be appointed to the Memorial Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. T. Mulcahy be appointed to the Memorial Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy be appointed to the Memorial Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. S. Talty be appointed to the Memorial Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. McGettigan be appointed to the Memorial Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. I. Lynch be appointed to the Memorial Committee.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 29: Appointment of 6 members to the Rural Development Forum.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. G. Keating be appointed to the Rural Development Forum.”
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Garrihy be appointed to the Rural Development Forum.”
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. R. McInerney be appointed to the Rural Development Forum.”
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. P. Hayes be appointed to the Rural Development Forum.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Begley be appointed to the Rural Development Forum.”
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. Gould be appointed to the Rural Development Forum.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 30: Appointment of 2 members to the Board of the Cliffs of Moher Centre Ltd.
This item was deferred.
Item 31: Appointment of 3 members to the Board of Ennis 2040 DAC.
This item was deferred.
Item 32: Appointment of 3 members to the County Clare Heritage and Biodiversity Forum.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. G. Keating be appointed to the County Clare Heritage and Biodiversity Forum.”
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. Hartigan agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy be appointed to the County Clare Heritage and Biodiversity Forum.”
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. D. Gould be appointed to the County Clare Heritage and Biodiversity Forum.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
Item 33: Fix date for first meeting for each of the Municipal Districts.
The following dates and times were agreed for the first meeting of the Municipal Districts:
Ennis Municipal District Thursday, 27
th
June, 2024.
Killaloe Municipal District Wednesday, 26
th
June, 2024.
Shannon Municipal District Tuesday, 25
th
June, 2024.
West Clare Municipal District Monday, 1
st
July, 2024.
Item 34: Schedule of Ordinary Meetings of full Council for next twelve months.
The Schedule of Meetings was circulated with the agenda and was proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney, seconded by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy and agreed by the members present.
Item 35: Approval of payment of Cathaoirleach and Leas Cathaoirleach allowances.
Approval for payment of the Cathaoirleach and Leas Cathaoirleach allowances for the forthcoming year was proposed by Cllr. J. Crowe, seconded by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy and agreed by the members present.
Conclusion
The newly elected Cathaoirleach of Clare, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan formally closed the meeting and invited those present to a reception in the atrium.
Signed: ____________________________ Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________ Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback