Minutes of July 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of July 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 8th July 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, D. McGettigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
John O’Malley, A/Director of Tourism Development
Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Councillors T. O’Callaghan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, I. Lynch
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr A. O’Callaghan presided and welcomed the members to the first meeting of the new Council and congratulated the Clare Senior Hurling Team on their victory over Kilkenny the previous weekend.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Kelly Family, on the death of Cyril Kelly, RIP.
The McMahon Family, on the death of Maureen McMahon, RIP.
The O’Brien Family, on the death of Patrick (Paddy) O’Brien, RIP.
The Meaney Family, on the death of Mary Meaney, RIP.
The Coyne Family, on the death of Festy Coyne, RIP.
The Ryan Family, on the death of Tom Ryan, RIP.
The Lynch Family, on the death of Bridie Lynch, RIP.
The Reidy Family, on the death of Maura Reidy, RIP.
The Cooney Family, on the death of Helen Cooney, RIP.
Votes of congratulations
Cllr. G. Keating extended congratulations to Monsignor Séamus Horgan on his appointment as Papal Nuncio to South Sudan, based in the city of Juba. Cllr. Keating requested that a Mayoral reception be held in honour of Monsignor Horgan and Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agreed.
Approval for Travel
It was approved that Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan travel to Milwaukee to take part in the Milwaukee Irish Fest having been proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney seconded by Cllr. J. Crowe and agreed by the members present.
It was approved that Leas-Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. Howard travel to Phoenix, Arizona in line with the Tourism Strategy 2023 having been proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien seconded by Cllr. P. Daly and agreed by the members present.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the May Meeting of Clare County Council held on 13th May 2024 be adopted and signed.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the adjourned May Meeting of Clare County Council held on 22
nd
May 2024 be adopted and signed.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of Clare County Council AGM held on 21
st
June, 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 21
st
June, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Housing in relation to a request to amend Planning Regulators Directive.
Correspondence dated 14
th
May, 2024 from Cathal Crowe, T.D. in relation to the Health Service Executive.
Correspondence dated 29
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Health in relation to the Health Service Executive.
Correspondence dated 10
th
June, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Housing in relation to the Enhanced Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme.
Correspondence dated 31
st
May, 2024 from TII in relation to funding for grass verge trimming.
Correspondence dated 25
th
June, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Transport in relation to the N85 Kilnamona re-alignment project.
Correspondence dated 30
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Rural and Community Development in relation to the Local Improvement Scheme.
Correspondence dated 18
th
June, 2024 from the HSE in relation to home care services.
Correspondence dated 5
th
June, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Health in relation to reviewing medical cards for over 70’s.
Correspondence dated 16
th
May, 2024 from the Taoiseach to Cathal Crowe, T.D. in relation to DMAP preparation.
Correspondence dated 16
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Taoiseach in relation to DMAP preparation.
Correspondence dated 19
th
June, 2024 from the office of the Minister for State for Special Education and Inclusion in relation to autism spectrum disorder.
Correspondence dated 11
th
June, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Agriculture in relation to assistance for Farmers.
Correspondence dated 1
st
July, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Justice in relation to anti-social behaviour.
Acknowledgement dated 15
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Transport in relation to active travel funding.
Acknowledgement dated 15
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Health in relation to purchase of Barrington’s Hospital, Limerick.
Acknowledgement dated 15
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Taoiseach in relation to purchase of Barrington’s Hospital, Limerick.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Taoiseach in relation to purchase of Barrington’s Hospital, Limerick.
Acknowledgement dated 16
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Housing in relation to the acquisition of privately owned properties by Local Authorities.
Acknowledgement dated 15
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Taoiseach in relation to the Health Service Executive.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Taoiseach in relation to the Health Service Executive.
Acknowledgement dated 24
th
May, 2024 from the office of the Minister for Health in relation to Home Care Services.
Acknowledgement dated 10
th
April, 2024 from the TFI Local Link Limerick Clare in relation to the effect local link services will have on taxi services.
Resolution dated 13
th
May, 2024 from Fingal County Council in relation to Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Resolution dated 4
th
June, 2024 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to a tax-free week for taxayers.
Resolution dated 15
th
May, 2024 from Monaghan County Council in relation to the ‘Free Education Scheme’.
Resolution dated 21
st
May, 2024 from Tipperary County Council in relation to Ash dieback.
Resolution dated 20
th
May, 2024 from Wicklow County Council in relation to Road Safety Officers.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the reply received in relation to LIS scheme and noted that applications can be submitted for the 2025 Scheme in January 2025. Cllr. McInerney stated that the Oireachtas members should be contacted and made aware so that they can make representations on behalf of the Clare submissions.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the reply received in relation to the DMAP and queried if there was any report from the meeting Clare County Council had with the Department.
Cllr. M. Begley sought clarification on the LIS scheme and if the 2025 allocation had already been decided.
A Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development noted that in relation to LIS the funding allocation was for 2024 and 2025. Mr. Farrell noted that they have contacted the Department for additional funding but have not received a response yet.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive assured the members that the local authority are constantly pressing for extra resources for LIS.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, Planning & Economic Development referred to Cllr. McInerney’s query on DMAPs and noted that the West Coast DMAP is being delivered by the Department for Environment, Climate and Communications. Dr. Kirby advised that they are pressing Government to proceed but that no recent updated that been provided.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 7
th
May, 2024 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 20
th
March, 2024 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 19
th
March, 2024 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 26 February, 2024 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 3
rd
May, 2024 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan acknowledged and commended the Chief Executive on the extensive coverage of the local elections in Clare and noted how well received it was nationally.
Cllr. G. Keating echoed the sentiments of the Cathaoirleach and thanked the Chief Executive and staff for all their hard work the weekend of the local elections.
Cllr. J. Garrihy acknowledged the coverage of the local elections. Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Doolin Pier Visitor Services Building noting that funding was granted in 2019 and requested an updated.
Cllr. Garrihy commended the North Clare Integrated Transport & Traffic Plan and the work that they have done with signage and road markings.
Cllr. Mary Howard acknowledged and thanked the Chief Executive, Mark Dunphy Communications and the local authority staff for their work over the local elections. Cllr. Howard referred to the HD17 Road Safety Projects and requested an update on timelines for the N85 Lahinch Road Ennis pedestrian crossing and the N85 Lahinch Road Shanaway Junction.
A Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development noted in relation to Doolin Pier that they are meeting with the Department regarding proposals submitted but that there are funding issues.
Mr. Farrell advised he would get an update on the HD17 Road Safety Projects for Cllr. Howard.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting to advise that he had received correspondence from Fiona Quinn, Assistant Secretary, Local Government Division in the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the directly elected Mayor of Limerick.
Mr. Dowling proceeded to read the correspondence he received which highlighted some of the main features of the new role and office of Mayor, along with associated changes within Limerick City and County Council. The communication highlighted a number of key provisions in the legislation relating to the role of Chief Executive of Clare County Council. Under the Act, the Chief Executive of Clare County Council will be an ex officio member of both the Limerick Project Ireland 2040 Delivery Board and of its Transport Sub-Group along with the Mayor (As chair), the Director General and the Director of the Southern Regional Assembly.
The correspondence outlined the role of the Office of directly elected Mayor, role of the Director General, role of Council and Príomh-Chomhairleoir
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted how significant this reform is within Local Government and that a copy of the correspondence will issue to the members in the coming days.
The elected members referred to progress of the Strategic Development Zone (SDZ) designation and requested that the Chief Executive would keep pressure on to see the project through. The members also raised the Limerick Northern Distributor Road (LNDR) and noted their hopes to see it revive and progress to completion following its omission from the Limerick Shannon Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (LSMATS).
Item 8: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development comprising of public realm enhancement works, creation of a new footpath at the playground and beach area at Cappa, Kilrush, Co. Clare.
Chief Executive Report dated 3
rd
July, 2024 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination). The reports outline details of proposed development comprising of public realm enhancement works including upgrade and creation of new continuous footpaths, provision of pedestrian friendly raised table with new courtesy crossing, road realignment, formalising of on street car parking and provision of age friendly parking, relocation of existing and provision of new street lighting and furniture.
Creation of new pedestrian footpath to the playground and beach and a new civic space adjacent to the existing playground, including alterations to the existing stone wall to facilitate the new access and viewing points.
All associated services, site development and landscaping works.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
Item 9: Memorial Committee Applications
Report dated 26
th
June, 2024 from Mary McMahon, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services Department was circulated with the agenda. The report outlined details of applications received and considered by the Memorial Committee on 28
th
May, 2024 as follows:
Memorial to father and son, Paul Loftus and Joseph Holland
The applications were approved having been proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney, seconded by Cllr. D. McGettigan and agreed by the members present.
Item 10: Adoption of Clare County Council Homeless Policy
Report dated 14
th
June, 2024 from Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development was circulated with the agenda. The report states that the draft Policy sets out details and processes to ensure smooth and efficient management of the provision of, and the management of emergency accommodation. The draft Policy was presented to the meeting of the Social and Cultural SPC on 15
th
May, 2024 whereby it was recommended that it be forwarded to the full Council for adoption.
The Clare County Council Homeless Policy was adopted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. D. McGettigan, seconded by Cllr. J. Crowe and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. P. Hayes requested that a briefing be held for the members in relation to the homeless policy to understand where the issues are arising from and how the elected members can assist people. Cllr. J. Killeen and Cllr. J. Crowe supported the request for a briefing noting what a serious issue it is nationally.
Item 11: Draft Strategic Policy Scheme
The Draft Scheme for the Strategic Policy Committees 2024 – 2029 was circulated with the agenda. The Draft Scheme outlines the requirements and guidelines on how Strategic Policy Committees (SPCs) operate. The draft scheme proposes to establish five SPCs and notes that five chair designates were appointed to the committees following the local elections in June 2024
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That the Council agrees the Draft S.P.C. Scheme as circulated.”
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle noted that he had spoken with the Chief Executive in relation to the proposed trade union representation. Cllr. Guilfoyle noted that trade union representation is only listed on one SPC in the draft scheme and ideally would like to see this increased
P. Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged that the scheme has been revised to include an additional SPC for Tourism and that there is criteria set for the representation of sectoral interests. Mr. Dowling noted that the draft scheme will be circulated to the sectoral interests for their feedback and observations and would come back before the Council in September for adoption.
Item 12: LCDC Membership
Report dated 12th June, 2024 from Bernadette Haugh, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare Irish Farmers Association (IFA) has advised of a new representative to the LCDC to replace Mr. Thomas Lane. Clare IFA has nominated Stephen Walsh as its representative.
This was approved the members present having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes, seconded by Cllr. A. Baker Bashua and agreed by the members present.
Item 13: LCDC Annual Report 2023
Report dated 28
th
June, 2024 from Bernadette Haugh, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda along with a copy of the Annual Report. The report states that the Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) is a statutory committee of Clare County Council and includes representatives from local state agencies, the community voluntary sector as well as other local development and interest groups. The LCDC has prepared and oversees the implementation of the community elements of the Local Economic and Community Plan 2024- 2030 (LECP) which is a 6-year strategy for the County. The committee is also responsible for the Healthy Clare Action Plan and oversight of the Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme (SICAP) for Clare.
The report notes that the annual report has been prepared in the context of Chapter 2 Section 128B (1) (i) of the Local Government Act 2001, as inserted by the Local Government Reform Act 2014, which states that one of the functions of a Local Community Development Committee is: "to prepare, adopt and submit to the local authority a report in relation to the performance of its functions during the year immediately preceding the year in which the report is submitted".
The LCDC Annual Report 2023 was adopted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney, seconded by Cllr. M. Begley and agreed by the members present.
Item 14: Clare Local Community Safety Partnership
It was agreed that this item be deferred to the September meeting.
Item 15: Clare Sports Partnership Committee Nomination
It was agreed that this item be deferred to the September meeting.
Item 16: Presentation on the Draft County Sports Plan at 2.p.m.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan welcomed Brendan Boyce to the Chamber.
Brendan Boyce, Integration Support Co-Ordinator, Social Development addressed the meeting and presented the draft county sports plan to the elected members.
Mr. Boyce addressed what the Clare Local Sports Plan is:
Four County pilot process supported by Sport Ireland (selected form across all of our local authorities)
A high-level strategic framework to create the conditions for increased participation in sport and physical activity
Support collaboration leading to increased participation
Promoting inclusion in sports and physical activity
Follow the national direction on sports and physical activity and will complement the forthcoming Outdoor Recreation Strategy
The purpose of the 2024-2028 Clare Local Sports Plan is:
‘Creating the conditions to support all in County Clare to enjoy active lifestyles’.
Mr. Boyce outlined the key milestones to develop the Clare Local Sports Plans and what the plan seeks to achieve:
“Clare Local Sports Plan seeks to:
Understand the motivation of people in County Clare engaging in regular sports and physical activity.
Establish the current perception of within the County in relation to the opportunities available to them to regularly engage in sports and physical activity.
Identify the barriers for regularly engaging in sports and physical activity.
Set out high level strategic actions which can address these barriers, led and delivered by the Council, Local Sports Partnership and Collaborative Partners (e.g. Healthy Clare, Slaintecare, Clare Local Development Company).
Mr Boyce referred to the Local Economic and Community Plan and noted that its key priority is to be a Healthy, Equitable and Inclusive County.
Mr. Boyce discussed how they have engaged with the public to create awareness and understanding and plans for the future:
Setting up of Steering Group whose role is to promote a high level of engagement, inclusion, communication and reviewing.
Collaborating with Stakeholders
Use of on-line advertising
Use ‘Have your Say’ Consultation Platform
Develop draft document and hold public webinar in September
Mr. Boyce noted that the draft document for Clare Local Sports Plan has been developed based on the information and direction shared by residents and stakeholders. It was as follows;
587 residents completing a survey focusing on their engagement in and vision for sports and physical activity.
211 young people (up to 18) completing a survey.
134 sports clubs and community organisations completing a survey
4 face to face workshops across the county, engaging 62 people
To date 982 responses have contributed to the development.
The Clare Local Sports Plan is being developed round five themes as follows:
Theme One: People and Participation
Theme Two: Facilities
Theme Three: Communication and Awareness
Theme Four: Active Outdoors
Theme Five: Collaboration
Mr. Boyce concluded his presentation outlining the next steps:
Complete the survey and workshops.
Consider information such as local v national statistics.
Engage with sectoral agencies and sport’s governing bodies.
Analyse the outputs of all processes.
Develop a Draft Framework for the Clare Local Sports Plan.
Clare Sports Partnership will use the direction on outdoor recreation to develop the Clare Outdoor Recreation Plan.
Host face to face and online consultation meetings on the draft plan.
Combine feedback and present to SPC and Clare County Council in September 2024.
The elected members thanked Brendan Boyce for the presentation and commended the team on the work done to date. The members acknowledged that this was a very important document and noted the importance of sport and recreation to communities throughout the county.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive thanked Brendan and the team for their work on this document. Mr. Dowling noted that this plan is not just about sports but also recreation and amenities. Mr. Dowling noted that the sports plan is as much about a regulatory role as it is about specific projects, ensuring that facilities are sustainable and that there is good governance in all codes across the county.
Mr. Dowling noted that the local authority have a duty of care to ensure it is run properly and that gaps, needs and opportunities are identified through the process.
Item 17: Communication Policy
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“I request that Clare County Council implement a policy whereby all email responses to elected members are signed by the responding person with their full name and contact details, this will enable more effect and efficient communication. This is specifically required for shared or grouped emails.”
(M)
Ann Reynolds, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Rural Directorate replied as follows:
“This matter has been raised and discussed with senior staff and all Departments are in agreement that responses to Councillors should include the name and contact details of the staff member responding. This will enable effective and efficient communication and facilitate timely follow up if required.”
The elected members agreed that emails should be responded to with full contact details so that the elected members know who they are dealing with and can refer directly to that person going forward.
Item 18: Violent Assaults
It was agreed by the members to take item no. 18, 19 and 20 together.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“Calling on Clare County Council to stand in Solidarity with Natasha O'Brien. The outcome of this case is hugely concerning. It has sent a message that you can beat a woman almost to death on the street, boast about it online, deny it, blame the victim and then walk free. Once again women around the country are left feeling that their lives don't matter. Time and again we have had to hold protests, vigils and outcry against injustice in cases like this, we should not have to ask or advocate for this. The system is broken, and it is taking brave women like Natasha to bring their case to the public in order to be heard. This has to go further than just an outcry.”
(M)
Item 19: Tougher legislation in relation to non-fatal and gender-based assaults
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. R. McInerney, R. Hartigan, A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“In light of the recent sentence handed down in Natasha O’Brien’s assault case-another victim of random violence on our streets-and the righteous public concern about assault type crimes, with both victims and the people at large being let down and dumbstruck by the sentencing system in Ireland, that Clare County Council;
(1) while not seeking to fetter judicial discretion, but rather seeking to attain a tougher legislative regime, call on the Government and in particular the Minister for Justice for the firming up/toughening up of sentencing involving the offence of non-fatal assault & gender-based assault, with provision of clear policy guidelines, and;
(2) that the Clare County Council, correspond with the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions asking that an appeal of leniency of sentence be lodged in this case as a matter of urgency.”
(M)
Item 20: DPP to reconsider sentencing
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council request the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to consider re-evaluating the sentencing in the recent Natasha O'Brien / Cathal Crotty case.”
(M)
The elected members noted that a change in culture is needed for gender-based stereotypes and negative attitudes towards women. The elected members called for a workshop to be held to give them the tools and information to help end gender-based violence noting that equality cannot be achieved without dealing with the issue at hand first. The elected members noted that the sentencing guidelines are not strict enough, women are being let down by the justice system and it is a poor reflection of the Irish court system. The members noted the outcome was unjust, outrageous and embarrassing. The elected members referred to Natasha O’Brien and noted how brave she was defending someone else prior to being attacked, it was noted that on the night she did everything right but during sentencing everything was about Mr. Crotty and his rights.
Item 21: Camping Site Models
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“Due to significant shortage in tourism accommodation, I propose the roll-out of a new camping site models similar to other European countries that would create much needed overnight accommodation instantly benefiting many urban and rural communities both socially and economically throughout the county.”
(M)
John O’Malley, A/Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council’s Tourism Department are working closely with Fáilte Ireland in the creation of an accommodation toolkit for Co. Clare that supports the sustainable growth of tourist accommodation. Engagement has also taken place with the Local Enterprise Office and LEADER to establish supports and grants available to those considering setting up new facilities.
The accommodation toolkit involves researching alternative options for tourist accommodation whilst balancing the site-specific sensitivities of the landscape in various parts of the county. Motorhome / Campervan Provision, Shepherds Huts, Pods, Treehouse Accommodation, Off Grid, Aire de Service are amongst the options currently being researched in the Clare context.
The Tourism Department have consulted with Clare County Council’s
Planning Department and the County Development Plan to identify the county settlement hierarchy outlining the tiers of feasible serviced and possible non serviced locations for future development. Those considering setting up new facilities are being referred to the pre planning enquiry service and details of LEADER and Local Enterprise Office services are communicated. The key aim of this workload is in the stimulation of interest within the private and social enterprise sectors to deliver short to long term solutions to the accommodation challenges set out.
Clare’s natural landscape makes it conducive to high-quality nature-based accommodation, however, to accommodate future capacity demands, there is a need for properties or resorts of scale to be developed. To draw new investment, a targeted approach is essential, along with initiative-taking incentives and policies aimed at improving Clare's position in this sector.
A business prospectus for Co. Clare is being developed at present aimed at two target audiences, inbound investors for hotels and extensions, and to entrepreneurs for the provision of outdoor accommodation types. The aim is to offer enough information to create interest in Clare as a destination and encourage dialogue with Clare County Council. Consideration is being given as to marketing and promotion of Clare as a destination including large scale international events in the property, building and agricultural sectors.
An online Webinar Event will be scheduled for September 2024 in conjunction with Fáilte Ireland and experts in the area of Off Grid Accommodation to provide information on planning considerations particularly in highly sensitive areas including options for wastewater and water services. A site visit is also planned for participants to a high-end facility operating here in Clare which promotes sustainability and has a fully accessible Shepherds hut accommodation.
The Tourism department continue to work in collaboration with Fáilte Ireland and are exploring all options to provide additional tourist accommodation throughout the county whilst also balancing the needs of our communities led by the leave no trace initiative to protect our countryside.”
The elected members welcomed the reply from A/Director of Service, John O’Malley and noted that accommodation is very limited and other options need to be looked at. The members agreed that the planning department need to be heavily involved to provide clarity on possible restrictions. It was noted that County Clare is a tourist county and the potential for different forms of tourist accommodation are vast. The elected members welcomed the reference to sustainable accommodation and noted that funding will play a huge role in getting this project off the ground.
Item 22: Future Plans for Asylum Seekers
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy, I. Lynch, T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“We call on Minister Roderick O'Gorman to clearly outline the future plan for supporting people coming to Ireland seeking asylum, refuge and protection along with local host communities where refuge is provided.
We seek a plan and implementation strategy which is fair, equitable and sustainable.
We seek a plan which aligns with local population versus expected numbers being hosted along with assessment of resource capacity and provision and impact on the sustainable development of the community overall.
We seek a plan and implementation approach which has decision making informed by engagement with local communities and local authority support agencies.”
(M)
The elected members noted that there is a lack of communication between the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY) and communities hosting asylum seekers. The members noted how unfair and cruel it is to, without any notice, move families out of schools and communities that they have settled in. Equally the elected members noted that it is unfair on towns and villages to receive more families without any notice. The elected members noted that this can no longer continue, and future plans need to be put in place in consultation with the local authority and community groups. The elected members noted that if the current practices continue it will discourage communities engaging in the future.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted that this is an emotive issue but that as it is under the DCEDIY and not Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, the local authority have no control over it. Mr. Dowling noted that integration has worked by and large, communities have been receptive and welcoming but that is now being undermined with these current practices that are taking place. Mr. Dowling noted that this will only be solved if there is a whole of Government approach and noted that it is a difficult situation as it was inevitable that contracts were going to come to an end. Mr. Dowling assured the elected members that he will continue to highlight the issue at a national level.
Item 23: Vacant and Derelict Sites for Mixed Community Use
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“To ask that Clare County Council conduct a mapping exercise to identify key vacant and derelict sites throughout the county that could be taken into municipal ownership for mixed community use.”
(M)
Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is committed to the revitalisation of towns, Villages and rural across the County in line with the Council’s strategic objectives and those of Government. Key policy documents include the Council’s Corporate Plan (2019-2024) and the recently adopted statutory Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP) 2030, including Town Regeneration and the Government’s Vacant Homes Action Plan and CPO Activation Programme.
Cross directorate working continues to drive the revitalisation of our towns and villages through the various initiatives available at both local and national level. The Rural and Community Development Officers community engagement and capacity building role is key in working in collaboration with Elected Members, Municipal District Staff and the Property Management Unit, incorporating the Derelict sites Team and other Departments. The Town Regeneration Officer and Town Centre First provide a further focused approach towards addressing vacancy and dereliction in our Towns. Where community needs and those of Clare County Council require a property solution that could be met by acquiring a derelict or vacant property and where there are potential income streams for such projects, there are benefits to be gained for all by continuing to pursue these opportunities collaboratively.
The Vacant Homes Team has recently completed a survey of vacant properties around the County as a follow up to data contained in the Geo Directory. Over 2,000 properties have been surveyed and while the majority of these are residential, many are mixed use. The Derelict sites team are actively engaging on 260 properties around the county and further detail on this is set out in the Monthly Management report.
The coordinated efforts of Clare County Council towards supporting the social, economic, rural and physical enhancement of our Towns and Villages remains the priority focus of Clare County Council and our collaborating partners in the County and we welcome the continued support of the Elected Members in meeting our commitments in this area.”
The elected members noted that active retirement groups and other community groups are struggling to find community space or locations for their group meet ups. The members noted that this was key to ensuring viability in town centres. The members noted that it would be ideal to use vacant or derelict sites that could be brought under the Municipal District ownership and operated for mixed community use.
Item 24: Financial Assistance for Hospitality Sector
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“We call on Central Government, Oireachtas Members and related parties for directed assistance and financial support for the hospitality sector particularly small-scale catering industry whose margins have diminished due to a variety of factors.” (M)
The elected members noted that the lack of bed nights is having a knock-on effect on the hospitality sector which is already facing difficulties such as staff shortages, cost of living increases and unsocial hours. The elected members suggested solutions such as reducing the VAT rate to 9% and pro-rata this support based on turnover and continuing the rates rebate, which it was noted, was greatly welcomed by businesses. The members noted how previously the 9% VAT rate was a great support to businesses.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Services, Finance and Support Services advised the members that the Increased Cost of Business Grant has been fully paid out to all applicants. Ms. Fitzgerald noted that the second tranche of the support will be paid in the coming weeks and that the local authority’s own schemes are still in place for the coming year.
Item 25: Revised Speed Limits
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
“Ask the Physical Development Director to give a detailed brief on the process & timeline for implementing the revised speed limits as enacted under the Road Traffic Act 2024 on 17th April 2024.
Please include details of plans, if any, to conduct a full countywide speed limit review and process and timeline for same.”
(Q)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Speed limits are set through a combination of ‘default speed limits’ and ‘special' speed limits in accordance with the Roads Act 2004 (as amended). It is important to emphasise that the setting of special speed limits is solely a reserved function of the Local Authority members. The setting of special speed Limits are supported by
the Guidelines for Setting and Managing Speed Limits in Ireland.
The setting of speed limits happens at two levels. The Minister for Transport sets general default maximum speed limits known as “ordinary speed-limits” for different classes of road as defined by the Minister under statute law, and this has been enacted in the Road Traffic Act 2024.
On a more local basis local authorities as a reserve function can adopt speed limits which depart from the default national standards, and these are known as special speed limits.
The Department of Transport has now directed that the new Default Speed Limits including necessary and supporting bye-laws be in place as soon as possible.
This is to coincide with the proposed commencement dates of the default speed limits as follows: -
End of November 2024 for Rural Local Roads - Local Roads the default Speed Limit be reduced from 80 km/h to 60 km/h
First half of 2025 for National Secondary Roads - National Secondary Roads the default Speed Limit be reduced from 100km/h to 80km/h
First half of 2025 Urban Speed Limits – Urban Roads the default Speed Limit with be 30km/h
Considering the extent of the road network in county Clare which will be dealt with under the proposed default speed limits in the next 12 months (79% local roads plus 4% national secondary roads = 83%) it is not our intention at this time to conduct a full speed limit review. As each default speed limit is introduced a process of evaluating the affected roads will also be undertaken.
The Road Design Office is currently reviewing the local road network to determine if any local road would when assessed under the detailed guidance document qualify for a special speed limit which would require the members to exercise their reserved function.
It is anticipated that assessment will be completed in the next 4-6 weeks after which the members will be briefed on any proposed special speed limits in early September.
The Municipal District engineering staff, in conjunction with the Road Design Office, will then undertake the procurement and installation of the necessary poles and signs in anticipation of the November deadline for the implementation of the new default speed limit and or any special speed limits.”
Cllr. S. Talty noted that any discussion on speed raises the issue of the speed limit review. Cllr. Talty noted that in relation to the localised appropriate assessment that the standard is not appropriate in certain areas and queried if there will be a review. Cllr. Talty referred to the Speed Limit Appeals Procedure and noted that any cases he has been made aware of have been unsuccessful.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted that it is a significant change of policy and that the Minister for Transport has directed the change with a deadline of November.
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate addressed the members and noted that it is the function of the Minister to set the default speed limits and the function of the elected members to set the special speed limits. Mr. Feeney noted that due to the extent of the road network covered under local and national secondary roads that 83% of the road network will be reviewed. Mr. Feeney acknowledged the frustration of the members in relation to the Speed Limit Appeals Procedure and advised that he would brief the members on the appeals process if they so wished. Mr. Feeney noted that there are strict guidelines on the setting of speed limits.
Item 26: List of Restricted and Banned Dogs
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“In light of recent dog attacks, we the members of Clare County Council are appealing to Minister Humphries to urgently finalise the list of restricted and banned dogs in Ireland and that the American XL Bully be considered a banned breed.”
(M)
The elected members noted that no dog’s life is worth more than a human. The members noted that appropriate legislation is needed and advised that there is no register for restricted breeds in Ireland. The members stated that breeds such as the XL Bully are bred for their strength and not bred to be pets.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive advised that he was selected as a local government representative on a new Stakeholder Group on Dog Control and was meeting with Minister Humphreys this week to discuss the local authority’s role on this issue including an awareness campaign, legislation to deal with dogs already in the country and the dog warden scheme.
Item 27: Sustainability and Regeneration of Towns and Villages
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“At the outset of the new Council term and in line with objectives of our Rural Development Strategy, LECP, I call on Clare County Council members, executive and all directorates to set a priority across all strategies and initiatives towards the success, sustainability and regeneration of our towns and villages, small medium business and surrounding communities who depend on them for the future.”
(M)
Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is committed to the revitalisation of Towns and Villages across the County with our stated commitment in the strategic objectives of Clare County Council’s Corporate Plan (2019-20214) and identified through strategic Goals and Objectives identified in the Clare Rural Development Strategy 2030 and the recently adopted statutory Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP) 2030. The Renewed Strategy focuses its aims on ten Strategic Objectives, which include social enterprises, multi-service centres and digital broadband, co-operating communities under the umbrella of the Municipal Districts, managing the environment and transitioning to a low-carbon economy, and a range of infrastructure designed to drive economic growth, improve social services, protect the environment, and enhance the overall quality of life in the region. Improving the lives of those living and working in Clare’s rural communities is a priority for the Clare Rural Development Forum who are leading out on the delivery of the strategy. The LECP builds on the Rural Development Strategy recognising the huge untapped potential in rural Clare where there are strong communities with ideas and ambitions for their futures and key agencies such as the HSE, LCETB, CLDC and Clare County Council all committed through the LCDC to support the delivery of actions under the LECP.
Within Clare County Council, cross directorate working continues to drive the revitalisation of our towns and villages through the various programmes and initiatives available at both local and national level. Since 2018, under the Department’s Rural Development Investment Programme, our towns and villages in the County have benefited from over €43 million of investment across National Funding initiatives including RRDF, CLAR, Town & Village, Streetscape Enhancement Programme, Outdoor Recreation and Infrastructure Scheme, Connected Hubs and Community Recognition Funding. During the same period, a further €3.8 million has been allocated to Community Groups and organisations by the Elected Members of Clare County Council under the Clare Local Area Grant Scheme which has supported community facilities, tourism, digital connectivity, arts and culture and various events in communities that further support the social and economic fabric of our towns and villages. The Rural & Community Development Officers provide a key role in linking cross-directorate working with community engagement and capacity building, working in collaboration with Elected Members, Municipal District Staff, Climate Action Team, Integration Team, Heritage and Biodiversity Staff and the Town Centre First Team.
The Town Centre First Initiative is led by the Town Centre First Department in the Economic Development Directorate and there is considerable cross-directorate collaboration in particular with the Rural & Community Development Officers. The initiative aims to tackle vacancy, combat dereliction and breathe new life into our town centres through the formation of Town Teams to deliver an holistic, place-based approach to sustainable rural development. A Town Centre First Plan is already in place for Sixmilebridge with the Town Team focusing on delivering actions set out in this plan. The focus of the Town Centre First Department is the development of a second Town Centre First Plan for Kilrush, and also on the formation of Town Teams for Tulla, Lisdoonvarna and Clarecastle and Kilrush to ensure that a representative group is in place for each of the towns. This will assist in delivering vibrant, viable and sustainable towns and communities that are more attractive places to live, work, visit and invest in.
The role of the RCDO’s is to build the capacity of voluntary community leaders and organisations, to identify and implement projects, which will provide the county with an identifiable comparative advantage in terms of securing national funding for projects. Outside of the core DRCD funding streams, the RCDO’s also support community projects in accessing other funding streams including annual Sports Capital and Equipment Funding, and LEADER funding in association with our partner agency CLDC.
Projects supported by the RCDO’s are aligned to the objectives of the LECP (Local Economic and Community Plan) and the Clare Rural Development Strategy. This work is underpinned by engagement that is based on established community development principles and practices.
In addition, the RCDO’s work with the Elected Members and with each of the four MD offices, providing a crucial link between local communities and the local authority. The RCDO’s current work program has a county wide focus across the four MD’s in terms of project development and funding.
Where local communities require additional long term sustainable community development supports, albeit in, group restructuring and governance, inclusivity, succession planning and project development, the RCDO’s provide significant support and guidance. Among the locations currently being supported by the RCDO’s at this level include for example Crusheen, Scariff/Tuamgraney, Killaloe, Tulla, Ennis West, Doora, Bunratty, Parteen, Shannon, Moy, Liscannor, Bellharbour, Kilkee, Miltown Malbay, Doonbeg and Labasheeda.
In addition to the cross-directorate working within the local authority, the Council continues to work with all local stakeholders in the County to bring added value to projects and initiatives which seek to revitalise our towns and villages. The Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) as a statutory committee of Clare County Council provides a forum for collaborative working with agencies and the community and voluntary sector in the County. The LCDC has administered €9.5 million in funding in the County since 2016 with a specific focus of €6.5 million of this funding on social inclusion and equality through its Programme Implementers CLDC, who work with the most disadvantaged and the hardest to reach communities and individuals under the SICAP programme. A further €3 million in funding was delivered across communities during the same period under the Community Enhancement Programme, Healthy Ireland, amongst other community development and engagement initiatives under the LCDC whose role is to co-ordinate, plan, and oversee local and community development funding and achieve a more strategic, joined-up approach to local and community development activity in the County.
The coordinated efforts of Clare County Council towards supporting the social, economic, rural and physical enhancement of our Towns and Villages remains the priority focus of Clare County Council and our collaborating partners in the County and we welcome the continued support of the Elected Members in meeting our commitments in this area.”
The elected members noted that in the last five years there was major investment in the Tourism sector, and they would like to see the same appetite to be directed towards town and village regeneration. It was noted by the members that towns and villages are the last frontier for rural life and accessing resources is the biggest challenge. The members queried what area is directly responsible for town and village regeneration. The elected members acknowledged that the lack of infrastructure is holding up progress and that it should be a big focus for the local authority but equally towns and villages with the infrastructure ready should be progressed as a matter of priority.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive replied to the query of who is responsible for town and village regeneration and noted that it is a cross-directorate responsibility. Mr. Dowling noted that the Senior Executive Officer of each Municipal Directorate is responsible to ensure that towns and villages in their district are thriving.
Item 28: Ash Dieback Disease
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on Clare County Council to outline what plans are in place to deal with roadside Ash Trees that have suffered from ash dieback disease and will inevitably lead to major issues during any storms that may occur during the coming winter”.
(M)
Seán Lenihan , Senior Engineer, Ennis Municipal District replied as follows:
“Municipal District Staff throughout the County are very mindful of the risks relating to roadside trees in the public domain affected by ash dieback disease among other things and routinely carry out tree surveys to assist in the identity of same. Inspections are regularly carried out by our own staff and within Ennis MD for example, the Council has developed an App to assist us with the inspection, recording and correct maintenance of trees. If necessary, expert Arborists are procured to assess and recommend the correct course of intervention that may be required.
Landowners are reminded of their statutory obligation under Section 70 of the Roads Act to ensure that any roadside trees/hedges within their lands do not present a danger to the public. All MD Offices would welcome a call from any member of the public who may have a query or concern in a particular location. If in an area of public charge, we will deal with the matter accordingly otherwise we can offer advice to the landowner concerned.
The Elected Members assistance with reminding the public of their responsibilities in this regard would be greatly appreciated. We can also consider the possibility of an information notice issuing in print and social media channels with a view to raising awareness of this important matter throughout the County.”
The elected members noted that a commonsense approach must be taken in the instance of dangerous trees that are suffering from ash dieback disease. The members noted that landowners need to be aware of their responsibility but equally where they need assistance due to overhead wires or traffic concerns the local authority should assist. It was also noted that there is a financial burden tied to getting these trees removed.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive acknowledged the issues faced by landowners but noted that a lot of these trees are on private land. As it is a local issue, Mr. Dowling advised the members to contact the Senior Executive Officer in the Municipal Districts and they will make personnel available to make the road safe. Mr. Dowling noted that the priority has to be health and safety.
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Cooney, seconded by J. Garrihy and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30 p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 29: Survey of Zoned Residential Publicly Owned Sites
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy
“Given the multifaceted approach required to address the housing crisis in Ireland, I am calling on Clare County Council to survey its zoned residential publicly owned sites or available to purchase in villages and towns with the view to providing all services including pre-planning, water & wastewater, electricity and broadband. These sites could then be divided into single sites and resold at cost to individuals, couples and families to build their own home as primary residence for minimum of 10 years.”
(M)
Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning and Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is continually reviewing options for development of lands in our own ownership on a cross-directorate basis to understand any limitations to development and identify solutions to any constraints as they present. For example, where any properties are acquired compulsorily under the Derelict Sites Act, the potential for use as social housing is assessed and in the past year, three such properties have transferred to the Housing Department for re-development.
Over the coming months the Planning Department will be preparing a ‘Two Year Progress Report on the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029’. This report will include Core Strategy Monitoring, where all planning applications permitted including those within towns and villages and those on residential zoned lands will be assessed. This monitoring will provide information in relation to the availability of zoned lands for development for the remaining 4 years of the development plan cycle. It will also provide information on where the greatest demand for development is located. It is also anticipated that in the coming weeks/months Uisce Eireann will complete their updated Capital Investment Plan 2025-2030. The information cont
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback