Minutes of September 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of September 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Minutes of September Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 9th September 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, D. Griffin, D. McGettigan, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Mr. Steve Smith, Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Bernadette Haugh, A/Director of Service, Rural Development
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Mr. John O’Malley, A/Director of Tourism Development
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. T. O’Brien, T. Mulcahy, M. Howard, R. Hartigan.
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan presided.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr A. O’Callaghan welcomed the members and praised the Clare Senior Hurling Team for the joy given to the county and congratulated Clare County Council for the work on providing the free homecoming event on the Fair Green, Ennis.
The Cathaoirleach also noted the efforts of the Little Blue Heroes fundraiser event by An Garda Siochana, on the 24th to 26
th
September from Thurles to Kilkee via Tulla and Ennis and urged support from the people of Clare.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy were extended to the following:
The Deely Family, on the death of Mary Deely, RIP.
The Whelan and Corbett Families, on the death of Pauline Whelan, RIP.
The O’Callaghan Family, on the death of Kathleen O’Callaghan, RIP.
The Dunne Family, on the death of Phyllis Dunne, RIP.
The Jennings Family, on the death of Patrick Desmond Jennings, RIP.
Cllr. P. Daly added his sympathies for Martin Linnane and noted he will be a huge loss the town.
The Chief Executive, Pat Dowling congratulated Director of Service Anne Haugh on the occasion of retirement following 35 years of dedicated public service. He acknowledged Anne’s contribution to local authorities, of which most of her time was spent in Clare County Council and wished her well on her retirement.
Mr Dowling also noted and congratulated Siobhan McNulty on her appointment as Director of Service and wished her well and advised that an internal acting Director of Service competition is to be run in the coming weeks.
Mr Dowling also welcomed Claire Gallagher, Communications Officer to Clare County Council and wished her well in the role.
The members acknowledged Anne Haugh’s contribution to Clare and congratulated Siobhan Mc Nulty and Claire Gallagher on their new appointments.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the July Meeting of Clare County Council held on 8
th
July 2024 be adopted and signed.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Clare County Council held on 26
th
July 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 11
th
July 2024, from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, in relation to the National Planning Framework.
Correspondence dated 4
th
July 2024, from the House of the Oireachtas, in relation to Community and Local Improvement Schemes.
Correspondence dated 2
nd
August 2024, from the Office of the Minister of Justice, in relation to the attack on Natasha O’Brien and subsequent court proceedings.
Correspondence dated 4
th
July 2024, from the Minister for Transport, in relation to road maintenance and emergency funding for Clare.
Correspondence dated 12
th
July 2024, from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, in relation to social housing acquisitions.
Correspondence dated 10
th
July 2024, from Cathal Crowe TD, in relation to financial support for the hospitality sector.
Correspondence dated 3
rd
July 2024, from Lim Nagle, IFA, in relation to support for farmers.
Acknowledgement dated 11
th
July 2024, from the Office of the Taoiseach, in relation to a tougher legislative regime following the attack on Natasha O’Brien.
Acknowledgement dated 11
th
July 2024, from the Office of the Taoiseach, in relation to financial support for the hospitality sector.
Acknowledgement dated 10
th
July 2024, from Michael McNamara TD, in relation to financial support for the hospitality sector.
Acknowledgement dated 11
th
July 2024, from the Office of the Minister for Rural and Community Development, in relation to restricted and banned breeds of dogs.
Resolution dated 9
th
August 2024, from Wexford County Council, in relation to gender-based violence.
Elected Member 2024 Training Programme September to November 2024 by AILG.
Conference titled ‘A Practical Guide to Budget 2025’ being held in McKevitts Hotel, Carlingford on 11
th
to 13
th
October 2024 by Celtic Conferences.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 15 May, 2024 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Annual General Meeting held on the 26 June, 2024 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’OGroman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 24 May, 2024 be noted.”
d. Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Annual General Meeting held on the 25 June, 2024 be noted.”
e. Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 7 May, 2024 be noted.”
f. Ar moladh Cllr. D. Gould Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 24 May, 2024 be noted.”
g. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Annual General Meeting held on the 1 July, 2024 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 6 March, 2024 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
That the minutes of the meeting held on 1
st
July, 2024 be noted.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
The members extended their best wishes on the retirement of Anne Haugh, Director of Service.
The members welcomed the appointment of Siobhan McNulty as Director of Service and extended their best wishes.
The members also welcomed the appointment of Claire Gallagher, as Communications Officer and extended their best wishes.
Cllr. I. Lynch referred the Physical Development update and noted his concerns on the contractor for the public lighting scheme withdrawing its services and asked for an update on the progress of their replacement.
Cllr. I. Lynch also referred to the West Clare Railway Greenway and acknowledged Anne Haugh, Director of Service, for her work done on this to date and all projects she had been involved in.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to the Physical Development update and noted that public lighting is an issue across all Municipal Districts. He also noted that Active Travel reports for Ennis are good but asked the Chief Executive for commitment to an equal spread of projects across the county. He noted his disappointment that there is no specific funding for regional and secondary roads and asked for the Director of Service to arrange a special meeting to discuss same.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Tourism Development Directorate site visits across the county and commended same. She also noted the progress of the Active Travel program in Ennis.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Planning and Economic Development update and commented on the success of the Vacant Property grant and how it is providing the opportunity for people to live and work in rural areas.
Cllr. J. Garrihy referred to the Rural Development update and welcomed the funding of €1.7million across the county for The Community Recognition Fund 2024.
Cllr. J. Garrihy also referred to the Planning and Economic Development update and noted the total of Vacant Property Refurbishment Grants had now amounted to €16million and commended same and also welcomed the progress at Doolin Pier and asked can we look at a complete masterplan for same.
Cllr. J. Crowe referred to the Physical Development update and noted his concerns on the public lighting scheme as we are approaching winter and added that it is a matter of urgency, we appoint a new contractor as soon as possible.
Cllr. M. Begley referred to the Physical Development update and noted his concerns on the public lighting scheme and how some areas are taking up to 12 months for repairs and also commented that repairs to footpaths in Clonlara have taken in excess of 6 months at this stage.
Cllr. D. Griffin referred to the Social Development Directorate update and noted his concerns regarding the increase in refusal rates from clients availing of Emergency Accommodation and asked for further background analysis that supports same.
Cllr. D. Griffin also referred to the Planning and Economic Development update and welcomed the health checks in Tulla and Lisdoonvarna and asked for them to be rolled out across the county.
Cllr. P. Burke referred to the Physical Development update and noted his concerns on the public lighting scheme and added that Mountshannon have 5 lights in the village out of order for an extended period of time.
Cllr. P. Burke also referred to the Physical Development update in reference to the Killaloe Bridge and Bypass Upgrade works and asked can residents in the estate and surrounding area be engaged with more regarding works, and more allowances should be given with regards to safety.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and noted in relation to issues around the estate in Killaloe, that to his understanding measures had been put into place regarding safety. Mr Dowling also added that Public Lighting needs to be looked at seriously and a detailed report is required on lighting which is defective across the county. Mr Dowling also commented on the €16million already allocated in Vacant Property grants and how the initiative had been very successful, and how Clare County Council currently has the 6
th
highest approval rate in Ireland, and we intend to continue to approve as many applications as reasonably possible going forward.
Item 8: Disposal of land at Violet Hill, O’Shea’s Acres, Broadford, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic & Planning Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 0.02 hectares at Violet Hill, O’Shea’s Acres, Broadford, Co. subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 23
rd
July 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Violet Hill, O’Shea’s Acres, Broadford, Co. subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 23
rd
July 2024.”
Item 9: Disposal of property at Cloonanaha, Inagh, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of a property at Cloonanaha, Inagh, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at Cloonanaha, Inagh, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2024.”
Item 10: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed residential development comprising of demolition of derelict house and construction of a Group home with car parking, boundary treatment and associated site works and services at Cloughleigh Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and construction of a three-bedroom infill bungalow between houses 26 and 28 with car parking, boundary treatment and associated site works and services at 27 Shallee Drive, Ennis, Co. Clare.
Chief Executive Report dated 16
th
August, 2024 from Gareth Ruane, Senior Executive Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The reports outline details of proposed development comprising of demolition of derelict house and construction of a Group home with car parking, boundary treatment and associated site works and services at Cloughleigh Road, Ennis, Co. Clare.
Construction of a three-bedroom infill bungalow between houses 26 and 28 with car parking, boundary treatment and associated site works and services at 27 Shallee Drive, Ennis, Co. Clare.
It is noted that the proposed development will be developed for age-friendly social housing and associated services.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
Item 11: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development comprising of the construction of a new housing estate development consisting of 12 no. residential units at Back Road, Kilrush, Co. Clare.
Chief Executive Report dated 31
st
July, 2024 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The reports outline details of proposed development comprising of:
Two no. 1-bedroom, single storey houses, (i.e. House Type A).
Two no. 2-bedroom, single storey houses, (i.e. House Type B).
Eight no. 2-bedroom two storey houses, (i.e. House Type C)
16 ancillary car parking spaces within the development.
The construction of pedestrian access point to the site.
New vehicular access point to the site.
Connection to main sewer and watermain.
Alterations to ground level to accommodate the development.
Surface water management will include attenuation and discharge to surface water network.
All ancillary site works to include boundary and landscaping works.
Councillor Lynch also commended the Housing department on work done to alleviate initial concerns with the proposal.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Item 12: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development comprising of 16 no. residential units including the refurbishment and demolition of existing residential and commercial units at Moore Street, Kilrush, Co. Clare.
Chief Executive Report dated 29
th
August 2024 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The reports outline details of proposed development comprising of:
The demolition of two existing dwellings, and part demolition of an existing commercial unit, sheds and outbuildings.
The construction of 16 no. new residential units in four separate blocks comprising of:
Eight no. 1 bed units
Three no. 2 bed units,
Five no. 3 bed units,
Ancillary car parking spaces and bin stores within the development.
Alterations to existing buildings retaining the existing street facade.
Varied boundary treatments and landscaping works.
Surface water management will include hydrocarbon interceptor and soakway.
All ancillary site works.
The Chief Executive’s report was considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended.
Cllr. R. McInerney added that both developments are welcomed and did originally have concerns in relation to further development on the ‘Back Road’ site, but after attending a workshop on same, welcomed the negotiations and the proposed development.
Councillor Ian Lynch commented that he agreed with the proposal based on the addition of 4 further parking spaces to the original application.
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
It was agreed to modify the proposal to provide for four additional car parking spaces within it on the western side.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted that the purpose of Part VIII planning applications is to be able to control the delivery of housing for Clare. He also confirmed the Part VIII application for Moore Street, Kilrush, Co. Clare, did in fact include the four additional spaces and that the report be modified to show same and thanked the elected members for their support.
Item 13: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed extension to the existing burial ground.
Chief Executive Report dated 3
rd
September 2024 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The reports outline details of proposed extension comprising of:
C.167 double plots and 10 single plots,
Access road improvements including turning bays,
Footpaths,
Drainage,
Tarmacadam finish to existing parking areas,
2 no. Columbarium Walls and Shrine,
Associated site works.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Item 14: Local Property Tax (Local Adjustment Factor).
The Chief Executives report on Local Property Tax (Local Adjustment Factor) which was circulated separately to the members, provides the information as required by regulation to this Council relevant to the decision-making process.
Elected Members must consider the following factors in coming to their decision:
The financial position of Clare County Council.
This Councils estimation of the income it will receive and the expenditure it will incur in the period for which the varied rate is to have effect i.e., the years 2025-2029.
The financial effect of the varied rate on both the Council and the property owner and
Feedback from the public consultation
In summary, the report recommended that this Council resolves to maintain the Clare County Council 2024 LPT rate for the term of the Council 2025-2029. This will secure €58million in funding for the operational needs of this Council and bring certainty for this Council to its budget process. These funds are critical to retaining discretionary budget areas but also, the level of funding generated locally by adopting this Local Adjustment Factor is acknowledged by Central Government when this Council is submitting other funding requests. This was clear in our Shannon Heritage due diligence process. I am recommending a multi-year decision from Council Members. As with all reserved functions, should Members decide to amend their LAF decision during the term of five years, this can be done in accordance with the provisions of the Local Authority and the processes as outlined in regulations and guidance. Based on the impact on current services of this €1.5m annually and the corresponding impact on property owners as outlined, it is recommended to Members to retain for the term of this Council 2025-2029 the Local Property Tax (LPT) Local Adjustment Factor (LAF +15%) at the same level as the previous five years 2020-2024. This will bring certainty to Clare property owners in a time of significant economic and rising costs as householders will be paying the same or lower rate as 2020 to 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney
“That in accordance with the provisions of Section 20 of the Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012 (as amended) to include the Local property Tax (Local Adjustment Factor) Regulations 2022, that the basic rate of local property tax should stand retained varied upwards by 15 per cent for the period
1 November 2024 to 31 October 2029 (multi-annual decision),
in respect of relevant residential properties situated in the administrative area of Clare County Council.”
Cllr. D. McGettigan proposed a reduction back to the base rate of Local Property Tax and was this seconded by Cllr. T. Guilfoyle.
A vote was taken on the Chief Executives Report as presented to the members, which was proposed by Cllr. M. Shannon and seconded by Cllr. J Cooney and resulted as follows:
In favour:
Cllrs. P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
(24)
Against:
Cllrs. T. Guilfoyle, D. McGettigan.
(2)
Abstained:
Nil.
Not Present:
Cllrs. T. O’Brien, T. Mulcahy.
(2)
The Cathaoirleach declared the vote was carried and that the basic rate of local property tax should stand retained varied upwards by 15 per cent for the period 1 November 2024 to 31 October 2029 (multi-annual decision), in respect of relevant residential properties situated in the administrative area of Clare County Council.”
Item 15: Audit Committee 2024-2029
Report dated 30
th
August, 2024 from P. Dowling, Chief Executive was circulated with the agenda. The report states that the nomination of members was considered by the Corporate Policy Group and the following external members are recommended for appointment:
Mr. Jimmy Browne
Mr. John Kilroy
Ms. Brid Darcy
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
Item 16: 2024 Council Resolution for Borrowing
Report dated 30
th
August, 2024 from Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare County Council Section 135 Capital programme 2024-2026 as presented to the Council in November 2023 outlined €725million in expenditure on developing and implementing capital infrastructure projects in the coming years. This report identified the forecasted funding sources for these projects which includes Clare County Council match funding or own funding by long term loan finance.
The report notes that to previous council meetings, the council of the day did approve under Section 66 & 106 of the Local Government Act 2001 €50+million in long term finance both annuity and bridge finance subject to Ministerial approval.
The reports states in order to proceed to the next stage of this process, to progress the projects and drawdown the required loan funding this council is now requested to reaffirm the loan approvals previous in place as outlined below under Section 106 Local Government Act 2001.
The following table sets out the projects:
Project Title
Project Description
Total Project Value
Grant Finance Approved
Loan Finance required.
Vandeleur Walled Garden Café Development- Phase 2
Completion and fit out of the remaining wing of the stable block at Vandeleur Walled Garden and Visitor Centre to house a Bistro within the Centre.
Status- Under Construction, provision has been made in the Councils Tourism Revenue Budget.
€1.5m
€1.5m
Inis Cealtra phase 1
Purchase of the Old Rectory and 25% RRDF phase 1 funding contribution from CCC
Status- Property Purchased and under renovation. provision has been made in the Councils Tourism Revenue Budget.
€7.2m
€4.2m
€3m
Project Title
Project Description
Total Project Value
Grant Finance Approved
Loan Finance required.
Ennis URDF Public Realm match Funding- phase 2
25% URDF phase 2 funding contribution from CCC. Towards O'Connell Square, High Street, O’Connell Street , Barrack Square and Old Barrack Street to deliver a higher-quality civic space incorporating seating and planting.
Status- Under Construction, provision has been made in the councils revenue budget.
€11.7m
€8.7m
€3m
Transportation Public Realm and Car Parking .
Development of 300+ car park facilities in Ennis.
Status- Work in Progress, subject to a business case and future budget provision.
€3.5m
€3m
Affordable Housing Delivery
Bridge Finance
Provide Bridging Finance to advance the delivery of Affordable Housing Schemes. This finance is a bridge finance working capital until such time as the units are sold.
Status- Work in Progress.
€15m
Land
Bridge Finance
to acquire Land banks for Economic and Housing developments
Provide Bridging Finance to CCC or its subsidiary to purchase land banks for the delivery of housing and/or economic development. This finance is bridge finance working capital until such time as the land is development.
Status- Work in Progress.
€5m
Project Title
Project Description
Total Project Value
Grant Finance Approved
Loan Finance required.
Ennis 2040 Strategic Development
Planned works programmed for the Ennis 2040 (Strategic Development) Strategy. This finance is bridge finance working capital where the total finance will over an investment period provide a return to this council .
Status- Work in Progress.
€10m
€5m drawn down
€5m
Waste Management and ACM remediation.
The remediation of seven sites in West Clare containing asbestos materials. Detailed design complete, review of statutory consent requirements ongoing.
Status- Work in Progress provision has been made in the council’s revenue budget.
€10m
€10m
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
Item 17: Interim Financial Report to 30 June, 2024.
Financial Report for half year to 30
th
June, 2024 was circulated with the agenda. The report set out a financial review of the Council’s income and expenditure account for the first six months of 2024, in both the day-to-day operational services and capital infrastructure delivery. The members noted the report as presented having been proposed by Cllr. C Colleran Molloy seconded by Cllr. A O’Callaghan and agreed by the members present.
Director Of Finance Noeleen Fitzgerald commented that it was a positive result in retaining the full allowance of LPT as we head into the Draft Budget for 2025.
Item 18: Nomination to the Board of the Clare Local Development Company to replace Cllr. J. Garrihy
“That Cllr. T. Mulcahy be appointed to the Board of the Clare Local Development Company.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
Item 19: Nomination to the Clare Sports Partnership Committee
“That Cllr. D. Griffin be appointed to the Clare Sports Partnership Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. J. Garrihy be appointed to the Clare Sports Partnership Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
Item 20: Draft Strategic Policy Scheme
Report dated 2
nd
September 2024 from A. Reynolds, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services was circulated to the members. The report states that at the July Council meeting the members adopted a Draft SPC Scheme. Submissions on the draft scheme were invited through the local media and via the Council’s online engagement platform, “have your say”. Details of the ten submissions received were set out in a schedule attached to the report. The report outlined the recommendations made by the Corporate Policy Group at its meeting on the 28
th
of August 2024.
The report states that the draft scheme has been amended to incorporate the recommendations of the Corporate Policy Group and the following decisions are required to be made by the Council:
Adoption of the revised Draft SPC Scheme
Confirmation of the Chairs of the individual S.P.C.s and approval of the payment of an allowance of €6,000 to each chair.
Allocation of each elected member to a particular S.P.C.
Once the scheme has been adopted nominations will be sought from the various sectors and a report outlining details of the nominees will be circulated to the members in due course.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
P. Dowling, Chief Executive thanked the members for ratifying the scheme and confirmed we will proceed to contact the nominating bodies once one SPC is finalised, and we can then convene the meetings.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle thanked the Chief Executive for listening to the concerns of the members and also thanked Cllrs. D. McGettigan and T. O’Brien on supporting the number of trade union representatives. He also noted the Tourism SPC is a great addition to the council.
Item 21: Hidden Disability Sunflower Presentation
The presentation was deferred.
Item 22: Road Markings.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“In the interest of road safety, I call on Clare County Council to explore and implement an enhanced program of road lining and refreshing of fading markings throughout all national primary, secondary and local road networks in the county with particular focus on junction definition and enhancement, additional on road directions including installation of directional arrows at entrances and exits to towns and villages and around heavily trafficked tourist areas.”
(M)
John Corry, A/Senior Executive Officer, West Clare Municipal District (North Clare) replied as follows
:
“Clare County Council implement a programme of road lining and refreshing of road markings as part of our annual Schedule of Municipal District Works. Additional works can be considered in consultation with the elected members and local communities subject to available resources. An example of where this has worked effectively in 2024 is as part of the North Clare Integrated Transport and Traffic Plan where there has been detailed consultation between the Council, local communities and stakeholders resulting in effective road lining and marking in heavily trafficked tourist areas. In light of similar issues across the County there is significant merit in the Roads Authority undertaking a coherent and comprehensive County-wide approach to the planning, provision and funding of road-lining and signage across Clare”.
The elected members thanked John Corry for his reply and noted they welcome a new enhanced scheme with simpler road marking measures, especially in high tourism areas of the county. The members also noted that all old signage across the county should be removed. They also asked could Clare County Council review the diversion situations around the Cratloe and Sixmilebridge junctions of the N18 during times of roadworks.
The elected members also noted the need for a Safety Committee, as Municipal District meetings are overrun with road issues.
Item 23: Proposal for New Veterinary School in the Midwest
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“I move that Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Further and Higher Education to support the application by the University of Limerick and immediately establish a new Veterinary School in the Mid-West in order to address the chronic shortage of college places for students wishing study veterinary and avoid them having to go abroad to study and to ensure that we have enough vets going forward to ensure our food security, animal welfare and support our farmers.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that they support the opening of a Veterinary School in the University of Limerick and called on members of the Oireachtas to back same. They also noted the cost issues students have when travelling to Dublin or further afield to be trained in veterinary practices, and once trained not returning to the West of Ireland.
Item 24: Maintenance of School Signage.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I call on Clare County Council to improve the maintenance of all school signage throughout the school year of 24/25.There are three electronic types of signage, which need maintenance and replacement on an ongoing basis.
We need a centralised logging system reporting faults on all signage for teachers, parents and members of the public. Text number or email address should be well publicised.”
(M)
Collette Costello, A/Senior Executive Officer, West Clare Municipal District (Kilrush Area) replied as follows:
“Clare County Council will be putting in place a reporting mechanism on the Council website under Online Services where members of the public, schools, or any person who wishes to report a fault can report the relevant details, similar to the “report a broken streetlight” system. This will ensure that the repairs are reported, recorded and resolved accordingly by the relevant authority”.
The elected members welcomed the replies and new system proposed. The elected members noted that they would like to see minor faults repaired with 7 days and larger ones within 14 days, and while the electronic LED signs are effective, they are affected by our climate in County Clare, and we need a process in place to remedy these faults speedily.
Item 25: Department Refusal of Zoning of Lands
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Department of Local Government to review its refusal of proposed zoning of lands agreed during the County Development Plan discussions by both the elected members and management of Clare County Council, in prime locations, in Ennis and other towns and villages.”
(M)
The elected members noted that after a number of workshops being held to discuss proposed zoning of lands within the county, up to 80% were refused. Ennis Municipal District has little land zoned for housing and there is no supply of housing locally, with currently 385 developments in judicial review. The elected members called for a review of refused lands from the last Development Plan.
The elected members also noted that some of the land which had been fought for in 2017, after 12 months of meetings, had been taken back in 2023, and agreed that an appeals process for local authorities is required, and decisions should be based on the local knowledge provided from planners and elected members.
Item 26: Biodiversity Study on River Fergus
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. McGettigan agus glacadh leis
“The River Fergus winds its way down through the North Clare MD and into the Shannon Estuary in the West Clare MD. The river's banks and surrounds play a major role in our county's flood defences. Alongside that serious function, it also plays a massive role in our county's wildlife and biodiversity.
To enable the Clare County Council to protect these key functions, I request that the Clare County Council carry out a Biodiversity Study and create an Action Plan on the Corrovorrin River (Fergus Minor) from the former West Clare metal bridge (adjacent to Aughanteeroe Estate) downstream to its confluence with the Fergus River at the railway metal bridge (adjacent to Knox's Bridge) in order to protect the existing undeveloped riverside corridor for biodiversity and nature-based flood solutions.”
(M)
Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Corrovorrin River (EPA Name: Fortfergus) plays a vital role in the overall water quality of the River Fergus. The river is monitored by the EPA with the latest River Water Quality results nearest the Gort Road returning a O value of 04 which equates to "Good" status under the Water Framework Directive indicating that this stretch of river is unpolluted and at satisfactory condition. Further downstream at the Tulia Road monitoring station it drops to a 03-4 which indicates a moderate Water Framework Directive Status. To protect the river corridor and its function as both a flood plain for the Corrovorrin River and its function as a riparian zone, the undeveloped riverside corridor has been zoned as "Buffer Space" from Kevin Barry's Avenue to the confluence with the Fergus in the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029.
Buffer spaces are intended to provide a buffer of undeveloped land for the conservation of biodiversity, visual amenity, or green space. Buffer spaces may include natural features such as floodplains, riparian zones, turloughs, valuable biodiversity areas including designated sites, amenity areas, woodlands, hedgerows, green spaces, and archaeological features. A riparian buffer zone is a strip of vegetated land running parallel to the river which acts as a protection strip for the river. This strip must be large enough to protect the ecological integrity of the river and the riparian zone, but can incorporate amenity uses provided it is done sensitively with minimal impact on the water and riparian environment. The remainder of the riparian zone from Dulick to Kevin Barry Avenue has been zoned as Open Space which also influences the nature of potential development which can be accommodated there. It is intended that lands zoned 'open space' will be retained as undeveloped open space, mainly for passive open space related activities.
It is also noted that this stretch of the Corrovorrin River is completely within Flood Zone A which will influence the potential for future development along this corridor. Building climate change resilience into the County Development Plan was a central consideration to both the zoning of lands and the development of objectives for economic growth. All land use zonings were assessed from a flood risk and environmental perspective, to ensure resilience and adaptation were accounted for throughout. This led to the inclusion of significant areas of buffer zone which will be protected due to their location adjacent to river channels, the presence of important wildlife corridors or their importance for biodiversity.
As funding opportunities arise, the Planning Authority will seek to prepare Biodiversity Studies and Action Plans for key sites across the County, including Ennis. Given the importance of the Corrovorrin River this will be added as one of the sites that can potentially be studied in due course as funding allows.”
The elected members thanked Helen Quinn for her reply and welcomed the fact that open spaces will be protected.
Item 27: Operational Status of all Clare based Coast Guard Units.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Prior to Clare County Council extending the lease and approving an expansion of the facility to the OPW for Kilkee Coast Guard, that Clare County Council request the Irish Coast Guard Operations Management Team attend a meeting to present the current operational status of all Clare based Coast Guard Units, and the future operational plans and improvements any developments will yield.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that the Irish Coast Guard provide and essential service and that a meeting represents the prime opportunity for them to update Clare County Council on the services and locations in the county, and any planned future developments.
Item 28: Abandoned Vehicles
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Cooney agus glacadh leis
“That the Environmental Department of Clare County Council liaise with an Gardaí Siochána in formulating an effective strategy in how to deal with the many abandoned vehicles that are strewn across carparks, roads and public spaces throughout Clare.”
(M)
Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate, replied as follows:
“Clare County Council through their community wardens and enforcement section actively respond to all reports of abandoned vehicles. We are continually liaising with An Garda Siochana to deal with this issue.
It is important to note that abandoned vehicles come under both An Garda Siochana and the local authority depending on the particular circumstances.
The general public can report an abandoned vehicle on the Council website under the “Report it” link
Abandoned vehicles | Enforcement | Environment | Services | Clare County Council (clarecoco.ie)
This link also provides information on the procedures involved in reporting and dealing with abandoned vehicles.
In 2024 we have received 122 complaints to date regarding abandoned vehicles of which only 41 vehicles were deemed to be actually abandoned and they have been dealt with by our enforcement team.
The elected members thanked Cyril Feeny for his reply and agreed that abandoned vehicles are a huge nuisance for residents and communities across the county and that a pro-active approach is needed to tackle same. They also asked clarification on what is deemed an abandoned vehicle.
Cyril Feeny, Senior Engineer, confirmed that abandoned vehicles can be reported online and will be actioned by Clare County Council Community Wardens. He also highlighted that vehicles which have no tax or insurance are an issue for An Garda Siochana, not Clare County Council, as well as vehicles which are parked on private land or estates, which are not in the charge of the local authority.”
Item 29: Croi Conaithe Serviced Sites Scheme.
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“We call on Minister Darragh O'Brien & government to provide additional funding to local authorities for the purchase of suitable sites in towns and villages for the purpose of the delivering housing projects under the Croi Conaithe serviced sites initiative and to examining enhanced supports under this scheme to add to the viability and affordability for qualifying people building their own homes and additionally for the purpose of making housing available for rightsizing/ people wishing to downsize. We request the reply outlines additional state supports possible to access to qualifying individuals for the Croi Conaithe Serviced Sites scheme as it is currently.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that there is a need in the county for an increase in housing stock and a requirement for different solutions to deliver same and noted that houses suitable for first time buyers can have a huge impact on communities in small towns and villages. This may include the availability of serviced sites ready for development with the possibility of pre-planning approval.
They also noted that there is a need for properties for older people wishing to downsize, and that the potential of ‘retirement’ village style properties could provide this.
The elected members agreed that this is a rural focused idea and is a transformative proposal to develop and revitalise our towns and villages.
Item 30:
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council conduct a report on industrial units in the county. This process would include consulting with estate agents and business park management to include:
Current Occupancy
Current Availability
Zoned Industrial Land
Current Demand
Future Demand
With the view to recognising and formulating a strategy from a planning perspective to address any shortfall identified.”
(M)
Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The existing Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 recognises the importance of supporting economic and employment generation within the county and to that end, the plan has zoned 583 hectares of land for industrial and enterprise uses reflecting the different developmental contexts and having regard to the organic nature of enterprise creation within the county. The plan also contains a dedicated chapter (Chapter 6) relating to Economic Development and sets out an array of policies and objectives to support the delivery of economic and employment generating uses across the county.
Over the coming months, the Planning Department will be preparing a "Two Year Progress Report on the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029". This report will include a review on the delivery of development on zoned lands and under specific objectives set out, including those in Chapter 6. This monitoring will provide information in relation to the availability of zoned lands for development for the remaining 4 years of the development plan cycle. It will also provide information on where the greatest demand for development is located. This report will be circulated to the members.
Of interest and subsequent to the making of the 2023-2029 plan, the new Planning and Development Bill currently under review (anticipated for enactment in 2024), sets out a new requirement for the preparation of an 'Economic Development Strategy' for each local authority which would in turn be incorporated in new Development Plans.
As part of the preparation of such a strategy, a baseline assessment of available, occupied or vacant enterprise space will need to be completed together with an assessment of available zoned land to accommodate particular purposes, such as commercial, industrial and other uses. The preparation of these enterprise and employment land assessments will require a range of skills and expertise to deliver a strong and reliable evidence base for the zoning of land for employment purposes which will require a strong partnership approach with key stakeholders and elected members.
In anticipation of this new statutory requirement, the Planning Authority will commence a scoping exercise ahead of the preparation of the Economic Development Strategy and will incorporate an assessment of the information requested in this motion.”
The elected members thanked Helen Quinn for her reply and noted that there is currently 583 hectares in County Clare zoned for industrial and enterprise use. The members also noted that there is a need to review occupied and vacant properties and to discuss with the public, estate agents, and the Local Enterprise Office to ascertain same, in order to have a plan prepared to grow these opportunities in the future.
The elected members noted that these facilities are required to attract indigenous and international business to the county and that there is a requirement for a strategic document to help avail of the information and data that is available and to consider consultation with the appropriate agencies.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, advised that there are proposed workshops scheduled for 8
th
October 2024, covering the roads program, investment, speed limits and public lighting, and asked the elected members to contact him with any further items for the agenda.
Item 31: Laws to Protect Children in the Purchase of Electronic Devices.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“To call on government to introduce strict laws that will protect our children when purchasing any electronic devices.”
(M)
The elected members noted that there has become a reliance on electronic devices for children and they are not capable of understanding the impact of their use. He also highlighted the risks of access to harmful materials being viewed by children and noted that laws need to be brought in to protect children from adult content.
The elected members agreed that laws are required for retailers of devices but also that stricter laws are required within the app companies themselves. They also commented on the difficulty of governing such within the confines of people homes but agreed that the government needs to step in to address same.
Item 32: Cliffs of Moher Walk
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council recognise that the Cliffs of Moher Coastal Walk has become integral to the tourism product of County Clare & is indistinguishable from the Cliffs of Moher Visitor Experience. In light of recent developments regarding the trail, we ask the Chief Executive to urgently engage with Clare Local Development Company to discuss the future management of the walk.”
(M)
John O’Malley, Acting Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Stretching from the official trail heads between Doolin Community Centre and Liscannor Football Field and along the world-famous Cliffs of Moher, the 18km Cliffs of Moher Coastal Walk has become firmly established as one of the Ireland's most popular walking trails since its launch in 2013.
Clare Local Development Company (CLDC) has administered the 'Walks Scheme' on behalf of the Department of Rural & Community Development. As part of this Walks Scheme, and in association with the landowners participating in the scheme, the Grade 5 (Difficult) walking trail has become integral to the tourism product of County Clare.
The opening of the Coastal Walk to the public by CLDC in 2013 occurred in partnership with and through the participation of landowners, Clare County Council, Cliffs of Moher Experience and relevant State Agencies. It has been hugely successful in attracting visitors who stay longer and spend more in the towns and villages in Clare, thus helping to sustain local jobs and the wider economy.
Clare County Council, CLDC, Failte Ireland, the Department of Rural & Community Development and the Cliffs of Moher Experience are working with landowners and the community in a planned and managed way to pave a new sustainable future for the Coastal Walk. In December 2023, TOBIN (Consulting Engineers) was appointed to develop a Management Plan for the Coastal Walk, which will be sympathetic to the environment, meet the needs of the host community and address the issue of safety for the public users of the Coastal Walk.
Clare County Council/Cliffs of Moher Experience, CLDC, the Department of Rural & Community Development and Failte Ireland agree that the starting point i
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback