Minutes of November 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of November 2024 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 11th November 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, J. Cooney, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, D. Griffin, D. McGettigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Mary McMahon, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, A/Director of Service, Rural Development
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. T. O’Brien, R. Hartigan.
Absent:
Cllrs. P. Burke, B. Slattery
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Lyons Family, on the death of Michael Lyons, RIP.
The Lynch Family, on the death of Theresa Lynch, RIP.
The Quirke and Burke Family, on the death of Breada Quirke, RIP.
The McLoughlin Family, on the death of Colm McLoughlin, RIP.
The Lawless Family, on the death of William “Billy” Lawless, RIP.
The McMahon Family, on the death of Rev. Fr. Joe McMahon, RIP.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the October Meeting of Clare County Council held on 14
th
October 2024 be adopted and signed.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the adjourned October Meeting of Clare County Council held on 15
th
October 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 9
th
October 2024 from the Office of the Minister of State, Alan Dillon in relation to zoning of lands.
Correspondence dated 16
th
October from Minister of State, Alan Dillon in relation to changing of place names.
Acknowledgement 18
th
October 2024 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to the Occupied Territories Bill.
Acknowledgement dated 21
st
October 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media in relation to tourism accommodation in Co. Clare.
Acknowledgement dated 24
th
October 2024 from the Office of Minister Roderic O'Gorman, T.D. in relation to childcare workers salaries.
Acknowledgement dated 18
th
October 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to roads funding.
Resolution dated 10
th
October 2024 from Donegal County Council in relation to extradition proceedings.
Resolution dated 10
th
October 2024 from Donegal County Council in relation to the hedge cutting policy.
Resolution dated 15
th
October 2024 from Fingal County Council in relation to a transient visitor tax.
Resolution dated 15
th
October 2024 from Roscommon County Council in relation to funding for a roadside tree survey.
Resolution dated 15
th
October 2024 from Roscommon County Council in relation to school transport.
Resolution dated 14
th
October 2024 from Westmeath County Council in relation to Social Personal and Health Education.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised the members that he had received correspondence from the Chief Executive, Pat Dowling advising of his intention to retire with effect from the 31
st
December 2024.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that that he would be sorry to see Mr. Dowling go and thanked him for his eight and a half years of service.
Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that Mr. Dowling will be a big loss to the organisation and wished him health and happiness in his retirement.
The elected members paid tribute to the Chief Executive noting his progressive approach to handling matters and his accessibility to the members. They stated that Mr. Dowling was always on hand to listen and offer advice to them and they outlined some of the projects that he progressed over his tenure and praised him for his vision and determination. The members noted that it was a sad day for the county, but that Mr. Dowling was leaving a strong legacy behind him.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive thanked the elected members for their kind words noting that it was a difficult decision to arrive at.
Mr. Dowling acknowledged all the local authority staff and noted that the projects mentioned by the members wouldn’t be possible if he didn’t have a good team around him. Mr. Dowling outlined the steps involved to appoint a new Chief Executive and assured the members that continuity of service will remain in the interim.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 17 July, 2024 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 7
th
October, 2024 as presented.
Item 6: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the 2024 Healthy Clare Micro Funding noting that it is a great initiative, she stated that she referred people to this programme and with over 150 referrals more resources are required to support the volume of applications.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the Offshore Wind Skills Action and acknowledged the great work being done. Cllr. McInerney suggested that this report be shared with the LCETB to plan for the future.
Cllr. McInerney thanked the finance team for their work on the Increased Cost to Business Grant, Cllr. McInerney noted that the difficulties with the scheme are evident and need to be expanded.
Cllr. McInerney welcomed the update on the Derelict Site Levy and noted the importance of getting these vacant sites back into fulltime use.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle sought an update on the Greenway Project and noted what a great facility it will be for the county.
Cllr. Guilfoyle sought an update on the Droichead Na Gabhair bridge and the Ennis Northern Inner Relief Road Link.
Cllr. D. Griffin acknowledged the IPB Pride of Place Awards 2024 which were held in early November and commended the team on the effort and work that went into compiling the applications.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to the Tulla/Barefield roundabout and noted that there are two critical exit points that require upgrading.
Cllr. P. O’Gorman wished A. Griffin, A/Senior Executive Officer in Shannon M.D. all the best in her new role and thanked her for her work on all the Shannon projects.
Cllr. M. Howard wished A. Griffin all the best in her new role and congratulated Bhavesh Patadiya for winning Rising IT Star award in this year’s Public Sector Digital Transformation Awards in Dublin.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development Directorate advised in relation to the West Clare Greenway, Kilrush to Kilkee section that TII are carrying out a review of the Phase 2 documentation and that following the successful review, that the project will progress to Phase 3 (Design & Environmental). In the interim Clare County Council will continue to engage with landowners in order to refine the route alignment. In relation to the Ennis to Ennistymon and the Ennistymon to Milltown Malbay to Moyasta, section work is continuing on progressing the non-statutory public consultation.
Mr. Farrell noted in relation to the Droichead Na Gabhair bridge, that this had been raised with NTA and that the preferred solution was to utilise the existing bridge for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Mr. Farrell advised in relation to the junctions on/off the M18 that this was a matter for TII but noted that a TII staff member is due to come to Clare for a meeting in the coming weeks and he would raise it with them.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive addressed the meeting and advised he had received correspondence late last week regarding an item that was raised at the October meeting in relation to the SDZ designation in conjunction with the University of Limerick. Mr. Dowling read out the correspondence to the elected members in which it noted that after a review, the University is of the opinion that the application to seek SDZ designation should be withdrawn. The correspondence stated that “among the reasons for withdrawing are infrastructure such as Limerick Northern Distributor Road, alignment with academic programme development, imminent changes in planning legislation and the current governance situation of the University”. The correspondence from Acting President, Professor Shane Kilcommins noted that while this is a disappointing outcome for the local authority, the University must prioritise it “core institutional purpose”. Professor Kilcommins stated in his letter that work done on the SDZ remains valid and will be progressed by the University and Clare County Council in a different way over a longer period of time.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive confirmed that the University of Limerick have formally communicated this with the Planning department of Clare County Council, but he stated that the SDZ status will remain in the County Development Plan. Mr. Dowling acknowledged the disappointment felt by the local authority but stated that he respected the decision of the University and he wished them well.
The elected members noted their disappointment at the decision taken by the University. The members noted that any development the University decide to pursue in the future will have to be in Co. Clare due to land constraints, but they felt that it was unfortunate it took 6 years for a decision to be made. The members noted that the Northern Distributor Road was infrastructure of real importance, and a lot of time and effort had been invested to get it finished. The members noted that Clare has a great relationship with the University and noted its importance to Clare and the Mid-West of Ireland. The members encouraged further meetings with the University to progress.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive thanked the members for their positive approach to the news and advised that the Executive continue to engage with the University on other potential opportunities. Mr. Dowling noted that all has not been lost with the Limerick Northern Distributor Road and advised that he has asked the Mayor of Limerick to add it to his agenda.
Cllr. M. Begley noted that the Limerick Northern Distributor Road and the SDZ designation shouldn’t affect each other and noted it was misleading to say so.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive agreed with Cllr. Begley but noted that they do enable each other.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle requested an update on the Ennis Northern Inner Relief Road Link.
A Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development Directorate advised that it is included in the local transport plan, and this will give direction when it is finalised.
Item 7: Disposal of property (by lease) at Bunratty, Cliffs of Moher and Vandeleur Walled Gardens pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from John O’Malley, Acting Director of Tourism Development was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that following a competitive tender process, Clare County Council have appointed Kilkenny Design/Banner Retail as the retailer operator for Clare County Council’s Gift Stores in Bunratty, Cliffs of Moher and Vandeleur Walled Gardens. It is noted in the report that some works will be carried out to improve the appearance of the properties within Bunratty, Cliffs of Moher and Vandeleur Walled Gardens. The proposed lease is Banner Retail Limited, Clydaville Investments Limited t/a Kilkenny Group and Clydaville Holdings Limited subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 30
th
October 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property (by lease) at Bunratty, Cliffs of Moher and Vandeleur Walled Gardens to Banner Retail Limited, Clydaville Investments Limited t/a Kilkenny Group and Clydaville Holdings Limited subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 30
th
October 2024.”
Item 8: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, for the redevelopment, extension and change of use of a building to the rear of the Ennistymon Digital Hub to provide for office accommodation with all ancillary site works.
Chief Executive Report dated 4
th
November, 2024 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The reports outline details of proposed development comprising of:
The proposed development consists of:
The change of use of the building to office accommodation.
Demolition of the steel framed and clad building located at the rear (south) of the site.
Carry out alterations and additions to the existing building on Monastery Lane and construct a new 2-storey extension to the rear of same.
Demolish the northern section of Digital Hub stone boundary wall and set back to provide off-road parking spaces.
Provide a new pedestrian footpath from the Digital Hub car park entrance to connect with the existing footpath located on Monastery Lane.
Connect to existing adjacent public services.
All ancillary site works.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
This was approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. S. Talty, seconded by Cllr. J. Killeen and agreed by the members present.
Item 9: Road Traffic Periodic Speed Limit Bye-Laws 2024.
Report from Anne O’Sullivan, Senior Executive Engineer, Road Design was circulated with the agenda together with maps. The report states that under a Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) Safety Improvement Programme an assessment of speeds at schools on National Roads was carried out by Tobin Consulting Engineers on behalf of TII in 2023. As a result of this assessment, Clare County Council prepared draft periodic speed limit byelaws under section 9(5) of the Road Traffic Act 2004.
The report notes roads in respect of which a periodic special speed limit for specified periods and specified days is proposed in accordance with Section 9(5) of the Road Traffic Act, 2004 are as follows:
The N68 National Secondary Road in the vicinity of Caherea National School.
The N67 National Secondary Road in the vicinity of New Quay National School.
The N67 National Secondary Road in the vicinity of Rinneen National School.
The report states that the process included consultation with TII, An Garda Síochána and Municipal Districts. All elected members in the relevant administrative areas were circulated with the proposed draft byelaws. The draft bye laws were then advertised for public consultation between the 26
th
of July and the 6
th
of September 2024. No submissions were received during the consultation period. One submission was received after the deadline and that submission welcomed the reduction in speed limits.
Approval from TII for the proposed periodic speed limit byelaws was received by Clare County Council on the 11
th
of October 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council in exercise of the powers conferred on it by Section 46 of the Road Traffic Act, 1961 (No. 24 of 1961) as amended by Sections 4-9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004 (No 44 of 2004) and Road Traffic Act , 2024 ( No 10 of 2024 ) hereby make the following Bye-Laws in respect of the area comprising the administrative area of the County of Clare:-
Report dated November 2024 from Anne O’Sullivan, Senior Executive Engineer, Road Design was circulated with the agenda together with the maps. The report states that it is proposed to introduce a periodic special speed limit of 50km/hr on the N68 National Secondary Road in the vicinity of Caherea National School and on the N67 National Secondary Road in the vicinity of New Quay National School and Rinneen National School.”
Item 10: Training and Development Programme for elected members
The Draft Training and Development Programme for elected members was circulated with the agenda. The Training and Development Programme is prepared in accordance with relevant circulars issued by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage.
Pursuant to Section 142 (5A) of the Local Government Act, 2001 as inserted by Section 53 (1) of the Local Government Reform Act 2014 the provision of allowances for expenses for training is separated from the allowances for expenses for conferences, on the basis that attendance at training events would be of greater advantage to individual councillors and thus to the overall membership of the council and ultimately of greater benefit to the people the councillors represent.
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority members) Regulations 2021 also apply.
The aim of the Training & Development Programme is to:-
Take a more structured approach to supporting the development needs of councillors so that they can discharge their duties as effectively as possible.
Inform decisions by the elected council on the training events at which councillors should be supported.
Address any knowledge gaps identified by individual Councillors.
The members noted the report as presented having been proposed by Cllr. I. Lynch seconded by Cllr. D. Gould and agreed by the members present.
Item 11: LCDC Membership
Report dated 22
nd
October, 2024 from Bernadette Haugh, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda. The report states that the Clare Public Participation Network have advised of a membership change of representative on the LCDC to replace Theresa O Donohoe. The Clare Public Participation Network have nominated Ms. Emma Karran as Environmental representative on the LCDC.
This was approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. M. Shannon, seconded by Cllr. A. O’Callaghan and agreed by the members present.
Item 12: Clare County Council Placenames Committee
Report from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare County Council Planning Department are now proposing to put in place a Clare County Council Placenames Committee with the remit to advise and monitor naming selections for public places that reflect local history, culture, and ecology.
The report states that Clare County Council's placenames policy emphasises the importance of preserving local heritage and cultural identity through the naming of housing estates, landmarks and public places. The policy involves a collaborative approach to ensure that new names are appropriate, meaningful, and reflect the county’s heritage. The purpose of the Clare County Council Placenames Committee is to assist in the implementation of the Council’s placenames policy by providing advice on selecting place names to ensure that placenames accurately reflect local heritage, culture, and community identity.
It is proposed that the Clare Placenames Committee members will comprise of representatives with expertise in the areas of local culture, history and linguistics, the Clare Heritage Officer, a local authority representative and an Elected Members Representative. The Committee will be coordinated through the Planning Department.
“That Cllr. T. O’Callaghan be appointed to the Clare Placenames Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. M. Howard be appointed to the Clare Placenames Committee.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Cooney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
Item 13: Active Travel Programme.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“I call on the NTA, Department of Transport and Minister Eamon Ryan to ensure fair and equitable treatment of rural areas of County Clare in the Active Travel program by allocating and ring fencing at least 50% of the funding provided to areas outside of large urban centres going forward to market towns, small towns and villages and to settlements with high tourism traffic.”
(M)
The elected members noted that great work was done on the Active Travel programme when it launched initially but since then, despite all the submissions received there has been no funding from the NTA for rural areas. The members noted that a percentage should be ringfenced for rural areas and stated that rural areas should not be any less important than urban areas. The members noted that there is a move nationally to encourage people to live in towns and villages but to make this an attractive prospect there needs to be the right infrastructure.
Item 14: Residential and Respite Services
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That this Council would invite the HSE to give a presentation and up to date report on residential and respite services available to Clare families for children aged under 18, the number of children and adults requiring services broken down by Municipal District Area and the current delivery and planning for future delivery.”
(M)
The elected members were in support of asking the HSE to give a presentation to the elected members on residential and respite services available to families for children aged under 18.
Item 15: GP Care
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“To call on the Department of Health and the HSE to outline their plans to ensure long term access to GP care in rural towns and villages in Clare and around the Country.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged that there needs to be more of a GP presence in towns and villages. The members noted that direct access to GP’s is challenging presently and with an aging GP population the members sought an update from the HSE on their medium- and long-term plans to address this. The members agreed that this motion should be incorporated with the previous motion and request a presentation from the HSE on both matters.
Item 16: Vacant Commercial Buildings
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council would implement a “meanwhile use” permission for existing vacant commercial buildings to support the short-term change of use and foster economic development in our towns and villages”.
(M)
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Service, Planning and Economic Development replied as follows:
“The Town Centre First Initiative is led by the Town Centre First Department in the Economic Development Directorate and there is considerable cross-directorate collaboration across the Council including the Vacant Homes and Derelict Sites Teams. The initiative aims to tackle vacancy, combat dereliction and breathe new life into our town centres through the formation of Town Teams to deliver a holistic, place-based approach to sustainable rural development. A Town Centre First Plan is already in place for Sixmilebridge with the Town Team focusing on delivering actions set out in this plan. The preparation of a second Town Centre First Plan for Kilrush has commenced. A number of Town Teams are being formed or re-aligned for the towns of Tulla, Lisdoonvarna and Clarecastle and Kilrush to ensure that a representative group is in place for each of the towns. This will assist in delivering vibrant, viable and sustainable towns and communities that are more attractive places to live, work, visit and invest in. Commercial activity is vitally important in driving footfall and economic activity into our towns and villages, and every effort will be made to promote the principles of “meanwhile use” where this is possible.
All temporary uses that may be associated with the ‘meanwhile use’ concept should ensure that they are fully compliant with planning permission requirements and potential occupiers should be encouraged to engage with the Planning Department to determine whether planning permission would be required ahead of occupation of structures.
The Derelict Sites team is working closely with owners of properties to encourage them to re-think the potential of the buildings that they own and if they do not have the resources or interest in refurbishment of the property that they consider letting it or selling it. There has been some success in this to date in town and village centres. Where owners cannot be found or are not engaging with the Council, it is then that the legal process under the Derelict Sites legislation is initiated, including the billing of the Derelict Sites levy and considering CPO of the property. It is interesting that the Heritage Council’s report includes a photograph of a property the Council has done a CPO on in Ennis, under the Derelict Sites legislation. The principles of the “meanwhile use” will be promoted by the Team in our engagement with owners but can be limited by the condition of some buildings, the investment needed to bring them into use and the ownership status of the building.
A report has been issued by Dublin City University and the Dublin Simon Community in March 2024, on the “opportunities and challenges of vacant above the shop units and the potential for residential use”.
The Town Centre First Department will continue to work closely with the Derelict Sites team and on a cross-Directorate basis to assist in implementing the Town Centre First Policy in Clare.”
The elected members acknowledged that it is hard to get retail spaces filled but it is vital that something is done to keep towns and villages vibrant places to live and visit. The members noted that the Town Centre First plan is a great programme but not every town and village have a town team. The members referred to “meanwhile use” and noted that it should be developed based on the needs of the town. The members agreed that footfall around a town is essential and businesses thrive around increased footfall.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, Planning and Economic Development noted that many teams are out engaging with the community in relation to vacant and derelict buildings. Dr. Kirby encouraged the members to refer constituents to the Municipal District offices or any of the teams involved in this programme with all ideas.
Item 17: Grants for Electrical Vehicles and Solar Panels
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“We call on the Minister for Environment and Minister for Transport to prioritise generous grants for electrical vehicles and solar panels, to power same, for those who live in rural Ireland who depend on their vehicles for transportation and work.”
(M)
The elected members noted that energy grants for cars and solar panels are reducing year-on-year. The members agreed that reducing grants is not a good idea. It was noted that for people living in rural Ireland there should be greater incentives to use buses but there continues to be a lack of services. The members noted that without the grants people cannot afford to avail of electric cars or solar panels.
Item 18: West Clare Railway Bridge Signage Maintenance
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Gould
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“To query the responsibility for the upkeep and maintenance/signage of the overhead bridges remaining from the West Clare Railway.”
(M)
John O’Malley, Senior Executive Officer, West Clare Municipal District replied as follows:
“Overhead bridges that remain from the old West Clare Railway are the responsibility of the landowner on who’s property they are located which in some cases is Irish Rail. Ownership for each such overhead bridge and responsibility for its maintenance should therefore be examined on a case-by-case basis”
The elected members sought to understand whose responsibility it is to maintain signage on bridges due to an accident recently where a lorry carrying machinery driving at night did not see the bridge as there was no reflective signs warning of an approaching bridge. The members felt it wasn’t fair that landowners would be responsible for a bridge that crosses a main road and queried the legal requirements to have signage to display height of a bridge.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive thanked Cllr. D. Gould for raising the motion and assured the members that he will ask the Director of Service to audit the scale and condition of the bridges and noted that health and safety of road users is most important. Mr. Dowling noted that while landowners have a duty of care, the local authority needs to be more proactive around protecting and promoting these structures.
Item 19: Allowances for those with learning difficulties
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council request the Minister for Education to make reasonable allowances for students with dyslexia and other learning difficulties.”
(M)
The elected members noted that extra time should be given to children with learning disabilities and dyslexia to help them reach their potential. The members noted that this is being done within the other EU countries and it has been advised that a review will happen in Ireland, but the timeline is too long. The members referred to other supports that are available to those with learning difficulties and encouraged people to reach out to their local libraries. The members stated that the review needs to take place as soon as possible.
Item 20: Designated Marine Area Plan
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council outlines the resources it has inhouse to input into the creation of the Designated Marine Area Plan. That this information is communicated to Kerry County Council and Limerick City & County Councils in order to request that they join with us in writing to the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communication to outline our position and seek confirmation that it is committed to, as stated in the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce, establishing a future DMAP roadmap by Q4 2024 and confirm that it is on target to achieve this.”
(M)
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Service, Planning and Economic Development replied as follows:
“Clare County Council has a long history in advocating for a Plan-Led approach to the sustainable planning and development of not only our terrestrial lands but also our maritime space through the preparation of the first integrated strategic plan for the Shannon Estuary, the SIFP. This plan was developed in partnership with our neighbouring authorities as well as key stakeholders such as the EPA, NPWS and Shannon Foynes Port Company amongst others. This group continues to meet through a steering group forum to discuss issues of mutual interest. In that regard the members can be assured that Clare County Council is working closely with Kerry and Limerick City and County Councils to explore all opportunities that may arise for the Shannon Estuary and the wider west coast marine area.
National government having set ambitious goals and targets to achieve a climate neutral economy are looking at developing a plan-led approach to explore opportunities for offshore wind, wave, and tidal energy initiatives. This has resulted in the publication of the Marine Planning Framework 2020 and the Marine Area Planning Act 2021 amongst other national policy guidance documents. It is this MAP Act which introduced the legislative basis for the development of Designated Marine Area Plans. The South Coast Designated Maritime Area Plan for Offshore Renewable Energy has recently been completed by the State (24 October 2024) and is Ireland's first forward spatial plan for offshore renewable energy (ORE).
The Economic Directorate is committed to continuing to engage with Department officials to advocate for the development of a Designated Marine Area Plan roadmap which would include for the preparation of a plan for the West Coast area. To prepare a DMAP, a coastal planning authority must be designated as a competent authority in accordance with Section 20 of the MAP Act 2021. Following a Competent Authority designation by the Minister for Housing Local Government and Heritage, Section 21 of the MAP Act requires that the Competent Authority must prepare a DMAP Proposal, specifying amongst other items the resources required or available to the authority to undertake the preparation of such a DMAP. The scope and range of that DMAP proposal will be critical in terms of identifying those essential resources, both staffing and budgetary required to secure its delivery. It will be imperative that each partner involved in the DMAP preparation will have adequate resources made available to cater for the complexity of preparing such a cross sectoral and spatially significant marine plan.
Rather than committing now on resources from individual councils, especially in the absence of sight of the scope or range of a possible DMAP proposal it may be more beneficial for Clare County Council to write to Kerry and Limerick City and County Councils with the objective of agreeing on a joint letter to the Minister setting out our joint support for the preparation of a DMAP roadmap and specifically requesting that consideration be given to prioritising the west coast within that roadmap.”
The elected members noted that Offshore Wind is a critical piece of infrastructure and Moneypoint has huge potential that needs to be utilised. The members stated that the Minister of Environment has previously indicated that the DMAP roadmap was going from East, Southeast, South and lastly West, the members agreed that pressure needs to be exerted to get a DMAP for the West Coast. The members queried if an update from the ESB would be possible.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, Planning and Economic Development advised that they are regularly in contact with the Department of the Marine advocating that the West Coast DMAP is prioritised. Dr. Kirby stated that they would look to get an update from the ESB in early 2025.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive noted that there has been a shift at policy level and recalled that at the launch of the Shannon Estuary Economic Taskforce there was a lot of political commitment given. Mr. Dowling noted that it needs to be put back on the agenda with the Ministers.
Item 21: Motor Tax Payments
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I propose that Clare County Council calls on the Department of Transport to review the current structure of motor tax payments, specifically addressing the additional charges applied to those unable to pay the yearly tax in a single instalment. These extra fees place an undue burden on individuals who may already be facing financial challenges, effectively penalising those who need to pay in instalments. We urge the Department to consider a fairer payment option that ensures equal access to motor tax without additional costs for those who opt for three monthly or half-yearly payments.”
(M)
The elected members stated that the extra fees placed on individuals who cannot pay the upfront yearly payment is unreasonable. The members noted that day-to-day expenses are not getting any lower and the government should be helping people and not burdening them further with these fees. The members advised that the system of road tax needs to be reviewed as a whole.
Item 22: Lung Cancer Screening
This item was deferred to the December meeting.
“In the circumstances where the Irish Cancer Society claim that screening could save “One Life a Day” and where Lung Cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in Ireland, accounting for 1083 deaths annually between 2018 and 2020, and where the majority of cases of this type of cancer are usually at an advanced stage when diagnosed, that the Minister for Health, implement Lung Cancer screening to detect the cancer at early stage.”
(M)
Item 23:Social and Affordable Housing
Ar moladh Cllr. D. McGettigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“This Council notes that:
The Housing Commission report recommended a radical reset of housing policy, including the delivery of an average of 60,000 new build homes a year over the next five years
The Housing Commission also recommended that 20% of all housing stock should be social and affordable, which would require a doubling of public housing output on current levels
This Council agrees to:
Write to Minister for Housing Darragh O’Brien calling on him to double the direct capital funding for social and affordable housing in order to deliver at least 25,000 social and affordable homes on average over the next five years.
To introduce the necessary reforms to enable Councils to increase and accelerate the delivery of public housing and to ensure that affordable homes to rent and buy are delivered at prices that working people can actually afford.”
(M)
The elected members stated that housing is one of the greatest challenges facing the Government currently and that more funding to facilitate the building and purchase of social and affordable homes is needed urgently. The members acknowledged that there are other challenges hindering the increase in housing numbers such as shortage of resources in the construction industry, increase in cost of materials and inadequate infrastructure such as wastewater. The members noted that affordable homes are only available in Ennis and Shannon and should be rolled out throughout the county.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan wished best of luck to all the candidates running in the General Election on the 29
th
November and particularly to Cllr. J. Cooney, Cllr. D. McGettigan and Cllr. R. McInerney.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised the elected members that the De Valera Library in Ennis had opened today, 11
th
November but that the official opening was Friday 15
th
November and all were welcome and encouraged to attend. He noted it was a fantastic facility, a landmark and piece of history.
Cllr. I. Lynch commended the Mayor on the Mayor’s Ball that was held Friday 8
th
November in aid of Down Syndrome Clare. Cllr. Lynch noted it was a very worthy cause and thanked all who contributed on behalf of Down Syndrome Clare.
P. Dowling, Chief Executive welcomed S. McNulty back to work and noted it was her first meeting as Director of Service for Tourism Development Directorate.
Mr. Dowling reminded the elected members of the site visit to Killaloe on the 13
th
December at which the Killaloe-Ballina Mobility Plan will be launched in association with Tipperary County Council.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
AILG Elected Member Training “Overview of the Planning System” held in the Bridge House Hotel, Tullamore, on the 28
th
September 2024.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €438.99 including conference fee of €85.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. T. O’Brien, A. Baker-Bashua and P. Murphy attend this conference.
LAMA Autumn Conference held in the Newgrange Hotel, Navan, County Meath, on the 17
th
to 18
th
October 2024.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €697.65 including conference fee of €170.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. M. Begley, P. Burke, C. Colleran Molloy, J. Cooney,
J. Crowe, P. Daly, M. Howard, G. Keating, J. Killeen, P. Murphy, T. O’Brien,
A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman, T. O’Callaghan and M. Shannon attend this conference.
AILG Elected Member Training “Local Authority Finance and Budget Process” held in the Sligo Park Hotel, County Sligo, on the 24
th
October 2024.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €557.53 including conference fee of €85.00.
It was agreed that Cllr. T. O’Callaghan attend this conference.
AILG Elected Member Training “Local Authority Finance and Budget Process” held in the Radisson Blu Hotel, Limerick, on the 2
nd
November 2024.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €156.20 including conference fee of €85.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. D. Gould and G. Keating attend this conference.
AILG Elected Member Training “A Councillors Guide to the Home Upgrade Grants” held in the Tower Hotel, Waterford, on the 14
th
November 2024.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €561.16 including conference fee of €85.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. P. Burke, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Daly, D. Gould, M. Howard, P. Murphy, T. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien and B. Slattery attend this
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback