Minutes of Budget 2025 Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of Budget 2025 Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Thursday 28th November 2024 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, J. Crowe, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Pat Dowling, Chief Executive.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Ms. Trina Rynne, Financial Accountant.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, A/Director of Rural Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Planning & Economic Development.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. T. Guilfoyle, T. O’Brien, D. Griffin, D. McGettigan, R. Hartigan, P. O’Gorman, D. Gould
Apologies:
Cllrs. J. Cooney, R. McInerney
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Alan O’Callaghan presided.
The Cathaoirleach called on the Chief Executive, Pat Dowling, to introduce Budget 2025. Mr. Dowling addressed the meeting and presented Clare County Council’s Draft Budget 2025.
Mr. Dowling addressed the members and stated that this is his 9
th
and final Revenue Budget with Income and Expenditure of €191.9m. He noted that each of the eight previous budgets were developed in a time of their own unique and familiar challenges and that this year’s budget is no different in this regard. Mr. Dowling stated that the ongoing economic implication of geo-political uncertainty proved challenging in presenting a balanced budget for the members consideration and adoption.
Mr. Dowling advised that energy costs and financial markets, while stabilising, are also not returning to pre-2021 levels and this is eroding existing budgets, and inflation increases are affecting all cost bases. Even with some easing in inflation, Mr. Dowling advised that ongoing global financial uncertainty will continue into 2025. He noted that the Local Authority are presenting this budget knowing that Government “one-off” €1.9 million supports provided for inflation in 2023 and the “once-off” impact on LPT uplift in 2024 of €3.7 million will not be repeated in 2025. Notwithstanding the positive uplift in the Local Property Tax allocation to this Council of €3.7m in 2024 has certainly helped with emerging financial demands.
Mr. Dowling noted that the decision by members at the September 2024 Council meeting to maintain the LPT at the same level for the next 5 years has secured €58 million LPT income for the term of the Council. While this provides important certainty over an extended period – it is not an additionality in context of meeting future demands.
Mr. Dowling stated that the manner in which the local authority sector is funded in Ireland presents many short comings. The Local Government Funding model is more and more a part-funded model where local income is expected to fund both infrastructure development and the operation of new services. One of the biggest challenges to this funding model is the multiple ministerial departments, the local government sector, have a direct link to, for service delivery and funding. Mr. Dowling further stated that local authorities are seen as the delivery mechanism for central government initiatives that are not always funded 100% by the government department. This model therefore provides positive funding for the initial development of infrastructure but does not fund the ongoing delivery of the services. It also provides considerable risk as government priorities change; government budget allocations change and at that stage local services are established and embedded. Thereafter the permanent funding commitment falls to the local authority to meet.
Mr. Dowling acknowledged that the Council's budget model is easily understood when one sees an imbalance between required expenditure and available income. To balance the budget, it required the local authority to generate more income or reduce expenditure or a combination of both.
Mr. Dowling noted that the additional services, infrastructure and the impact of inflation over the last council explain the challenges the local authority faced and will face over the term of the new council. However, despite this significant challenge, Mr. Dowling advised that the local authority would remain cognisant of the challenges faced by the business community in the county – challenges that reflect in many ways the challenges the local authority face. Mr. Dowling advised the members that the local authority is recommending that commercial rates do not increase in the coming year.
Mr. Dowling noted will also support local businesses by continuing the
Long Term Vacant Property Incentive Scheme in 2025
The Hospitality 5% Support Scheme
And Small and Medium Business 5% Support Scheme. This support is available to approximately 87% of our commercial rates customers.
Mr. Dowling advised that despite any financial challenges the council have, they are also committed to continuing support for the community grants managed by Rural and Community Development with funding of €690,000. This funding of almost €700,000 will support the development of playgrounds, burial grounds, the arts, and other projects and facilities in our communities. Mr. Dowling noted that this budget has been framed with no increase in commercial rates but with a commitment to support businesses and local communities.
Mr. Dowling noted that this has, however, resulted in challenges across a number of service areas. To present a balanced budget, the deficit in funding has been addressed with a combination of the following:
No increase in expenditure across budget request areas.
Additional income in commercial rates from a national revaluation of ESB networks and Uisce Éireann networks.
Increased income from Goods and Services where a review will be completed on all income from Goods and Services for implementation in 2025.
Reduction in match funding for capital projects through loan finance.
Reduction in salaries and wages where vacant posts occur throughout the year and the timing of their filling will provide this budget saving.
Additionality in street cleaning and resources to burial grounds and roads.
Mr. Dowling summarised that the 2025 Budget is being presented without an increase in commercial rates to the business sector and this will no doubt provide challenges to the council in the delivery of the Schedule of Municipal District Works in 2025 as it provides for minimal increases above 2024 levels to this service area. Despite these challenges, Mr. Dowling advised that the council would continue to support and work with businesses and the community and continue to lead the social, economic, physical, rural and tourism development of the county.
Mr. Dowling thanked the Director of Finance, Noeleen Fitzgerald and her staff for their co-ordination of the budget process and their assistance to the Council.
Mr. Dowling acknowledged the support, courtesy and co-operation of the Cathaoirleach, the Elected Members and staff over his tenure in Clare County Council and nine budgets. He noted his appreciation to the elected members for their commitment and dedication in the delivery of services for the people and businesses in County Clare.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald addressed the meeting and outlined the purpose of the meeting:
Adopt the Budget with or without amendment.
Determine the Annual Rate on valuation.
Determine the proportion of Rates abatement applicable on vacant commercial properties.
Approve under Section 66 LG Act 2001 the Clare County Council Small & Medium Business scheme, the Hospitality scheme and the Business Startup Credit scheme and Specific Leisure and Arts Ctr. Grant Scheme.
Ms. Fitzgerald presented details of the revenue expenditure as well as details of the capital expenditure forecast for 2025 – 2027. She outlined details of:
Commercial rates noting the changes in legislation to Section 9, Section 12 and Section 15.
General Municipal Allocation.
Outcome of the Local Property Tax baseline review.
Effects of Inflation on the Revenue Budget.
Route to balancing the budget.
Comparison of Budget 2025 to Budget 2020.
Community, Business and other supports.
In her presentation to the members, Ms. Fitzgerald highlighted the following:
€630m capital expenditure forecasted over 3 years.
No change in ARV of 0.239
34% of all commercial rate payers pay less than €1,500 annually.
Out of the 4,135 properties valued in the county 3,550 are occupied.
88% commercial rates collection in Clare County Council.
LPT retained at same level as 2024 and secured for 5-year term.
Total costs for the operation and maintenance of the new public Library in Ennis is circa €700,000 in Budget 2025.
Continuation of the Long-Term Vacant Property Incentive Scheme, the Small and Medium Enterprise Support Grant and the Hospitality Grant Scheme.
Ms. Fitzgerald concluded by thanking the Cathaoirleach for his ongoing support, the members of the Corporate Policy Group, Strategic Policy Committees and the elected members for the various discussions/meetings at Municipal District level and at county level. She thanked the Chief Executive and the Directors of Service. She particularly acknowledged the work of her colleagues in Finance in the preparation of this budget.
Social Development Directorate
Cllr. J. Crowe, Chair of the Social Development S.P.C. addressed the meeting and provided an outline of activities for the Social Development Directorate which administers responsibility for Housing delivered by the local authority. Cllr. Crowe noted that the incoming committee will have its first meeting in early December and is looking forward to a strong program of work for the coming 5 years.
Cllr. Crowe advised that the SPC will review the outputs of this year’s work in developing the Draft Traveller Accommodation Plan at their first meeting.
The Housing S.P.C. is aligned with the functions of the Social Development Directorate which include Housing, Integration, Ukrainian Services, Sport and Recreation and the North Clare LEA of Ennistimon.
Integration, Ukrainian Services have been budgeted as cost neutral to Clare County Council again in 2025 with no revenue impact on finances Cllr. Crowe advised. Housing revenue expenditure budget for 2025 is €40.53m while sports and recreation budgets are more or less in line with prior year.
Cllr. Crowe noted it is great to see the draft sport plan for County Clare currently live for public consultation on the Clare County Council website and a final version will be coming through the S.P.C. in the coming months. He further noted the upgrade works to the Lees Road track and facilities that will be completed during 2025 funded through sport capital funding and councils own match funding.
Cllr. Crowe advised that accommodation remains a national priority, and the annual delivery targets are set for the Housing Department in Clare County Council under ‘Housing for All’.
This is the third year in the 5-year cycle that Clare County Council has exceeded the targets set. It is anticipated that in 2025 the target of 164 homes will be delivered.
Cllr. Crowe advised that the local authority aims to have delivered 833 new homes under ‘Housing for All’ by 2026, the funding of which is provided by the Department of Housing, aided by own resources and the land acquisition fund which is administered by the Housing Agency.
“Affordability” is a key objective of ‘Housing For All’ and Clare County Council has received approval for three schemes to date with homes in Shannon being sold under the scheme in 2024. More affordable homes will be advertised during 2025.
Cllr. Crowe noted that the Defective Concrete Block scheme is live since 2023 and the team in the Housing Department have received 100 applications and that details of the launch of the local authority focused scheme are being awaited.
Cllr. Crowe advised that funding for the establishment of a Local Authority Integration Team during 2024 was received and is set to continue. Further funding to develop an Integration Strategy for Clare with the assistance of partners on the County Integration Forum and the local community will be sought.
Physical Development Directorate
Cllr. P. Burke, Chair of the Physical Development S.P.C addressed the meeting and provided an outline of activities for the Physical Development Directorate which administers responsibility for the Roads & Transportation; Fire & Emergency; Water Services; Environment; Climate Change and the Project Management Office.
Cllr. Burke noted that Budget 2025 provides for the priorities of the Directorate which are:
The provision of funding for Fire & Emergency in line with WRC recommendation
The provision of funding for resourcing and ongoing maintenance of stormwater infrastructure
The provision of funding for Public Lighting Energy Efficiency Project (PLEEP) and associated unbundling costs
The provision of the match funding required for our capital programme
Supporting the implementation of the objectives of the Climate Action Plan
The budget book sets out the 2025 budget for the Physical Directorate. Items for note in:
Division B - Roads & Transportation
Budget 2025 provides for the maintenance and improvement of the road infrastructure across the County in line with funding available through department grants and own resources. The detail on the roadwork programme will be set out in the Schedule of Municipal District Works in the first quarter of 2025.
Division C - Water Services
For the purpose of budget 2025 income and expenditure in this area is static. Uisce Éireann (UÉ) is the authority responsible for municipal water services since the effective date which for Clare was the 20
th
September 2023.
Division E - Environment
The focus of the Environment section for 2025 is compliance with statutory obligations in the relevant legislation areas.
Division E - Fire & Emergency
The key driver in Division E for Budget 2025 is meeting the cost of the WRC agreement in the provision of additional fire personnel. The process of recruitment of additional fire personnel has commenced and are working towards reaching the numbers as set out in the agreement.
Cllr. Burke advised that the staffing of the Climate Action office and a portion of project management team is provided for in the revenue budget with the projects delivered by these offices set out in the capital programme in the Section 135 report.
Items for note in these areas:
Climate Action
The Climate Action Plan was adopted in February 2024 with 124 actions under 5 strategic goals for delivery over the lifetime of the plan to meet energy efficiency and emission reduction targets by 2030.
Project Management Office
There is significant capital expenditure ongoing and planned for 2025 in the Physical Directorate, these projects amount to some €29.9m capital expenditure for 2025. A significant portion of this expenditure is recouped from the relevant parent department.
Cllr. Burke informed the members that projects such as the Ennis Public Realm project, Blakes Corner, the West Clare Greenway, Killaloe Bypass, Shannon and Kilkee CFRAMs, Ennis Public Realm, Doolin project, N19 project are progressing and will incur expenditure during 2025.
Economic Development Directorate
Cllr. P. Daly, Chair of the Economic Development S.P.C. addressed the meeting and outlined key objectives for the Economic Development Directorate for 2025 noting that County Clare is an important driver of economic development both regionally and nationally. The multinational sector continues to perform strongly, and local indigenous businesses remain competitive.
Cllr. Daly noted that 2025 is likely to see a continuation of many external factors impacting on the local economy. The rising costs of doing business is taking its toll but the various business entities continue to demonstrate resilience. Through the Local Enterprise Office, Clare County Council will continue to support local businesses by providing a wide range of training and upskilling programmes, free dedicated mentoring, and funding supports for driving sustainability and digitalisation to offset rising costs. The Local Enterprise Office now has an expanded remit to support local businesses employing up to 50 people. In 2025, the annual budget for the Local Enterprise Office is €1,331,966 million which is funded by Enterprise Ireland under a service level agreement. The Draft Budget 2025 also provides for the continuation of several commercial rates customer grant schemes.
Cllr. Daly advised that the overall economic growth in Clare is slower than expected and many of our young skilled workforce are travelling to larger urban centres like Galway and Limerick for meaningful employment. This has a knock-on effect on small service industries across towns and villages and for that reason we must continue to invest in strategic projects across the county to attract more investment into Clare.
Cllr. Daly noted that progress continues on the economic agenda of the Ennis 2040 Strategy. Over the course of 2024, significant preparatory work was undertaken on several key projects which will lead on to specific planning applications being made over the course of 2025. Cllr. Daly welcomed the announcement in the recent Budget of a new town bus service for Ennis and noted the completion of the public realm in 2025 and acknowledged the daily operations carried out by Ennis Municipal District which is provided for in this budget.
Cllr. Daly stated that 2024 saw the completion of the concept design stage of the ‘One Shannon Hub’. An application for funding will be made in 2025 under the next URDF call for this large-scale investment in Shannon Town which will inform the amount of match funding required from Clare County Council as well as other potential sources of funding. This will see the development of new municipal district offices, a new library, an innovation hub and a community centred event space.
Building on the allocation of €3.53m in Rural Regeneration (RRDF) funding in 2023 Clare County Council is currently progressing work on funding applications to progress the establishment of a Maritime Training Facility in Kilrush.
Cllr. Daly advised that in 2025 the Council’s Economic Development function will continue to participate in the Regional Enterprise Plan Steering Group which along with other strategic projects is focussed on the development potential of the Shannon Estuary. Clare County Council continues to lead the Shannon Integrated Framework Policy Steering Group and with partners we will continue to focus on data collection for the estuary and to provide advice to stakeholders on potential developments in the maritime area.
Cllr. Daly gave updates on the following:
Town Centre First
The Town Centre First team will continue to deliver Town Centre First Plans, encourage the establishment of Town Teams and deliver capital projects with cross directorate support.
Forward Planning & Statutory Plans
It is anticipated that a new National Planning Framework will be finalised early in 2025. The Southern Regional Assembly will then prepare a revised Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy and Clare County Council will feed into that process.
Development Management
2024 has been a busy year for new planning applications, planning enforcement complaints and taking in charge of roads and open spaces applications and the budget provided will allow the Planning Office to deal with similar levels of activity in 2025. The most notable shift has been around the ever-increasing use of the e-planning facility, where more than 60% of planning applications and submissions are now made electronically.
Property Management
The Property Management Team continue to ensure that they use and maintain assets to the maximum benefit of the council and communities.
Vacant Homes
The Vacant Homes Team has received 470 applications for the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant and to date 66% have been approved to the value of €18.5 million. 45 grants have been paid out in the sum of €2.6 million. The team continues to assist property owners with their applications and promote the grant.
Derelict Sites
The Council is dealing with 270 derelict sites at the present time, and commenced billing of the Derelict Sites Levy during 2024. In an effort to reduce dereliction in the county, the activity in this area will progress further with billing of additional properties and activation of more properties under the Compulsory Purchase Programme.
Cllr. Daly concluded by noting that the Economic Directorate work programme for 2025 is extensive and progressive and its delivery will involve input from both internal and external stakeholders.
Rural Development Directorate
Cllr. P. Hayes, Chair of the Rural Development S.P.C addressed the meeting and provided an outline of activities for the Rural Development Directorate which was amended in 2024 to include Corporates and Cultural Services, while Recreation and Amenity and Ukrainian Integration function reverted to the Social Directorate.
Cllr. Hayes advised that the Rural Work programme is broad and varied with a continued focus on the delivery of the renewed Rural Development Strategy 2030 for the county.
From a strategic perspective, a new Local Economic and Community Plan for County Clare was adopted in 2024. The Plan sets out a 6-year vision for the county seeking to target funding and investment into the county to where it’s needed.
Cllr. Hayes noted that the Healthy Ireland program will continue to target funding for wellbeing initiatives into 2025 while Community Playgrounds, which are owned, managed and operated by playground committees will continue to be supported.
The Age Friendly Programme in Clare remains a priority for Clare County Council, through the implementation of the Age Friendly Strategy, 2023-2027, which sets out “a collective ambition” for age friendly in Clare. This strategy is supported by the Clare Older People’s Council and the Clare Age Friendly Alliance and builds on the success of the previous strategy.
Cllr. Hayes acknowledged that the burial grounds are an essential service and budget 2025 provides for the continued maintenance and support for this function. To further assure and support the burial ground function budget 2025 provides for two new crews for ongoing burial grounds maintenance in East Clare and West Clare.
Community playgrounds which are owned, managed and operated by Community Playground Committees remain a focus for Budget 2025. While serving the local community, these recreational facilities provide a further opportunity to support integration, youth and age-friendly, tourism and other initiatives within the community. Clare County Council will continue to support the sustainability of community operated facilities of this nature
Cllr. Hayes referred to the Clare Local Community Grants Scheme (CLAGS) and noted that funding stands at a similar level to investment support in 2024 recognising the invaluable work and contribution our community groups provide to their local areas. Some 454 groups across the county benefitted from CLAGs funding totalling over €690,000 in 2024 which provides critical support for economic, social, environmental and cultural initiatives across our communities.
Cllr. Hayes noted that the Rural Directorate will continue to seek to maximise funding through the national Rural Development Programme funding initiatives such as Clár, ORIS, Town and Village Renewal and Community Recognition. Communities are directly supported in their capacity building, in a ‘bottom-up approach’ through the four Rural & Community Development Officers who are focussed on each of the Municipal Districts.
Cllr. Hayes advised that Clare County Council works closely with the Public Participation Network (PPN) and is committed to providing the same level of support in 2025.
Cultural Services
Cllr. Hayes noted that 2024 was a milestone year for the Cultural Services function with the long-anticipated opening of the new flagship library campus adjacent to Glór in the heart of Ennis. The completion of this building which includes the Súil Art gallery, new De Velara Library and Library Head Quarters also represents one of the largest capital projects ever delivered in the county.
Cllr. Hayes acknowledged that it is already evident that footfall has significantly increased in the new library. The branch operates over two floors and consists of distinct areas for children/teenagers and adult members of the community. The local studies centre which is a reference library is housed in the new building and will showcase the historic Clare collection, genealogical resources, and all aspects of Clare history.
Budget 2025 has provided an additional €700,000 including loan charges, for the operation and maintenance of this new development.
The Arts Development Plan will lay the groundwork for arts development countywide from 2025–2029. Súil Gallery in Ennis will programme exhibitions throughout the year and will develop an outreach and education programme to accompany the exhibitions.
Cllr. Hayes concluded noting that the range of services, projects and initiatives supported through budget 2025 is extensive in its reach but recognised that the good-will, commitment and sense of community of the people across the county is at the heart of the directorate’s success.
Tourism Development Directorate
Cllr. S. Talty, Chair of the Tourism Development S.P.C addressed the meeting and provided an outline of activities for the Tourism Development Directorate noting that Clare County Council is the first local authority to have a dedicated Tourism Development Directorate and SPC. The Tourism Directorate, established in 2024, will continue to support the tourism economy in County Clare in partnership with the state agencies, the tourism industry and local communities. It is noteworthy that recently County Clare was named one of the best places to visit in 2025 by Condé Nast Traveller.
Cllr. Talty advised that Clare County Council has amalgamated the portfolio of assets in the ownership of the Council as the Clare collection which includes Vandeleur Walled Garden, Loop Head Lighthouse, Cliffs of Moher Visitor Experience, Inis Cealtra, Bunratty Castle and Folk Park, Craggaunowen and Knappogue Castle and Gardens.
Cllr. Talty referred to budget 2025 for the Tourism Development Directorate and items for note are in
Division D – Tourism
:
The positive contribution to the overall budget from Clare County Council tourism products.
The improvement in performance and outturn from what was the Shannon Heritage products.
The capacity to support the growth and development of the tourism product without adversely impacting on the revenue budget of the Council.
The positive contribution and impact of the Clare County Council wholly owned tourism DAC companies in terms of employment and support to the local economies.
Cllr. Talty noted that Budget 2025 provides for the priorities of the Directorate which for 2025 are:
The delivery of projects identified in the Clare Tourism Strategy 2030
Leading and supporting tourism development in Clare.
Ensuring effective governance of tourism companies.
Managing and developing the Clare Collection (council owned tourism sites).
Delivery of projects under Cliffs of Moher Strategy 2040.
Renewing the Digital Strategy and maintenance of the Digi Clare digital hub network.
The elected members thanked the Chief Executive, P. Dowling, Director of Finance and Support Services, N. Fitzgerald, her team in Finance and all the Council executive for their work and support in preparing Budget 2025.
The members expressed concern over local government funding and noted that reform is needed in this area. The members discussed road funding and how inadequate it is for the ongoing maintenance of local road infrastructure. The members agreed that the new government need to look to reforming how local authorities are funded and not to leave the challenge with the finance departments at a local level.
Questions were raised by the members in relation to public lighting, the new Section 12 legislation in relation to commercial rates and percentage figures referred to in the presentation.
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance answered all the queries raised by the members.
Resolutions
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
That pursuant to Section 103 of the Local Government Act 2001 (substituted by Section 58 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014) the Draft Budget 2025 as presented by the Chief Executive is hereby adopted.
The Meetings Administrator read out the remaining four resolutions which were adopted by the members:
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
That pursuant to Section 3 of the Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, the Council hereby determine in accordance with the Draft Budget 2025 as presented by the Chief Executive, the General Annual Rate on Valuation for the County of 0.239 set out in Table A.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
That in accordance with Section 9 of the Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended, Clare County Council makes a scheme for the abatement of rates due to it by the liable person, or classes of liable persons, in respect of
vacant
properties .Such a scheme in respect of vacant property will provide for an abatement of rates due to Clare County Council by a liable person for the financial year ending 31 December 2025 as follows:
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
The adoption of the following, Commercial Rates Incentives Schemes, as outlined in the Chief Executive Report, in accordance with Section 66 of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended by Section 43 of the Local Government Reform Act, 2014.
Long Term Vacant Property Incentive Scheme 2025
The Hospitality 5% Support Scheme 2025
Small and Medium Business 5% Support Scheme 2025
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
That pursuant to Section 66 of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended by Section 43 of the local Government Reform Act, 2014, that total assistance, in the form of both cash and non-cash payments, to the bodies outlined below is hereby approved.
Lahinch Seaworld €161,000
Shannon Leisure Centre €164,500
Kilkee Waterworld €140,000
Glór €270,000
The Cathaoirleach thanked the members, Chief Executive, Directors of Service and Director of Finance and Support Services and their staff for their co-operation in the preparation and adoption of the Budget for 2025. He also thanked members of the Corporate Policy Group and all members for their input into the Budget process.
The meeting then concluded at 16:27p.m.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
The Cathaoirleach thanked the members, Chief Executive, Directors of Service and Director of Finance and Support Services and their staff for their co-operation in the preparation and adoption of the Budget for 2025. He also thanked members of the Corporate Policy Group and all members for their input into the Budget process.
The meeting then concluded at 16:27p.m.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback