Minutes of January 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of January 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 13th January 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Interim Chief Executive.
Ms. Mary McMahon, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Mr. Seán Lenihan, A/Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. B. Slattery, I. Lynch
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Bleach Family, on the death of Tommy Bleach, RIP.
The Shannon Family, on the death of Nellie Shannon, RIP.
The O’Keeffe Family, on the death of Marguerite O’Keeffe, RIP.
The O’Grady Family, on the death of James O’Grady, RIP.
The elected members extended a vote of sympathy, thoughts, prayers and support to Cllr. Shane Talty and his family on the passing of their mother, Marian Talty, RIP.
Cllr. R. McInerney proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect. This was seconded by Cllr. J. Crowe and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. S. Talty thanked the elected members and staff of Clare County Council who contacted him over the last few weeks to pass on their condolences and messages of support.
The meeting resumed at 3.20 p.m.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan extended his compliments and thanks to the outdoor staff, volunteers and all those who helped to keep the county moving the previous week during the cold weather event.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the December Meeting of Clare County Council held on 9
th
December 2024 be adopted and signed.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Clare County Council held on 19
th
December 2024 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
Cllr. R. McInerney requested an update on her previous query on a database for the Notice of Motions.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised that an update will be provided.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Acknowledgement dated 20th December 2024 from HIQA in relation to submission send from the Cathaoirleach and Chief Executive.
Acknowledgement dated 12th December 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to Lung Cancer Screening.
Acknowledgement dated 12th December 2024 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to Hospitality Sector Grants.
Acknowledgement dated 12th December 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Finance in relation to Hospitality Sector Grants.
Correspondence dated 31st December 2024 from the HSE in relation to Medical Cards for urgent cases.
Correspondence dated 23rd December 2024 from the Office of the Minister for Housing in relation to social and affordable housing.
Resolution dated 17th December 2024 from Donegal County Council in relation to Rainwater Harvesting.
Resolution dated 17th December 2024 from Donegal County Council in relation to the restoration of Town Councils.
Resolution dated 10th December 2024 from Wexford County Council in relation to affordable insurance options for community organisations.
Association of Irish Regions' Annual Training Seminar 2025, taking place on the 5th & 6th February 2025 in the Radisson Blu Hotel, Athlone, Co. Westmeath.
Southern Regional Assembly Schedule of Meetings 2025.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 12 November, 2024 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Budget Meeting held on the 12 November, 2024 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a) Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 27 May, 2024 be noted.”
(b) Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 7 May, 2024 be noted.”
(c) Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 15 May, 2024 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 2
nd
December, 2024 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle welcomed the report on the Bridge Permeability Project but sought an update on the Droichead na Gabhair Bridge.
Cllr. Guilfoyle sought an update on the Affordable Housing Scheme planned for Francis Street in Ennis. Cllr. Guilfoyle referred to the Post Office Field Masterplan and requested that the plan be reviewed to consider a more tourist friendly option for that space.
Cllr. S. Talty referred to the Tourism Development initiative relating to alternative accommodation in Clare. Cllr. Talty queried if engagement had taken place with the in promoting this initiative. He noted the volume of work that had gone into the promotion of it, and the importance of engagement to prevent delays in the planning process.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the bridge permeability project and requested a list of the 11 bridges that had been assessed.
Cllr. McInerney sought an update on the speed limit review.
Cllr. P. Burke referred to the recent storms and the fallen Ash trees. Cllr. Burke noted that roadside Ash trees need to be taken seriously as they are brittle and could cause a fatal accident.
Cllr. J. Garrihy noted the positive work being done with the junction improvement scheme.
Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Doolin Pier Visitor Services Building and welcomed the construction of the footpath down to Doolin Pier noting small changes have a big impact.
Cllr. Garrihy noted in relation to the Rural Regeneration and Development Fund (RRDF) that it hasn’t delivered anything yet and that initiatives need to have a co-ordinated wrap-around approach to succeed.
Cllr. M. Begley referred to the Active Travel update in relation to the Ardnacrusha to Athlunkard Bridge and sought an update as to when a draft report will be issued.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to the Tulla/Barefield roundabout and sought an update from the meeting with TII that was to take place.
Cllr. Hayes queried if a strategic roads plan could be put in place for the County.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that a briefing is due to be held with Ennis MD in relation to the Ennis projects.
Dr. Kirby referring to Cllr. Garrihy comments in relation to RRDF noted that all projects are managed on a cross-directorate basis.
A. Farrell, Director of Physical Development Directorate noted that the 18 bridges listed on page 47 of the Management Report are those that are in the program and being progressed, the Droichead na Gabhair Bridge falls under active travel and following assessment that the proposed solution is to utilise the existing bridge.
In relation to roadside trees, Mr. Farrell noted that as discussed in previous meetings they are the responsibility of the landowner. He clarified that Pat Dowling, former Chief Executive had advised previously at a meeting of Council that while it was the landowner’s responsibility and that this was the legal position, he would ask that the MD’s provide some assistance or advice in terms of traffic management and said that the MD should facilitate this where possible.
In relation to Doolin Pier, Mr Farrell noted that stakeholder engagement has been held and noted that while the issues won’t be fixed overnight, they are working with the MD on the roll out of the plan. He said he was happy meet with Cllr. Garrihy to discuss and to brief the North Clare members if they wished.
Mr. Farrell noted in relation to the Ardnacrusha to Athlunkard Bridge that he would ask a member of the Active Travel team to brief Cllr. Begley and the MD members if necessary.
In relation to the Tulla/Barefield junction, Mr. Farrell noted that he and the senior engineers had met with TII before Christmas and have agreed to meet with representatives of the Council and to have a meeting regarding this and any other issues relating to matters within the responsibility of TII. He advised that it was proposed to agree the details of the meeting and Council representation at it through the CPG.
In relation to the strategic road plan Mr. Farell noted that there is a three-year investment program and that they will arrange for a costing to be done and presented at the SPC meeting.
Cllr. P. Burke thanked the Director for his reply and requested that they consider a media campaign to remind landowners of their responsibilities.
Cllr. R. McInerney requested an email with the list of the 11 bridges assessed.
In response to Mr. Farrells proposal of a presentation to the SPC, Cllr. P. Hayes suggested that instead a plan be compiled of priority road works for the county and bring it to Government for funding.
Item 8: Disposal of land at Gaurus, Ennis, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of land at Gaurus, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 12
th
December 2024.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Gaurus, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 12
th
December 2024.”
Item 9: Audit Committee Charter 2024 - 2029.
Clare County Council Local Government Audit Committee Charter 2024 – 2029 was circulated with the agenda.
The members noted this item as presented having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes, seconded by Cllr. P. Burke and agreed by the members present.
Item 10: LCDC Membership.
Report dated 18
th
December, 2024 from Bernadette Haugh, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare PPN has advised of a membership change of representative on the LCDC to replace Maurice Harvey. The reports states that Clare Older People Council have nominated Mary O’Callaghan as representative on the LCDC.
This was approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. G. Keating, seconded by Cllr. P. Hayes and agreed by the members present.
Item 11: Global Covenant of Mayors
Report from Morgan Lahiffe, Climate Action Co Ordinator/Senior Engineer, Physical Development and A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development was circulated with the agenda.
The reports states that due to increasing challenges posed by climate change, Clare County Council wish to align its efforts with global initiatives that support sustainable urban development. The report notes that joining the
Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy (GCoM)
presents an invaluable opportunity for the council to enhance their climate actions, increase visibility, and access additional resources. The reports notes that there is no cost associated with this membership and that membership of the Global Covenant of Mayors represents a political commitment on Climate Action.
The report outlines 5 benefits of joining Global Covenant of Mayors:
Leadership and Global Recognition.
Access to Resources and Tools.
Financial Opportunities.
Collaboration and Networking.
Support for Ambitious Goals.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“Global Covenant of Mayors is the largest global alliance for city & municipality climate leadership, built upon the commitment of over 12,500 cities and local governments. Clare County Council resolves to become a signatory to the Global Covenant of Mayors having been briefed at Management Team and at CPG.”
Item 12: Memorial Committee
Report dated 7
th
January, 2025 from Mary McMahon, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services Department was circulated with the agenda. The report outlined details of applications received and considered by the Memorial Committee on 7th January, 2025 as follows:
a) John Haugh memorial
b) Ulrike Sauer memorial
c) War of Independence memorial
The applications were approved having been proposed by Cllr. G. Keating, seconded by Cllr. M. Howard and agreed by the members present.
Item 13: RRDF Projects
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
“Request Clare County Council to provide a full list of Clare County Council led RRDF projects which have been successful in securing funding since the launch of the scheme in 2018. Please provide LEA location, a status and progress report, timeline for delivery if not completed, the value of the projects and funding sources. I also request a listing of projects led by the Council that were not successful to date and a status/progress report on all.”
(Q)
A. Reynolds, A/Director of Service, Rural Development Directorate replied as follows:
Since the launch of the Rural Regeneration Development Fund (RRDF) in 2018, there have been 5 calls for funding applications under Category 1 with one call currently open. Category 1 applications relate to projects that are ready to commence i.e. “shovel ready” with all permissions/consents/design etc in place”. With the exception of the first call, applicants are only permitted to submit a maximum of 3 applications each call.
In relation to Category 2 funding i.e. funding for project development – there have been 4 calls since the scheme commenced in 2018. With the exception of the first call, applicants are only permitted to submit a maximum of 3 applications to each call.
The Table below provides a full list of Clare County Council-led successful projects since the launch of the scheme in 2018. Those in red were community-led.
Successful RRDF Projects
Project
Estimated Project Cost at time of application
Total RRDF Funding Approved
Year
LEA location
Status & Estimated completion date
Loophead Loop Head Visitor Attraction*
€1,273,800
€984,300
2018
Kilrush
Complete
Ennistymon Innovation Centre
€1,750,000
€1,023,300
2018
Ennistymon
Complete
Lahinch Seaworld and Town Upgrade Project*
€6,600,000
€2,908,750
2018
Ennistymon
Complete
Vandeleur Estate, Kilrush*
€2,905,829
€2,220,604
2018
Kilrush
Complete
Inis Cealtra Island (Cat 2)
€1,227,000
€920,500
2018
Killaloe
95% Complete with application lodged to ABP Dec 2024
Doolin Pier Masterplan (Cat 2)
€620,721
€465,471
2018
Ennistymon
Ongoing
Multifunctional Performance Auditorium at Cnoc na Gaoithe Cultural Centre, Tulla**
€1,239,186
€929,389
2018
Killaloe
Complete
Scariff Regeneration Plan (Cat 2)
€865,000
€524,000
2022
Killaloe
Complete
Old Rectory - Inis Cealtra Visitor Experience
4,882,815
3,900,000
2022
Killaloe
Construction works commenced Jan 2024. Expected project delivery Q2 2025
Clare Maritime Economic Zone (Clare MEZ)
€13,000,000
€3,500,000
2022
Kilrush
Ongoing – additional sources of funding being sought to cover the remaining funding gap. Clare County Council are working closely with Enterprise Ireland in relation to the Smart Regions funding scheme and its applicability to the Kilrush MTC project.
Scariff Regeneration Project
€10,870,000
€8,700,000
2024
Killaloe
Ongoing –Contracts signed & construction has commenced in Jan 2025on car-park Hub/Community Centre. The second phase i.e the development of a public realm in Market Square, Scarriff is to commence once the car-park has been brought into use later in 2025. It is anticipated Market Square will be completed in 2026.
* Additional Funding awarded post-initial announcement.
** Grant amount includes Ex-Gratia payment
Submitted to DRCD but not successful Projects
Project
Estimated Project Cost at time of application
Grant sought
Year
LEA
Status
Lisdoonvarna Spa Wells Project (Cat 2)
€199,750
€159,800
2018
West Clare
Community Led Project – has not progressed to date
Crusheen Community Hall
€667,000
€500,250
2018
Killaloe
Community Led project – works have been completed on the hall – some funding provided under CLAR Programme
Kilmaley Community Centre (Cat 2)
€195,000
€146,250
2018
West Clare
Community Led
Mars Cinema Project Kilrush & Frances Street Public Realm Enhancement (Cat 2)
€510,750
€383,062
2018
West Clare
Building purchased under TVR Building Acquisition Measure 2022 & a Feasibility Study for the future use of the facility has been completed. Possible RRDF Cat 2 application
Tobermurragh Bane Field
€814,345
€509,509
2018
Killaloe
Works at Tobermurragh have been funded under TVR 2023 - €225k
Cliffs of Moher Coastal Walk – Path upgrades
€974,360
€730,770
2019
West Clare
ORIS funding circa €1m
Scattery Island Visitor Experience
€1,423,697
€1,067,77
2019
West Clare
OPW managed site – works have been progressed on site by the OPW.
Kilmihil Peoples Park Phase 3
€1,602,600
€1,282,080
2019
West Clare
Community led project – to date has not proceeded
Clare County Council Beach Amenities Facilities Project
€2,188,712
€1,969,841
2019
West Clare
A number of projects advanced that were on the original RRDF proposal submitted.
The Diamond Rocks toilet facilities in Kilkee were constructed; Cappa with council resources; Enhancement works are due to commence this year; Beach Promenade works in Kilkee have been completed using a mixture of Own resource funds, Active Travel and Planning development Contributions; works at Spanish Point were completed through Active Travel, Own resources
Gael Cholaiste O’Comhrai (Cat 2)
€157,000
€125,600
2020
West Clare
Project has not progressed – planning application to be submitted to better position the site for future grant funding.
Multi-functional Community Building - Quilty (Cat 2)
€230,000
€184,000
2020
West Clare
Community led – did not proceed – likely that project will be scaled back by community
Corofin Enhancement Plan
Circa €21m
€16,000,000
2024
West Clare
Other sources of funding being sought – possible RRDF Cat 2 (4
th
Call application)
Cllr. J. Garrihy thanked the Director and her team for the reply and noted it was great to see the extensive work that has gone into the planning of these projects.
Item 14: FASD Ireland
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“Calling on FASD Ireland (Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders) to give a workshop to Clare County Councillors with a view to calling on the Minister to recognise it as a disability.”
(M)
Cllr. J. Ryan gave a brief background on Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) and the organisation FASD Ireland which is an organisation that provides awareness, education and support with FASD.
The elected members welcomed a workshop from FASD Ireland and the opportunity to learn about the disorder. The members acknowledged how fortunate the county was to have this organisation headquartered in Ennis.
Item 15: Air Quality Improvements
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council what measures are in place to ensure improving air quality in our urban villages and towns in our county.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is the designated competent authority for the implementation of all Irish and European Union (EU) ambient air quality legislation. The EPA is also the specified monitoring and reporting body under this legislation. The EPA manages and co-ordinates current ambient air monitoring activities in co-operation with local authorities. At present, Ireland has an established network of stations to monitor air quality which are configured to meet the requirements of the European Union CAFE (Clean Air For Europe) Directive. Currently there is 1 No. CAFE Air Monitoring site situated in Ennis. This monitoring station measures Particulate Matter and Sulphur Dioxide. Particulate matter (PM) are minute particles of dust, soot and smoke etc and the daily limit over a 24-hour averaging period for PM
10
is 50 ug/m
3
. The unit of measurement is the ug (microgramme) and is a unit of mass equal to one millionth (1×10
−6
) of a gram per cubic meter.
The detailed information provided by that station and the local monitoring station in Ennistymon is delivered in real time and readily accessible for the general public on the EPA website on the following link
Station 25 Ennis, Co. Clare | AirQuality.ie
and
TNO3947 Ennistymon, Co. Clare | AirQuality.ie
. The website also provides easily interpreted Air Quality Index for Health (AQIH) colour coded mapping for the entire country.
In addition, the EPA have developed a 3-day forecasting for Air Quality available at
Home | AirQuality.ie
It is important to note that the limit specified in the Regulations is only deemed to be breached if more than 35 exceedances occur over a 24-hour averaging period during the entire year. Based on EPA data currently available for 2024 there were 7 exceedances recorded in Ennis throughout 2024. This represents a reduction of 36% compared to 2023 data. To date there have been no breaches in County Clare of the Air Quality Regulations. This highlights that the increased enforcement inspections and awareness campaigns coupled with the changes in fuels used by the public are having a positive impact in Clare.
The most recent significant legislation was introduced in 2022 when the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications, Eamon Ryan, signed the
new Solid Fuel Regulations for Ireland (S.I. 529 of 2022)
, which commenced on 31 October 2022. The primary focus of these regulations is on improving air quality and improving people’s health outcomes, by restricting the retail, online and commercial sale of smoky fuels, including smoky coal, turf and wet wood. These fuels are proven to be a major contributor to air pollution in Ireland.
Clare County Council is also active across many different Directorates to further improve air quality. The Environment section has notified all retailers of solid fuels of their obligations under the new Regulations and carry out regular checks on retailers of solid fuels to ensure compliance. Additionally, the Environment Section carried out 147 on site retailer inspections.
The Environment section also monitors extractive industries in the county for air pollution and impose dust limits on new construction sites through the Planning process.
Government policy in this area is for a transition away from the use of fossil fuels for heating to more sustainable sources of green energy. This transition will take time to deliver but it is enshrined in many facets of legislation across all government departments. The new social housing schemes delivered by the Social Housing Directorate and opened by Minister O’Brien in County Clare are all built to nearly zero energy buildings (NZEB) standards. These houses do not use solid fuel heating but instead rely on in part improved air tightness, increased insulation and more effective heating/ventilation systems to achieve more energy efficient homes. They will help lower people’s energy bills, reduce the risk of fuel poverty and dramatically reduce any contribution to air pollution.
A Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (2019-2024) was previously adopted by Clare County Council and a Climate Action Plan 2024-2029 for Clare has being developed in accordance with national climate change policies
clare-climate-action-plan-2024-2029-55368.pdf
. These strategies include for adaptation and mitigation measures which will improve air quality. These measures include smarter travel initiatives, increased use of electric vehicles and charging infrastructure, retrofitting of housing, green infrastructure and healthier living initiatives. Various Directorates are tasked with delivering actions under this plan.
Awareness and education also play a vital role in ensuring that only those fuels that are approved are used and that there are health implications for use of unapproved fuels. Under the Greener Clare brand, we continue to promote through print and social media the positive message in relation to air quality actions.”
The elected members noted that air pollution has a major impact on people’s health, most notably increased risk of respiratory diseases. The members noted that in Ireland air quality is held to a national standard but noted that there is only one site in Clare that is monitoring air quality and queried about the rest of the county. The members referred to modern homes that are being built to nearly zero energy buildings standards and noted that when there is a power cut during a storm or cold weather these houses have no other source of heat.
Item 16: Housing Aid for Older People’s Grant
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P. Daly agus J. Killeen glacadh leis
“We request Clare County Council to make urgent contact with the Department of Local Government regarding housing aid for Older People’s grant in connection with the exclusion of new fossil fuel boilers, oil or gas.”
(M)
The elected members expressed frustration and disappointment at how quickly this directive was introduced by the Government prior to Christmas without any lead time. The members noted it was unfair and insensitive particularly to elderly people and families who are on reduced incomes. It was noted by the members that for people to retrofit their homes they would have to potentially move out to get the work complete and it was noted that the SEAI grant can take up to 26 months to be received.
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Social Development Directorate confirmed that the guidelines were implemented from the 1
st
January 2025.
Item 17: Transport Connectivity
This item was deferred to the February Council meeting.
“In advance of the 2025 tourist season we call on Clare County Council to outline plans proposed or in place to increase transport connectivity designed to minimise traffic density difficulties while supporting our towns and villages.”
(M)
Item 18: Speeding
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“I call on Clare County Council to arrange an urgent meeting of the Gardaí and TII in connection with the serious problem of speeding of cars in our urban and rural roads of not alone Co. Clare but throughout Ireland.”
(M)
The elected members noted that speeding on Irish roads has become a national crisis. The members expressed concern over the statistic that Ireland has the fastest growth in road deaths in Europe. The members agreed that the Gardaí, TII, Road Safety Authority and Local Authorities need to agree a plan to combat this issue. The elected members noted that the technology is there and is effective when used but they stated that funding needs to support the initiative. The members noted that it is important to get the new Local Community Safety Partnership approved by the Minister so issues like this these can be addressed in this forum.
Item 19: Survey of Croí Cónaithe Affordable Housing Schemes
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council undertake a comprehensive survey of Croí Cónaithe Affordable Housing Schemes currently being implemented by Local Authorities across the country. The purpose of this survey is to gather insights, identify best practices, and compile a detailed report that will inform the development and implementation of similar schemes within Clare County Council’s jurisdiction.
This report should address key elements such as eligibility criteria, funding structures, administrative processes, and any identified challenges or successes, ensuring that Clare County Council can adopt a strategic and effective approach to affordable housing provision.”
(M)
A. Headd, Senior Engineer, Social Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Housing Dept. of Clare County Council acknowledges receipt of this motion, and we wish to advise that we will undertake the survey as requested and we will issue a report to all Councillors by the 31
st
of January 2025 for consideration.”
The elected members welcomed the undertaking of the survey by the Housing Department and the timelines attached to it. The elected members noted that it was a critical opportunity to learn from other local authorities and to see the innovative efforts and best practice in other counties. The members acknowledged the importance of affordable housing and how effective and financially sound the scheme is.
Item 20: Admission Charge for U16’s to GAA matches
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. C. Ryan, P. Burke, S. Talty agus T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council oppose the recent decision by the GAA, whereby children under the age of sixteen will be charged a fee to gain admittance to GAA matches, and that we call on the GAA to reverse this decision as a matter of urgency. It is also proposed that this Notice of Motion be circulated to all Local Authorities across the country.”
(M)
The elected members expressed frustration at the newly introduced levy and noted their opposition to it. The members agreed that the extra charge will discourage attendance at games and engagement with the sport in general. The members queried why the levy was only introduced at the top two divisions in hurling and football and the members felt that using health and safety as the reason for the new charge was unreasonable and queried how a €5 fee would assist with this.
Item 21: Purchase of Residential Developments
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
“That Clare County Council:
(1) provide the criteria utilised for its purchase of residential developments from private developers for social housing (which were granted planning permission as non-social housing development and without undertaking the Part 8 process);
(2) Since 2020, please list the developments purchased from private developers as described in part (1) above by Clare County Council; their geographic location, number of units within each development; and the per unit cost for each such residence;
(3) Where such purchases as detailed in part (2) above have occurred, what is the policy regarding additional/further purchases of private developments for social housing within the same localities?”
(Q)
A. Headd, Senior Engineer, Social Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is responsible for the provision of homes to those in need across our community. The number of homes to be provided has been set out by DHLGH under our ‘Housing For All’ objectives to 2026 and our ambition as a Council has been to meet this need.
To date, Clare County Council has achieved our targets by providing 256 homes in 2022, 151 homes in 2023 and 156 homes in 2024. It is our objective to provide 833 homes to our community by 2026 in line with government policy.
There are a number of ways in which homes can be provided and it is always acknowledged that no one way is solely effective in its own right: A blended approach allows the Housing Department to have regard to tenure mix, distribution, density, wider housing market, local demand, family needs. Such an approach also allows us to consider the availability of sites, services capacity, and environmental considerations across the county at given times.
One such mechanism to provide these homes is, as referenced in the Notice of Motion, to purchase turnkey developments. Other ways in which Clare County Council meets our county’s housing need include:
Direct Build.
Direct Buy & Renew Construction of vacant and or derelict properties.
Approved Housing Bodies Delivery.
Part V, etc.
(1) The criteria utilised by Local Authorities on the provision of new build housing through Turnkey Acquisition was outlined by the Dept. of Housing Local Government & Heritage (DHLGH) in guidance issued in October 2019. The guidance acknowledges that Turnkey Acquisition is a good source of social housing delivery and encourages Local Authorities to continue to pursue delivery in this manner alongside the other delivery mechanisms. Department Guidance outlines the following steps in running a Turnkey campaign:
A public advertisement should be placed in local newspapers and can also be circulated through CIF and/or other LA contacts. It is recommended that all turnkey campaigns have a closing date for submissions; LAs could run turnkey campaigns twice yearly or as required to meet demand.
Guidance recommends a two-stage process whereby Stage 1 facilitates the LA casting the net wide to capture all potential turnkey development opportunities, including those which may be less advanced in terms of design/planning. The only requirement at stage 1, is a site location map. All site locations are assessed and if a proposal corresponds with an area identified with a housing need, then it is progressed to stage 2 where further information is sought, such as:
Ø details on the individual or company submitting the proposal
Ø Proposed site layout
Ø House/Unit types
Ø Floor Plans/Areas
Ø Schedule of finishes
Ø Number and mix of units proposed
Ø Planning details
Ø All in cost of the proposal
Following assessment of the Stage 2 submission, only those proposals deemed suitable advance for further discussion and possible agreement for purchase. If agreement is reached with the developer, department approval is sought by way of a Capital Appraisal using a single stage evaluation and approval procedure.
(2) The following table outlines all Turnkey Acquisitions acquired by Clare County Council since 2020 including address, number of units and unit cost.
Turnkey Acquisitions Since 2020
Year
Address
No of Units
Unit Cost
2021
Cloughleigh, Ennis
4
€ 234,451.00
2022
Cluain Gréine, Drehidnagower Road, Ennis
61
€ 310,227.00
Main Street, Mountshannon
4
€ 148,556.00
Killaloe
4
€ 250,000.00
2023
Garna House, Main St. Sixmilebridge
9
€ 281,222.00
70 O'Connell St. Ennis
10
€ 284,415.00
2024
Harveys Quay, Ennis
4
€ 281,724.00
(3) Each proposal submitted in response to an advertisement by Clare County Council seeking expressions of Interest will be evaluated in line with departmental guidelines and will include a sustainable community proofing assessment. This will take into consideration factors such as existing services and communities to help promote long term social and economic sustainability for the community. Such an assessment, in conjunction with our own housing needs assessment for any given area will inform any decision made in relation to the progression of any given proposal. It should be noted that while Clare County Council have ambitious targets for the delivery of social housing under “Housing for All” and having exceeded those targets to date, certain proposals that have been put forward to Clare County Council have not been progressed having regard to the criteria outlined by the DHLGH.
Clare County Council will continue to provide homes in order to meet our targets and address our county need. It is expected that Turnkey Acquisitions will continue to form part of our delivery mechanisms as appropriate and in particular those developments which also address vacancy and dereliction within urban settings having regard to the successful schemes delivered to date and as referenced above.
The Housing Department in Clare County Council continues to explore all options regarding the delivery of both social and affordable housing in areas of need. We anticipate the opportunity to activate a Croi Cónaithe scheme (serviced sites for private owners) in Lisdoonvarna during 2025 which will further diversify housing opportunity to our community, and we appreciate the continued support of our Elected Representatives.”
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy thanked the Senior Engineer for his reply and noted that Clare County Council is doing well with their blended approach of providing housing. Cllr. Colleran Molloy requested that the local authority give a sense of comfort to communities that they won’t become overwhelmed with social housing.
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Social Development Directorate noted that in the last three years the housing department of Clare County Council has delivered 560 homes in Co. Clare and stated that it is their objective to meet government policy with regards to social housing. Mr. Murphy stated that the purchase of any property is evaluated in line with departmental guidelines and will include a sustainable community proofing assessment.
Item 22: Household Waste Collection Subsidy Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“To ask if the implementation of a Household Waste Collection Subsidy Scheme (Bin Waiver) for pensioners as well as those in receipt of certain social welfare payments such as the Disability Allowance, similar to the one in place in Limerick and other counties, would be considered by Clare County Council.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council has not provided a kerbside household waste collection scheme for 20 years.
The current kerbside collection scheme is privately operated in Clare. The Service Providers hold Waste Collection Permits, which are provided through the National Waste Collection Permit Office under S.I. No. 820/2007 - Waste Management (Collection Permit) Regulations 2007.
Clare County Council operate 5 Civic Amenity Sites incorporating 3 Waste Transfer Stations, where certain waste items are accepted free of charge from the public. In addition, we also operate 52 bring banks across the County for glass, cans, and textiles. Private kerbside collection operators do not provide such additional services.
The provision of a waiver for customers of private companies is a matter for the private companies who provide the service. Extract from Ombudsman report 2008 in relation to a waiver scheme.
“In accordance with section 52 of the Protection of the Environment Act 2003, the determination of waste management charges, and any associated waiver scheme, is a matter for the relevant local authority, where it acts as the service provider. Similarly, where a private operator provides the collection service, it is a matter for that operator to determine charges.”
The report of the Ombudsman further states that
“Generally speaking waiver schemes do not operate in respect of privately supplied collection services. There is legal advice to the effect that such a scheme is not legally provided for in circumstances where the private sector are providing the service.”
Clare County Council does not receive a subvention from Central Government for the implementation of the waiver scheme.
A nationally administered waiver system may provide the best solution. The issue was previously debated in Dail Eireann in 2005 to introduce such a scheme nationally, but the motion was defeated. A national scheme which provides for a partial waiver of the fixed charge element
only
would comply with the polluter pays principle and still provide an incentive to reduce the volume of waste being disposed of.”
Cllr. R. Hartigan noted that for people on a pension or certain social welfare payments such as disability allowance this would be beneficial. Cllr. Hartigan suggested if other local authorities could implement such a scheme, it could also be undertaken by Clare County Council.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that the services provided by Clare County Council are second to none and referred to the Civic Amenity sites where certain waste items can be dropped for free.
Cllr. R. Hartigan agreed that the services provided by Clare County Council are second to none but that these sites do not help those who don’t drive or have a disability. Cllr. Hartigan noted she would raise it with the Oireachtas members.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback