Minutes of the February 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of the February 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 10th February 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Carmel Kirby, Interim Chief Executive.
John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Seán Lenihan, A/Director of Economic Development.
Ann Reynolds, A/Director of Rural Development.
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
A. Baker Bashua
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan presided.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan welcomed J. Corry as the newly appointed A/Senior Executive Officer and Meetings Administrator and thanked A. Reynolds and M. McMahon for their support over the past few months.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan welcomed the 6
th
year debating team from St. Flannan’s College to the Chamber.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan thanked the Executive of Clare County Council, the outdoor staff and all those involved in the clean-up following Storm Éowyn. He noted that it was an unprecedented storm and noted how the work started immediately on carrying out a review and learning from the lessons.
A. Farrell, Director of Physical Development, acknowledged the work done by the Municipal Districts, Fire Service, Civil Defence, Senior Management, the Chief Executive and Rural Development in conjunction with agencies such as ESB, HSE, Gardai and Uisce Éireann. Mr. Farrell noted the work done to address issues such as clearing to make primary roads accessible. Mr. Farrell also noted the work of communities and how they came together to support each other. Mr. Farrell thanked his own team and noted that an internal review will be starting next week on lessons learned from the most recent storm.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive thanked all involved and noted the importance of the elected members who were out in communities reporting back to the Council on issues. Dr. Kirby acknowledged the importance of community groups and local businesses that provided invaluable assistance. Dr. Kirby also noted the internal review that would be taking place the following week.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The O’Sullivan Family, on the death of Alex O’Sullivan, RIP.
The Malone Family, on the death of Anne Malone, RIP.
The Mulready Family, on the death of Brigid Mulready, RIP.
The O’Driscoll Family, on the death of P.J. O’Driscoll, RIP.
The Hassett Family, on the death of Paddy Hassett, RIP.
The McEvoy Family, on the death of Tony McEvoy, RIP.
The Hynes Family, on the death of James Hynes, RIP.
Vote of Congratulation
Cllr. P. Murphy extended a vote of congratulations to Doctor Bernárd Lynch who received the Freedom of the City of London in recognition of his activism and commitment to LGBTQIA+ community.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the January Meeting of Clare County Council held on 13
th
January 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
Cllr. P. Murphy referred to his previous motion in relation to the GAA charging under sixteens an admission fee into GAA matches. Cllr. Murphy noted that this has been raised by the Cork County board now and they are going to take the matter up with the Central Council and it may be overturned. Cllr. Murphy noted that it was good that Clare had taken on the matter and hopefully that a resolution will be reached.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to his request at last month’s meeting to get an update on the Affordable Housing scheme on Francis Street.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted his request for an update and advised one will be provided.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 21 January 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Housing Adaption Grants.
Correspondence dated 20 January 2025 from TII in relation to speeding on Irish roads.
Correspondence dated 9 January 2025 from State Examinations Commission regarding allowances for students with Dyslexia.
Correspondence dated 16 January 2025 from Office of the Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media in relation to tourist accommodation.
Correspondence dated 20 January 2025 from Irish Coast Guard in relation to an invitation to attend a meeting with Clare County Council.
Acknowledgement dated 16 January 2025 from An Garda Síochána in relation to speeding our Irish roads.
Acknowledgement dated 16 January 2025 from An Garda Siochána in relation to speed on Irish roads.
Acknowledgement dated 22 January 2025 from the GAA in relation to fee being charged to under sixteens.
Resolution dated 15 January 2025 from Leitrim County Council in relation to voting for Diaspora.
Resolution dated 17 January 2025 from Roscommon County Council in relation to Ministry for rural and urban isolation and loneliness.
Cllr. I. Lynch referred to correspondence which had been received from the Irish Coast Guard and expressed his disappointment that they would not attend a meeting as requested. Cllr. Lynch noted that if they wish to extend their lease then they should be willing to come into the Chamber and meet with the elected members.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the correspondence received on the 21
st
January 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage and noted he was not content with the reply received.
It was noted that as per Standing Order no. 12 Order of Business, the discussion on Correspondence items will be limited to the original proposer or the proposer’s nominee (one speaker only) of the motion.
Cllr. Guilfoyle noted this and asked the proposers of the motion if they were happy with the reply from the Department.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that it was best to take this offline and discuss with the proposers of the motion.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 10 December, 2024 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 13 November, 2024 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 19 November, 2024 be noted.”
d. Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 19 November, 2024 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a) Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 9 December, 2024 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 6
th
January, 2025 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management Report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. S. Talty referred to RRDF Applications and queried if the decision has been made as to what projects are going forward to apply for funding.
Cllr. P. Burke referred to the housing allocations update and queried how photos of tenants receiving their keys is allowed under GDPR.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle thanked the Chief Executive for the detail and information that goes into the Management Report. Cllr. Guilfoyle noted that all sections had updates in relation to their involvement in the recent Storm Éowyn and he thanked all those who worked on clean-up operations.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Cliffs of Moher and noted that there has been misinformation in the public surrounding accessibility to the Cliffs of Moher but Cllr. McInerney acknowledged that the Cliffs of Moher Experience is open and accessible to all.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the new shuttle bus service at the Cliffs of Moher and requested that the bus schedule/timetable would start early enough to accommodate staff travelling there.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted in relation to the RRDF funding application that a lot of deliberation had gone into each of the projects with Management Team and that consideration had to be taken as to who would most likely be awarded the funding. Dr. Kirby advised that two projects emerged from the Management Team deliberations as front runners, namely Killaloe-Ballina Town Enhancement and Mobility Strategy and the Crusheen Railway & Village Enhancement project.
Dr. Kirby thanked the members for their goodwill on Storm Éowyn and agreed that the Cliffs of Moher are very much open and accessible.
P. Murphy, Director of Social Development noted in relation to the photos of tenants receiving their keys that those families had given their permission to have photos taken and shared.
S. McNulty, Director of Tourism Development noted she was aware of the misinformation surrounding the Cliffs of Moher and noted that it was the coastal walk that was being closed for safety works but reaffirmed that the Cliffs of Moher Experience is very much open to the public. Ms. McNulty acknowledged the points made by Cllr. McInerney in relation to shuttle bus timetables and advised they will work with the successful tender.
A. Reynolds, A/Director Rural Development listed the five project proposals that were assessed by Management Team for RRDF funding. Ms. Reynolds noted that the Killaloe/Ballina project has been put through for Category 2 RRDF funding which will make it easier to secure further funding under Category 1 of the RRDF. Ms. Reynolds noted of the other projects reviewed it was agreed that the Crusheen Railway Project best met the criteria due to the county wide impact it has.
Item 8: Disposal of property (by lease/licence) at Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Knappogue Castle and Inis Cealtra Visitor Centre pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Siobhán McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that following a competitive tender process, Clare County Council have appointed Corporate Catering Services Ltd as the catering operator for Clare County Councils catering locations in Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Knappogue Castle and Inis Cealtra Visitor Centre subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 15
th
January 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. C. Molloy agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property (by lease/Licence) at Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Knappogue Castle and Inis Cealtra Visitor Centre to Corporate Catering Services Ltd subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 15
th
January 2025.”
Item 9: Strategic Policy Committees Standing Orders.
The Strategic Policy Committee Standing Orders were circulated with the agenda.
The members noted this item as presented having been proposed by Cllr. S. Talty, seconded by Cllr. P. Daly and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. P. Burke welcomed the appointment and urged the company to look at employing local people and using local produce.
Item 10: Transport Connectivity
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“In advance of the 2025 tourist season we call on Clare County Council to outline plans proposed or in place to increase transport connectivity designed to minimise traffic density difficulties while supporting our towns and villages.”
(M)
Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development, Siobhán McNulty, Director of Tourism Development and Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development replied as follows:
“In 2024 Clare County Council established the North Clare Integrated Traffic and Transport Plan and significant work took place to address concerns associated with the growing scale of demand for the public road network in North Clare. This work was supported by key stakeholders and done in partnership with community representatives and the following working groups were established, comprising Council officials from across various Directorates, Fáilte Ireland, National Parks & Wildlife Services, NTA, community representatives and other key stakeholders, to advance the delivery of the themed actions in the timeliest manner possible:
One-way Bus System
Signage and Lining
Traffic Management and Pedestrian Facilities
Lay Bys, Parking and Park and Ride
Public Transport
Road Maintenance and Improvement
The Council is currently preparing an updated report in relation to the actions completed in 2024 and has commenced planning for 2025. One of the key actions that is planned, to build on the work done last year, is a pilot hop-on hop-off bus service to reduce traffic on the roads of North Clare and to deliver footfall to the towns and villages for economic sustainability. Following consultation, a tender process is now being progressed.
Service Overview:
The hop-on hop-off shuttle is a convenient transportation service designed to enhance the travel experience for tourists and locals alike. The shuttle operates on a predetermined route with designated stops at the towns and villages in North Clare namely Miltown Malbay, Lahinch, Liscannor, Doolin, Lisdoonvarna and Kilfenora, arriving at the Cliffs of Moher Visitor Centre, which will allow passengers to explore key attractions, towns and villages at their own pace.
The complimentary service will run for the months of June, July and August each year and may include May and September in addition to the mandatory period.
Objectives:
Provide an accessible and affordable transportation option for visitors.
Encourage tourism by linking major attractions towns and villages.
Enhance the overall visitor experience with informative commentary on the amenities of the Burren and Cliffs of Moher UNESCO Geopark.
Key Features:
Flexible Schedule:
Buses run every 30-60 minutes daily, with extended hours during peak tourist seasons.
Designated Stops:
Stops at major towns and villages that include shopping areas, and dining, cafes, and services.
Safety Measures:
Candidates must note that shuttle services will not run on any day in which a yellow or higher weather warning is in place, which would instigate a closure of the Cliffs of Moher Visitor Experience
Affordable:
The Service is to provide visitors daily complimentary transfers from the towns of Milltown Malbay, Lahinch, Liscannor and Kilfenora, Lisdoonvarna, Doolin.
Branding:
Vehicles must be white or unbranded. The contracting authority reserves the right to require the vehicles to be wrapped or liveried in the contracting authority’s livery.
Target Audience:
Tourists exploring the area for the first time.
Locals seeking an easy way to go to town, work, visit a friend or relative, access essential services.
Families and groups wanting a flexible travel option.
Clare County Council will continue working through the process under the North Clare Traffic and Transport Plan framework and to engage with the Members in 2025.”
The elected members welcomed the developments that have been put in place but raised concerns over routes that have been left out such as Fanore, the members noted that it is important that all communities are linked in. The members acknowledged that towns and villages are suffering and declining and noted that footfall is the bloodline of small businesses, the members noted that if this plan isn’t a success, then there is a danger of losing these towns and villages. The elected members also noted that a county wide integrated transport plan is needed so not to isolate other parts of the county.
Item 11: Public Safety
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council formally invites Garda Commissioner Drew Harris to address a Council session. This invitation follows a recent increase in reported criminal activity in Ennis, Clarecastle, and throughout County Clare. The Council aims to understand the strategies being implemented to improve public safety and address these concerns promptly and effectively.”
The elected members acknowledged that the Gardaí are under resourced, the members noted that Clare has a growing population, and they are seeking to understand what the vision is for the Garda set up in Clare in the future. The elected members queried if the new Garda configurations is fit for purpose and urged for the new Local Community Safety Partnership to be set up as soon as possible. The members referred to the new speed limits and noted enforcement of the new speed limits would be difficult if Gardaí are under resourced.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that a Chairperson has been appointed to the new Local Community Safety Partnership, but they are awaiting approval from the Minister.
Item 12: Tree Removal and Replacement Plan
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P. Burke, J. Crowe, C. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That this Council would immediately put in place a major removal and replacement plan (away from the infrastructure) for trees near electrical infrastructure i.e. light poles and cable lines. It is no longer acceptable that we continue to have lighting installations completely overgrown by trees. The last two storms have left 1.25 million customers without power and many such incidents caused by falling trees.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“It is anticipated that a national review will be undertaken to better understand the challenges faced by all response agencies and in particular utility companies such as ESB Networks, Eir and mobile phone operators in dealing with the aftermath of storm Eowyn.
Clare County Council have responsibilities and certain powers under the Roads Act in conjunction with landowners in relation to roadside vegetation and trees but that does not extend to private property.
However, prior to the proposed removal of any trees we would first need to establish the responsibility for such action and consult with the relevant utility company.
The local authority is active each year in the area of roadside maintenance across the 4,400 km of the county road network. However, we do not have responsibility for the installation and maintenance of third-party utility infrastructure on the public road network. As a Road Authority our responsibility is to ensure the safety of road users and not the protection of third-party utilities.
With regard to public lighting concerns and in particular overgrown trees the Municipal District offices throughout the county can address any such issues directly. If a light is faulty this can be reported immediately to our maintenance contractor via the following link
https://electricskyline.ie/report-a-fault-public-lighting/
.
In the aftermath of storm Eowyn ESB Networks are currently not permitting access to public lights which are situated on ‘network poles’ as they assess the damage across their network. Therefore, in the short term we will not be able to address lighting faults on these poles but once the curfew is lifted, we will carry out the relevant repairs. All faults should still be logged in the meantime. The remaining public lighting network is not affected by this curfew. Of the non-network lights which make up approximately 80% of the network there are currently only 70 lights logged with a fault. The total outage rate across the entire public light network currently stands at 1.7%.”
The elected members acknowledged that the climate is changing, these storms will be more frequent and that it is imperative that dangerous trees near roads or on Council properties be dealt with as a priority. The members stated that parts of Clare were left without power for too long and it was mainly due to trees falling on power lines. The members commended the ESB for the work they did and how responsive they were to the Councillors and to the Council, but it was noted that ESB need to maintain their property, so power lines aren’t damaged to the extent they were in the most recent storm. It was also agreed that clarification is needed regarding the rules around felling of trees, and it was suggested that a media campaign should be run to inform landowners. The members stated that water pumping stations need to have generators installed.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that public health and safety is the primary concern of the Local Authority and a co-ordinated response between all agencies is required to ensure that power lines, properties and roads are made safe.
A. Farrell, Director of Physical Development Directorate stated that they will get the information out about the felling of trees. Mr. Farrell noted that removal of trees is not as straightforward as it seems. There is a huge cost to the state but Mr. Farell noted if there is a specific issue that the landowner needs help with to approach the MD they will assist where possible. Mr. Farrell noted that this is part of a larger plan nationally and the cost will feed into the national review in terms of how it is addressed going forward.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that this is a very serious issue and due to the danger to life it needs to be dealt with as soon as possible.
Item 13: Funding for severe weather events
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I call on the new Government to make available funds to meet the needs of our community's hardship as a result resent severe weather in Co. Clare.”
(M)
The elected members suggested that a compensation fund be made available to those that were without power and water for long periods. The members noted that businesses had to close for extended periods and farming communities had to deal with damaged or structurally exposed buildings after the storm.
The elected members noted the Humanitarian Assistance Scheme was put in place but that it was means tested and difficult to access. It was felt by the elected members that utility companies such as the ESB and EIR should be compensating those that were without power for long periods.
Item 14: Government to Grant Aid Affordable Generators
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. M. Begley, M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“We call on Clare County Council to request the Government to grant aid, affordable generators, so that for future storms people will be in a position to cope with the difficult circumstances which has been seen in the recent Storm Éowyn.”
(M)
The elected members referred to new build homes that are heavily reliant on electricity to run and stated that the government needs to grant aid to assist with purchasing affordable generators. The members stated that any adaption or work required to install the generators should be included in the scheme. The members agreed that rural areas need generators for water, farms and for communication to allow people to call the emergency services. It was also suggested that the HSE be mandated to have a plan in place for those with specific medical needs such as dialysis treatment.
Item 15: Engagement with Agricultural Sector for Storm Cleanup
Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“Calling on Clare County Council to engage with farmer representative organisations and agricultural contractors, to investigate the potential for cooperation in dealing with the fallout from storm damage.”
(M)
The elected members noted that following the recent storm farmers were helping clear roads and cut trees and it was suggested that Clare County Council assist by providing training and insurance for these farmers so that they can help during the winter period with tasks such as gritting. The members noted that farmers are willing to help and should be utilised.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that it was fantastic to see the community resilience over the last two weeks but noted that to put a more formal structure in place will mean a lot of red tape. Dr. Kirby advised that where there is good community spirit and resilience it is best to leave it as it is.
Item 16: Development of Tourism Assets along Shannon Estuary
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council supports the development of tourism assets along the Shannon Estuary to take advantage of the opportunities posed by such a beautiful and unique landscape.”
(M)
Siobhán McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development replied as follows:
“Thank you for this motion regarding support for the development of tourism assets along the Shannon Estuary. I want to take this opportunity to confirm that the Tourism Directorate and key state agencies, namely Fáilte Ireland and the OPW, have always recognised the Shannon Estuary as a unique and special tourism destination, rich in heritage, natural beauty, and visitor experiences.
The Shannon Estuary has been identified by both Fáilte Ireland and Clare County Council as an area of significant tourism potential, and we remain committed to supporting its ongoing development and promotion. This includes working with attractions, activity providers, and service businesses to ensure that the area’s tourism offering is strengthened and maximised.
The promotion of the area is ongoing, and key investments have already been made to enhance the visitor experience and promote the route, including:
An investment of nearly €4 million in the development of Vandeleur Walled Garden and Visitor Centre, ensuring it becomes a major attraction and another compelling reason to visit the area.
Investment in the EuroVelo cycle route, with Clare County Council investing in additional road signage and mapboards to improve visitor navigation and awareness. Visit Clare is also actively promoting the Shannon Estuary Way as a key part of the EuroVelo route, encouraging more cyclists to explore the area.
Significant investment made by the OPW to the capital improvement and renovation to the Street and remedial works on Scattery Island off the northern bank of the Shannon Estuary. In addition, the NPWS are working on a comprehensive strategy for the Hen Harrier at Scattery Island.
In addition, further promotional initiatives are planned to raise the profile of the Shannon Estuary and increase visitor numbers, including: Inclusion in the new Top Attractions and Activities Guide to Clare, highlighting the key visitor experiences along the Shannon Estuary.
A dedicated Shannon Estuary feature in the Shannon Region Edition of The Daily Adventure (Ireland’s #1 visitor guide), ensuring year-round visibility from March 2025.
Expanded visibility on the Visit Clare website, complementing the existing Shannon Estuary tourism website, which is supported by Clare County Council, Fáilte Ireland, and others.
A new promotion of local bus routes to encourage both locals and visitors to explore the Shannon Estuary Way in a sustainable and accessible way, highlighting public transport options that connect key attractions, towns, and villages along the route.
Highlighting the Shannon Estuary Way as part of the ‘Be a Tourist in Your Own County Clare’ campaign in 2025, encouraging locals to explore and advocate for the area.
With these investments and planned promotional initiatives, we expect the Shannon Estuary area to continue to grow as a must-visit destination, benefiting both visitors and the local communities that rely on tourism.”
The elected members noted that the Shannon Estuary is the largest and most picturesque asset and is a specific area of conservation. The members noted that the Southeast Clare side of the Estuary needs to be focussed on given its proximity to Shannon Airport. The members acknowledged that the Estuary is an untapped resource that has huge potential. The members stated that a rounded offering could be provided by linking up South Clare with West Clare though the waterways.
Item 17: Waiver of Planning Permission Fees and Associated Connection Fees
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council request that the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to apply a waiver of planning permission and associated connection for all properties impacted by Defective Concrete Blocks.”
(M)
Cllr. I. Lynch noted that he wished to add the word fees to his motion so that it reads as follows:
“That Clare County Council request that the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to apply a waiver of planning permission fees and associated connection fees for all properties impacted by Defective Concrete Blocks.”
(M)
The elected members noted that property owners shouldn’t have to fund costs such as ESB reconnection fees, planning permission fees and development contribution fees which they may have paid previously because of defective concrete blocks.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that the development contribution fees are being reviewed with the SPCs for those impacted and noted that the Director for Social Development, Jason Murphy can raise it at a national level.
Item 18: Ennis 2040 DAC
Ar moladh T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T.Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“Ennis 2040 DAC - Council approved a loan for €10 million that a discussion be allowed under the following headings:
What's the cost of the loan and it's duration.
Schedule of loan repayments by Ennis 2040 DAC.
List the assets owned by Ennis 2040 DAC at this current date.
Purpose of loans and has the Council guaranteed all liabilities.
Is the Council financially liable in any event of unfortunate financial misadventure.”
(Q)
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Seán Lenihan A/Director of Economic Development replied as follows:
“Members will be aware that the Ennis 2040 Economic & Spatial Strategy was developed in the period 2018 to 2020 and involved extensive public consultation and stakeholder engagement with local communities, businesses and locally elected Councillors. An Ennis 2040 Steering Group was formed from Clare County Council Chief Executive, Directors, the President of the Ennis Chamber of Commerce, the Mayor of Ennis and other key stakeholders. This group in consultation with business leaders, developed the vision, objectives and goals of the Strategy.
The Strategy titled 'Ennis 2040 – An Economic and Spatial Strategy', was officially launched on 22nd October 2021 by Tánaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, Leo Varadkar TD. This strategy provides a comprehensive framework for the sustainable development of the town and seeks to support compact growth and realise sustainable economic, social and environmental opportunities in Ennis and Clare over the next 20 years. The purpose of the strategy is to guide the long-term development of our county town, Ennis, and highlight investment opportunities that will deliver competitive advantage over the short, medium and long term. The strategy capitalises on the strengths, addresses the challenges and puts in a spatial implementation plan that will facilitate the delivery of the vision for Ennis.
A Designated Activity Company (DAC) was established as a 100% owned subsidiary of Clare County Council to deliver on this strategy. The use of special purpose vehicles has long been established in Clare County Council to utilise the advantages in building commercial relationships, utilising specialist knowledge & skill and potential in raising capital. This delivery method arises from the evolvement of Local Government under the Local Government Act 2014.
The strategic sites identified in the plan required the incurring of preliminary expenditure in building on the plans and business cases and in support of the strategy. A €10m working capital loan was proposed on 14th June 2021 to finance a Planned Works Programme as set out in the Ennis 2040 Economic and Spatial Strategy. This loan was proposed and approved by the elected Members of Clare County Council.
The minutes of this meeting are published on Clare County Council website on the following link: www.clarecoco.ie/your-council/meetings/minutes/ccc-minutes/2021/june-council-meeting-2021-43496.pdf
Sanction from the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, in accordance with Section 106 of the Local Government Act, 2001 as amended, for a working capital loan of €10m to finance the startup works programme of the Ennis 2040 Strategy was subsequently sought by Clare County Council. Said Sanction was secured in March 2022. Members are advised that there is a need to provide additional loan funding for the continuing implementation of this strategy.
The audited accounts of the Ennis 2040 DAC are completed to Financial Year 2023 and the Financial Year 2024 audit is in progress. These audited accounts have been previously made available to all Members.
In response to the question, we wish to advise as follows:
A) What is the cost of the loan and its Duration.
Clare County Council has to date drawn down €10m of the approved funding @ 31/12/2024 in two tranches. These loan tranches have been drawn for 20 years at a Fixed Interest rate of 2.6%-3.25% for the first 3 years interest only. This cost in the first three years to the Council is €130k per annum interest on the €5m drawn initially and from 1/1/2025 €296k interest only on the €10m.
As of 31st December 2024, a total of €2.2m has been advanced to Ennis 2040 (Strategic Development) DAC by this council for the purpose of funding the work programme underway. This cost to date by Ennis 2040 DAC is circa. €95k interest. It is planned for the remaining €7.8m to be drawn in 2025 on demand and interest will be calculated thereon.
B) Schedule of Loan Repayments by DAC 2040 DAC
As outlined above, Clare County Council has advanced Ennis 2040 €2.2m as part of this loan finance. This loan was drawn for 20 years at a Fixed Interest rate of 2.6% with the first 3 years interest only. This cost to date by Ennis 2040 DAC is circa. €95k interest.
When the full €10m is drawn down, the indicative repayments per annum based on the current interest rate is €650k per annum subject to the timelines of project delivery.
C) List the Assets owned by DAC at this current date
Appendix 8 of the Annual Financial Statement of Clare County Council lists the Associate and Subsidiary of this Council and the asset values.
As per draft 2024 Accounts of Ennis 2040 DAC, the value of Fixed Assets and Current Assets is €2.24m, offset by the loan balance of €2.2m at that date.
D) Purpose of Loans and has the Council guaranteed all liabilities
The purpose of the €10m loan approved by the Members at the June Council meeting in 2021 was working capital finance as preliminary expenditure on a planned works programme for Ennis 2040 (Strategic Development) DAC
The funds drawn down have been applied to the design, planning, and progression of key projects on behalf of Clare County Council and on behalf of the Ennis 2040 DAC, namely:
Abbey Street
Francis St
Harvey’s Quay
Post Office Field
In addition, the funds also covered company setup, ongoing operating costs and overheads. Such overheads are fully allocated to each project in proportion to the duration of time spent on the particular project.
The four projects listed above are works provided on behalf of Clare County Council under a Service Level Agreement and the costs are recouped from the Council. Currently, the Council is carrying these costs as Preliminary Expenditure Work in Progress on its balance sheet. A total of circa. €5.15 million preliminary expenditure is carried in the books of Clare County Council which is not DAC activity and will form part of the 2024 Work in progress on the council’s balance sheet.
At this juncture, the entity has as yet not progressed significantly any of its own sites that will be a draw on the loan approved. The primary activity to date has been on Council owned sites which is indicative of the turnover of the entity to date and the work in progress expenditure reported in the accounts of the Council.
A number of Key property purchases are in progress where the remaining loan finance will be used to secure these sites. A further workshop with Members is scheduled for March to discuss these sites and the financing of the development of these sites.
E) Is the Council financially liable in any event of unfortunate financial misadventure.
The Council is liable for the financial activity on its own books, the preliminary expenditure incurred to date and also for the loan that has been drawn by the Council and advanced to its subsidiary.
This is in line with expenditure that would be incurred with ongoing capital project development of the local authority as project move from concept to delivery. At the close of the council’s accounts in 2023, €91.9million in work in progress expenditure was reported.
It should be noted that the annual accounts of both Clare County Council and Ennis 2040 (Strategic Development) DAC are subject to independent audit. The audits are completed for both entities for 2023.
Trusting the above clarifies the position.”
The elected members expressed concern over the increase in interest rates, the ability to repay the loan and how income is being generated. The members stated that they take issue with public money being given to private companies to spend on behalf of the members and queried what the €7.8m to be drawn in 2025 was being spent on. The members noted that this issue is of great importance to the county and should be discussed on a more regular occurrence.
Cllr. P. Murphy stated that the Motion was worded like a Question and as such by allowing discussion it was in breach of Standing Orders.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that CPG agreed this was to be a Question and not a Motion but when the agenda went to print it was noted as a Motion in error.
Cllr. T. O’Brien stated that two speakers had already been allowed so a change to proceedings couldn’t be made on it now.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that Ennis 2040 DAC is a wholly owned subsidiary of Clare County Council and that prior to set up of the DAC a significant amount of stakeholder engagement was undertaken. Dr. Kirby outlined the reasons why a DAC is the preferred option and noted that the primary focus is to stimulate the Clare economy. Dr. Kirby noted that there was a workshop for the elected members last September and that on the 4
th
March 2025 a workshop is being held for the Ennis MD Councillors and on the 24
th
March for the full Council. Dr. Kirby stated that she is satisfied that the DAC are doing good work and assured the elected members that funding is being spent wisely.
Item 19: Recognising President Michael D. Higgins
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“Recognising the distinguished service of President Michael D. Higgins as he approaches the completion of his terms as President of Ireland, and acknowledging his strong connections to County Clare through his early life and education, my motion is:
That Clare County Council formally invite President Higgins to attend a Civic Reception in County Clare, where representatives from communities across the county would have the opportunity to express their appreciation for his lifelong commitment to public service, social justice, and the promotion of Irish culture and heritage.
In the event that such a visit is not feasible, that Clare County Council respectfully request the President to facilitate the attendance of representatives from community groups across County Clare at one of the President’s Garden parties at Áras an Uachtaráin during the summer, providing an opportunity to mark and celebrate his enduring connection with the county.”
(M)
Cllr. R. McInerney advised the meeting that following submission of the Motion she was informed that a Civic Reception had already been held for President Higgins and she would like to amend the motion as follows and this was seconded by Cllr. J. Killeen:
“Recognising the distinguished service of President Michael D. Higgins as he approaches the completion of his terms as President of Ireland, and acknowledging his strong connections to County Clare through his early life and education, my motion is:
That Clare County Council respectfully request the President to facilitate the attendance of representatives from community groups across County Clare at one of the President’s Garden parties at Áras an Uachtaráin during the summer, providing an opportunity to mark and celebrate his enduring connection with the county.”
(M)
Cllr. R. McInerney noted President Higgins’ deep personal connection to Co. Clare and acknowledged that the President’s Garden party is a wonderful experience that would be a fantastic opportunity for our communities to attend.
Item 20: Road / Footpath Funding
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. R. McInerney, P. Hayes, J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“We propose that Clare County Council, our Oireachtas members and the relevant Government Departments redouble their efforts in securing increased road/footpath funding for our county and outline the funding streams available to improve our overall county road and footpath network as well as details of the funding applications submitted in each funding category in the last 5 years.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Set out below are the initial funding allocations in the primary grant categories received from the Department of Transport (DoT) & Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) for the period 2020 to 2024.
DoT
FUNDING CATEGORY
2020 (€)
2021 (€)
2022 (€)
2023 (€)
2024 (€)
Non National Roads Grants
Strategic Regional & Local Roads (SRLR)
4,600,000
4,000,000
11,800,000
15,000,000
19,500,000
Safety Improvement Works
395,000
405,000
529,000
530,000
529,000
Discretionary
3,587,000
3,599,000
3,592,000
3,572,500
3,568,000
Restoration Improvement
10,586,500
11,235,000
12,186,000
12,877,000
13,093,000
Training
79,500
79,500
79,500
79,500
79,500
Bridge Rehabilitation
784,500
687,000
602,000
612,000
615,000
Specific Improvement
330,000
100,000
70,000
-
100,000
Drainage Works
879,864
879,864
879,864
880,000
792,000
PSCI Survey
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
Speed Limits
12,500
15,000
-
8,800
22,000
Cycle Signs
0
2,200
-
1,800
85,200
Active Travel
0
579,340
-
-
-
Climate Adaptation
0
20,000
683,000
739,000
726,500
Former National Roads
0
267,000
380,000
500,000
500,000
Total Improvement
21,287,864
21,901,904
30,834,364
34,833,600
39,643,200
Restoration Maintenance
3,043,000
3,223,000
3,357,000
3,357,000
3,357,000
Total Maintenance
3,043,000
3,223,000
3,357,000
3,357,000
3,357,000
CIS
142,000
142,000
726,000
594,000
594,000
TOTALS
€24,472,864
25,266,904
€34,917,364
38,784,600
43,594,200
TII
FUNDING CATEGORY
2020 (€)
2021 (€)
2022 (€)
2023 (€)
2024 (€)
NATIONAL ROADS
N19 Shannon Airport Access
250,000
400,000
500,000
500,000
500,000
N P Public Lights
119,123
119,123
119,123
119,123
119,123
TOTAL National Primary
369,123
519,123
619,123
619,123
619,123
NS Overlays
1,240,000
2,040,000
1,450,000
2,087,800
2,185,000
HD15/HD17
(including Ministers Place Kilkee)
65,000
-
240,000
255,000
262,000
HD28 NS Pavement Renewals
180,000
-
-
-
-
N85 Kilnamona
100,000
100,000
100,000
-
-
N18 Cycleway Latoon
-
-
-
25,000
-
Ballyvaughan Village
-
50,000
-
-
-
N67/N85 Blakes Corner
350,000
2,000,000
2,000,000
50,000
50,000
N S Maintenance
237,009
237,009
237,009
237,009
237,009
N S Public Lights
62,208
62,208
62,208
62,208
62,208
N S Winter Maintenance
159,500
159,500
159,500
159,500
129,406
Fencing Retrofit
25,000
-
-
-
-
TOTAL National Secondary
2,418,717
4,648,717
4,249,517
2,876,517
2,925,623
TOTAL ENG SUPPORT
144,200
144,200
144,200
344,200
344,200
Greenways
0
0
970,000
2,030,000
2,120,000
OVERALL TOTALS
2,932,040
5,312,040
5,982,840
5,869,840
6,008,946
The level of funding provided for road improvements and maintenance is primarily dictated by the various government funding departments; DoT, TII, NTA & DRCD. Many of the grant categories are not subject to funding applications. In most cases where funding submissions are made, there are funding limits set for these submissions. Examples of these limits are set out below;
Restoration Improvement
Every 3 years local authorities are requested to submit a 3 year Restoration Improvement Programme to the DoT for approval. The last programme was submitted in 2024 and was limited to an annual budget estimate of 100% of this Council’s initial 2024 RI Grant allocation. The total funding submission for the years 2025 – 2027 was therefore limited to €39.5m.
CIS
In 2023 a funding submission for the Community Involvement Scheme for 2024 & 2025 was invited by the DoT. The value of the funding submission was limited to the combined value of the 2022 & 2023 allocations plus 20%, which amounted to €1,584,000
Climate Adaptation and Resilience Works
In 2024 a funding submission for Climate Adaptation and Resilience Works for 2025 was invited by the DoT. The value of the funding submission was limited to 50% of the Council’s Restoration Maintenance allocation for 2024 which amounted to €895k.
Safety Improvement Works
In 2024 a funding submission for Safety Improvement Works for 2025 was invited by the DoT. The value of the funding submission was limited to 150% of the Council’s 2024 Safety Improvement Works allocation, limiting the funding submission to €793,000
Funding for other significant elements of the roadworks programme such as National Secondary overlays and the Local Improvement Scheme are determined by the relevant funding department and are not subject to funding submissions.
It should be noted that specific funding for new footpaths and footpath improvement works have been provided by way of a dividend from Irish Public Bodies over the last number of years. The total amount provided for footpath works in the period 2020 to 2024 was €2,620,000.”
The elected members sought to understand what funding specifically the local authority had applied for and if they have been applying for the maximum funding in all categories. The members noted that in order to lobby the Ministers they need to know what exactly has been applied for. The members queried the Active Travel funding figures for 2022-2024.
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development addressed the meeting noting that he shared the concerns of the members and that the reply addressed actual applications with what was received. Mr. Feeney noted that as with all grant applications there are strict criteria when applying for funding and the local authority must adhere to these. Mr. Feeney noted that footpath improvement works have been funded by way of a dividend from the Irish Public Bodies and advised that the Municipal Districts can deliver these improvement works.
Mr. Feeney noted that there is a strategic plan in place and referred to the County Development Plan and the Northern Limerick Distributor Road which was not supported by the Minister at the time but noted it was deemed of strategic importance.
Mr. Feeney referred to the Memorandum of Roads Grants that is issued by the Department which details the funding application process for Strategic and Local Roads, he noted that the strategic road network is ranked by indicators such as volume of traffic and number of road accidents in order to prioritise funding. Mr. Feeney stated that road resurfacing is the priority for the local authority at this time.
A. Farrell, Director of Physical Development addressed the meeting and advised that the local authority is seeking additional funding, and a case was submitted to the Department last year. Mr. Farrell confirmed that all opportunities in relation to funding will be sought.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive advised that a meeting has been arranged with the Minister and Oireachtas members for the end of February and it will be raised with them at that meeting.
Cllr. P. Hayes sought further details on funding applications made and Active Travel funding.
A. Farrell, Director of Physical Development stated the team did a workshop with the elected members last year and advised that he was happy to arrange another workshop with the elected members if they so wished.
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback