Minutes of the March 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of the March 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 10th March 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Interim Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Mr. Seán Lenihan, A/Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, A/Director of Rural Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. P. Daly, P. O’Gorman
Absent:
Cllr. D. Gould
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The O’Dea Family, on the death of Maye (Mary) O’Dea, RIP.
The Murphy Family, on the death of B. May Murphy, RIP.
The Gormley Family, on the death of Mikey Gormley, RIP.
The Walsh Family, on the death of Bishop Willie Walsh, RIP.
The O’Keeffe Family, on the death of Noel O’Keeffe, RIP.
The Hoban and Wallace Family, on the death of Kevin Hoban, RIP.
The elected members remembered Bishop Willie Walsh and noted what a compassionate man he was and what a loss he is to the County. The elected members noted the work he did with regards to domestic violence and stated that he never shied-away from challenging issues. Cllr. P. Hayes proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Howard and agreed by the members present.
The meeting resumed at 3.25p.m.
St. Patrick’s Day Parade in New York
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon and agreed by the members that the Cathaoirleach accept the kind invitation of the County Clare Patriotic, Benevolent and Social Association of New York City to attend the St. Patrick’s Day Parade in New York.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that Seachtain na Gaeilge is under way and encouraged the members to use Irish throughout the meeting if they so wished.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan referred to International Women’s Day and noted that the theme of this year’s event was “Accelerate Action”. He noted that one of the messages was “supporting women and girls into leadership & decision-making.” Cllr. O’Callaghan referred to the strong female leadership in Clare County Council and stated that the Council’s continued focus on supporting an open and inclusive workplace is paying off to the benefit of the council and the county. Cllr. O’Callaghan noted that Clare County Council is a place where all employees have the same opportunities for recognition and career development, and it continues to be committed to addressing workplace barriers to equality and creating an open and inclusive workplace community. Many equality, diversity and inclusion initiatives and supports are already in place, and the council will continue to work in this area.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the February Meeting of Clare County Council held on 10
th
February 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Cllr. T. O’Brien sought an amendment to the minutes under Item 18 to accurately reflect his comments at the meeting, as follows:
“The members stated that they take issue with public money being given to private companies to spend on behalf of the members and queried what the €7.8m to be drawn in 2025 was being spent on.”
Cllr. O’Brien stated as elected members they are answerable, but they have yet to be briefed on the update that the Ennis MD members were briefed on.
Dr. C. Kirby noted that the minutes will be amended to reflect Cllr. O’Brien’s comments. She also noted that an Ennis 2040 workshop is planned for the full Council for the 24
th
March and a briefing is scheduled for the May meeting with the Interim Chief Operating Officer of Ennis 2040 DAC.
Cllr. P. Hayes noted his disappointment that they had not yet been given the Ennis 2040 update and stated that he is being asked questions that he can’t answer.
In response, S. Lenihan, A/Director of Economic Development advised the meeting that the Ennis MD Members asked that a statement issued following the Briefing with them on March 4
th
. Mr. Lenihan confirmed that he issued said statement to the full Council and the Oireachtas Members that evening prior to issuing to the media. He also advised that there was additional information that they would like to share with the Members but could not yet due to commercial sensitivities. Mr. Lenihan pledged that he would at the earliest possible juncture.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services noted that Ennis 2040 DAC has work in progress across number of sites, some are under the ownership of Clare County Council, and those costs are on the Clare County Council ledger. Ms. Fitzgerald noted that there are two different structures, and more detail will be provided at the workshop on the 24
th
March.
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Acknowledgement dated 14th February 2025 from An Garda Síochána in relation to invite issued to the Garda Commissioner.
Acknowledgement dated 25th February 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Rural and Community Development in relation to funding post Storm Éowyn.
Acknowledgement dated 21st February 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to properties affected by Defective Concrete Blocks.
Acknowledgement dated 13th February 2025 from Timmy Dooley T.D. in relation to Footpath and Road Funding.
Acknowledgement dated 13th February 2025 from Joe Cooney T.D. in relation to Footpath and Road Funding.
Acknowledgement from The Office of the Minister for Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and Digitalisation in relation to Footpath and Road Funding.
Resolution dated 27th February 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to Control of Dogs in Public Spaces.
Resolution dated 6th February 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to grant aid for purchase of generators.
Resolution dated 7th February 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to compensation for those affected by Storm Éowyn.
Resolution dated 7th February 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to actions following Storm Éowyn.
Resolution dated 5th February 2025 from Roscommon County Council in relation to preventative measures following Storm Éowyn.
Resolution dated 17th February 2025 from Roscommon County Council in relation to extra time in examinations for those with learning difficulties.
Resolution dated 17th February 2025 from Roscommon County Council in relation to emergency frontline services getting access to GOV NE.
Resolution dated 17th February 2025 from Roscommon County Council in relation to tree removal.
Resolution dated 13th February 2025 from South Dublin County Council in relation to the Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Resolution dated 4th March 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to children with additional needs.
Resolution dated 4th March 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to gender-based violence cases.
Resolution dated 11th February 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to the VAT rate.
Resolution dated 11th February 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to Carbon Taxes.
Resolution dated 11th February 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to the Tenant in Situ Scheme.
Resolution dated 11th February 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to Eviction Bans.
Resolution dated 11th February 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to Vaping.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the acknowledgement from An Garda Síochána and queried if it would be in order to get a date set for a meeting.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator, Corporate Services advised that he has been engaging with An Garda Síochána to set a date.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 14
th
January, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 4
th
February, 2025 as presented.
Item 6: Monthly Management Report
The monthly management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the TII safety improvement update and welcomed the N85 Clareabbey Roundabout project. Cllr. Guilfoyle queried why the Droichead na Gabhair Bridge was not included on the update. He noted that this is a vital project for the people of Clare given its proximity to Lees Road.
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Planning and Economic Development noted that they were exploring all options in relation to this, but the source of funding needs to be considered.
Cllr. T. O’Brien referred to pedestrianisation trial of the Killaloe Bridge and noted that consideration should be given to pausing the trial and reassess in September/October of this year when schools have returned, and holiday period is over.
Cllr. J. Garrihy acknowledged the work done by Rural Development in relation to grants and commended the Community Recognition Fund 2024. Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Clare Sports Partnership update and congratulated then on the work they do and noted the scale of activity taking place.
Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Historic Town Initiative for Lisdoonvarna Spa Wells and noted it requires major investment and requested it be presented to full Council.
Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant and noted it shows that people desire to live in rural Ireland.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Kilrush Maritime Training Centre and requested a progress update.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the Speed Limit Review and sought information on areas to be exempt and the submission the local authority made to the Department.
Cllr. J. Killeen referred to the Climate Action Plan Implementation update and queried how West Clare can benefit.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted in relation to the Kilrush Maritime Training Centre that they are pursuing funding through the Smart Regions Enterprise Innovation Scheme. Dr. Kirby stated that they need to get certainty over funding and DMAP’s.
A Farrell, Director of Physical Development noted that the Speed Limit Review would be on the April Council Meeting agenda.
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Planning and Economic Development referred to the Shannon Estuary Taskforce Report and noted that Clare is uniquely placed due to our deep-water port and the Atlantic. Mr. Lenihan noted that we are the lead authority with Kerry and Limerick and are working in collaboration with them.
Item 7: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at Vandeleur Walled Gardens and Visitor Centre, Kilrush, Co. Clare.
Report dated 27
th
February, 2025 from Deirdre O’Shea, Head of Tourism, Tourism Development and Planning Report dated 18
th
February, 2025 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination) and map. The reports outline details of proposed development at Vandeleur Walled Gardens and Visitor Centre, which includes the following improvement works:
The construction of a new wall and entrance gates to the existing Gardener’s yard.
The installation of a prefabricated storage container in the existing Gardener’s yard.
The demolition and rebuilding of the existing glasshouse in the walled garden.
Ancillary site works.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
Item 8: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at The Cloister, 49 Abbey Street, Co. Clare.
Report dated 4
th
March, 2025 from Joan Tarmey Acting Town Regeneration Officer and Planning Report dated 3
rd
March, 2025 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination) and map. The reports outline details of proposed development at The Cloister, 49 Abbey Street, which includes the following improvement works:
Change of use from bar and restaurant to multi-use community spaces including arts studios, classrooms, conference spaces, exhibition and heritage spaces, tourism space, the retention of existing ground floor café and existing kitchen (over two floors) and the retention of bar licence;
Addition of accessible platform lift internally to make all three floors accessible;
Addition of a universally accessible toilet and changing places toilet to ground floor;
Provision of storage internally;
Stripping out of superficial decoration such as carpets, internal walls and ceiling fittings;
Creation of 'Art Wall' on ground floor exterior onto Abbey Street in order to facilitate engagement with art in the public realm including digital display and projected media;
Internal and external decoration;
Signage externally;
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy addressed the meeting and gave a brief background of the proposed development.
Cllr. P. Hayes noted that he had no understanding of the project and suggest a full briefing on the proposed development. Cllr. Hayes queried if there was a business case for this.
Cllr. S. Talty noted that the local authority is actively buying new heritage buildings while other heritage buildings are falling into disrepair.
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan queried if there was a business case for the project.
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Planning and Economic Development noted that this was an opportunity that the Council was presented with, he noted that the building has not been bought but there is an option to buy if funding through Thrive is successful. Mr. Lenihan noted that in order to receive the funding planning permission is required. Mr Lenihan noted that €180,000 has been received through Thrive 1 which allowed initial works to be completed to apply for Thrive 2.
Mr. Lenihan noted in relation to the GAA carpark it is owned by the GAA and Clare County Council have entered into an agreement to develop the carpark and recoup the costs through parking charges.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy queried if the funding is successful will it be 100% funded and how will it work.
Cllr. S. Talty queried if Ennis MD have agreed their byelaws for parking fees.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services noted that until the grant is approved, the local authority is not committed to anything, but she stated that it will not be 100% funded and the cost of the building and future operation costs of the building will have to be funded by the council from future revenue budgets.
S. Lenihan noted acknowledged that if the grant is approved it will be a significant ask of the Council. In relation to the parking byelaws, he noted the review has started.
Item 9: Chief Executive Report in accordance with the requirements of Section 291 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended in relation to the Sceirde Rocks Windfarm.
Report from Dr. Carmel Kirby, Interim Chief Executive dated 5
th
March, 2025 was circulated with the agenda. The Chief Executive report is in accordance with the requirements of Section 291 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended following on from the submission of an application for an offshore windfarm to An Bord Pleanala, known as the Sceirde Rocks Windfarm.
The development consists of 30 no. wind turbines with fixed foundations and associated infrastructure, with an energy generating capacity of 450MW. The proposal consists of both on and offshore components with the development in Co. Clare consisting primarily of onshore works from the townland of Killard to Moneypoint.
The Chief Executive Report gave a detailed description of the development:
Offshore Development:
30 no. offshore Wind Turbine Generators (WTGs) with gravity based fixed-bottom foundations with the following details:
Tip height of 324.9m above Lowest Astronomical Tide (LAT),
Rotor diameter of 292m;
Hub height of 178.9m above LAT;
1 no. 220kV offshore substation (OSS) of 55 m in height above LAT (including crane and communications mast) with a gravity based fixed bottom foundation. The OSS consists of an offshore electrical substation platform with multiple decks accommodating the electrical and communications plant and equipment, ancillary components and welfare facilities;
A network of inter-array electrical and communication cables, of approximately 73 km in length, connecting the 30 WTGs to the OSS;
A 220kV offshore export cable complete with communication lines, of approximately 63.5 km in length, laid in and on the seabed from the OSS to landfall in the townland of Killard, Co. Clare;
Onshore Development:
An underground Transition Joint Bay (TJB) at the landfall point in the townland of Killard, Co. Clare connecting the offshore export cable to the onshore grid connection cable. The TJB consists of an underground concrete chamber (20m x 5m wide, with a depth of 2.5m), where the proposed offshore export cable will be connected to the onshore grid connection cable;
220kV onshore grid connection and communications cables laid underground, primarily in the public road corridor with small sections in third party lands, for approximately 19.3 km between the TJB in the townland of Killard, Co. Clare and the new 220kV Onshore Compensation Compound (OCC) in the townland of Ballymacrinan, Co. Clare;
220kV onshore grid connection and communication cables laid underground, primarily in the public road corridor with small sections in third party lands, for approximately 3 km between the new 220kV OCC in the townland of Ballymacrinan, Co. Clare and the existing Moneypoint 220kV substation in the townland of Carrowdotia South, Co. Clare;
43 no. joint bays complete with communication chambers and link box chambers along the onshore grid connection route between the TJB in the townland of Killard, Co. Clare to the existing 220kV Moneypoint substation in the townland of Carrowdotia South, Co. Clare;
A 220kV Onshore Compensation Compound located in the townland of Ballymacrinan, Co. Clare. The 220kV onshore compensation compound consists of:
Eirgrid 220kV GIS Building (49m x 18.5m, with a total height of 16.7m above Finished Floor Level (FFL);
ESB 220kV GIS Building (49m x 18.5m, with a total height of 16.7m above FFL);
Customer SCADA and MV power building (18.4m x 8.7m, with a total height of 6.15m above FFL);
Statcom building (30.5m x 22m, with a total height of 7.59m above FFL);
Upgrade of existing entrance onto the L-6150 including the removal of a small portion of existing stone wall and hedgerow;
All associated electrical and communications plant and equipment, welfare facilities, 3 no. foul water holding tanks, 3 no. bored wells, 3 no. attenuation tanks, access roads, car parking, security fencing and gates, rail and post fencing, telecommunications pole, lightning masts, signage, safety bollards, landscaping, drainage infrastructure and all other ancillary works and associated site development works;
3 no. temporary construction compounds along the onshore grid connection cable route:
1 no. temporary construction compound at the landfall point in the townland of Killard Co. Clare;
1 no. temporary construction compound at the Kilrush Golf Club in the townland of Parknamoney, Co. Clare;
1 no. temporary construction compound at the new 220kV OCC in the townland of Ballymacrinan, Co. Clare;
Reinstatement of the road or track surface above the proposed onshore grid connection cable trench along existing roads and tracks;
New and upgraded access tracks above the proposed onshore export cable trench in third party lands
Temporary entrances from public roads to facilitate construction of the onshore grid connection for construction phase only;
Provision of 3 no. passing bays and the widening of the L-6150 road in the townland of Ballymacrinan to facilitate the delivery of abnormal loads for the construction of the proposed OCC;
All works associated with spoil management;
All associated site works and ancillary development above and below ground including hard and soft landscaping, habitat enhancement and drainage infrastructure
A ten-year development permission is sought together with a 38-year operational life from the date of commissioning of the project.
The elected members discussed the proposed development and raised concerns on the following points:
Residents in west Clare are frustrated that there has been little to no engagement from the developers.
There is no mention of Co. Clare on the development website.
Condition of road network before, during and after the works is of concern. Will the developers carry out remediation works to the full width of the road? Concerns expressed that only part of the road will be remediated and long term this will have a negative impact on road users and the Council.
What will the benefits for County Clare be.
Potential for impact to local communities in West Clare with relation to noise, visual impact from compounds and disruption.
Concerns over percentage of community gain fund to be received by Clare expressed. There is no clarify what percentage of the fund will be allocated to Co. Clare.
Traffic management plan during the works was discussed. It was noted that many people not directly associated or benefiting from the development will be impacted as a result of the road closures and works proposed.
No consultation with full Council by the developer to date.
Will this proposal fast track the DMAP roadmap making process.
Mechanism to charge for conduits running through Clare. Will there be demand for several similar connections to be made in West Clare in the coming years, given that Moneypoint is a very strategic location for connecting to the grid.
What is the capacity of the ducts that are proposed to be laid? Can future developments also connect into those ducts to avoid reopening roads at this location? Or is it possible to lay more than one duct when the road is open?
Is there potential to take a connection from the underground line to serve future enterprise sites in Kilrush?
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive explained the process to the members and noted the concerns they raised.
Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services advised on how commercial rates are not applicable for infrastructure of an offshore site.
Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning and Economic Development addressed the meeting and advised that the Chief Executive Report will issue to An Bord Pleanala as it is and that that the members by resolution can decide to attach recommendations to the report. Ms. Quinn noted that the minutes of the Council meeting will also be attached to the submission to be sent to An Bord Pleanala.
Ms. Quinn advised that any specific recommendations would have to be done at the Council meeting that day or at a Special Council Meeting to be held before the 28
th
March.
The elected members agreed that they were not ready to decide on this yet.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan advised that a Special Council Meeting would be arranged to deal with this specifically.
Item 10: Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan 2025
The Annual Service Delivery Plan was circulated with the agenda.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator noted there was a change to the report on pages 91 and 99 and read out the change that the status of the Cliffs of Moher Strategy 2040 is finalise and agree the strategy.
This change was proposed by Cllr. S. Talty and seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon.
After some discussion the elected members requested that this item be deferred as some members felt the timeline to consider the report was too short and they highlighted items they wished to see included in the Annual Service Delivery Plan.
Cllr. S. Talty withdrew proposing the motion to allow deferral to the April meeting.
A Reynolds, A/Director of Service, Rural Development explained the legislative requirement for the Annual Service Delivery Plan noting its sets out how the objectives of the Corporate Plan are to be delivered annually. Ms. Reynolds noted that there was extensive engagement with the members throughout the Corporate Plan 2024 – 2029 process.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that the Annual Service Delivery Plan sets out the priorities across all directorates. Dr. Kirby agreed that the item be deferred to the April meeting to allow members give due consideration to the report and provide submissions to the Meetings Administrator within two weeks.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator advised that in order to continue with consideration of reports, a suspension of Standing Orders was required, as the time for dealing with reports had exceeded the time allocated as per Standing Orders. This was agreed by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. T. Guilfoyle, seconded by Cllr. T. Mulcahy.
Item 11: Fáilte Ireland’s Festival and Events Funding 2025
Report dated 26
th
February, 2025 from Siobhán McNulty, Director of Tourism Development was circulated with the agenda together with details of Local Festivals and Participative Events Funding Programme for 2025.
The report states that the Council’s Working Group for the Action Plan for Rural Ireland met on 26
th
February, 2025 and recommend the projects to the March 2025 meeting of Clare County Council to be approved for Fáilte Ireland funding.
Details of applications which had been assessed and the grant levels determined based on the evaluation criteria, the application details, and the level of funding available were outlined.
The applications were approved having been proposed by Cllr. P. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. P. Hayes and agreed by the members present.
Item 12: Kilkee Waterworld Refurbishment
Report from Jason Murphy, Director of Service, Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda. The report provided an updated on the Kilkee Water World Refurbishment project since the last report to Council in February 2024. The report states that the regeneration and retrofit of the Kilkee Water World (KWW) CLG facility has been ongoing over the past year and is in the final stages of completion. The project is one of strategic importance to this Council both in West Clare Municipal District but also for the wider recreation and tourism services it provides.
The report notes that the Board of KWW has now written to the Council requesting support to deliver on the project. The board have finalised the project plan and have identified variations to the original project due to health and safety and regulatory compliance issues that were unforeseen until works commenced on site. The impact of these works has resulted in a request from the Council to consider approving an uplift in the loan finance approved for this project from €0.6m to €0.7m. the report states that the board are satisfied that this additional loan finance will not overburden the sustainable operation of the facility.
The loan repayment will be on a three-year interest only step-in basis, annuity thereafter with first call on this annual subvention.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“Under Section 66 of the Local Government Act 2001 loan funding to KWW of €0.7m. There will be no cost to the council above that budgeted as energy savings and budget subvention will fund the repayments. This loan will be secured as a charge on the asset.”
Item 13: Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2025
Report dated 10
th
March, 2025 from Bernadette Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural & Community Development was circulated with the agenda together with details of the grant recommendations. The report states that a total of 498 applications were received under the Council’s Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2025. The total fund for 2025 is €682,500.
The report continues that at their meeting on 26
th
February, 2025, the elected members of the ‘Working Group for the Action Plan for Rural Ireland’ considered the grant recommendations under the following support schemes:
Support Scheme for Public Realm Initiatives & Amenity Projects
Support Scheme for Maintenance of Open Spaces in Private Housing Developments
Support Scheme for Community Playgrounds
Support Scheme for Burial Ground Maintenance, Boundary Repair & Provision
Support Scheme for Christmas Lighting
Support Scheme for Maintenance and Upkeep for Local Authority Estates
Support Scheme for the Arts
Support Scheme for the Irish Language
Support Scheme for Tourism Marketing & Promotion
Support Scheme for Sustainable Tourism
Support Scheme for Community Project Development
Support Scheme for Age Friendly Initiatives
The elected members approved the Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2025 (CLAGS) having been proposed by Cllr. P. Burke, seconded by Cllr. S. Talty and agreed by the members present.
Item 14: Climate Action Implementation
Report from Morgan Lahiffe, Climate Action Co-Ordinator, Physical Development was circulated with the agenda.
The report gives an update on the progress and implementation of the Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029.
The report outlines progress on the following:
Clare Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029
Consultation and Engagement
Policy and Legislation
Sustainable Development Goals
Strategic Goals
Emissions and Energy Targets
Monitoring and Reporting
Climate Action in Practice highlighting:
Governance
Built Environment
Transportation
Communities & Partnership
Natural Environment
Decarbonisation Zone
The elected members approved the Climate Action Implementation having been proposed by Cllr. G. Keating, seconded by Cllr. J. Killeen and agreed by the members present.
Morgan Lahiffe Climate Action Co-Ordinator, Physical Development gave a brief presentation to the elected members on the progress and implementation of the Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029.
The elected members thanked Mr. Lahiffe for the presentation and acknowledged the number of projects that are underway. The members noted that it was disappointing to hear the announcement in recent days that Ireland will not reach its target for 2030. The members stated that there is a lot happening within this space but there is still a lot more to do.
Mr. Lahiffe replied to queries raised by the elected members.
Item 15: Civic Reception for Foster Carers in the Clare Region
Report dated 5
th
March, 2025 from John Corry, A/Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services Department was circulated with the agenda. The report noted that at the March meeting of the Corporate Policy Group (CPG) the members considered a nomination for a Civic Reception to honour foster carers in the Clare region.
The reports notes that the proposal for the award of a Civic Reception is to acknowledge the significant contribution that foster carers make within their communities, in the lives of children who need a safe, stable and nurturing environment.
Having considered the nomination, the Corporate Policy Group recommended to Council the Award of a Civic Reception to foster carers in the Clare region in recognition of their contribution to the lives of children.
This was approved the members present having been proposed by Cllr. A. Baker Bashua, seconded by Cllr. P. Murphy and agreed by the members present.
Item 16: FASD Briefing
Leas-Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. Howard welcomed Tristan Casson-Rennie, Chief Executive Officer, FASD Ireland and Mike Taylor, Director of Policy & Public Affairs, FASD Ireland to the Chamber.
Mr. Casson-Rennie addressed the meeting and thanked the Cathaoirleach, Chief Executive and elected members for inviting them to the Chamber. Mr Casson-Rennie explained what FASD was and stated that FASD is an acronym for Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. He noted that FASD is life-long irreversible brain damage for which there is no known cure or treatment.
Mr. Casson Rennie stated that FASD is caused by drinking alcohol whilst trying to conceive or whilst pregnant and that no amount of alcohol is safe to drink at any time during pregnancy. He advised that there are no national guidelines for the HSE to diagnose FASD, therefore most cases are overlooked or misdiagnosed as a co-morbid condition. In addition, there is no statutory support framework when a diagnosis is obtained. FASD is Ireland’s most prevalent and preventable Neuro-Developmental Disability affecting more people than Autism (ASD), Cerebral Palsy and Down Syndrome combined.
Mr. Casson-Rennie discussed in further detail:
FASD statistics in Ireland
Characteristics of FASD
Services provided by the FASD Hub based in Ennis.
FASD Conference being held in Hotel Woodstock, Ennis on the 22
nd
May 2025.
The elected members thanked Mr. Casson-Rennie and Mr. Taylor for their presentation and for all the work they do for those with neurodevelopmental and behavioural disabilities. The members raised queries in relation to their engagement with secondary schools, why the Government doesn’t want to recognise this as a disability and the importance of raising awareness of this condition with the Department of Education, Schools and the drinks industry.
Mr. Casson-Rennie and Mr. Taylor answered all queries raised by the elected members.
Item 17: Ennis 2040 DAC
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
“That the Interim Chief Operating Officer of Ennis 2040 DAC attend the April monthly meeting to allay my concerns and allow discussions on the following topics:
AECOM Report
Costings Provided
Rate of Return with Advisor providing Market Analysis.
Provide all reports and advice received to date.
List all Assets owned by Ennis 2040 to date.
Provide detailed repayment schedule.
Confirmation Ennis 2040 DAC’s Board and activity is fully compliant with Company Law Governance requirements.”
(Q)
Seán Lenihan, A/Director of Service, Planning and Economic development replied as follows:
“Yes, I am happy to comply with the request for the Interim COO to attend before Council. However, it will have to be at the May monthly meeting as he will be out of the Country on the date of the April Meeting.
Trusting that this is satisfactory.”
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan expressed disappointment that the Interim Chief Operating Officer (COO) of Ennis 2040 DAC could not attend until the May meeting, two months after his initial request and was worried that there might be a further delay. He noted that he would be writing to the Interim COO of Ennis 2040 DAC in advance of his attendance at the May meeting to request the details in the company asset register of the declared €2.2m assets in the ownership of the Ennis 2040 DAC as at the 31/12/2024 draft accounts.
Cllr. O’Callaghan suggested that a special meeting be arranged to allay his concerns before drawdown of a further €7.8m.
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Planning and Economic Development replied to Cllr. O’Callaghan stating that there was no conspiracy theory to the perceived delay. The request was only tabled at the March meeting. In good faith, it was proposed that the interim COO would attend the April Meeting but on checking, it was confirmed that he would be unavailable as he would be out of the country on that date. Therefore, the May Meeting is the earliest juncture for him to attend and the local authority are happy to facilitate same.
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan stated that he never suggested there was a conspiracy theory to the perceived delay.
Item 18: Wild Atlantic Way and Estuary Way Signage
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council write to Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) requesting the erection of signage for the Wild Atlantic Way and the Estuary Way on the following routes:
The N19 National Primary Road from Shannon Airport, and
The M18 Motorway from Limerick and from Galway, before Junction 12 for Ennis in both directions.
The purpose of this request is to enhance the visibility and accessibility of these key tourist routes, supporting local tourism and businesses by guiding visitors more effectively to the scenic attractions of the Wild Atlantic Way and the Estuary Way.”
(M)
The elected members noted the importance of signage to promote tourism and encourage economic development within the County.
Cllr. T. O’Brien proposed an amendment to the motion to include Ireland’s Hidden Heartlands and Cllr. T. Guilfoyle seconded the amendment and requested that Clarecastle be signposted at Junction 12 on the M18 as entry point to Clare’s Estuary Way.
The motion was amended as follows:
“That Clare County Council write to Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) requesting the erection of signage for the Wild Atlantic Way, the Estuary Way and the Hidden Heartlands on the following routes:
The N19 National Primary Road from Shannon Airport, and
The M18 Motorway from Limerick and from Galway, before Junction 12 for Ennis in both directions.
Also, that TII amend the current signage at Junction 12 on the M18 to include the village of Clarecastle as the entry point to Clare's Estuary Way.
The purpose of this request is to enhance the visibility and accessibility of these key tourist routes, supporting local tourism and businesses by guiding visitors more effectively to the scenic attractions of the Wild Atlantic Way and the Estuary Way.”
Item 19: Funding for Early Years Educators
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“I call on the Minister for Children and Disability, Norma Foley to provide funding for all of the valid applications made by Early Years Educators across the country through the Building Blocks Capital Investment Program 2025. A pillar service with major waiting lists and need across the country requires sufficient focus and funding now to ensure those who have taken the time and invested money in developing projects that prove a need in their area should be funded as a matter of urgency to see delivery of much needed additional spaces in the next 12/18 months.
If agreed, I ask this motion is shared with other local authorities.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the work that Early Years Educators do. The members noted that with population growth it will affect the ability to prosper if there aren’t sufficient spaces in childcare and early learning facilities. It was noted that Clare is the second highest applicant for the Building Blocks Capital Investment Program, but it was stated that even with the €25m fund there is still a deficit to meet all the applications that have been submitted.
Item 20: National Technology Testing Hub at Shannon Airport
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council engage with the Shannon Airport Group and the Department of Transport to ensure we maximise the potential of the programme for Government commitment that Shannon Airport become a national technology testing hub.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the programme for Government has committed to develop a National Sustainable Aviation Fuel Policy Roadmap and support Shannon Airport as a hub for testing new aviation technologies. The members acknowledged the huge potential this presents for the airport and the mid-west region. The members noted that the next stage of the strategy needs to be realised which is the development of sustainable aviation fuel, utilising the huge potential of artificial intelligence and the use of drone and unmanned technology in the aviation space.
Item 21: Appointment of Occupational Speech Therapists and Behavioural Therapist in County Clare Special Schools.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. Guilfoyle agus Clare Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“Immediate Appointment of Occupational Speech Therapists and Behavioural Therapist in County Clare Special Schools.
That the County Council call on both the Department of Education and the Department of Disabilities to conduct immediate interviews and appoint full-time occupational therapists and speech therapists to the two special schools in County Clare. In the event that these positions cannot be filled immediately, I request that the Council secure a definitive timeframe for recruitment and obtain assurance of appropriate funding, to relieve the schools from the current burden of privately financing these essential services. These vital roles are crucial for addressing the needs of students and ensuring they receive the support they require to thrive academically and socially.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged carers, SNA’s and teachers and the impact they have on children with disabilities and their families. The members noted that children with special needs require therapists to assist them to learn. The members expressed concern over the lengthy waiting periods for children to be assessed and stated that it needs to improve drastically.
The elected member acknowledged the fantastic work that The Clare Crusaders do as a voluntary group in Clare.
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. T. O’Callaghan and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30 p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 22: Ennis Dialysis Unit Update
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Request for Update on Ennis Dialysis Unit:
On 9 July 2024, Ms. Colette Cowan, Chief Executive Officer of UL Hospitals Group, confirmed in writing (reference REPDR/24/04537) that a new haemodialysis unit was planned for Ennis and that funding had been secured. This followed my representation to the UL Hospitals Group on behalf of a constituent.
The letter received indicated that the tender process was complete, and steps to finalise arrangements were ongoing, with an interim start date of 2025.
To monitor the progress of this vital healthcare project, Clare County Council will write to the, Chief Executive Officer of UL Hospitals Group, requesting a comprehensive update on the progress of the new haemodialysis unit in Ennis, including:
A precise timeline for the commencement of services.
Confirmation of the unit's location.
Details of the contractor and any potential delays encountered.
A detailed outline of the project's current status and any challenges preventing its timely completion.” (M)
The elected members agreed that this is a critical issue that has a significant impact on patients. The members noted that they were advised a dialysis unit would be operational in 2024 which got delayed to the end of 2025 and most recently it was advised it would be the second quarter of 2026, the members stated that answers are needed as to the delays to this urgently needed service.
Item 23: HEA Free Fees Initiative
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“To call on the Minister for Further and Higher Education to examine the possibility of expanding the HEA Free Fees Initiative to include students studying Graduate Entry Medicine.”
(M)
The elected members noted that there is a chronic shortage of GPs in the country and the population is increasing. The members noted that the ratio of GPs per 10,000 population is 7 when it should be 12.
The elected members noted that it is a huge financial burden on students that have already gained a lot of experience in an under-graduate programme. The elected members noted that there is an expectation on students that while studying they don’t work part-time. The members stated that it is a shame that we lose so many doctors that study here and then go abroad and don’t return and queried what could be done to retain the Physicians here.
Item 24: Felling Licence Applications
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“We call on Minister Hayden and Minister of State Michael Healy Ray to fast-track Felling Licence applications for forest owners whose trees were damaged by Storm Èowyn and do not have a Thinning or Felling Licence. We further call for grant aid for the replanting of the forest area.
We welcome the founding of the Windblown Taskforce and ask that a large-scale timber rescue operation be progressed similar to the Swedish experience of 2005.
Finally, we call for the appointment of a coordinator for each County to assist the massive logistical and marketing strategy of our national asset.”
(M)
The elected members stated that there are 60,000 acres of forest trees on the ground following Storm Éowyn and that once the tree has fallen farmers have twelve months to get the trees off the ground. The members noted that after six months the timber has dried out to a certain extent and is not worth the same amount. The members noted that 1,200 felling licences are needed, and they need to be expedited.
Item 25: Periodic Reassessment of Licensed Drivers
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Murphy
“That Clare County Council call on Minister Darragh O'Brien, Minister of State Jerry Buttimer, officials at The Department of Transport and officials in the Road Safety Authority, to consider periodic reassessment of all licensed drivers that drive on our roads. This would lead to all drivers being updated on ongoing changes to the rules of the road and it would be a serious bid at tackling the huge loss of life that occurs on our roads on an annual basis.”
(M)
Following a brief discussion Cllr. P. Murphy withdrew the motion and advised that an amended version would be submitted at a future meeting.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that a Special Meeting would be arranged to deal with Item 9.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
AILG Module 1 Training, “An Overview on Wind Energy”, held in the Newpark Hotel, Kilkenny on the 22
nd
February 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €404.10 including conference fee of €90.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. M. Begley, P. Burke, C. Colleran Molloy, J. Crowe, P. Daly, J. Killeen, P. Murphy, T. O’Brien, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Callaghan, C. Ryan, B. Slattery attend this conference
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________ Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________ Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback