Minutes of April 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of April 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 14th April 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
P. Daly, P. Murphy, T. Guilfoyle, A. Baker Bashua, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Interim Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Mr. Seán Lenihan, A/Director of Economic Development.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, A/Director of Rural Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Morgan Lahiffe, Climate Action Co-Ordinator, Physical Development.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllr. M. Howard, T. O’Brien, J. Crowe, T. Mulcahy, J. Garrihy
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan presided.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan acknowledged Clare becoming the first certified sustainable tourism destination in Ireland awarded Global Sustainable Tourism Council (GSTC) Destination Certification by certifying body EarthCheck.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Creedon Family, on the death of Denis Creedon, RIP.
The Conneally Family, on the death of Elizabeth Conneally, RIP.
The O’Connell Family on the death of Joe O’Connell, RIP.
The Quinlivan Family, on the death of Paddy Quinlivan, RIP.
The Cullinan Family on the death of James Cullinan, RIP.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the March Meeting of Clare County Council held on 10
th
March 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan sought an amendment to the minutes under Item 17 to accurately reflect his comments at the meeting, as follows:
“Cllr. T. O’Callaghan stated that he never suggested there was a conspiracy theory to the perceived delay.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Clare County Council held on 19
th
March 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Cllr. I. Lynch noted in relation to the proposed Sceirde Rocks Windfarm that while reportedly it is not now proceeding the discussions elected members had on the subject and submission made were worthwhile and should be implemented in preparation for the next proposal.
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 3rd April 2025 from Minister Jack Chambers T.D. in relation to challenges faced by communities resulting from Storm Éowyn.
Correspondence dated 7th March 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme.
Correspondence dated 24th March 2025 from the TII in relation to road signage to enhance tourism.
Correspondence dated 18th March 2025 from Shannon Airport Group in relation to National Technology Testing Hub.
Correspondence dated 14th March 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Education in relation to Speech Therapists & Behavioural Therapists for special schools in Clare.
Correspondence dated 14th March 2025 from Minister of State Michael Healy-Rae in relation to Felling Licences.
Acknowledgement dated 26th March 2025 from Fáilte Ireland in relation to road signage to enhance tourism.
Acknowledgement dated 13th March 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to Shannon Airport becoming a national technology testing hub.
Acknowledgement dated 19th March 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Children, Disability and Equality in relation to funding for speech and behavioural therapists.
Acknowledgement dated 19th March 2025 from the Office of the Minister of State for Disability in relation to funding for speech and behavioural therapists.
Acknowledgement dated 13th March 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science in relation to HEA Free Fees Initiative.
Acknowledgement dated 13th March from the Office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine in relation to Felling Licences.
Acknowledgement dated 12th March 2025 from Minister of State Michael Healy-Rae in relation to Felling Licences.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle requested a copy of the correspondence that was issued to the HSE following the March meeting.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 11 February, 2025 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 15 January, 2025 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 19 March, 2025 be noted.”
d. Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 21 January, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 3
rd
March, 2025 and the Special CPG Meeting held on the 10 March, 2025 as presented.
Item 6: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a. Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 5 December, 2024 be noted.”
b. Ar moladh Cllr. D. Gould Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 26 November, 2024 be noted.”
c. Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 4 December, 2024 be noted.”
d. Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Tourism Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 4 December, 2024 be noted.”
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management Report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. J. Ryan referred to the West Clare Railway Greenway update and noted the great progress on this project. Cllr. Ryan noted that he hoped to see progress in a similar manner for East Clare along the Shannon Banks.
Cllr. I. Lynch referred to the Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme and queried if the Council will be making a submission to the scheme. Cllr. Lynch noted that an SEAI workshop would be valuable for homeowners.
Cllr. Lynch referred to the Seafarers Conference that was held in Limerick on the 20
th
March and requested an update on a Moneypoint briefing and a briefing on Clare MEZ.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle requested an update on the Clareabbey Roundabout under the TII Safety Improvements in the Physical Development update.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Kilrush Town Team meeting and noted that concerns were raised regarding the Wild Atlantic Way. Cllr. McInerney also referred to correspondence received in relation to her motion at the March meeting where TII suggested that Failte Ireland be contacted regarding signage. Cllr. McInerney requested that Clare County Council write to Failte Ireland as suggested by TII.
J. Murphy, Director of Social Development noted in relation to the Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme that Clare County Council has issued grants to the value of €12.61m so far on the scheme. Mr. Murphy noted that Clare County Council will make a submission and are happy to work with Councillors if they wish to make a submission.
C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted that they will arrange a meeting with Moneypoint and will cover Clare MEZ.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator noted that arising from the correspondence received from TII a letter was issued to Failte Ireland.
Cllr. M. Shannon referred to vacant property upgrades and welcomed the 35% of grants approved for the Kilrush LEA.
Cllr. J. Killeen welcomed the North Clare LEA update under Social Development and thanked Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development and Eoin Troy, Senior Executive Officer, West Clare MD.
Item 8: Disposal of property (by lease/licence) at Sean O’Farrell Drapery Store, Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Bunratty, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Siobhán McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that following an expression of interest process, Clare County Council have appointed Made in Crecora a licence to operate within Sean O’Farrell Drapery store located at 21 Main Street, Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Bunratty, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 28
th
March 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property (by lease/Licence) at Sean O’Farrell Drapery Store, 21 Main Street, Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Bunratty, Co. Clare to Made in Crecora subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 28
th
March 2025.”
Item 9: Disposal of property (by lease/licence) at JJ Corry Terraced House, Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Bunratty, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Siobhán McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that following an expression of interest process, Clare County Council have appointed Chapel Gate Irish Whiskey Company Limited a licence to operate the JJ Corry Unit located at Main Street, Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Bunratty, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 28
th
March 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property (by lease/Licence) at JJ Corry Unit, Main Street, Bunratty Castle & Folk Park, Bunratty, Co. Clare to Chapel Gate Irish Whiskey Company Limited subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 28
th
March 2025.”
Item 10: Disposal of property at No. 13 Church Road, Miltown Malbay, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Julie Brosnan, A/Administrative Officer, Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with map. The report states that the property was a previously owned Council property which was purchased by the owner in 2007 under the tenant purchase incremental scheme. The report notes that due to an error on the original land transfer map the freehold title is still registered to Clare County Council and in order to rectify this matter a deed of transfer and rectification is required to include a revised land transfer map subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 3
rd
April 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at No. 13 Church Road, Miltown Malbay, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 3
rd
April 2025.”
Item 11: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at Bodyke Village, Co. Clare.
Report dated 18
th
March, 2025 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination) and map. The reports outline details of proposed development in the village centre of Bodyke, which includes the following improvement works:
Provision of vehicular and pedestrian access from the R352 roadway via alterations to existing access.
Provision of addition pedestrian access to the car park from the adjacent Bodyke Community Park.
Provision of cycle parking and repair station
Installation of public lighting
Connection to existing surface water drainage system, via a proposed rainwater garden.
All ancillary site works.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the Killaloe MD members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Item 12: Statutory Audit Report to the members of Clare County Council for the year ended 31st December 2023.
The Statutory Audit Report to the Members of Clare County Council on the Accounts of Clare County Council for year ended 31
st
December, 2023 was circulated with the agenda.
The report included the Chief Executive’s responses to all comments raised by the Auditor. The report as presented was noted by the members present.
Item 13: Report from Audit Committee on Statutory Audit Report for year ended 31st December 2023.
Report from Jimmy Browne, Chairman on behalf of the Clare Audit Committee was circulated with the agenda. The report states that the Audit Committee held its meeting on 9th December, 2024 to review the Statutory Audit Report for year ending 31st December, 2023.
The members noted the report as presented.
Item 14: Clare County Council Audit Committee Annual Report 2024.
The 2024 Audit Committee Annual Report was circulated with the agenda. The report states that under the provision of the Audit Charter for Clare County Council and Section 60 of the Local Government Act 2014 requires that the Audit Committee report to the Council at least annually.
The report outlines details of the Audit Committee under the following headings:
Functions of the Audit Committee
Membership of the Committee
Role and Responsibility of Internal Audit
Meetings of the Audit Committee
Audit Committee Charter 2024-2029
Internal Audit
Local Government Audit Report 2023
Corporate Risk Register/Risk Registers
The members noted this item as presented.
Cllr. P. Hayes thanked all those involved with the Audit Committee, the Local Government Auditor Joanne Greene and Karen Stackpoole for her assistance in supporting the Audit Committee. Cllr. Hayes noted the volume work that is involved in the Audit Committee. Cllr. Hayes discussed recommendations made by the Local Government Auditor, Joanne Greene in relation to takeover of Shannon Heritage DAC and Land Purchases and he noted that these recommendations should be addressed and adhered to going forward. Cllr. Hayes also noted that it is difficult dealing with issues from 2023 two years later.
Cllr. S. Talty acknowledged that there was a theme of governance running through the audit report and raised queries into file maintenance for the Bunratty Land Purchase.
Cllr. T. O’Callaghan queried the repayment capacity of the outstanding debt in relation to Ennis 2040. Cllr. O’Callaghan referred to the Ennis County Library and what an asset it was for the County but noted the €16.1m expenditure and additional costs expected and noted that as per the audit report they will have to come from the Councils own resources.
Cllr. P. Burke acknowledged the work done by the audit committee and noted that it was challenging being on the committee and dealing with issues from two years previous.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive thanked Joanne Greene, Local Government Auditor and the Audit Committee for their work. Dr. Kirby noted that the local authority is in the process of drafting governance guidelines on all entities. Dr. Kirby noted that the Clare County Council have very good governance and oversight but there is always room for improvement. Dr. Kirby referred to the property register and the volume of work that is involved but noted that it is an objective for Carmel Greene and her team to produce.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services noted that there was no qualification by the external auditor, and in relation to governance that Clare County Council has an internal audit team, the audit committee and external audit. Ms. Fitzgerald explained the audit process and length of time to complete the process. She noted that with an expenditure of €272m in 2023 the feedback from the auditor is expected and where weaknesses are identified they have been noted and will be addressed with the audit committee when they meet. In relation to the Library, Ms. Fitzgerald noted that the €16.1m was fully funded .
Cllr. P. O’Gorman noted that while the Executive don’t have to inform the elected members of property purchases it would be good to know what is being purchased.
Item 15: Clare County Council Annual Financial Statement 2024 Unaudited
The Annual Financial Statement for 2024 together with a report was circulated in advance of the agenda.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services addressed the members and noted that the Annual Financial Statement for 2024 was prepared in the format as required by the Local Government Act, 2001. Ms. Fitzgerald noted the following:
Expenditure of €311.6million, significant increase over the last number of years. This comprises of revenue expenditure of operating activities of €186.3m and capital project expenditure of €125.3m.
Revenue expenditure exceeded the budgeted expenditure figure of €186.3m by €19.5m. This additional expenditure that was budgeted is matched by the increased income received in the year of €19.6m.
88% collection rate of commercial rates in 2024 – outperforming at this level.
The level of arrears in both Housing loans and rents has also reduced over prior years. Collection of mortgage housing loans continues to improve year on year. Arrears on housing loan repayments stands at €0.13m, improving the key performance indicator to 91%.
Level of debt the Council carries from the Government is €33m, this relates mostly to housing schemes (€22.9m) and the remainder to the development contribution waiver.
Cllr. S. Talty raised a motion under section 25b of Standing Orders which was seconded by Cllr. I. Lynch and read as follows:
“Request that a report be given at the May meeting as to the status of member representation on all boards listed at Appendix 8 of the Annual Financial Statement.
At the May meeting, nominations be sought for 2 members to be appointed to the Board of Clare Tourism DAC in line with the DAC constitution. Also, that nominations be sought at that meeting for any other positions where members should be on the boards of companies listed at Appendix 8”
The elected members thanked Noeleen and the team for the work done on the Annual Financial Statement. They discussed the heritage sites that are underperforming, compliance within DAC’s and having full representation on committees/DAC boards.
N. Fitzgerald noted the comments made by the members and advised in relation to the heritages sites there was a lack of investment in infrastructure which was identified, Ms. Fitzgerld noted that the council is two years in now and are reviewing what they have learned from the process.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive noted in relation to membership of the Clare Tourism DAC board that they are still working on integrating HR and IT systems and are also preparing governance guidelines for all the entities and suggested it might be best to put a hold on assigning members to boards until there is an agreed approach in place.
Cllr. S. Talty queried who is currently on the board of the Clare Tourism DAC and Shannon Heritage.
S. McNulty, Director of Tourism advised who was currently on both boards but noted that both companies are payroll companies only.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator then read out the resolutions to be approved:
In accordance with Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001, the approval of Council is sought for additional expenditure by Division as set out below in accordance with Note 16 of the AFS considered at this meeting.
That Transfers to reserves as set out in Note 14 in the presented AFS 2024 are hereby approved:
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
Item 16: Annual Service Delivery Plan
The Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan was circulated with the agenda.
The report was adopted by the members having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes and seconded by Cllr. I. Lynch and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle noted that the Droichead na Gabhair Bridge is not referenced specifically but hoped that there was scope for it to be included next year.
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Planning and Economic Development noted that under item 3 of the Ennis MD update it states that the improvement actions for 2025 are to “identify & progress other relevant Ennis MD projects of benefit where funding permits”, Mr. Lenihan noted that this includes the Droichead na Gabhair Bridge.
Item 17: Schedule of Municipal District Works 2025.
The Schedule of Municipal District Works as previously circulated and adopted at Municipal District level was noted by the members present.
Item 18: Adoption of Supplemental Speed Limit Byelaws No. 2 2024 - (Speed Limit Appeals & Periodic Speed Limits).
Report dated 7
th
April from Anne O’Sullivan, Senior Executive Engineer, Road Design was circulated with the agenda together with maps. The report states that Clare County Council in exercise of the powers conferred on it by Section 46 of the Road Traffic Act, 1961 (No. 24 of 1961) as amended by Sections 4-9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004 (No 44 of 2004) and Road Traffic Act, 2024 ( No 10 of 2024 ) hereby give notice of proposals to introduce and or amend special speed limits at the locations listed below in the administrative area of the County of Clare in the interests of road safety.
The report notes that these proposed Byelaws propose amendments on foot of Speed Limit Appeal decisions, consolidate previous Speed Limit Appeal resolutions by the elected members, regularise Temporary Speed Limit Road Works Orders and introduce periodic speed limits at National Schools on Regional Roads.
Locations:
N67 Carnaun Cross - St. Thereasa's Nursing Home, Kilrush, Co. Clare
N67 Kilkee - Moyasta, Co. Clare
N67 Bealaha - Doonbeg
NBS lnagh, Co. Clare
R463 Larkin's Cross, Parteen, Co. Clare
R477 O'Donoghue's Pub - Fanore Beach Gate, Co. Clare
L-1012 Boston, Co. Clare
L-1016 Bealaclugga, Bellharbour, Co. Clare
L-1112, Kilnaboy, Co. Clare
L-2006, L-2016, L-6054, L-6056, Querrin, Co. Clare
L-60771, Bog Road, Kilkee, Co. Clare
L-2006 Doonaha, Kilkee, Co. Clare
The proposed introduction of periodic speed limits at National Schools on Regional Roads will be at the following locations:
R-460 Scoil Naisiunta Cluain An Atha, Cloonanaha, Co. Clare
R-479 Doolin Mixed National School, Co. Clare
R-487 Moveen National School, Co. Clare
R-485 Kilmurry McMahon National School, Co. Clare
R-463 Ogonnelloe National School, Co. Clare
R-463 Raheen Wood Community National School, Co. Clare
The report outlines the speed limit process and advises that the process included consultation with TII, An Garda Síochána and Municipal Districts in accordance with Section 9 of the Road Traffic Act. A briefing of the proposed speed limit bye laws was held with the elected members on the 8th of October 2024.
The draft bye laws were advertised for public consultation between the 22nd November until 23rd December 2024.
The reports states that one submission was received & considered as part of the public consultation period.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council in exercise of the powers conferred on it by Section 46 of the Road Traffic Act, 1961 (No. 24 of 1961) as amended by Sections 4-9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004 (No 44 of 2004) and Road Traffic Act, 2024 (No 10 of 2024 ) hereby make the ROAD
TRAFFIC {SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS/PERIODIC SPEED LIMITS} BYE-LAWS No 2 2024 in respect of the following locations in the administrative area of County Clare as per the report dated 7th April 2025 from Anne O’Sullivan, Senior Executive Engineer, Road Design:
N67 Carnaun Cross - St. Thereasa's Nursing Home, Kilrush, Co. Clare
N67 Kilkee - Moyasta, Co. Clare
N67 Bealaha - Doonbeg
N85 lnagh, Co. Clare
R463 Larkin's Cross, Parteen, Co. Clare
R477 O'Donoghue's Pub - Fanore Beach Gate, Co. Clare
L-1012 Boston, Co. Clare
L-1016 Bealaclugga, Bellharbour, Co. Clare
L-1112, Kilnaboy, Co. Clare
L-2006, L-2016, L-6054, L-6056, Querrin, Co. Clare
L-60771, Bog Road, Kilkee, Co. Clare
L-2006 Doonaha, Kilkee, Co. Clare
R-460 Scoil Naisiunta Cluain An Atha, Cloonanaha, Co. Clare
R-479 Doolin Mixed National School, Co. Clare
R-487 Moveen National School, Co. Clare
R-485 Kilmurry McMahon National School, Co. Clare
R-463 Ogonnelloe National School, Co. Clare
R-463 Raheen Wood Community National School, Co. Clare”
The elected members welcomed the reduction in speed limits particularly in front of national schools. The members raised concerns about the number of speed signs in particular areas and felt that TII are reducing these speed limits to avoid improving the road infrastructure. The members also noted that changing speed limits wont have a big impact if they are not going to be monitored and currently there is lack of a forum to discuss these issues with Gardaí.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator advised that a motion to continue with the headed items was required as the time for dealing with headed items had exceeded the time allocated as per Standing Orders. This was agreed by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. S. Talty and seconded by Cllr. T. O’Callaghan.
Item 19: Section 85 Agreement between Clare County Council and Donegal County Council in respect of the Department of Transport Zero Emissions Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI) funded project.
Report from Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda. The report states that in 2022 the Government created a new office within the Department of Transport called Zero Emission Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI). The function of the new office was to establish the blueprint for delivering EV infrastructure nationally and to support and coordinate its delivery. ZEVI developed the EV Charging Infrastructure Strategy 2022-2025 which sets out the ambition to deliver an EV charging network that will meet and be ahead of EV users’ needs.
Local authorities have a key role to play in the delivery of this strategy and are tasked with developing a local EV Charging Infrastructure Strategy coordinated on a regional basis. The counties of Clare, Donegal, Galway (County), Mayo and Sligo have been designated as Region 7 for the development of their local strategies.
The reports notes that Donegal County Council in collaboration with the other Region 7 Client Authorities as listed below:
Clare County Council
Galway County Council
Mayo County Council
Sligo County Council
will need to procure and appoint specialist Technical Engineering Consultancy Services (Technical Consultant) to formulate a comprehensive Regional EV Charging Infrastructure Strategy for all 5 counties in Region 7.
The reports states that in accordance with Section 85 of the Local Government Act 2001, it will be necessary for Donegal County Council to enter into agreements with Clare County Council, Galway County Council, Mayo County Council and Sligo County Council, thus enabling the EV Charging Infrastructure Strategies to be undertaken by Donegal County Council as the Lead Authority.
The making of the agreement under Section 85 of the Local Government Act 2001 is a Reserved Function and is subject to adoption by each of the aforementioned Local Authorities.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council hereby resolves to enter into an agreement with Donegal County Council under Section 85 of the Local Government Act 2001 in respect of the Department of Transport Zero Emissions Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI) funded project to prepare Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Strategies for Region 7; whereby Donegal County Council will be enabled to appoint and manage the consultant completing said strategy as relevant to the overall region and incorporating County Clare.”
Item 20: Schedule date for Annual General Meeting.
It was agreed that the 2025 Annual General Meeting will take place at 3.00 p.m. on
Friday, 27th June, 2025 having been proposed by Cllr. G. Keating, seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon and agreed by the members.
Item 21: Safe and Competent Driving
Cllr. P. Murphy withdrew the motion.
“That Clare County Council ask Minister Darragh O'Brien, Minister of State Seán Canney, and the Road Safety Authority, to outline any proposals that might be under consideration in relation to ensuring that all drivers have an adequate level of competency to drive safely on our Nation's roads”.
(M)
Item 22: County Development Plan Meeting as per Standing Orders
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“Can a meeting be arranged to review the implementation of the County Development Plan, as per Standing Order 12.B? It states that meetings should be held twice yearly. I don’t recall any such meeting being held during my time on the Council.”
(M)
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Service, Planning & Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Given that there are often a number of other County Development Plan themed meetings and briefings during the year, perhaps the need for such particular CDP review meetings as provided for by Standing Order 12 (B) may not always have been deemed necessary.
That being said, should the Members so wish, the Planning Department will of course facilitate such meetings when and as required.
Related, I wish to advise the Members that the Planning Department will be presenting the Councillors with the Chief Executive’s Report in accordance with Section 15(2) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) on the progress achieved in securing the objectives in the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029. It is intended that this Two-Year Progress, Implementation and Monitoring Report will be an item on the Council Agenda in the coming months and Workshops re same will be arranged.”
Cllr. S. Talty noted that a lot of time was spent on the County Development Plan, and it would be good to get an update. Cllr. Talty appreciated that there is a two-year progress, implementation and monitoring report due to be presented to the members in the coming months. Cllr. Talty suggested that if Standing Order 12(B) is not required a meeting of the Standing Orders Committee be convened to update as necessary.
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Service, Planning & Economic Development Directorate advised that there were a number of County Development Plan themed meetings throughout the year and perhaps the twice-yearly meeting was not required and could be addressed as the next meeting of the Standing Orders Committee.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator advised that he has recently invited feedback on the standing orders document and will schedule a meeting to address recommendations.
Cllr. S. Talty queried if the request should go to all members for consideration.
J. Corry, advised that the Sub Committee should meet first to discuss and then any changes and amendments be brought before the full Council for consideration.
Item 23: Rural Funding Streams
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“I call on Government and in particular Minister for Rural and Community Affairs Dara Calleary to review the situation whereby many rural funding streams preclude co-funding or match funding from other Government schemes. I call on Government and Minister Calleary to recognise the well noted value of master strategic planning, multiuse and access along with the major challenges associated with significant and increasing costs of capital projects and investment of scale. This applies particularly to the majority of community-based projects by community and voluntary groups and in my experience is becoming a serious disincentive/challenge for those wishing to develop vital projects in their area and should be addressed. I further call on Minister Calleary to explore a manner whereby strategically located projects of scale and multiuse/benefit and access are graded and recorded with a view to future regeneration and required capital upkeep funding.”
(M)
The elected members noted the difficulties with regards funding that are facing community and voluntary groups trying to develop local projects. The members outlined issues they have encountered within their own municipal districts in trying to get various projects off the ground. The members noted that a realistic approach into how they are delivered needs to be adopted.
Item 24: ‘Taste of Clare’ Food Festival
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council evaluates the potential of establishing a ‘Taste of Clare’ food festival in Ennis, showcasing the county’s rich food heritage and supporting local artisan producers. This festival would highlight the best of Clare’s local food scene, attracting both residents and visitors while boosting food tourism in the region. By celebrating local produce, traditional and contemporary cuisine, and sustainable food practices, this event could enhance Ennis as a destination for culinary tourism and provide valuable opportunities for small food businesses to promote their products.”
(M)
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development replied as follows:
“This is a welcome motion and is in line with the 'Celebrate our creative vitality' Strategic Objective of the Clare Tourism Strategy 2030, which is to work with food and drink producers and the culinary/hospitality sector to build food and local flavours as a key attractor in Clare.
It is noted that in the past the 'Clare Food and Drink Fleadh' was organised by Ennis Chamber; launched in 2019 under the banner 'Taste the Island ' national event was supported by Failte Ireland. The festival evolved in 2024 to an Artisan Food & Drink Market, across four consecutive Saturdays in the run up to Christmas, which incorporated music entertainment from community groups. This event is no longer running and having researched with other Counties it seems the cost to re-start and organise such an event in Ennis would be significant and any such event would need a support network and structures for it to be successful.
We are currently exploring opportunity to showcase the county's rich food heritage and support to local artisan producers such as hosting of specific food awards events and/or promotions via Irish Food Writers Guild.
The Tourism Directorate is committed to working with Ennis Municipal District and will continue to explore options around tourism festivals and promotions for the County town.”
The elected members noted that such an event would draw in Tourism and the county can showcase the wonderful food producers that are operating sustainably throughout the county. The members acknowledged the boost it would give to the county and noted that this should not be run solely by Ennis MD as it is a countywide event and should be run out of the Tourism Directorate.
It was agreed that Items no. 25 and 26 be discussed together.
Item 25: Funding for National Ambulance Service
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council acknowledges the critical need for a fully operational ambulance service within County Clare. We will formally request increased funding for the National Ambulance Service (NAS) in Clare from the Minister for Health. The recent explanation of insufficient ambulance coverage due to "unfunded shifts" is inadequate. Recent incidents, such as a road traffic accident victim awaiting care for nearly four hours and a sixteen-year-old student left unattended for an hour following a seizure (necessitating ambulance transport from Galway and a helicopter from Cork), underscore the urgent need for service improvements. The citizens of Clare and NAS personnel, deserve enhanced emergency medical services.”
(M)
Item 26: Review of Emergency First Response Care in Clare
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council request our Oireachtas members collaborate to establish a Dáil committee to fully review emergency first response care for Clare residents, specifically addressing: the complete failure of National Ambulance Service (NAS) dynamic deployment, including a thorough investigation into recent County Clare failures, such as a reported three-hour roadside wait following a recent road traffic collision; a full investigation into the awarding of the new Coast Guard Search and Rescue (SAR) contract, including how it commenced without adequate training and upskilling, resulting in an 8 AM to 8 PM restricted operating period; and how a SAR contract was awarded to a helicopter lacking a forward-mounted searchlight.”
(M)
The elected members noted that “unfunded shifts” are no way to run the ambulance service and felt that Ireland is a first world country with a third world healthcare system. The members noted that Clare is a rural county and needs full ambulance cover. The members called on the elected representatives in Dail Eireann to invest the proper resources to the National Ambulance Service, Emergency Response Units and the healthcare system in general.
Item 27: Limerick Northern Distributor Road Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council pushes for the continuance of the Northern Distributor Road from Knockalisheen to the University of Limerick Road exit as it represents a key strategic route that is going to service the county of Clare.”
(M)
J. Leahy, Senior Engineer, Project Management Office, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is actively advocating that this project be put back on the agenda at government department level. Management Team recently met with our Oireachtas members and the urgency to have this proposal included in a review of the National Development Plan (NDP) was discussed. Unfortunately, the proposed Limerick Northern Distributor Road scheme was not included in the current Limerick Shannon Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (LSMATS) and therefore will not receive the necessary Dept of Transport funding to progress to Phase 2 currently. However, the proposed route corridor is safeguarded in both the Clare County Council and the Limerick City & County Council Development Plans should funding become available. A copy of same is available for viewing on the Councils website.”
The elected members noted what a critical piece of infrastructure the Limerick Northern Distributor Road was and how it would benefit Clare and Limerick greatly. The members noted that the road would provide significant improvement in connectivity throughout the city and neighbouring counties, would ease traffic congestion and assist with traffic into University of Limerick and Castletroy, the members acknowledged that not everyone needs to go into the city, and this would be their option to avoid having to do that. The members noted areas where there are large housing developments, but the road infrastructure never followed and as a result there is considerable congestion in these areas.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that Minister of State at the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage John Cummins visited Clare the previous week and the Limerick Northern Distributor Road was discussed in the hopes of getting it back on the agenda with Government.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive stated that the Limerick Northern Distributor Road was a priority for Clare County Council and underlined the importance of it to Clare and Limerick. Dr. Kirby noted that she would raise it with the directly elected Mayor.
Item 28: Funding for Deer Management Programme
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council call on Minister for Agriculture, Martin Heydon, to provide additional funding for and to extend the Deer Management Programme to Co. Clare, in light of the unsustainable growth of the deer population in the county.”
(M)
The elected members welcomed the awarding of the tender for the Deer Management Strategy to Farm Relief Services (FRS) and noted that FRS will be responsible for the establishment of 15 local Deer Management Units. The members noted the need to reduce deer numbers to sustainable levels given the impact it has on the local economy, environment and road safety.
Item 29: Fire Service Cover
Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“Call on Clare County Council to ensure the appropriate level of fire service cover in the Shannon region noting the International Airport, the large industrial base and the growing population in the area.”
(M)
A. Kelly, Chief Fire Officer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is committed to maintaining the standards as set out in the government policy "Keeping Communities Safe - A Framework for Fire Safety in Ireland" which remains the appropriate guidance on fire services delivery in Ireland.
An initial draft Fire and Emergency Operations Plan 2025 - 2030 for Clare County Council has been presented at the Physical Directorate's last Strategic Policy Committee meeting. A final draft is currently being prepared for the consideration of the Elected Members.
As set out under Section 26 of the Fire Services Act 1981 & 2003, this plan will detail the provisions made by the fire authority in respect of the organisation, fire stations, appliances, equipment, water supplies, training and operational procedures together with setting strategic objectives of the fire authority for the coming years.
The drafting of this plan will take cognisance of recent changes that have taken place affecting future delivery of the fire service in Ireland - these changes include the changing environment that the fire service work in, together with the implementation of the 2023 WRC Recommendations for the Retained Fire Service.
It is intended that there will be an engagement process including with the councillors and that the final draft would go before the council members in Q3/Q4 of 2025 for consideration and adoption.”
The elected members acknowledged the importance of the fire service within the county but noted that within the Shannon MD region there is chemical plants, a fuel farm, 10,000 people living and 10,000 people working within the Shannon area along with an international airport, a dual carriage way and two pump stations. The members expressed the need to retain the level of fire fighters at 15 and not diminish the service. The members noted that reducing the numbers within the fire station would incite fear in the community that the service isn’t adequate.
Dr. C. Kirby, Interim Chief Executive assured the members that the review is ongoing with the S.P.C. group and advised that once drafted it will be brought to the Municipal Districts.
Cllr. J. Ryan queried when the Chief Fire Officer will attend a meeting at the Municipal District.
Dr. Kirby advised he will attend for the presentation of the Fire and Emergency Operations Plan 2025 – 2030.
Item 30: Funding for Eradication of Hogweed
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle, M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council asks the relevant Minister to provide the necessary funding for the eradication of Hogweed. This is an issue in many different parts of County Clare and bordering counties.”
(M)
The elected members noted the dangers of Hogweed stating that it is full of toxins that damage the skin, its spreads up along rivers and can cause bank collapse. The members acknowledged that Clare County Council does treat some areas, but more is needed to eradicate it totally. The members noted there is a high cost involved to treat it and that Limerick County Council need to treat their side of the river. The members stated that community groups should not be left to deal with this issue.
Cllr. J. Ryan suggested that Dr. Kirby raise it with the Mayor of Limerick at their next meeting.
Item 31: Shannon Airport Oireachtas Group
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council supports the recent establishment of a dedicated Shannon Airport Oireachtas Group and will engage proactively with the group and senior airport management to ensure that Shannon and the wider mid-west region benefits from growth in the aviation sector in years to come.”
(M)
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Service, Planning & Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“As always, Clare County Council welcomes any opportunity to support initiatives aimed at strengthening the role of Shannon Airport as a key driver of economic and regional development in the Midwest. We welcome the newly established Shannon Airport Oireachtas Group and look forward to supporting the valuable work it will undertake in promoting the strategic interests of Shannon Airport and the mid-west region. A strong and vibrant Shannon Airport is vital not only for international connectivity but also for job creation, tourism, investment and balanced regional development.
Accordingly, Clare County Council is committed to engaging proactively with the Shannon Airport Oireachtas Group as well as continuing the good relationship we have with senior airport management, and indeed with the wider Shannon Group. Clare County Council looks forward to playing a constructive role in supporting all stakeholders working towards a sustainable and prosperous future for Shannon Airport and the communities it serves. We will continue to advocate for policy support and infrastructure investment to ensure that the benefits of future growth in the aviation sector are maximised for Shannon and the broader Midwest Region.”
The elected members noted that the development of Shannon Airport needs to be a political matter as it is a key infrastructure asset within the county. The members welcomed the support and confidence Ryanair has in the airport and noted it would be good to see other airlines have the same enthusiasm. The members noted that Shannon airport is the gateway to the north Atlantic but given the current political environment it needs to build on connectivity to Europe.
Item 32: Update from National Broadband Ireland
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I call Clare County Council to invite the Chief Executive of National Broadband Ireland (NBI) for a comprehensive update on this county broadband rollout, NBI broadband rollout is gathering momentum in certain areas throughout County Clare. To date fibre to the home is available to 51% of the premises in Clare that were included in the NBI rollout plan.”
(M)
The elected members sought an update from the CEO of National Broadband Ireland on the rollout and uptake of broadband within the county. The members noted that since COVID a lot of people are working remotely and need high speed fibre broadband. The members referred to rural communities and the importance of broadband in these areas to encourage people to settle there. The elected members noted the importance of an efficient rollout given the evolving nature of technology.
Item 33: Engagement with T-Shore Initiative
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council engages with the T-Shore initiative to explore opportunities for collaboration in developing training and upskilling programmes for the offshore wind sector, ensuring that Clare benefits from emerging job opportunities in renewable energy.
Recognising the significant potential of offshore wind in driving economic growth and job creation along the Atlantic coast, I call on the Council to:
Establish a working group to engage with T-Shore partners and assess how Clare can benefit from its vocational training and skills development programmes.
Support the development of local training hubs and educational partnerships to equip workers with the necessary skills for careers in offshore wind energy.
Advocate for government funding and EU support to ensure Clare is positioned as a leader in offshore wind workforce development.
Furthermore, I request that the Council explores potential partnerships with T-Shore and relevant educational institutions to facilitate training opportunities in Clare.”
(M)
S. Lenihan, A/Director of Service, Planning & Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“With an update from Government expected before Summer in regard to how we move forward with the West Coast DMAP among others, this Motion is extremely timely and I wish to assure the Members that Clare County Council is actively working on ensuring that County Clare is well placed to benefit significantly from the huge potential that Offshore Renewal Energy (ORE) offers. To this end, Members will be aware of our efforts in progressing a Marine Economic Zone (MEZ) and a Maritime Training Centre in Kilrush among other initiatives. Moreover, the Economic Directorate of Clare County Council has engaged extensively with all relevant 3rd level Colleges, further and higher education providers, vocational providers and at an international level, with all of the relevant certification providers from a Safety at Sea perspective. Data gathered to date will inform any future Maritime Training Centre in County Clare and will ensure we are best placed to progress this when the time is right.
Related, Clare County Council is a partner on the Mid-West Renewables Education and Training Cluster which was established to forecast and report on the education and talent gaps of the emerging offshore wind industry in the Mid-West. This group in collaboration with the key education providers is looking to develop education pathways to satisfy talent gaps in the industry. Clare County Council will continue to engage with the Department of Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science with regard to identifying new opportunities and the relevant funding from government to equip workers with the necessary skills for careers in offshore wind energy.
The Motion specifically mentions T-Shore and for the other Members information, I wish to advise that T-shore is an innovative project that aims to address the challenges of skills shortages head-on. T-Shore is a consortium of thirteen partners from five European countries (Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, Norway & The Netherlands) who have come together to develop training programmes, a training library, and Centres of Vocational Excellence (CoVEs) to provide workers with the skills and competencies they need to succeed in the offshore wind industry today and for the future. Wind Energy Ireland are one of the Irish partners involved in the consortium and whom Clare County Council are engaging with regarding the delivery of both on and offshore wind along with the associated skills shortages.
The Council will continue to work with our Irish partners to formulate a direction for Ireland and for Clare and we will keep the Members informed of developments.”
The elected members welcomed the reply from the Director and the engagement with T-Shore and noted that it is essential to broaden the focus on offshore wind sector. The members suggested that strategic engagement should start at secondary school level to build a pipeline for the future. The members acknowledged the need to be proactive in upskilling and educating in this sector to enable Clare to be an attractive proposition for companies down the line.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
AILG Training Programme Module 2 entitled ‘Embracing Equality’ held in the Clayton Hotel, Galway on the 22
nd
of March 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €156.33 including conference fee of €90.00.
It was agreed that Cllr T. O’Callaghan attend this conference.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________ Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________ Cathaoirleach
Date: _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback