Minutes of December 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of December 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 8th December 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ann Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services.
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Carmel Kirby, Director of Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental & Emergency Services.
Adrian Headd, Senior Engineer, Housing Activation and Delivery.
Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllr. T. O’Brien, Cllr. S. Talty
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The O’Keeffe Family, on the death of Pat O’Keeffe, RIP.
The McMahon Family, on the death of Gerard (Buddy) McMahon, RIP.
The Owens and Roche Family, on the death of Helen Owens (née Roche), RIP.
Cllr. J. Crowe extended a vote of sympathy to the Carey Family, on the passing of Donal Carey, RIP, former Minister of State, T.D., Senator and Councillor and proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect. The elected members also paid their respects to Mr. Carey and extended condolences to his daughter Leonora and sons Joe and Donal. Cllr. T. O’Callaghan seconded the proposal for a 15 mins adjournment.
The meeting resumed at 3.40p.m.
Approval to Travel
It was approved that Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy travel to Barcelona for the European Volunteer Awards having been proposed by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy, seconded by Cllr. B. Slattery and agreed by the members present.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy welcomed the people in the public gallery who are participating in a course entitled Women of Clare – Making a Difference. The Cathaoirleach noted that this programme is an initiative of Clare County Council, funded by the Dept. of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The course facilitator is Sinéad Doody (Doody Facilitation and Consulting Ltd).
The Cathaoirleach stated that the course has been made available to all women, especially those from minority groups - including Travellers, migrants, disabled women, and LGBTQIA+ - who want to strengthen their leadership, confidence, and ability to create change.
It was noted that there were 16 women registered for the programme, representing many of those minority groups, and focusing on areas such as understanding how local authorities and other bodies make policies and decisions, and on how women can influence change at local and national level.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a.      Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the November Meeting of Clare County Council held on 10
th
November 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to Item 19 from the November Council meeting and noted that the Director of Service was to provide an update on discussions with TII, emphasising that significant work is required at these junctions.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service for Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services, advised that TII are prioritising Junction 13 and are proceeding to the planning stage.
Cllr. P. Hayes queried whether Junction 14 is also included in these plans. Dr. Kirby confirmed that TII had only referenced Junction 13 but undertook to follow up with them regarding Junction 14.
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 1st December 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Education and Youth in relation to funding for free sanitary products.
Correspondence dated 28th November 2025 from the Chief Executive Officer of the Road Safety Officer in relation to M18 motorway slip road.
Correspondence dated 2nd December 2025 from TII in relation to average speed cameras.
Correspondence dated 1st December 2025 from Timmy Dooley T.D. in relation to the recommendations outlined in the HIQA report.
Correspondence dated 5th November 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to the recommendations outlined in the HIQA report.
Correspondence dated 2nd December 2025 from TII in relation to traffic calming measures.
Acknowledgement dated 14th November 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to Period poverty.
Acknowledgement dated 17th November 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Education and Youth in relation to Period poverty.
Resolution dated 6th November 2025 from Laois County Council in relation to the establishment of a referendum commission.
Resolution dated 26th November 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to a public information campaign on electrical wiring systems in older homes.
Resolution dated 2nd November 2025 from Kerry County Council in relation to the “End Discrimination of Inheritance” Campaign.
Resolution dated 13th November 2025 from Leitrim County Council in relation to alternative education pathways.
Resolution dated 27th November 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to the 150th anniversary of the Catalpa expedition.
Resolution dated 2nd December 2025 from Longford County Council in relation to OAP medication.
Resolution dated 15th October 2025 from Tipperary County Council in relation to the Child Leap Card Scheme.
Resolution dated 20th November 2025 from Wexford County Council in relation to the survivors of abuse in industrial and reformatory schools.
Celtic Conferences being held on the 9th – 11th January 2026 in the Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth on “The Finance Act 2025”.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.         Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 14 October, 2025 be noted.”
b.         Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 17 September, 2025 be noted.”
c.         Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Budget Meeting held on the 10 November, 2025 be noted.”
d.         Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 16 September, 2025 be noted.”
e.         Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Budget Meeting held on the 10 November, 2025 be noted.”
f.          Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 16 September, 2025 be noted.”
g.         Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Budget Meeting held on the 12 November, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a)   Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 17 June, 2025 be noted.”
(b)   Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 15 July, 2025 be noted.”
(c)   Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Tourism Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 8 May, 2025 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 3
rd
November, 2025 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the recent Microsoft Dream Space pilot launch in West Clare, noting the strong attendance and describing the event as a powerful and enjoyable experience for the children who participated. Cllr. McInerney commended Clare County Council ICT and Kilkee Library for hosting and successfully delivering the event.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the Draft Kilrush Town Centre First Plan and urged all departments within Clare County Council to review the plan and consider the role they can play in its implementation. She highlighted that the plan requires the full support of the local authority to ensure its success.
Cllr. McInerney requested an update on the West Clare Railway Greenway project and the meeting with landowners that was scheduled to take place at the end of November.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, emphasised the importance of this process and advised that the query will be referred to Alan Farrell, Director of Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation, as the project now falls under Capital Infrastructure Delivery.
Item 8: Disposal of property at Curranroo, Burren, New Quay, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Alan Farrell, Director of Service, Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the property at Curranroo, Burren, New Quay Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 25
th
November 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at Curranroo, Burren, New Quay Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 25
th
November 2025.
Item 9: Material Contravention Report in accordance with Section 34 (6) of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, for the development of 6 no. houses at Acha Bhile, Loughville, Lahinch Road, Ennis, Co. Clare.
The Chief Executive report was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s planning reports, appropriate assessment and determination and Natura Impact Statement Determination).
The report states that it has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 34(6) of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, and relates to the granting of permission for a housing development by way of a material contravention of the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029.
The report sets out the main reasons and considerations on which the proposal to grant permission is based. Attached to the report is the technical planning report which provides for a detailed assessment of the application and sets out the planning conditions to be included should permission be granted.
The report notes that the proposal is for a development of 6 no houses and associated site works. The layout sees vehicular access being provided from the Lahinch Road via the existing access serving Ache Bhile housing development.
The report recommends that the development be considered as a material contravention of the Clare County Development Plan 2023 – 2029 in accordance with the provisions of Section 34(6) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended).
In accordance with Section 34 (6) of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, the Cathaoirleach called a vote which resulted as follows:
In favour: 25
Against: 0
Abstentions: 0
Not Present: 3
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal carried.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
Item 10:  Chief Executive Report in accordance with Section 37E (4) and (5) of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, in relation to the Cloonkett Windfarm application.
Report from Gordon Daly, Chief Executive dated 28
th
November, 2025 was circulated with the agenda.  The Chief Executive report is in accordance with the requirements of Section 37E (4) and (5) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended following on from the submission of a Strategic Infrastructure Development (SID) to An Comisiún Pleanála, known as the Cloonkett Windfarm.
The development consists of 14 no. wind turbines with an energy output of approximately 63MW with a 40-year operational lifespan. A 10-year permission is sought and the application is accompanied by an Environmental Impact Assessment Report (EIAR) and a Natura Impact Statement (NIS). The main components of the development are as follows:
14 no. three-blade wind turbines with an overall ground to blade tip height range of 150m, a rotor diameter 136m and a hub height of 82m;
Construction of associated reinforced concrete foundations, crane pad hard-standing areas and associated plant/switching gear;
Creation of one new access and upgrading of 1 no existing agricultural access of the local road L 2072 to serve as construction and operation access to the site.
Creation· of 2 accesses onto the local road L6239 to serve as construction and operation access to the site.
Construction of new permanent, internal site tracks (9.51 km) and upgrading of existing tracks {1.43km) and associated drainage infrastructure including a Water framework Directive (WFD) water course crossing comprising a new clean span bridge to replace an existing crossing.
Erection of 1 no. permanent meteorological mast to a height of 100 m above existing ground level;
Creation of a dedicated peat and spoil deposition areas and berms.
All associated internal, underground electrical and communications cabling connecting the wind turbines to an on-site substation;
Forestry felling of 8.40ha.
Provision of 1 no. 220kV onsite substation and associated compound including welfare facilities, waste water holding tank, rain water harvesting tank, , associated security fencing, external lighting and lightning protection, and over head line works
All associated site development works including excavation, earth works, peat and spoil management, and landscaping.
The Chief Executive report was approved having been proposed by Cllr. M. Shannon, seconded by Cllr. I. Lynch and agreed by the members present.
Item 11: Draft Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2026
Report dated 8
th
December, 2025 from Leonore O’Neill, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with Clare Local Area Grants Scheme 2026 guidelines for applicants (previously known as the Community Support Scheme).
The report states that the Budget for the 2026 scheme is €687,500. The new Scheme for 2026 and the allocations across the grant categories were approved by the members of the Grant Funding Working Group on the 27
th
November 2025.
The following are the approved grant categories for 2026
Support Scheme for Public Realm Initiatives and Amenity Projects & Tidy Towns Initiatives.
Support Scheme for Maintenance of Open Spaces in Private Housing Developments
Support Scheme for Community Playgrounds
Support Scheme for Burial Ground Maintenance, Boundary Repairs and Provision
Support Scheme for Christmas Lighting
Support Scheme for the Maintenance and Upkeep of Local Authority Estates
Support Scheme for the Arts
Scéim Deontais na Gaeilge/Support Scheme for the Irish Language
Support Scheme for Tourism Marketing & Promotion
Support Scheme for Sustainable Tourism
Support Scheme for Community Project Development
Support Scheme for Age Friendly Initiatives
The 2026 Clare Local Area Grant Scheme was approved having been proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. P. Burke and agreed by the members present.
Item 12: Draft Clare Biodiversity Action Plan 2025 - 2031
Report dated 25
th
November, 2025 from Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development was circulated with the agenda and a copy of the Clare County Biodiversity Action Plan 2025-2031 was issued to the members in advance of the Council meeting.
The report states that Clare County Council has prepared its 4th Clare County Biodiversity Action Plan 2025-2031 which provides a framework for biodiversity action over the next six years with the aim of halting biodiversity loss in County
Clare and to address the ‘biodiversity emergency’ at a local level.
The plan is underpinned by Ireland’s National Biodiversity Action Plan 2023-2030 and aligns with the strategic biodiversity objectives of the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029.
The report outlines the preparation of the Draft Clare County Biodiversity Action Plan 2025-2031 which followed guidance issued by the Heritage Council,
Local Authority Biodiversity Action Plan Guidelines
.
The report also notes the plan implementation and its reliance on the ongoing collaborative engagement and commitment in partnership with the key stakeholders outlined in the plan.
The Clare County Biodiversity Action Plan 2025-2031 was noted by the members present.
Item 13: Appointment of 2 members to Kilrush Amenity Trust.
Following a lengthy discussion by the members around the constitution of the Trust it was agreed by the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy to defer this item noting that the request to increase the number of members on the board to three would be discussed at the next CPG meeting in January with the Chief Executive.
Item 14: Appointment of 2 members to Clare Tourism Development DAC.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. S. Talty be appointed to Clare Tourism Development DAC.”
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Cllr. C. Ryan be appointed to Clare Tourism Development DAC.”
It was agreed that these appointments would be for the life of the Council.
The members discussed the need to have an additional elected member on this board, and it was agreed to raise this at the January CPG meeting.
Daly, Chief Executive noted that the governance guidelines for Subsidiary Associated Companies of Clare County Council are in the process of being finalised and together with this he will consult with CPG in January around the request to increase the number of members to the board.
It was agreed to take Item 18 first.
Item 18: Road Safety
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy, T. O’Callaghan, C. Colleran Molloy, A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council urgently engage with Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) and relevant stakeholders to install hard shoulders on the N68 Kilrush Road between Edenvale and the junction with the Ballyea Road (L-4166), a stretch of approximately 1 kilometer. This intervention is necessary to improve safety for pedestrians and cyclists accessing Ennis or starting their journey west to the towns, villages, and townlands in the surrounding countryside.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“We will discuss the issue with Transport Infrastructure Ireland and also include the location in our upcoming strategic review for investment in roads in county Clare.”
The elected members extended a welcome to those present in the public gallery and acknowledged the significant traffic volume along this stretch of road. They expressed concern that the current road conditions, including its narrow width and absence of a hard shoulder, pose serious safety risks for cyclists. The members noted their appreciation for the response provided by the Senior Engineer and expressed hope that a resolution will be implemented without delay.
Item 15: Traffic Management Plans
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council develop a suite of pre-established traffic management plans for strategic routes across the county, to be made available to emergency
services and relevant private companies as required. The purpose of these plans is to ensure that, in the event of an unexpected emergency road closure, there are clear, safe, and pre-approved diversion routes and procedures ready for immediate implementation. This proactive approach will help minimise disruption to local communities, support effective emergency response, and maintain public safety during unplanned incidents. Where non-critical vehicle recovery is taking place, no approval should be given unless outside of peak traffic hours and confirmation the approved traffic management plan is in place and adequately resourced.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“There are approximately 935km of roads across the national primary, secondary and regional network in County Clare. It would be a significant undertaking to try and develop a full suite of diversion routes across such a vast strategic road network. However, the principles of diversion routes are well established and guidance is provided across a range of Traffic Management publications. Each unplanned event will require its own potentially unique diversion route depending on the circumstances. Emergency road closures are usually instigated by An Garda Siochana (AGS) to prevent further injury or collisions and allow access for emergency services. The Gardai are also very familiar with the road network and can be best placed to instigate diversion routes at short notice to alleviate traffic buildup on the strategic routes.
The recovery of vehicles which may involve the use of cranes or tow trucks can be complicated depending on the nature of the incident. We would liaise with AGS to determine the most appropriate timelines for vehicle recovery with consideration given to the additional health and safety challenges which nighttime working may present. Usually, time is of the essence to reopen strategic routes and so it is not always possible to have the vehicle owners and recovery company provide the traffic management resources required to fully signpost any proposed diversion route at short notice.
I fully understand the frustrations experienced when diversion routes are put in place. However, such diversions are necessary at times to ensure the safety of the motoring public and attending emergency services.”
The elected members expressed concern regarding the recent increase in road traffic accidents. Reference was made to a recent incident on the N68, during which the road was closed for several hours at peak traffic time, resulting in significant disruption as motorists sought alternative routes, causing congestion on non-strategic roads. Members noted that the development of a traffic management plan for strategic routes would assist both emergency services and private operators in responding effectively to such situations. It was further noted that all key stakeholders, including Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) and An Garda Síochána, should be involved in the preparation of this plan.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, advised that An Garda Síochána hold primary responsibility for managing road traffic incidents and cautioned that it would be unsafe for the local authority to divert traffic onto non-national roads. Dr. Kirby confirmed that she would engage with An Garda Síochána to explore a suitable solution.
Item 16: Housing Crisis
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“We call on the Minister for Housing and our MEP’s to progress strategies and devise an E.U. wide approach to help alleviate, in part, Europe's and thus Irelands housing shortage crisis.”
(M)
The elected members welcomed Clare County Council’s emphasis on housing activation, while acknowledging that the issue is of national importance. They noted that house prices have increased substantially in recent years and emphasised the need for further measures to improve affordability and expand housing supply. The members suggested streamlining planning regulations and leveraging all available European supports as possible solutions. The members expressed particular concern for young people and middle-income earners who face significant challenges in purchasing or building homes and agreed that reducing bureaucracy and encouraging collaboration between public and private sector expertise are essential to addressing the problem.
Item 17: Assessment of Mould
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to assess the council houses with reported instances of mould as a matter of urgency.”
(M)
A Headd, Senior Engineer, Housing Activation and Delivery replied as follows:
“Clare County Council’s current housing stock is 2935 properties and the tenant handbook relating to these properties sets out the responsibilities of the Council and its tenants to include the following:
The Council is responsible for the provision of appropriate heating & ventilation provisions in all habitable rooms and the tenant is responsible for adequately heating and ventilating the property via these provisions.
Where reports of mould are reported to this Council the cause of such mould will be assessed having regard for the above.”
The elected members noted the response provided by the Senior Engineer and highlighted that, in certain cases, assessments are taking up to seven months to complete. While acknowledging that tenants have a responsibility to ensure proper ventilation within their properties, the members observed that the introduction of new heating systems has led to a lack of understanding regarding their operation, resulting in instances of mould growth. The members also commended the housing maintenance team for their responsiveness in addressing reported issues.
Item 19: Winter Service Plan
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council revise the winter service plan to include gritting of all regional roads in the county. Further can Clare County Council conduct an information and advisory campaign to promote safe driving in icy conditions.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“Clare County Council aims to provide a winter service plan which, as far as reasonably possible, allows for the safe movement of vehicular traffic on the more important strategic defined routes of the road network, while minimising delays and accidents directly attributed to adverse weather conditions.
Given the scale of the resources involved in delivering this winter service plan unfortunately it is not possible to provide this service to all parts of the regional road network. In addition, it may not be possible to ensure that all routes are kept free of ice or snow at all times even on the treated routes. Priority will be given to the national secondary and strategic regional and local routes based upon the road classification, traffic volumes, public transport usage, critical infrastructure routes and the importance of the route on a national, regional or local level.
The road network is monitored through a series of permanent weather stations and supplemented by additional road temperature sensors. From recorded data, there is generally no requirement to treat certain sections of the regional road network in some coastal areas. On average Clare County Council treat 714km of the road network per night during adverse weather conditions .The 2025-2026 winter service plan routes are available on the Council website
Winter maintenance and salting routes | Road maintenance and improvement schemes | Roads, parking and travel | Services | Clare County Council
There is excellent information available on the government website at
www.winterready.ie
on all aspects of winter preparedness including driving in adverse conditions. We will promote that information and further helpful guidance from the Road Safety Authority on our social media channels.”
The elected members welcomed the reply from the Senior Engineer and noted that the recently delivered Winter Maintenance workshop was highly beneficial. Members emphasised that driver responsibility is equally important as road treatment and welcomed the promotion of guidelines for driving in adverse conditions. Members sought an update on progress regarding the involvement of local residents and farmers in assisting with road gritting in untreated areas. It was noted that during Storm Éowyn, local farmers were able to assist with road clearance using their machinery and enabling them to grit roads would significantly benefit remote areas. Additionally, members requested that all local authorities ensure gritting extends to the County boundaries to avoid unnecessary gaps in coverage.
Item 20: Funding for additional bedrooms in Council properties
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council requests the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, James Browne provide for funding and a strategy to enable local authorities to build extensions and or attic conversions for additional bedrooms for families who are living in overcrowded council properties.”
(M)
The elected members observed that tenants often outgrow the houses initially allocated to them, creating a need for rehousing. Members highlighted that, by this stage, children are typically settled in schools and have established friendships and community ties, making relocation disruptive.
The members further noted that the solution proposed in the motion is practical and would facilitate more efficient use of existing housing stock.
Item 21: National Road Projects in Co. Clare
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council prepare and present to the Elected Members a comprehensive list of all national road projects in County Clare that have been, or could in future be, submitted to the Department of Transport and Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) for consideration under the National Development Plan (NDP).
This report should clearly identify:
Projects previously submitted under the Major Projects category (over €200 million);
Projects previously submitted under the Sub-€200 million category;
Potential future projects that the Council considers suitable for submission under either category, including their current status, strategic importance and indicative cost band;
Any projects for which preliminary studies, feasibility assessments or early-stage design work have already been undertaken.
The purpose of this request is to ensure full clarity for Elected Members on Clare’s past and potential future submissions to the national programme, and to support a stronger and more coordinated approach to securing inclusion in upcoming NDP updates.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“We have recently completed a scoping document for a strategic review of the entire road network for county Clare. This strategic review will focus on national, regional, and local roads and will be developed fully early in Q1 2026. This should provide the Members with additional detail on the various proposed projects across the county road network. Earlier this year we also made a comprehensive submission to the 2025 National Development Plan (NDP) review process in which we outlined the importance of the national road network in providing vital connectivity to major economic and tourism assets across county Clare. The recently published NDP Transport Sectoral Investment Plan review includes the N19 Shannon Airport Access Road as a project to be advanced for future construction. The Plan also clarifies that the Minister and the Department retain the option of re-prioritising capital expenditure commitments to address emerging priorities.
In replying to this Notice of Motion it is important to put in context how national roads projects will be developed in the future.
Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) have overall authority and responsibility for the national road network. Their primary function is to operate, maintain and extend the life of national roads. These functions will ensure the safety and efficiency of our transport networks, ensure appropriate management of environmental resources and contribute to the transition to a low-carbon and climate resilient society.
TII, through their NR2040 strategy, will align with the NIFTI, (National Investment Framework for Transport in Ireland), intervention hierarchy and seek to address transport challenges through the use of existing road space before considering the provision of new infrastructure. When developing a project on National Roads, the relevant Local Authority and TII department will need to demonstrate that the proposed investment aligns with NIFTI as set out in the Department of Transport (DoT) Common Appraisal Framework (CAF) and associated appraisal guidance documents as published by the DoT.
The NIFTI investment priorities outline how transport investment must align with two principle-based hierarchies which will ensure that the most sustainable means of delivering a transport project is achieved.
The first of these principles is the Modal hierarchy. This hierarchy details how sustainable modes such as active travel, followed by public transport will be encouraged over less sustainable modes such as the private car. In addition, the second hierarchy known as the Intervention hierarchy outlines the priority for investment. The first objective is to maintain the existing roads infrastructure, second to optimise its use, third to improve the network and the final intervention would be new road construction.
Projects previously submitted under the Major Projects category (over €200 million)
We have not recently submitted a national roads project valued at over €200m. The last significant investment in this category was the N18/N19/M18/N85 network with associated by-passes (Newmarket on Fergus, Carrigoran to Bunratty, Ennis and Crusheen to Gort) which were constructed over a series of different contracts. The total construction value of those contracts from 1999 to 2011 would have a net present value of approximately €730m which represents the single biggest investment in national roads in county Clare. That figure does not allow for land acquisition and other ancillary costs which when considered would value this investment in the region of €850m-1 billion.
Projects previously submitted under the Sub-€200 million category;
The current national roads projects submitted under this category are as follows;
N85 Blakes Corner.
N85 Kilnamona Realignment.
N19 Shannon Airport Access.
Potential future projects that the Council considers suitable for submission under either category, including their current status, strategic importance and indicative cost band;
Any projects for which preliminary studies, feasibility assessments or early-stage design work have already been undertaken.
We will be exploring interventions on the national network N(67,68,85) with TII in accordance with the NIFTI hierarchy.
The 3 No. Projects outlined under Item 2 have various levels of design and environmental works completed to date.”
The elected members welcomed the completion of the recent strategic review as a positive development but expressed disappointment that Clare has not submitted an application for a major project in recent years. Members emphasised the importance of adopting an integrated approach and reiterated the need to plan and advocate for more robust infrastructure within County Clare.
The members also highlighted the significance of ongoing communication with Oireachtas members on these matters and stressed the need to remain informed about the objectives and efforts being pursued by the local authority.
Item 22: Over the Counter Medication
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council requests the Minister for Health to provide for Vaginal Estrogen Gels & Creams be available over the counter without a prescription like other countries.”
(M)
The elected members welcomed the motion aimed at raising awareness of women’s health issues. Members noted that vaginal estrogen gels and creams are available over the counter in other countries, including the UK, Australia, and Spain, and expressed the view that a similar approach should be considered in Ireland.
The members emphasised the importance of ensuring equal access for all and commended the open and unbiased discussion of women’s health matters.
Item 23: Illegal Dumping
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I propose that Clare County Council immediately begin the process of identifying and establishing a number of pilot locations for the installation of CCTV and other appropriate monitoring technologies to combat the ongoing problem of illegal dumping across the county and that this Council prepare the necessary assessments and compliance measures required under data-protection legislation (Prosecution of Offence Regulations 2022)  to begin this process, and that we also engage with local communities to determine priority sites.”
(M)
Mellett, A/Senior Engineer, Climate Action, Environment and Water Services replied as follows:
“Clare County Council, in addition to representations made by elected representatives and through its own resources e.g. Environmental Patrol Wardens, Municipal District Staff and Community Development Officers keep an ongoing conversation with local communities. Through this network we are alert to locations of illegal dumping and take measures under the
Waste Management Act, 1996 to pursue those responsible.  We also arrange to collect and restore areas where this has occurred on public property.
Under section 14A of the 1996 Act, as amended by the Circular Economy and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2022, Local Authorities may operate CCTV Schemes under very stringent conditions and must illustrate proportionality of use, compliance with a data impact assessment and creation of a business case before CCTV use can be permitted.
CCTV can only be used on a temporary basis and in circumstances where all other avenues have been exhausted. Clare County Council will continue to monitor all illegal waste activity and will consider a pilot location for the introduction of CCTV.”
The elected members expressed concern regarding the ongoing issue of illegal dumping and acknowledged the efforts of hardworking communities across Clare who voluntarily maintain towns and villages. Members discussed the relevant legislation and requested clarification as to why other local authorities have implemented CCTV measures while Clare has not.
Members noted their frustration that this matter has been raised on several occasions without any apparent action to date. While commending the Environment Team for their continued work, members emphasised the need for greater accountability and stronger enforcement by the courts. They further stated that CCTV has proven effective in deterring anti-social behaviour and would similarly serve as a deterrent to illegal dumping.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, acknowledged that CCTV has proven to be an effective deterrent for anti-social behaviour; however, the local authority is restricted to using it solely for waste management purposes and must comply with stringent legislative requirements.
Dr. Kirby advised that processes are currently being put in place to undertake a pilot initiative. In response to a query regarding timelines, Dr. Kirby confirmed that the aim is to have these processes in place by early Quarter 1.
Item 24: Ireland's Declining Economic Competitiveness
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Irish Government to respond urgently to the concerns raised by John Collison (co-founder of Stripe) and by businessman Denis O'Brien regarding Ireland's declining economic competitiveness, infrastructure shortages, skills mismatches in the labour market, and challenges in our tax and regulatory environment.
Specifically, Clare County Council requests that the Government:
Prioritise a world-class education and skills strategy that ensures graduates are equipped for a rapidly changing global economy and increasing technological demands.
Accelerate planning and delivery of housing, transport and digital infrastructure in line with John Collison's concerns that Ireland is "going backwards" in developing the homes, transport networks and energy systems needed to support economic growth.
Promote a more agile, innovation-focused tax and regulatory system, addressing criticisms raised by Denis O'Brien regarding "digital colonialism" and Ireland's ability to sustain a competitive enterprise environment for both multinational and indigenous businesses.
Adopt a more ambitious national vision and leadership approach that strengthens ministerial accountability and reduces process-driven delays, ensuring Ireland remains future-focused and responsive to economic challenges.”
(M)
The elected members observed that, despite Ireland being a small but wealthy economy, the delivery of infrastructure and housing continues to be hindered by bureaucracy and frequent legal challenges. Members agreed that this has contributed to a level of distrust within the private sector regarding the State’s ability to deliver on infrastructure commitments.
The members welcomed the forthcoming Local Democracy Taskforce report and emphasised that Government must learn from previous shortcomings. They further noted the urgent need to accelerate planning processes and the delivery of housing.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes, seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 25: Local Government Funding
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Taoiseach to initiate a full and urgent review of local government funding, powers, and democratic structures, with a view to aligning Ireland with European norms. In the 2019 report “Democracy Works If You Let It” by Dr. Mary Murphy of Maynooth University, it was noted that only 8% of public spending in Ireland occurs at local government level, compared to an EU average of 23%.
The review must examine the overall financing model for local government, including the significant financial pressures placed on councils due to the requirement to fully fund pension obligations and to co-fund government schemes, often at levels ranging from 10% to 50%. It should also assess the employment status and pension arrangements of local authority staff, with a view to formally recognising all local authority employees as public servants and incorporating their pension entitlements into the public sector pension scheme.
Once completed and approved by Government, the review should be implemented through a clear and time-bound action plan to restore democratic accountability, strengthen local service delivery, and ensure parity of esteem for the workforce delivering essential public services.
I request that this motion be forwarded to all County Councils.”
(M)
The elected members noted a significant gap between Ireland’s funding model and that of other European countries, observing that local authorities are frequently required to seek funding at a local level. Members emphasised the need to align Ireland with European norms, highlighting that allocating only 8% of public spending to local government is insufficient and contributes to delays in project delivery. Members further expressed concern that Ireland remains overly centralised and that the level of match funding required from local authorities is excessive. They noted that State bodies have assumed considerable control over functions traditionally managed locally. The members expressed hope that these issues will be addressed in the forthcoming Local Democracy Taskforce report.
Item 26: HIQA Review
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. M. Shannon, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council, noting the Minister for Health’s announcement to progress Options A and B of the HIQA Review, expresses its disappointment that the development of a hospital in County Clare is not included as an immediate action, despite the well-documented challenges faced by communities in West, North and East Clare in accessing timely emergency care.
While acknowledging the proposed improvements to services at University Hospital Limerick, this Council calls on the Minister for Health and the HSE to outline, as a matter of urgency, the mitigation measures that will be introduced to support healthcare provision for those living in remote and rural parts of the county who continue to experience long ambulance response times and extended travel distances for emergency treatment.
In addition, recognising that Option B offers a critical and time-sensitive opportunity to secure acute hospital infrastructure within the Clare boundary, this Council further calls on the Executive to:
Immediately identify and assess at least two potential sites of approximately 30–40 acres within County Clare, located within a 20–30 minute travel time of UHL, with access to the motorway network, available wastewater capacity and appropriate ESB connectivity;
Engage directly with HSE Estates, possible published or private landowners, and relevant agencies to confirm feasibility and accelerate preparatory technical work;
Report back to Elected Members before Christmas on these discussions in relation to the potential of Option B being in Clare.
Given the urgency and the profound impact on the people of Clare, this Council agrees that this work must begin immediately to ensure that our county is not excluded from the next phase of acute hospital development in the Mid-West.”
(M)
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development:
“The Planning Department have considered various sites that would have potential to accommodate a range of hospital options should one be required by the HSE in Co. Clare.
Sites have been considered against a matrix of criteria including access to public transport, access to road infrastructure water and wastewater infrastructure, brownfield or greenfield nature of the site, known ecological considerations, proximity to residential areas, access to energy sources, distance from other medical centres, amongst other criteria.
Consideration of all sites remains ongoing and is considered sensitive at this stage having regard to landownership arrangements, HSE announcements and commercial sensitivities.
Clare County Council have engaged directly with the HSE property division in relation to these sites and this Notice of Motion and have received the following response:
“Many thanks for your correspondence below. We appreciate the continued partnership between the HSE and Clare County Council and acknowledge how as you have stated both bodies can continue to work together as key partner agencies in the delivery of a wide range of services and responses in the mid-west.
We note the ongoing concern regarding the matter of the provision of medical services and facilities in the county and that a Notice of Motion has been submitted by the elected members of Clare County Council in advance of the forthcoming December Council Meeting. Thank you for the work undertaken by Clare County Council in identifying potential sites and for bringing this work to our attention at this time.
As you may be aware, following the recent HIQA Report, the overall matter is under review by the Minister for Health and her officials and various options for the way forward are being considered at government level. Government decisions will therefore inform the way forward.
In the meantime, it would be very helpful if you could share all the details of the potential sites that have been identified with us. I would be pleased to receive this information directly from you at your earliest convenience. This will allow us to be informed and move more quickly once decisions have been made and a path forward identified.
We value the Council’s ongoing commitment to supporting the HSE and will revert to you further on the matter in due course.”
An updated list is being forwarded to the HSE this week. Clare County Council remains in constant contact with our colleagues in the HSE on these matters.”
The elected members acknowledged the sensitive nature of considerations regarding potential hospital site options and agreed on the need to be prepared should Option C in the HIQA report be implemented. Members referred to the importance of the “Golden Hour” and stressed the need to reassure the rural population of Clare that their healthcare needs are being adequately addressed.
Members noted that the announcement confirming Clare will not receive a Model 3 or Model 4 hospital was a significant disappointment. While improvements to University Hospital Limerick (UHL) were welcomed, members highlighted that these enhancements will not sufficiently address the needs of residents in West and North Clare.
The members emphasised the need to lobby for the upgrade of services at Ennis Hospital and for substantial improvements to the ambulance service. They also acknowledged the constructive engagement with the HSE prior to the December Council meeting.
Item 27: Funding for Road Upgrade
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council request the Minister for Local Government James Browne T.D. to assess the main road from Ennis to Kilrush N68, the gateway to West Clare, in particular the end of Darragh/Caherea to Lissycasey and from Lissycasey to Kilrush town with a view to allocating substantial funding for the upgrade of this seriously poor road. Please send copies of this motion to all Clare Oireachtas members.”
(M)
The elected members expressed concern that the N68 is too narrow and lacks lay-bys, noting that these issues need to be addressed in advance of the Irish Open in 2026. Members further highlighted that, given the commitment to offshore energy development, the N68 represents a critical piece of infrastructure to support this initiative.
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, acknowledged the significant number of motions in recent months relating to national secondary roads. Mr. Feeney advised that funding for such works is a Central Government matter and remains a constant challenge. He noted that under the new NIFTI framework, there is a targeted approach to investment, with an emphasis on optimising existing infrastructure.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:               _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback