Minutes of April 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of April 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Location:  Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams
On:  	Monday 13th April 2026 
Time:  	3pm
Present
Councillors
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle,
C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien,
C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Mr. Steve Smith, Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental & Emergency Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. P. Hayes, J. Crowe. A. Reynolds, Director of Service
Absent:
Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Leyden Family, on the death of Martin Leyden, RIP.
The Clifford Family, on the death of Elizabeth Clifford, RIP.
The Safi Family, on the death of Tajuddin Safi and Salahuddin Safi, RIP
The Cusack Family, on the death of Geraldine Cusack, RIP.
The McKenna Family, on the death of Sean McKenna, RIP.
The Howard Family, on the death of Pa Howard, RIP.
The Lyster Family, on the death of Michael Lyster, RIP.
The Kilroy Family, om the death of Maeve Kilroy, RIP.
The Howley Family, on the death of Luke Howley, RIP.
The Boddy Family, on the death of Jack Boddy, RIP.
Approval to Travel
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Daly, seconded by Cllr. A. O’Callaghan and agreed by the members, that further to a recommendation of the CPG and in accordance with Section 142 (5) of the Local Government Act 2001, approval be granted for Cllrs. D. Gould, M. Begley, S. Talty and incoming Cathaoirleach for Council term 2026/2027 to travel to Milwaukee to attend the
Milwaukee Irish Fest from 13
th
– 16
th
August 2026 in line with the Clare Tourism Strategy 2030.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the March Meeting of Clare County Council held on 9
th
March 2026 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 15
th
March 2026 from Uisce Éireann in relation to public group water schemes.
Correspondence dated 2
nd
April 2026 from Michael Healy-Rae T.D. in relation to the Irish Beekeepers Association Appeal.
Correspondence dated 27
th
February 2026 from Mid Ulster District Council in relation to the Irish Beekeepers Association Appeal.
Correspondence dated 27
th
March 2026 from HSE Mid-West in relation to additional dementia specific care home beds.
Correspondence dated 6
th
March 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to the proposed rail spur to Shannon Airport.
Correspondence dated 6
th
March 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Affordable Housing Scheme.
Correspondence dated 27
th
March 2026 from the Office of the Minister for oreign Affairs and Trade in relation to the funding of Israeli Bonds and the Occupied Territories Bill.
Correspondence dated 5
th
March 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science in relation to Ireland’s declining economic competitiveness.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
March 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Ennis Inner Relief Road.
Acknowledgement dated 12
th
March 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Social Protection in relation to emergency Disability Payment.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
March 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration in relation to the current Garda divisional structure in Clare.
Acknowledgement dated 18
th
March 2026 from the Assistant Commissioner, Southern Region, An Garda Siocháná in relation to the current Garda divisional structure in Clare.
Acknowledgement dated 18
th
March 2026 from Corporate Services, An Garda Siocháná in relation to the current Garda divisional structure in Clare.
Resolution dated 5
th
March 2026 from Sligo County Council in relation to Mother and Baby Homes.
Resolution dated 4
th
March 2026 from Galway County Council in relation to increase provision of Irish-medium Education.
Resolution dated 5
th
March 2026 from Leitrim County Council in relation to revised EU Anti-Trafficking Directive.
Resolution dated 5
th
March 2026 from Leitrim County Council in relation to Road’s funding allocation.
Resolution dated 12
th
March 2026 from Longfort County Council in relation to Disability funding.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 10 February
, 2026
be noted.”
b.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 21 January
, 2026
be noted.”
c.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 19 February
, 2026
be noted.”
d.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 20 January
, 2026
be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
a.
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 3 December
, 2025
be noted.”
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Tourism Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 19 November
, 2025
be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 2
nd
March, 2026 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr R. McInerney asked was there any update on submissions received to the variation of the County Development Plan. Cllr McInerney also requested an update on RRDF funding submissions.
G. Daly, Chief Executive, stated that the date had passed for submissions to proposed variations to the County Development Plan, and he added that he was preparing a Chief Executive Report, which was planned to be presented to Council at the June Meeting.
With regards to RRDF funding, G. Daly stated projects were still being considered at this stage.
Item 8:
Disposal of land at Lifford, Gort Road, Ennis, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the land at Lifford, Gort Road, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 12th March 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves, pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of the disposal of land at Lifford, Gort Road, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 12th March 2026.”
Item 9:
Disposal of property at Shannon Town Centre, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of property at Shannon Health Centre, Shannon Town Centre, Shannon, Co. Clare to subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24th March 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves, pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of the disposal of property at Shannon Health Centre, Shannon Town Centre, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24th March 2026.”
Item 10:
Disposal of Land at Clonmoney South, Bunratty, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of land at Clonmoney South, Bunratty, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24th March 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves, pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of the disposal of land at Clonmoney South, Bunratty, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24th March 2026.”
Item 11:
Disposal of Land at Clonmoney South, Bunratty, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of land at Clonmoney South, Bunratty, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24th March 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves, pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of the disposal of land at Clonmoney South, Bunratty, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 24th March 2026.”
Item 12:
Clare County Council Audit Committee Annual Report 2025.
The 2025 Audit Committee Annual Report was circulated with the agenda. The report states that under the provision of the Audit Charter for Clare County Council and Section 60 of the Local Government Act 2014 that the Audit Committee report to the Council at least annually.
The report outlines details of the remit of the Audit Committee under the following headings:
Functions of the Audit Committee
Membership of the Committee
Role and Responsibility of Internal Audit
Meetings of the Audit Committee
Audit Committee Charter 2024-2029
Internal Audit
Local Government Audit Report 2024
Corporate Risk Register/Risk Registers
The members noted this item as presented.
Item 13:
Report from Audit Committee on Statutory Audit Report for year ended 31st December 2024.
Report from Jimmy Browne, Chairman on behalf of the Clare Audit Committee was circulated with the agenda.  The report states that the Audit Committee held its meeting on 26
th
January, 2026 to review the Statutory Audit Report for year ending 31st December, 2024.
The members noted the report as presented.
Item 14:
Statutory Audit Report to the members of Clare County Council for the year ended 31st December 2024.
The Statutory Audit Report to the Members of Clare County Council on the Accounts of Clare County Council for year ended 31
st
December, 2024 was circulated with the agenda. The report included the Chief Executive’s responses to all comments raised by the Auditor.  The report as presented was noted by the members present.
Cllr. P. Hayes acknowledged the importance of the role of Audit Committees and their work, and the openness, engagement and transparency from all directorates in dealing with the Audit Committee.
Item 15: LCDC Membership
Report from Leonore O’Neill, Senior Executive Officer, Rural and Community Development was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare Older Peoples Council has advised of a requirement of a membership change of representative on the LCDC to replace Mary O’Callaghan.
The reports notes that Clare Older Peoples Council have nominated Larry Hally as their representative on the LCDC.
This was approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. J. Killeen, seconded by Cllr. M. Begley and agreed by the members present.
Item 16: Update to SPC Scheme
Report from John Corry, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services and Governance was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare County Council adopted its current SPC scheme (2024-2029), at the beginning of the term of the current Council in September 2024. Following on from the Organisational restructuring of Clare County Council in October 2025 the report notes that it was an opportune time to update the Strategic Policy Committees (SPC’s).
The report outlines the proposed changes and notes that it was not proposed to change the chairmanship or the membership of the elected members on the individual SPC’s.
In relation to the nominees from the Sectoral interests the report states that no changes are proposed to the sectoral representation however an opportunity will be available to those Sectoral interests to switch their representatives between SPCs subject to there being no changes to the overall sectoral representation on each SPC.
This was approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. B. Slattery, seconded by Cllr. T. Guilfoyle and agreed by the members present.
Cllr B. Slattery suggested details on large scale developments to be considered by the SPC before proceeding through planning.
G. Daly, Chief Executive, outlined that the role of the SPC’s was to deal with matters regarding policy, and wouldn’t anticipate that specific developments would be raised at SPC, unless discussed in a broader capacity.
Item 17: Schedule date for Annual General Meeting.
It was agreed that the 2026 Annual General Meeting will take place at 3.00 p.m. on
Friday, 26th June, 2026 having been proposed by Cllr. A. Baker Bashua, seconded by Cllr. A. O’Callaghan and agreed by the members.
Emergency Motion: Cost-of-living Measures.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch, J. Ryan, M. Begley, D Gould agus glacadh leis
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy informed the meeting that a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business had been received and that the motion may be proposed in accordance with Standing Order No. 44. This was agreed by the members present.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy informed the meeting that the request was signed by Cllrs. T. Guilfoyle, I. Lynch, J. Ryan, M. Begley, D Gould, which read as follows.
“That Clare County Council notes the Government’s announcement of its cost-of-living measures and expresses concern that the package unveiled does not meet the needs or wishes of the Irish people. This Council calls on the Government to bring forward a fair and comprehensive cost-of-living package that delivers meaningful relief for households, workers, farmers, and businesses. Please circulate this motion to the Taoiseach, Tánaiste, Minister for Finance, all Oireachtas members for Clare and Councils in the State.”
Cllr T. Guilfoyle stated that over the previous weekend we had seen many protests on the news, and that the Taoiseach was not listening to the needs and wishes of the people of Ireland.
Cllr I. Lynch added that cost of living has increased dramatically, and the packages provided need to be reviewed.
Cllr M. Begley added the Government had a first opportunity to provide support to the people and these packages were not acceptable. The protests shouldn’t have been allowed to go on for such a length of time, and a new strategy should now be considered.
Cllr J. Ryan agreed this should have been addressed sooner.
Cllr D. Gould agreed that the Government didn’t act fast enough and that 2 to 3 cent per litre on home heating oil is not enough of a reduction, when we have seen costs rise considerably in two weeks.
It was, agreed to take this item in conjunction with Item 30 on the Agenda.
Item 30: Increase to Tax Relief on Agricultural Diesel
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Agriculture to immediately increase the level of tax relief on agricultural (green)
diesel, in light of the unprecedented surge in fuel prices and the inadequate reductions currently applied. Furthermore, Clare County Council requests that Government introduce additional supports for farmers and agricultural contractors to offset the severe cost pressures now impacting primary food production in Co. Clare.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that the current increases to fuel were troubling and while already affecting consumers, they will further affect them due to increases
passed on to food and other consumables. They wished to also acknowledge the agricultural sector, who were experiencing up to 70% increases in green diesel and 30% on plastic bale wrap.
A discussion took place on the suitability of the €500 million package provided by government to reduce fuel prices, and they agreed the situation was complex. The measures, while delayed and not communicated sufficiently, were welcomed. The elected members hoped more measures were to follow as the situation evolved.
The elected members discussed an amendment to the emergency motion and Cathaoirleach, Cllr P. Murphy read out the agreed amendment as follows:
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Agriculture to immediately increase the level of tax relief on electricity, gas and all fuels, in light of the unprecedented surge in fuel prices and the inadequate reductions currently applied. Furthermore, Clare County Council requests that Government introduce additional supports for farmers and agricultural contractors to offset the severe cost pressures now impacting primary food production in Co. Clare.”
(M)
Item 18: Derelict Sites Levy
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council, recognising that the Derelict Sites Levy (DSL), introduced in 1990 to address dereliction and stimulate redevelopment, has historically underperformed due to weak enforcement, limited staffing resources, and administrative challenges, and noting
(A) that despite reforms in 2018 increasing the levy to a maximum of 7% of site value, many local authorities nationwide have collected minimal revenues and significant numbers of derelict properties remain untreated; and
(B) acknowledging the Government’s decision to reform and rebrand the levy as the
Derelict Property Tax
, with responsibility for collection transferring to the Revenue Commissioners from 2027, alongside the establishment of a centralised national register of derelict properties; and
(C) recognising that the period between now and January 2027 represents a critical window for local authorities to intensify enforcement, update registers, and ensure accuracy ahead of the transition to Revenue;
That this Council:
1. Request the Chief Executive to provide an up-to-date report to elected members on:
- The current Derelict Sites Register in County Clare;
- The number, location, and status of all properties listed;
- The total levies applied, collected, and outstanding to date;
- Actions taken to pursue unpaid levies and timelines for enforcement.
2. Seek a detailed implementation plan outlining how Clare County Council will:
- Intensify identification and registration of derelict properties between now and January 2027;
- Improve enforcement and collection rates under the existing DSL;
- Prepare for the transition to the Derelict Property Tax system.
3. Request a specific audit of Local Authority-owned lands and buildings to:
- Identify any sites or properties in Council ownership that meet the criteria for dereliction;
- Confirm whether such properties are included on the Derelict Sites Register;
- Outline clear timelines and proposals to bring these assets back into active use.
4. Call for regular quarterly reporting to elected members on progress in register updates, enforcement actions, and levy collection performance.
The Council further calls on the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to:
- Provide additional resources and staffing supports to local authorities;
- Ensure the new national register is fully integrated with local authority systems;
- Provide clear guidance on publicly owned derelict properties to ensure transparency and accountability.”
(M)
Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property Management replied as follows:
“1
. Regarding Item 1,
-
The current Derelict Sites Register in County Clare;
There are currently 144 properties on the Derelict Sites Register for County Clare
-
The number, location, and status of all properties listed;
As the Derelict Sites Register is updated on an ongoing basis and is available to the public on request, I have not included the listing in this response.
-
The total levies applied, collected, and outstanding to date
;
This information is provided in the monthly report to the members and a summary is included here:
Subject
Amount
Amount billed to date
€926,093
Amount collected to date
€95,559
Amount outstanding
€740,534
-
Actions taken to pursue unpaid levies and timelines for enforcement
.
The are
a number of actions being taken by the Council to pursue unpaid Derelict sites levies.
At the end of 2025, all of those whose payment of the derelict sites levy was overdue were billed an amount for the interest due on the outstanding sums for 2024 and 2025
The debt collection process is now being commenced by the Council. The aged debt analysis has been carried out and this has determined the customers on which  legal proceedings will be issued for collection of outstanding Derelict Sites levy.
Where a property is sold, any sums due to the Council on foot of Derelict Sites Levy should be addressed by the solicitors for the vendor and the purchaser and paid at close of sale.
Where a property is the subject of compulsory acquisition, the amount due to the Council for the Derelict Sites levy (including any interest due ) shall be deducted from any compensation payable to the previous owner.
2. Regarding Item 2, the Council’s plan for targeting and tackling dereliction includes the following:
-
Intensify identification and registration of derelict properties between now and January 2027;  A
key objective of the Council’s service delivery plan and the Government’s Housing Plan “Delivering Homes, Building Communities” is for continued targeting of dereliction in order to increase housing supply and improve the fabric of our towns and villages.
Clare County Council is making considerable strides in this area and to date in 2026, has taken action under the Derelict Sites Act on an additional 60 properties.
Surveys of properties around the County are continuing, which will identify both derelict and vacant properties.
An extensive compulsory activation programme is being commenced at the current time and public notices and notices to individual owners will be issued on the properties in question.
-
Improve enforcement and collection rates under the existing DSL
;
This is outlined above
-
Prepare for the transition to the Derelict Property Tax system.
Such preparation will commence when the specific details of any new legalisation pertaining to same is known and directions are received from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage.
3.
In relation to Item 3,
the Council continually reviews its building assets to ensure they are used for economic / social / business benefits.
There can be varying reasons why properties may be vacant for a period of time, for example, there will be properties at project inception stage, planning stage or construction stage.
In addition, the Council aims to ensure that any properties acquired by the Council by CPO under the Derelict Sites Act, 1990 are either refurbished by the Council or sold on the open market and a purchaser may be able to avail of the significant grant aid available for refurbishment of vacant properties.
4.
Call for regular quarterly reporting to elected members on progress in register updates, enforcement actions, and levy collection performance.
The Monthly Management Report gives information to the members on a monthly basis on activation of derelict properties, derelict sites levies and the compulsory acquisition activation programme.
5. The Council considers that these
requests to the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage
are a matter for the members to decide upon.”
The elected members thanked Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, for her reply and acknowledged the work performed by the team working on the current grant schemes and achieving the sixth highest uptake in the country. They noted they were hopeful that future government legislation will have a similar impact, as derelict sites are critical to the potential housing growth in the county, especially during the current housing crisis.
Item 19: Planning Permission Restrictions
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council formally calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to review and remove the current restrictions on the granting of planning permission for individual dwellings along national primary and secondary routes, including the N67, N68 and N85 within County Clare.
These restrictions are having a significant and disproportionate impact on rural landowners, effectively preventing them from building homes on their own family lands, despite often meeting local housing need criteria and contributing to the sustainability of rural communities.
The current policy, while originally intended to address road safety concerns and protect the strategic function of national routes, is now acting as a blunt instrument that fails to recognise:
The rights of rural families to live on and develop their own lands
Advances in road design, traffic management and sightline engineering
The ability of local authorities to assess planning applications on a case-by-case basis, ensuring safety is not compromised
Clare County Council believes a more balanced, common-sense approach is required — one that protects road safety while also supporting rural housing, community sustainability, and generational renewal.
The Council therefore calls on the Minister to:
Amend national planning guidelines to allow greater flexibility for local authorities in assessing one-off housing along national routes.
Introduce provisions for safe access solutions (including shared entrances, improved sightlines, and set-back designs)
Recognise the specific needs of rural counties like Clare, where national routes often function as local roads for communities.”
(M)
The elected members noted the restrictions in planning are too rigid and the ‘local rule’ should be abolished as they believe it to be outdated, especially in light of the current housing crisis. They also noted the major routes within the county, the N67, N68 and N85, surround a significant part of County Clare, making potential planning applications on these routes difficult, effectively driving families into towns. They added that landowners, currently accessing this land along these routes daily, cannot apply for planning permission due to the outdated legislation.
Item 20: 2026 Communicating Europe Initiative (CEI) Grant Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin, M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council:
1. Welcomes the opening of the 2026 Communicating Europe Initiative (CEI) grant scheme by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, which provides funding to support projects that deepen public awareness and engagement with the European Union, particularly in the context of Ireland’s EU Presidency in the second half of 2026;
2. Notes the dedicated funding stream available to local authorities, including support for community engagement, ambassador visits, and the EU Presidency County Pairings Programme, with grants of up to approximately €10,000 per project;
3.  Requests that Clare County Council, through the Chief Executive and relevant Directorates, actively prepare and submit applications under the CEI 2026 call, either directly or in partnership with community, educational, cultural and civil society organisations across County Clare;
4. Further requests that the Council identify and develop projects that:
- Promote awareness of the EU’s role in the daily lives of citizens;
- Strengthen links between County Clare and partner regions within EU Member States, such as Croatia which is paired with County Clare;
- Support civic participation, youth engagement, cultural exchange, and educational initiatives during Ireland’s EU Presidency period;
5. Asks that a report be provided to the elected members outlining proposed applications, potential partner organisations, and anticipated benefits for communities throughout County Clare.
Rationale:
This funding presents a timely opportunity for County Clare to showcase its communities on a European stage and deepen public understanding of EU membership, and secure additional resources for local engagement, cultural exchange, and educational initiatives during Ireland’s EU Presidency.”
(M)
E. Troy, Acting Director of Service, Tourism, Recreation, Libraries & Cultural Services replied as follows:
“Clare County Council welcomes the Notice of Motion and acknowledges the opportunities presented by the Communicating Europe Initiative (CEI) funding stream to support public engagement with the European Union during Ireland’s EU Presidency in 2026.
Given the very short application window, Clare Cultural Services, on behalf of Clare County Council and following consultation with Rural Development and Corporate Services, successfully submitted applications under the CEI scheme on 31 March 2026 (following an extension of the original deadline). Three interrelated project strands were included in the submission.
The proposed projects include:
A storytelling project between Ireland & Croatia & other EU countries: Celebrate the art of storytelling by hosting a programme of storytelling events for children, families and older people.
Celebrate European authors with a book promotion on European authors throughout Clare Libraries: This activity will spread awareness of the rich literary tradition of European authors and books in translation.
Proposed diplomatic visit: Official reception, civic welcome event and visit to the county as part of the cultural programme of events. Clare Cultural services have contacted the Croatian Ambassador, Dr. Davor Vidĩs and will progress this subject to funding.
The CEI application process has now closed. Should the applications be successful, a further report will be brought to the elected members outlining details of the approved projects, partner organisations involved and the anticipated benefits for communities across County Clare.”
The elected members thanked E. Troy, Acting Director of Service for his response. They noted that an enhanced awareness of the EU, especially by the youth of our country, is very important and added how important it is for our youth to understand what our government does in the wider EU context and how they represent our country. They also thanked S. McNulty, Director of Service, for submitting the application.
S. McNulty advised that the EU Presidency County Pairings Programme, with grants of up to approximately €10,000 per project, was separate to the €42,000 for the EU Cultural award, and details will be circulated in the next Monthly Management Report.
Item 21: National Cardiovascular Policy and Strategy
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Health to:
Urgently progress and publish the National Cardiovascular Policy and Strategy, as committed to in the Programme for Government, noting the absence of an updated national strategy since 2019;
Provide a clear implementation roadmap for the recommendations contained in the National Review of Cardiac Services (April 2025), including defined timelines, milestones, and accountability structures;
Clarify the funding model underpinning the implementation plan, including:
whether funding will be allocated centrally by the HSE or devolved through Regional Health Areas;
how funding will be ringfenced to ensure delivery of cardiac services;
and the mechanisms through which funding can be accessed and drawn down at regional and hospital level;
Ensure equitable and timely delivery of cardiovascular services across all regions, including rural counties such as Clare, in the context of the HSE’s regionalisation;
Provide assurance that sufficient multi-annual funding is in place to deliver the full implementation of the cardiac services review.”
(M)
The elected members agreed this was a very important motion to bring to the chamber and that effective planning and prevention with regards to cardiovascular issues is key. They also agreed there was a requirement for reassurance that regionalisation of funding does not adversely affect County Clare.
Item 22: Maintenance Requests and Complaints in Municipal Districts
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council outlines how many maintenance requests/complaints/CRMs were logged, opened and completed per Municipal District office in the year 2025, ranks the top 5 complaints in each area and confirms how much was allocated to rectify these per Municipal District.”
(Q)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
The following list has been compiled by the individual Municipal Districts and gives a breakdown per Municipal District of the CRM’s logged and closed out and top 5 CRM issues for 2025.
Municipal District
CRMs Received in 2025
CRMs Closed Out in 2025
Top 5 CRM Issues 2025
Killaloe MD
842
714
1.
Potholes (160)
2.
Road edge
subsiding/wearing
away (71)
3.
Overhanging trees
(70)
4.
Blocked road
gullies (61)
5.
Dangerous stretch
of road/junction (49)
Ennis MD
1014
419
1.
Potholes (150)
2.
Blocked road
gullies (86)
3.
Defective footpaths
(77)
4.
Dangerous trees
(66)
5.
Dangerous
junction/stretch of
road (62)
Shannon MD
1696
1552
1.
Blocked road gullies
(186)
2.
Potholes (139)
3.
Defective footpaths (119)
4.
Grass cutting of
estates (115)
5.
Overgrown hedges
(112)
West Clare MD (Ennistymon LEA)
123
75
1.
Potholes (65)
2.
Dangerous
junction/stretch of
road (8)
3.
Blocked road gullies
(7)
4.
Overhanging trees (5)
5.
Flooding on roads (5)
West Clare MD (Kilrush LEA)
416
394
1.
Potholes (143)
2.
Overgrown
hedges/trees/grass
(36)
3
. Road edge
subsiding/wearing
away (36)
4.
Blocked road gullies
(31)
5.
Signage (28)
The above figures are largely dependent on the use/input of data to the CRM system in each Municipal District Office and are not an accurate representation of the actual figure of maintenance requests/complaints dealt with in the Municipal Districts. For example, the following maintenance requests/complaints are not recorded in the CRM system in some instances:
duplicate customer queries/complaints/requests for service
issues that are dealt with immediately
direct email/verbal communications to members of staff
on the ground verbal communications to staff
A standardised approach to logging customer queries/complaints/requests for service will be considered for implementation across the council to ensure consistency and the provision of robust statistics.
In respect of the allocation of costs, there is no provision in the CRM system to allocate individual costs per complaint not would it be practicable to do so. The funding of road maintenance is provided for in the Schedule of Municipal District Works.
The elected members thanked C Kirby, Director of Service, for her reply. They also noted they had asked to see clearer data in relation to allocation of cost at a macro level, to identify if Clare County Council are investing in a way that meets our demands on the ground.
Item 23: Community Based Banks
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“Given the imminent threat of inflation to Ireland’s economy, exacerbated by ongoing wars, we call on the Minister for Communications to engage with all relevant stakeholders, including An Post, to explore the possibility of rolling out a community-based bank, similar to models in other countries, that would serve both urban and rural communities.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that inflation is a real issue in the country and that should the government decide to roll out a community bank model, similar to that of the U.S., Canada and New Zealand etc., it would provide the opportunity for reduced fixed interest rates. They added that the Post Office is an integral part of the community and would be a huge loss to an area. It was also noted that a similar motion had been raised five years previous and the Council should consider writing to the Department and urged the Senior Management of Clare County Council to take this on board and act on same.
Item 24: Review of Coastal Fishing Locations
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council, in light of the recent tragic loss of life at Blue Pool, Doonbeg, I call on Clare County Council to:
1. Undertake a comprehensive review of coastal fishing locations across County Clare that are currently promoted by Fisheries Ireland in their Shannon Sea Angling Guide, with a view to assessing their suitability and safety for use by the fishing community;
2. Engage and collaborate with Fisheries Ireland and other relevant stakeholders to ensure that all promoted fishing locations meet appropriate safety standards, particularly in areas exposed to hazardous coastal conditions;
3. Identify high-risk and known dangerous fishing locations along the Clare coastline and prioritise these areas for the installation of clear, visible warning and danger signage, highlighting risks such as strong currents, rogue waves, unstable footing, and limited access/egress;
4. In the specific case of Blue Pool, Doonbeg, urgently convene a local stakeholder meeting involving the fishing community, landowners, emergency services, and relevant agencies to:
Review the circumstances and risks associated with this location;
Explore practical safety interventions, including signage, access improvements, or restrictions where necessary;
Ensure that local knowledge and lived experience inform any decisions taken.”
(M)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
The promotion of angling and fishing locations along the coast of Clare is under the remit of Inland Fisheries Ireland (IFI). Accordingly, Clare County Council will write to Inland Fisheries Ireland requesting that it undertakes a comprehensive review of all coastal fishing locations across County Clare currently promoted within the Guide, with a particular focus on assessing their suitability, accessibility, and safety for use by the fishing community.
The Council will further request that IFI engage with relevant stakeholders, including Local Authorities, emergency services, coastal safety organisations, landowners, and the fishing and angling community, to ensure that safety considerations and local knowledge are fully reflected in any review and subsequent guidance.
While the Council does not have direct responsibility for regulating or promoting fishing activity at coastal locations, it remains committed to working collaboratively with IFI and other agencies on matters relating to public safety, coastal awareness, and risk mitigation.
The Blue Pool Area is being assessed for signage and placement of ring buoys and West Clare MD will assist with installation.
The elected members thanked C. Kirby, Director of Service, for her response and stated that this motion was sparked by real tragedy at the Blue Pool in Doonbeg in recent weeks and highlighted that it is a shared responsibility when it comes to public safety. It was noted that 12 people had lost their lives in the last 40 years, without measures being put into place, and requested signage to be erected. It was also noted that access to this area is through private land and a real concern for the landowners, who are willing to engage with Clare County Council.
C. Kirby, Director of Service, agreed it was concerning and was arranging to review signage to promote the area as unsuitable for fishing.
Item 25: Nuclear Power as a Viable Option for Future Energy Needs
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“I call on Government to openly and honestly review and consider the option of including nuclear power as a viable option to Irelands future energy needs.”
(M)
The elected members discussed the wording of the motion and highlighted the need to include the words “investigate” and “generate”. They added due to the recent fluctuations in oil prices, that the Government should be investigating the possible use of nuclear generated power. They stated that Ireland should have the ability to be independent and in control of its future energy requirements.
Cllr I. Lynch noted that County Clare has been critical to the energy distribution for the state, and asked could the Director of Service arrange for an update meeting with Moneypoint.
Cllr T. Guilfoyle added, that while he was opposed to the use of nuclear power, we should not be naive enough to understand we could actually be using nuclear generated power when connecting to the European connector.
The elected members discussed an amendment to the motion and Cathaoirleach, Cllr P. Murphy read out the agreed amendment as follows:
“
I call on the Government to openly investigate the option of including nuclear generated power as a viable option to Irelands future energy needs.”
Item 26: Road Upgrade and Maintenance
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“We call on the Minister for Transport and our Oireachtas Members to make more money available for road upgrade and maintenance of the Clare road network. We call also for an assessment of the road network in preparation for the 2027 Roads Programme with money set aside for most urgent road repair.”
(M)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
In reply to 2
nd
part of Notice of Motion:
Pavement asset management is a key component of Regional and Local Road maintenance. Successful road asset management will depend on the measurement, collection and analysis of data relating to the condition of the public road asset throughout the county. As part of the data collection exercise, each Municipal District is required to monitor and quantify the condition of the public road network within its functional area through the regular measurement and recording of the Pavement Surface Condition Index (PSCI). The frequency of surveying is detailed in the following table and is done on a rolling programme ie all roads are not surveyed at the same time but are covered within the specified period.
The elected members thanked C. Kirby, Director of Service, for her response and agreed that it was not a reflection on Clare County Council, but the budget was reduced, and we need to identify priorities and a detailed plan of what is required in County Clare going forward. They also stated that they would like to see Councillor input before decisions on this are taken. They also noted that in Clare 6% of remediation works are carried out per year, while nationally 10% is required.
C. Kirby, Director of Service stated they would continue to look for additional funding.
Item 27: Road Safety Works Review Section 38 Process
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. R. McInerney, J. Garrihy, J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council asks the Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage James Browne to review & update Section 80 (1) (K) of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001. The figure of €126,000 needs to be updated, while appropriate in 2001, it needs to be increased in line with general inflation & in building costs inflation. This limit in the current cost environment, is directing local authorities down the Part VIII planning route for basic roads/traffic safety works which were previously permitted through the Section 38 process.”
(M)
The elected members stated that the original figure of €126,000 was based on the conversion from the Irish Pound to Euro and was no longer matching current expenditure for works. They asked for this to be brought to Minister James Browne for review, in line with inflation. It was noted that the low threshold was causing an over reliance on Part VIII’s, as opposed to S38’s.
Item 28: Provision of Dedicated Ambulance Units within Fire Stations
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. Guilfoyle, I’ Lynch, R. Hartigan agus glacadh leis
“That this Council calls on the Minister for Health, the Health Service Executive, and the National Ambulance Service to immediately address unacceptable ambulance response times in County Clare by allocating dedicated ambulance units to be based at Ennis, Kilrush, and Shannon Fire Stations.
This Council notes that, under the Fire Services Act 1981, local authorities are tasked with protecting life and responding to emergencies. Yet, in County Clare, firefighters are increasingly left providing critical first response care while patients wait prolonged periods for ambulance transport, an arrangement that is neither sustainable nor acceptable.
This Council further notes that in Dublin, Dublin Fire Brigade successfully operates ambulances from fire stations, demonstrating that co-location is a practical, proven solution that can significantly reduce response times and save lives.
Accordingly, this Council demands:
• The immediate provision of dedicated ambulance units at Ennis, Kilrush, and Shannon Fire Stations
• A full and urgent review of ambulance cover across County Clare
• The adoption of co-located fire and ambulance response models where appropriate to ensure no community is left waiting in an emergency.
This is a matter of patient safety, equity of service, and public confidence. Delays cost lives, this must be acted on without further delay.”
(M)
The elected members outlined how a combined service between the Ambulance Service and Fire Service is currently operational in Dublin. While they understand the finance and resources are the biggest issue for County Clare, the elected members asked for a working group to be set up, to discuss a proposal to consider this for County Clare. They also stated that, with the recent news that the new hospital would not be built in County Clare, an improved ambulance service should urgently be reviewed.
C. Kirby, Director of Service noted that the joint service in Dublin is a significant cost to Dublin City Council of circa €26 million in 2023.
Item 29: BreastCheck Density Mandatory Notification
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Health and the HSE to introduce a standardised system to notify all women of their breast density following mammograms within the BreastCheck programme.
The Council notes that:
Dense breast tissue increases the risk of breast cancer and can make detection more difficult on mammograms.
Approximately 43% of women have dense breasts.
Women are not routinely informed of their breast density in Ireland.
International best practice, including recommendations from the European Society of Breast Imaging (EUSOBI), supports informing women of their breast density.
The Council calls for:
Mandatory notification of breast density for all women attending BreastCheck.
Clear information to support informed decision-making.
Access to additional screening where clinically appropriate.”
(M)
The elected members stated that countries such as the U.S., Canada and parts of the EU have acknowledged that women should be told of the results of the density scan,
to provide clarity and an opportunity to seek further tests if required. This information can provide informed decision making and the elected members added that women in Ireland deserve the same care as other parts of the world.
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Killeen, seconded by Cllr. G. Keating and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30 p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 31: Limerick Northern Distributer Road
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. M. Begley, P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“The members of Clare County Council welcome the opening of the new road from Coonagh to Knocklasheen which is part of the LNDR. We the members of Clare County Council are now asking the Minister for Transport to revisit the Limerick Northern Distributer Road (LNDR) project and to support the preparation of an updated feasibility report on the scheme, having regard to its strategic importance for connectivity between County Clare and Limerick City, access to the University of Limerick and surrounding industrial parks.”
(M)
The elected members stated that the LNDR was removed from the transport plan with no explanation and rationale provided, and while the opening of this section of road has been welcomed by the local people, the surrounding infrastructure has not kept pace. They also noted that there was a need for this road, to connect this corner of County Clare to the surrounding areas.
G. Daly, Chief Executive stated that the LNDR was a strategic priority of Clare Co Council and was an
objective of the County Development Plan. He also noted that he would be requesting a meeting with the Department of Transport and Limerick City and County Council to discuss same.
Item 32: Community Gardai
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to request more community Gardai to tackle anti-social behaviour in Clare. This anti-social behaviour includes vandalism, drug dealing, use of illegal road vehicles and intimidation.
Additionally, that councillors be furnished with contact information for the relevant
Gardai in each area that anti-social behaviour occurs.”
(M)
The elected members agreed on the need for increased availability and visibility of community Gardai, and that Gardai need more resources.
Cllr J. Ryan also added that the two policing areas in the Shannon Municipal District can cause confusion regarding responsibilities.
Item 33: Periodic Training for Driving License Holders
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Transport, Darragh O'Brien, and the Road Safety Authority to consider introducing periodic in-person training days for driving licence holders to reinforce the rules of the road, enhance driver behaviour and improve road safety.”
(M)
The elected members stated that driver behaviour needs to be addressed, and, periodic driver training, similar to that of the Safe Pass, could help. They added they envisaged that this should come into effect after the first ten years from qualification for a driver’s licence.
Item 34: Site for Model 3 / 4 Hospital in Clare
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. O’Callaghan, J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“It was very disappointing for Clare people to hear the new hospital will go ahead in Limerick, so it is very important that Clare County Council, like many other organisations throughout the county, request the HSE to identify and purchase a serviced site in the Ennis region that will accommodate a Model 3 / 4 hospital
for the people of County Clare in years to come.”
(M)
The elected members agreed to take this item in conjunction with Item 35 on the Agenda.
Item 35: Site for Model 3 / 4 Hospital in Clare
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“That this Council, having regard to the further analytical work required prior to any determination on Option C, as identified by the Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) at a meeting of the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Health in November 2025, and noting that this work has substantially been completed by the Hybrid Simulation Modelling Lab (HSML) and is available to inform decision-making, subject to consideration by the Minister, the Department of Health, HIQA and the Health Service Executive (HSE),  recognising that completion and validation of the analysis can support timely, evidence-based decision-making in the upcoming Memorandum to Government in Quarter 4 2026.
• calls for no final decision regarding Option C be made regarding MW UEC services until the analysis has been fully validated and;
• calls on Government to refer the matter to the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Health for full scrutiny of regional demand and service utilisation;
• affirms unequivocally its commitment to safeguard the interests of the people of County Clare should any decision be advanced prior to the completion of this process;
• calls for the full inclusion of West Clare, specifically Kilrush, in all future equity-based healthcare planning and resource allocation, similar to Limerick city;
• calls for the immediate preparation of a business case, feasibility study and land acquisition for a new hospital on a greenfield site in Ennis.”
(M)
The elected members welcomed Sinead Madden, to the Public Gallery and agreed that they were not giving up on the possibility of a new hospital in County Clare. They proposed the Council and HSE identify a site in Clare, that can accommodate a Model 3 / 4 hospital and then fight for the allocation of funding to build it. They also noted that pressure needs to be applied now, before any decisions are made during Autumn 2026.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed:
____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed:
_____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:
_____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback