Minutes of November 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of November 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 10th November 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillor P. Daly, M. Howard, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, , I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ann Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services.
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Carmel Kirby, Director of Transportation, Climate Acton, Recreation, Environmental & Emergency Services.
Adrian Headd, Senior Engineer, Housing Activation & Delivery.
Helen Walsh, County Librarian, Libraries, Arts & Cultural Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Councillor R. McInerney.
Absent:
Councillor P. Murphy.
Presiding
The Leas Cathaoirleach, Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Lahiffe Family, on the death of William (Willie) Lahiffe, RIP.
The O’Brien Family, on the death of Brian O’Brien, RIP.
The Brennan Family, on the death of Lily Brennan, RIP.
The McEvoy Family, on the death of Barbara McEvoy, RIP.
The Frawley Family, on the death of Brendan Frawley, RIP.
The Monahan Family, on the death of Nuala Monahan, RIP.
The O’Regan Family, on the death of Andrew O’Regan, RIP.
The Comte Family, on the death of Bernadette Comte, RIP.
Vote of Congratulations
Cllr. P. Hayes wished to acknowledge President Michael D. Higgins on his last day in office. Cllr. Hayes noted what a great ambassador he was for the county and that he should be proud of the legacy he has left. Cllr. Hayes noted that he was recognised as a great author and poet and noted his support of the arts, music and people. Cllr. Hayes proposed to stand and applaud President Higgins as a mark of respect, Cllr. J. Crowe seconded this proposal.
G. Daly, Chief Executive welcomed Sinead O’Donoghue to Clare County Council as a Senior Executive Officer in the Housing Activation Department.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a.      Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the October Meeting of Clare County Council held on 13
th
October 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 24 October 2025 from the Office of State for Special Education and inclusion in relation to review of additional needs placements for primary and secondary schools in Clare.
Correspondence dated 16 October 2025 from Minister of State Timmy Dooley T.D. in relation to increased road and footpath funding.
Correspondence dated 16 October 2025 from Minister of State Timmy Dooley T.D. in relation to healthcare in the Mid-West.
Correspondence dated 4 November 2025 from TII in relation to N85 realignment project.
Correspondence dated 21
st
October 2025 from Minister of State Timmy Dooley T.D. in relation to the participation of women in sport.
Acknowledgement dated 20
th
October 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Children, Disability and Equality in relation to inheritance tax.
Acknowledgement from the Office of the Minister for Finance in relation to inheritance tax.
Acknowledgement dated 23
rd
October 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Children, Disability and Equality in relation to additional needs placements for primary and secondary schools in Clare.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
October 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Education in relation to additional needs placements for primary and secondary schools in Clare.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
October 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Education in relation to NCSE SNA Guideline Review.
Acknowledgement dated 20
th
October 2025 from the Office of the Minister of State for Special Education and Inclusion in relation to NCSE SNA Guideline Review.
Acknowledgement dated 21
st
October 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to Healthcare in the Mid-West.
Acknowledgement dated 23
rd
October 2025 from the Office of the Minister of State for Sport and Postal Policy Office in relation to the participation of women in sport.
Acknowledgement dated 9
th
October 2025 from Uisce Éireann in relation to water services.
Resolution dated 16
th
October 2025 from Galway County Council in relation to the Child Leap Card Scheme.
Resolution dated 9
th
October 2025 from Monaghan County Council in relation to Nursing Homes and Care Facilities.
Resolution dated 4
th
November 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to the Emergency Household Response Pack.
Resolution dated 22
nd
October 2025 from Wexford County Council in relation to Inheritance Tax.
Resolution dated 22
nd
October 2025 from Wexford County Council in relation to Stout’s Law.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.         Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 9 September, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 6
th
October, 2025 as presented.
Item 6: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. I. Lynch referred to Cranny Cross noting that the update has been removed and queried if the works are going to continue.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the draft Clare Biodiversity action plan and queried if there would be MD updates on the plan.
Cllr. Guilfoyle requested an update on industrial relations issues.
Cllr. S. Talty referred to the Ennistymon Inner Relief Road and Bridge Crossing (Blake’s Corner) and queried if the high court judgement was the final decision and the development could proceed now.
J. Murphy, Director of Service advised that the Biodiversity MD workshops will be starting in Ennis on the 11
th
November.
A. Reynolds, Director of Services advised that Management continue to engage with SIPTU in relation to the dispute regarding the implementation of vehicle usage and telematics policies and noted that the local authority is due to participate in a further conciliation process with the Workplace Relations Commission on Wednesday 12
th
November.
C. Kirby, Director of Service advised that she would revert on the query in relation to Blake’s Corner. Dr. Kirby noted in relation to Cranny Cross, items are only put in the Management report when there is an update.
Cllr. P. Hayes appealed to all those involved in the industrial relations matters to come to the table, particularly the unions, in order to get a resolution if there is a threat to service.
Cllr. B. Slattery referred to Cllr. Talty’s question in relation to Blake’s Corner and noted he would be putting forward a motion along the same lines for the MD meeting and would appreciate a reply.
C. Kirby, Director of Service, acknowledged same and advised a reply would issue.
Cllr. J. Killeen referred to the update in relation to derelict sites and thanked the team for the great work being done.
Item 7: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at Finian Park, Shannon, Co. Clare.
Report from John Strand, Executive Engineer, Shannon Municipal District and Chief Executive Report dated 23
rd
October, 2025 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Economic, Rural and Community Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The report states that the purpose of the proposed development is to enhance the existing open space in the centre of Finian Park, Shannon, Co. Clare, with the works to take place from no 9 Finian Park to the Tullyvarraga Community Hall.
It is proposed to upgrade the existing area of open space, which is in poor surface condition and develop this area into a modern, welcoming space by expanding the existing green areas, clearly defining the pedestrian routes, re­moving mobility impairments and introducing three circular paved areas to support a sustainable community in this area.
The proposed development consists of:
Upgrade of existing paving.
Upgrade of existing footpath surfaces.
Creation of a new paved area adjacent to house no.s 15 & 108, 46 & 145, 71 & 150
Increasing the existing green areas as shown in the accompanying drawings No's S25-18-001, S25-18-002, S25-18- 003
Replacement of existing lighting columns.
Retention of existing mature trees.
All associated and ancillary site works.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
Item 8: Proposal to initiate a Variation to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 on foot of the ‘NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements’ Guidelines for Planning Authorities (July 2025) issued under Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended.
The Chief Executive report was circulated with the agenda.
The report states that it is the intention of the Chief Executive to initiate a Variation of the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029, in accordance with Section 13 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended. In addition to the aforementioned, there are a number of other matters that the Chief Executive considers pertinent to include in a proposed Variation and are set out below:
The publication of the Revised National Planning Framework and the subsequent Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines ’NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements’ (July 2025).
The publication of the Residential Zoned Land Tax Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines ‘Residential Zoned Land Tax – Change in zoning of lands subject to existing economic activity’ (December 2024).
The Ennis 2040 Economic and Spatial Strategy Review.
The preparation of an Ennis Local Transport Plan.
The need to undertake a small number of necessary text and mapping refinements.
The ‘Sustainable Residential Development and Compact Settlements’ Guidelines for Planning Authorities.
The members noted the report as presented having been proposed by Cllr. P. Burke and seconded by Cllr. I. Lynch and agreed by the members present.
Item 9: Briefing from Clare Comhairle na nÓg
The Leas Cathaoirleach, Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy welcomed Brian McManus, Niamh McManus and Isabel Gurure from Comhairle na nÓg to the chamber.
Niamh and Isabel addressed the Council and thanked the members for the opportunity to present on their project. They explained what Clare Comhairle na nÓg do and how they support young people in Clare.
Niamh and Isabel outlined how the project came about at their AGM where various issues were discussed but that the topic of discrimination of women was agreed to be the main focus with particular attention to period poverty.
They played the video they made to the elected members and noted it was created on real issues people thought would occur. The aim of the project is to reduce period stigma, increase education and distribute free period products.
Niamh and Isabel noted that Comhairle na nÓg have engaged with Clare Sports Partnership to provide period packs for training bags.
The elected members congratulated Niamh and Isabel on their presentation and on the runners up award at the IPB Pride of Place awards. The members commended them for discussing a difficult subject and doing so with confidence and professionalism.
The members noted how the packs should be available in every sports facility and in all schools.
Item 10: Housing Solutions for Aging Population
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy, J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That this Council resolves to prioritise the development of housing solutions for the aging population in County Clare, with a specific focus on those living alone in isolated rural areas.
This Council notes that:
The most recent Census highlights a significant challenge in rural areas of Clare, particularly in the North and West, where high levels of isolated living among the aging population are evident.
There is a pressing need for innovative housing solutions that cater to the unique needs of older people, enabling them to live independently and safely.
This Council calls on the relevant departments and agencies to:
Develop models of independent living housing that incorporate support services, community engagement, and accessible design.
Incorporate mixed housing types in future developments, including age-friendly and accessible units.
Prioritise the needs of older people living alone in isolated areas, ensuring that housing solutions are tailored to their specific requirements.
That this Council further resolves to:
- Work with relevant stakeholders, including community groups, healthcare providers, and approved housing bodies, to deliver innovative and responsive housing solutions.
- Conduct a comprehensive review of existing housing stock and infrastructure to identify opportunities for adaptation and retrofitting.
- Develop a Clare-specific strategy for aging-in-place, incorporating the needs and
preferences of older people.
By passing this motion, Clare County Council can demonstrate its commitment to supporting the aging population and addressing the unique challenges faced by older people in rural areas.”
(M)
A. Headd, Senior Engineer, Housing Activation and Delivery replied as follows:
“Clare County Council’s strategic priorities include accelerating all forms of housing delivery and as such the organisational structure within Clare County Council has been revised to support these ambitions. The changes include the newly established Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision and Land Activation Directorate to include a dedicated Housing Activation Unit.
As part of the “Housing for All Plan” this Council has provided for mixed house types within new developments across Clare from which 47 new age friendly / assessable units on average have been delivered over the last 3 years. In addition, this council in conjunction with relevant service providers have and are currently providing for new Group Homes that incorporate accessible design and includes support services. We continue to proactively engage with the relevant support service providers in identifying and delivering other developments across Clare where required.
With the support of our Elected Members, we now have in place our Asset Management System which provides a comprehensive survey of our existing housing stock to assist in identifying properties suitable for adaptation and retrofitting as opportunities arise. Since the commencement of the Energy Retrofit Programme by the Dept. of Housing, we have successfully completed full energy retrofits on 181 council properties to date with contracts awarded to retrofit another 34 council properties in the coming months. In addition, and again with the support of the Elected Members we have successfully undertaken adaptations to 158 council properties in 2023 and 2024 amounting to €1.19m approx. We are committed to deliver on this programme of work for 2025 and beyond across Clare.
Clare County Council continues to be proactive as part of the Healthy Age Friendly Homes Programme with the provision of resources and advice as required. The programme helps older adults live independently by connecting them with housing, health and social supports. In 2024 and 2025 Clare County Council has administered the following applications which has provided some assistance to this programme for private residents in Clare:
Disabled Grant Applications: 675 no. applications - €5m approx.
Older People Support Funding: 601 applications - €2.47m approx.
We are committed to deliver on this programme of work for 2025 and beyond across Clare.
Clare Age Friendly Strategy 2024-2030 was launched by Clare Older Persons Council. In particular Theme 1: Housing, sets out a Goal:
Work to support housing needs among Clare’s older persons, ensuring age friendly appropriate housing options”
,
and contains a number of key objectives around housing which we are also committed to supporting and delivering on along with other key stakeholders.
Clare County Council acknowledges the challenges in rural areas of Clare, and we shall continue to maintain strong working relationships with our Elected Members and work in collaboration with influencing key stakeholders to include the Governments Dept. of Housing and the Housing Activation Office, Infrastructure & Service Providers, Community Groups and our Approved Housing Bodies Partners for the benefit of the county.”
The elected members commended the work that is being done in the housing directorate. The members noted that the scale of the issue was highlighted from results of the last census. The members expressed the need for secure accommodation and adapted bungalows for elderly and disabled people and also the need to have these facilities in towns and villages with services nearby. The members discussed the retirement villages concept and step-down accommodation schemes and noted that upkeep of older properties is too expensive for pensioners to maintain. The members welcomed the focus on housing by the chief executive in his strategic priorities.
G. Daly, Chief Executive noted that the motion speaks to management priorities and advised that housing activation is spread across the board capturing all age groups. Mr. Daly noted that a new housing plan is being published this week by Government, so this is a timely motion.
Item 11: Defective Concrete Blocks Tax Incentive
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Finance to urgently introduce a 0% VAT rate on all remediation works undertaken by homeowners affected by defective concrete blocks, including MICA and pyrite-related damage.”
(M)
The elected members advised there was a change to the Pyrite Remediation Scheme whereby affected homeowners receive 100% redress but this scheme is not available for affected homeowners in Clare and the Defective Concrete Block scheme that is available is capped, doesn’t give enough to cover costs and is taxed twice. The members noted the volume of people that are affected by this issue and outlined the need for full redress for those affected.
It was agreed to take items 12, 13 & 14 together.
Item 12: Traffic Calming Solutions
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That a deputation from Clare County Council meet with TII with a view to enforcing traffic calming measures outside a busy commercial premises on the N68 at Darragh, Ennis, Co. Clare to avoid imminent danger of a tragic accident.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“We will forward the request to TII and revert to the Members in due course.”
Item 13: National Secondary Road Network Speed Limit
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“I call on Clare County Council for an update on the introduction of the default speed limit of 80kph on our national secondary road network and also request the introduction of speed reduction measures and safety improvement works on the N68 at Darragh considering ongoing collisions at this location.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“The required legislative change to reduce speed limits on the National Secondary road network is included in the National Vehicle and Driver File Bill 2025. It was initially envisaged that this would be enacted towards the end of this year, but from discussions with the Department of Transport our current understanding is that it will likely not be enacted until early 2026 subject to Government priorities.
We are in discussion with Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII), who have overall responsibility for the planning, supervision and maintenance of works on the national road network, regarding possible safety improvement works on the N68 at Darragh.”
Item 14: Road Safety Review
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch, D. Gould agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council:
1. Formally identify Darragh village and the surrounding section of the N68 at McNamee’s Cross and the adjoining double junction as an Area of Interest for public road safety, in line with local authority and TII guidelines.
2. Include this area for assessment within the forthcoming Clare County Council Road Safety and Speed Limit Review (2026), ensuring that it is prioritised for the development of appropriate safety interventions, including traffic calming, reduced speed limits, improved signage, and pedestrian safety measures.
3. Engage directly with Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) to progress the development and funding of safety improvement works on this section of the N68, as referenced in correspondence from the Senior Executive Engineer (October 2025), who confirmed that a formal funding application to TII will be made.
Provide an interim safety response, in consultation with the area office, including temporary electronic signage or other short-term safety measures to mitigate ongoing risk to residents, road users, and pedestrians pending the full review and implementation of long-term works.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“The N68 at Darragh is part of the national road network. Darragh itself is not identified as a settlement/village in the County Development Plan. Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) has overall responsibility for the planning and supervision of works and for the construction and maintenance of the national road network. As part of that remit, it carries out collision analysis of the entire national road network. The purpose of this analysis is to identify locations that have above average concentrations of collisions. It is not in the local authority’s remit to carry out this collision analysis. However, the local authority does consult with TII to identify potential accident locations, but those locations are subject to review by TII in accordance with their relevant standards.
The required legislative change to reduce speed limits on the national secondary road network is included in the National Vehicle and Driver File Bill 2025 which will likely not be enacted until early 2026 subject to Government priorities. The default speed limit on the national secondary network, including the N68 at Darragh, will be set to a default speed limit of 80km/h when this legislation in enacted. Any further reductions in speed limits at any location will be subject to the relevant setting of speed limit guidelines and TII approval. The introduction of the proposed new default speed limits on the national secondary network will not include for traffic calming or pedestrian measures. Such measures will be subject to a separate process with TII.
We are in discussion with Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) regarding safety improvement works on the N68 at Darragh including possible interim measures.”
The elected members noted that this junction is an area of great concern and temporary measures are needed to be put in place urgently to avoid a fatal accident. The members noted that the residents are extremely concerned about the dangerous conditions of this junction and noted that it should be marked as an area of interest for public road safety. The members expressed concern over TII’s lack of engagement on this matter. The members discussed the benefits of traffic calming measures and the impact that speed vans can have if implemented in an area. The members discussed various measures that could be put in place to make the area safer.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service acknowledged the concerns of the members and noted that it is a busy section of the N68. Dr. Kirby advised that she is eager to find a resolution and is happy to sit with the members to pursue solutions and she advised that as it is a national secondary road it is the responsibility of TII. Dr. Kirby noted that the speed limit will reduce to 80 kph in early 2026 and clarified that she could not commit to erecting signposts without the approval of TII.
G. Daly, Chief Executive noted that the review of the County Development Plan is to ensure sufficient zoning of residential land within the county’s settlements but that he would raise the issue of redesignation of Darragh. Mr. Daly did note that road behaviour needs to change and that there may be other solutions to this issue.
Item 15: Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 2028–2034
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Government of Ireland not to support the European
Commission’s proposal to establish a single common fund under the new Multiannual
Financial Framework (MFF) 2028–2034, which would merge key EU policy instruments such as the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), Cohesion Policy, and the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund into one overarching funding mechanism.
This Council expresses concern that:
The proposed “common fund” risks undermining the integrity and transparency of longstanding EU policies that have delivered tangible benefits to Ireland’s regions, farmers, and coastal communities.
The Commission’s justification—that this structure would “simplify” the MFF—fails
to recognise that simplification through centralisation can weaken the specific policy
objectives and ring-fenced funding that underpin regional and rural development.
The proposal links the next MFF to the repayment of EU debt incurred under the
NextGenerationEU recovery instrument, creating fiscal pressure that is already leading to an overall 20% reduction in key investment areas compared with the current period.
The Commission’s claim that the new MFF will be “the biggest EU budget ever” is misleading, as this increase is largely accounted for by debt repayments rather than by additional funding for future programmes or regional growth.
Accordingly, Clare County Council urges the Minister for Public Expenditure, NDP
Delivery and Reform, and the Minister for Finance, to:
- Reject any move towards a single aggregated fund that would erode the distinct purposes
of the CAP, Cohesion, and Fisheries policies;
- Advocate instead for a transparent, policy-based MFF that maintains clear and separate
funding streams for agriculture, regional development, and the blue economy; and
- Support an ambitious, adequately resourced EU budget that ensures balanced and
sustainable growth across Ireland and the European Union’s regions.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged that a great deal of funding comes from Europe and that this proposed change to the budget would mean that all policies would be competing for funding from the same resource pool. The members noted that this change is concerning and must be rejected. The members stated that the CAP budget is under pressure as it stands and acknowledged the importance of the regional development fund and the rural regeneration and development fund. The members stated that there is a need to retain as much control as possible at a local level and not to have it all centralised by central government.
Item 16: Tidy Towns Group Funding
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to assist Tidy Towns Groups in housing estates to be able to avail of the same funding that is provided to official villages and towns in Clare. These Tidy Towns Teams currently cannot receive certain funding because the area is a grouping of housing estates and not a village or town.”
(M)
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development replied as follows:
“Clare County Council administers a number of grant schemes, funded from both its own resources and external government agencies.  Each grant type has differing eligibility criteria, some of which focus the benefit of the funding towards groups or settlements of varying sizes, geographic characteristics or towards meeting specific policy objectives such as climate change, community well-being or the environment to name a few.
By way of examples the ‘Town and Village Renewal’ grant scheme is focussed on settlements with less than10,000 persons while the ‘Urban Development and Regeneration Fund’ is focused on settlements with more than 10,000 persons. The ‘Clar’ funding is targeted at rural areas that have experienced population decline while the ‘Clare Local Area Grants and the Local Enhancement Programme’ (CLAGS) is open to all community and voluntary groups across the county to improve the quality-of-life experience in their areas.
County Clare is known both nationally and internationally for its strong sense of community and commitment to volunteering. New volunteer-based groups continue to emerge across the county to meet new challenges or to explore new opportunities in our communities.
It is recognised that many new groups can grow and benefit through the support of our councillors and agencies. In Clare County Council our Rural Community Development Officers work closely with our elected representatives and a wide range of new and existing groups to support them as they develop. These supports extend to assisting groups in developing funding applications suited to their activities, projects, and eligibility including grants external to Clare County Council's remit.
The team in Rural Development will continue to support groups, irrespective of their status or experience, to leverage funding appropriate to their needs – their contributions to our communities are invaluable. For any group seeing support the team in Rural Development can be contacted by either calling into our offices, through our website (
www.clarecoco.ie
), via our dedicated e-mail address (
ruraldev@clarecoco.ie
) or by phone on (065) 6821616.”
The elected members noted that there are a number of estates and settlements that have set up their own group of volunteers that should be designated as official Tidy Towns groups to avail of funding. The members noted that nothing would happen in the county without volunteers.
J. Murphy, Director of Service acknowledged that the work that is being done by these groups is invaluable.
Item 17: Period Poverty and Period Dignity in Ireland
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“Period Poverty and Period Dignity in Ireland: This is a very real issue. Clare County Council has received funding from the Department of Health to provide free
sanitary products in our public buildings. This has been a very successful and positive initiative.
Clare County Council requests the Ministers for Health, Education, Sport, and Finance to continue to support this important action that affects young women and families on low incomes. I am requesting that funding be identified that will allow free sanitary products to be made available in all secondary schools, 6th class in primary schools, and in all sports clubs nationwide.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged that people living on limited budgets struggle to afford necessities such as menstrual products. Lack of access to these products means days missed in school or work and this leads to feelings of embarrassment and shame. The members noted that this is not solely about hygiene but about respect and dignity. The members noted that all schools and sports facilities should have free period products made available.
Item 18: Audit of Vacant, Underused, and Derelict Properties
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council undertake a comprehensive audit of vacant, underused, and derelict properties within the towns and villages of Clare to identify opportunities for activation under the Town Centre First, Croí Cónaithe, and other relevant regeneration schemes.
That this audit build upon and incorporate the work and data collection already undertaken by the Council’s Derelict Properties Team, recent Council reports, the relevant Strategic Policy Committees, and available national data sources, to ensure an integrated and evidence-based approach.
Further, that this process include a review of existing zoning designations within settlement plans to ensure an appropriate balance between residential, commercial, community, and leisure uses, supporting the sustainable development, liveability, and vibrancy of our towns and villages.
That a pilot project for community-led property activation and zoning review be developed in collaboration with local development groups, business associations, and community representatives, with a view to informing the next review of the County Development Plan.”
(M)
H. Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Placemaking & Economic Development replied as follows:
“Clare County Council is committed to the roll out of town and village health checks across the county which will help to identify the level of vacancy across our county.  It is important to note that surveys are completed at a point in time with constant change to vacancy rates applicable.   The work completed by the various departments across the Council however give an indication of occupancy rates experienced in recent years.
Since the establishment of the amalgamated Vacant Homes and Derelict Sites Teams, the Council have surveyed 2,141 properties across the entire County, with a primary focus on towns and villages.  The surveys were commenced in 2023 and are ongoing using 2022 Geo-Directory vacancy data and validation of same. Any additional properties identified on an ongoing basis by the staff involved are updated to the survey data, which is collated on a GIS mapping layer.
The survey data compiled to date shows of the 2,141 on the ground surveys complete 1,079 were considered to be vacant (50%).  293 of those were considered to be derelict (13%), and 769 were considered to be occupied (36%).
The Planning Department are currently preparing to conduct a Town Centre Health Check for Ennis Town for 2025.  This will capture information on occupancy rates and the nature of uses within the town centre core area.
In addition as part of the ongoing monitoring of the implementation of the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 there is an on-going review of zoned land across the county.  This data base of information will be critical to informing potential future proposed variations to the development plan but will also inform the review of the development plan which is set to commence in 2027.
The Planning Department complete town centre health checks as part of all town and village masterplans completed by the department, over recent years these have included checks completed for Ennistymon, Corofin and Lisdoonvarna and would complement a wider suite of health checks completed by the Town Centre First Team and other Council wide plans and strategies.
The development plan review will be informed by all of the various town and village health checks completed over recent years together with land use surveys that will be required ahead of the drafting of the next development plan.”
The elected members acknowledged the work that has been done and the progress that has been made but that there is a need to build on that progress and create a plan that leads to activation. The members noted that there needs to be a cross-directorate approach to dereliction. The members referenced the importance of the audit of vacant, underused and derelict properties with the pressures in housing currently. The members noted that second homes that require renovation are a financial burden to people and they queried how could people be incentivised to engage in the schemes available to them.
Item 19: Safety Audit and Design Compliance Review
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“I’m calling on the Minister for Transport, the Road Safety Authority and Transport Infrastructure Ireland to carry out an immediate safety audit and design compliance review of the M18 motorway slip roads at Barefield (Junction 14) and Tulla Road (Junction 13).
The M18, linking Limerick and Galway, carries a 120 km/h speed limit. Therefore, I’m asking that:
An
independent engineering and safety audit
be undertaken immediately at
both junctions.
TII
publish the actual lengths and design classifications
of these slip roads, along with any existing safety mitigations.
The Minister
prioritise remedial measures
— whether that means lengthening the lanes, improved signage, or interim speed controls.
A
formal update
be provided to Clare County Council.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the M18 motorway slip roads are too short and drivers on the motorway are having to break quickly when driving at high speeds. The members noted that from a previous meeting held with TII there was a clear commitment from them to deal with the issue. The members stated that this matter has been ongoing for five years and needs to be rectified as a matter of urgency.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, noted that the issue has been raised by TII especially junction 13 and an update will be provided to the members.
Item 20: Uachtarán na hÉireann
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council will write to the Áras to formally extend our fraternal congratulations to President-Elect Catherine Connolly on her historic election as Uachtarán na hÉireann.
We commend her lifelong commitment to public service, social justice and democratic values, and we recognise the significance of her election for communities across the island of Ireland as we take steps towards reunification under the Good Friday Agreement.
We also extend our warmest wishes to her family, her husband, Ennis native Brian McEnery and their two sons who have supported her throughout her distinguished career.”
(M)
Cllr. Guilfoyle requested that an amendment be made to his motion to include a request for a civic reception for Catherine Connolly.
A. Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services noted that a request for a Civic Reception would need to be considered by CPG first before being considered by the full Council.
The elected members congratulated Catherine Connolly on her presidential election victory. The members noted that she ran a wonderful campaign and it was great to see young people get involved. The members wished her well in her role and commended her for the respect she showed throughout her campaign. The members acknowledged that she will be a president for all.
Item 21: Motorway/Dual Carriageway Average Speed Camera Safety System
Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council would request that the TII would look at installing a motorway/dual carriageway average speed camera safety system. On the M18 and N18 wherever the TII would feel that it would work best.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged that data has shown very few people have been caught speeding in average speed zones in Co. Tipperary since the cameras were installed. The members noted that there has been a significant increase in crashes on the motorway over the last few months and that one life taken is one too many. The members noted that the M18 is a strategic piece of infrastructure linking people to Limerick, Galway and Shannon Airport and when there is an accident it causes major disruptions for commuters. The members urged TII to implement the average speed cameras urgently.
Item 22: Location of Defibrillators Accessible on Maps
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“Calling on the HSE to work proactively with Google maps to ensure the location of all registered defibrillators in the country are available and accessible on their app.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the importance of time in cardiac episodes and having the location of defibrillators readily available on Google maps could save a life. The members noted that if the location of a restaurant can be found on google maps then having registered defibrillators on there shouldn’t be that difficult. The members noted that unless you know an area very well you may not know where to find the nearest defibrillator.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
LAMA Autumn Training Seminar, held in the Amber Springs Hotel, Gorey, County Wexford on the 16-17
th
October 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €917.73 including conference fee of €245.00
It was agreed that Cllrs A. Baker Bashua, M. Begley, P. Burke, C. Colleran Molloy, J. Crowe, P. Daly, D. Gould, D. Griffin, M. Howard, G. Keating, J. Killeen,  P. Murphy, T. O’Brien, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman,               M. Shannon and B. Slattery attend this conference.
Celtic Conference entitled “The Evolving Role of AI in Public Relations”, held in O’Donovan’s Hotel, Clonakilty, County Cork on the 7-9
th
November 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €699.41 including conference fee of €130.00
It was agreed that Cllrs P. Daly, A. O’Callaghan, M. Shannon and S. Talty attend this conference
AILG November Training Module entitled “Evolving planning context and the new Ministerial Guidelines under Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act”, held in the Ravenport Resort Hotel, County Wexford on the 13
th
November 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €595.74 including conference fee of €90.00
It was agreed that Cllrs P. Burke, M. Howard, G. Keating, A. O’Callaghan,    P. O’Gorman and M. Shannon attend this conference.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:               _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback