Minutes of February 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of February 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Location:  Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams
On:      Monday 9th February 2026
Time:  3pm
Present
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental & Emergency Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllr. R. Hartigan
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The McMahon and Daly Families, on the death of Gemma McMahon Daly, RIP.
The Ensko Family, on the death of Declan Ensko, RIP.
The Ryan Family, on the death of Tomás Ryan, RIP.
The Flynn Family, on the death of Colum Flynn, RIP.
The Conway Family, on the death of Lourda Conway, RIP.
The Callinan Family, on the death of Marian Callinan, RIP.
The Lynch Family, on the death of Louisa Lynch, RIP.
The Moloney Family, on the death of Stephanie Moloney, RIP.
Approval to Travel
It was proposed by Cllr. P. O’Gorman, seconded by Cllr. J. Garrihy and agreed by the members that the Cathaoirleach accept the kind invitation of the County Clare Patriotic, Benevolent and Social Association of New York Inc. to attend the St. Patrick’s Day Parade in New York.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the January Meeting of Clare County Council held on 12
th
January 2026 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 29th January 2026 from the Office of the Secretary General to the President in relation to the request for Civic Reception.
Correspondence dated 21st January 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Education and Youth in relation to maternity health and safety for SNAs.
Correspondence dated 30th January 2026 from the HSE in relation to the centralisation of GPs.
Correspondence dated 28th January 2026 from Seán Kelly MEP in relation to Affordable Housing.
Correspondence dated 8th January 2026 from Kathleen Funchion MEP in relation to Affordable Housing.
Correspondence dated 12th January 2026 from TII in relation to hard shoulder on N68.
Correspondence dated 20th January 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to wind energy development.
Correspondence dated 27th January 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Social Protection in relation to Automatic Enrolment retirement savings scheme.
Correspondence dated 21st January 2026 from Minister Timmy Dooley in relation to Automatic Enrolment retirement savings scheme.
Correspondence dated 29th January 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Disabled Persons Grant Programme.
Correspondence dated 16th January 2026 from the Office of the Minister of State John Cummins in relation to local government funding.
Acknowledgement dated 15th January 2026 from Uisce Éireann in relation to Group Water Schemes.
Acknowledgement dated 20th January 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Affordable Housing Scheme.
Acknowledgement dated 15th January 2026 from Joe Cooney T.D. in relation to Automatic Enrolment retirement savings scheme.
Acknowledgement dated 22nd January 2026 from Central Bank of Ireland in relation to funding of Israeli Bonds.
Acknowledgement dated 19th January 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to Crusheen Train Station.
Resolution dated 22nd January 2026 from Tipperary County Council in relation to hi visibility jackets when using e-scooters and e-bikes.
Resolution dated 22nd January 2026 from Offaly County Council in relation to the Mercosur deal.
Resolution dated 15th January 2026 from Sligo County Council in relation to the Investor Court System.
Cllr. A. Baker Bashua referred to the correspondence dated 21st January 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Education and Youth in relation to maternity health and safety for SNAs. Cllr. Bashua Baker noted that the reply was insufficient and advised she would speak with the Meetings Administrator in relation to further communication with the Department.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the correspondence dated 12th January 2026 from TII in relation to hard shoulder on N68. Cllr. Guilfoyle noted that following that communication he has referred the reply to the Roads Department in Clare County Council.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 9
th
December 2025 be noted”
b.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 19 November
, 2025
be noted.”
c.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 18 November
, 2025
be noted.”
d.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 18 November
, 2025
be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 6
th
January, 2026 as presented.
Item 6: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. B. Slattery referred to the reopening of the Lahinch playground and commended the team on the works completed.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to CCTV for the purposes of waste management enforcement and sought an update on the progress of this undertaking.
Cllr. Hayes referred to the Housing Update, noting the significant level of detail provided. He suggested that the SPC undertake a comprehensive review of all elements, with particular attention to the more challenging areas where tenant‑related issues are arising.
Cllr. T. O’Brien referred to the Killaloe Bridge Bypass and R494 Upgrade, noting that while the project is an excellent development, the surrounding roads remain in poor condition. He further highlighted that the local community has been exceptionally patient in awaiting necessary repairs to these roads.
Cllr. M. Shannon referred to the bridge repair on the R473 and commended the team on the standard of work completed.
Cllr. J. Garrihy acknowledged the work being undertaken by the Climate Action Team and commended the creativity emerging from the Community Climate Action Programme.
Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Regional Festival and Participative Events Funding, seeking clarification on whether applications have now closed and enquiring how the local authority may be able to support these festivals in the future.
Cllr. P. O’Gorman referred to the 343 Bus Route Upgrade and sought clarification on who is responsible for evaluating the submissions - Clare County Council or the bus operators?
A. Farrell, Director of Service, noted in relation to the Killaloe Bridge Bypass and R494 Upgrade that he understood that the MD has been working with the Physical Directorate in relation to seeking funding to address any damage to roads and he confirmed that PMO will assist with this.
Mr. Farrell confirmed that he understood that most of the snags have been addressed but if there are any concerns they should be raised with the site office or MD.
C. Kirby, Director of Service, noted, in relation to CCTV, that she is working with A. Reynolds, Director of Service, who is establishing the Oversight Committee. They anticipate that the committee will be in place and at least 1 pilot progressed by the end of Quarter 1.
C. Kirby further advised that the strategic roads plan is underway and Municipal Districts are currently identifying areas of concern.
C. Kirby confirmed that it is the Road Design Office who are evaluating the submissions regarding the 343 Bus Route Upgrade.
S. McNulty, Director of Service, noted that the closing date for submissions for the Festivals funding was the 30
th
January 2026.
Item 7:
Disposal of property at Broadford Health Centre, O’Sheas Acres, Broadford, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the land at Broadford Health Centre, O’Sheas Acres, Broadford, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 26th January 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr.T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Broadford Health Centre, O’Sheas Acres, Broadford, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 26
th
January 2026.
Item 8:
Disposal of lands at Ballycuggeran, Killaloe, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the land at Ballycuggeran, Killaloe, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 26th January 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Ballycuggeran, Killaloe, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 26
th
January 2026.
Item 9:
Disposal of lands at Ballyminogue, Scariff, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the land at Ballyminogue, Scariff, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 15th January 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Ballyminogue, Scariff, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 15
th
January 2026.
Item 10: Resolution for funding the purchase of Cloister building for the delivery of the THRIVE project.
Report from Siobhán McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare County Councils Section 135 Capital programme 2026-2028 as presented to the council in November 2025 outlined €437million in expenditure on developing and implementing capital infrastructure projects in the coming years. This report identified the forecasted funding sources for these projects which includes Clare County Council match funding or own funding by long term loan finance.
The reports further states that it is now necessary to secure approval for loan funding for the purchase of the Cloister building under Section 106 Local Government Act 2001.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That pursuant to the provisions of Section 106 of the Local Government Act, 2001 it is approved to raise loan financing of €1.8 million for the purchase of the Cloister building to deliver the THRIVE funded project.”
Item 11: Approval of Annual Service Delivery Plan
The Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan was circulated with the agenda.
The report was adopted by the members having been proposed by Cllr. G. Keating and seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon
and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to the recruitment objectives outlined in the Annual Service Delivery Plan and welcomed the introduction of the new online recruitment platform. He noted, however, that there are a significant number of staff currently serving in acting positions and expressed the view that it would be beneficial to reduce reliance on this practice.
He also acknowledged the positive feedback received regarding recent public consultations and remarked that the area of remote working requires more structured management going forward.
Cllr. M. Shannon, referring to the Public Lighting update, queried how many new public lights had been installed.
Item 12: Ratification of nominees from sectoral pillars for Physical Development SPC
Report from John Corry, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services & Governance was circulated with the agenda. The report stated that Clare Public Participation Network have advised of a membership change further to the resignations of the following members from the Physical Development SPC:
Maurice O’Sullivan, Community/Voluntary.
Tom Spillane, Environment/Conservation.
Veerle Claeys, Social Inclusion.
The reports notes that the Clare Public Participation Network have nominated the following replacements:
Community & Voluntary
Gerard Reidy
Environment
Bridget Ginnity
Social Inclusion
Noel Kearney
The nominations were adopted by the members having been proposed by Cllr. P. Burke and seconded by Cllr. I. Lynch
and agreed by the members present.
Item 13: Large Energy Action Plan (LEAP)
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“In light of the recent approval of the Large Energy Action Plan (LEAP) by Cabinet, I request Clare County Council to review our strategic approach to the potential development of green energy sites within the county. This initiative aims to leverage the strategic grid and enhance the green energy potential available through both Ardnacrusha and Moneypoint, with Ardnacrusha providing robust green energy resources and Moneypoint offering large-scale lands for future green energy development.
Should a successful expression of interest be concluded, Clare County Council will also consider a material alteration to the County Development Plan to rezone lands as appropriate for such development. This will ensure the county is well-positioned as a hub for sustainable and future-focused infrastructure.”
(M)
H. Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Placemaking and Economic Development replied as follows:
“The Large Energy User Action Plan is the government’s strategy for facilitating future investment in energy intensive sectors while unlocking renewable energy opportunities.
The plan sets out 17 actions aimed to address development barriers impacting large energy users (LEUs).
This is a government plan-led approach to the co-location of the most energy-intensive LEU sectors with renewable energy supply within what is termed as “green energy park locations”.
Green Energy is understood to encompass energy generated from natural and sustainable sources that have a minimal impact on the environment compared to traditional fuels.
Development types in this green energy sector might include solar, wind, hydro, tidal, and geothermal.
Clare County Council have a plan led approach towards the delivery of green energy developments across the county.
This is set out in the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 and in particular in the Wind Energy Strategy (Volume 4) and the Renewable Energy Strategy (Volume 5).
These Strategies aim to position Clare as a national leader in renewable energy generation, supporting energy efficiency and conservation, achieving balanced social and economic development and assisting Ireland’s Climate Action Plan. The development plan outlines the potential for a range of renewable resources, including bioenergy and anaerobic digestion, micro renewables, geothermal, solar, hydro, energy storage, onshore and offshore wind, wave and tidal energy and sets targets for their delivery to 2030.
The development plan acknowledges the significant contribution that Green Energy developments can make to Clare being more energy secure, less reliant on traditional fossil fuels, enabling future energy export and meeting assigned targets.
As referenced above there are a range of policies and objectives in place within the County Development Plan to rely upon to facilitate development while at the same time protect the receiving environment.
The members will also be aware that the process of reviewing the existing development plan and making the next development plan will commence early in 2027 with preparatory work commencing over the coming months.
This subsequent development plan will be effective from 2029 to 2039 and will present an opportunity for the planning authority to reexamine this area of Green Energy and the link with Large Scale Energy Users.”
The elected members acknowledged the significant opportunity presented by the Large Energy User Action Plan for County Clare. They noted that few counties possess the level of connectivity that Clare has and highlighted the county’s national importance in this regard. Members emphasised that Clare should be well positioned to attract major energy users due to this strong connectivity. They also expressed concern that the existing grid infrastructure is already operating at maximum capacity. In light of this, members stressed the urgency of progressing the matter and questioned the rationale for delaying the review until 2027.
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development acknowledged the existing strategic energy infrastructure at Moneypoint and Ardnacrusha but noted that an appropriate balance must be maintained in future planning. He agreed that community expectations are a key consideration and stated that the plan‑led approach will support and enable further investment in the area. Mr. Murphy clarified that while the written reply references 2027, work on the County Development Plan will commence this year. He noted the members’ comments regarding the need for a proactive approach and confirmed that the Council will engage with Bord Gáis Networks as part of this process.
G. Daly, Chief Executive, acknowledged the members’ comments regarding the pace of progress and concurred with the view that the initiative presents a significant opportunity for the county. Mr. Daly advised that the Council will engage with the IDA to deliver a presentation to the Councillors, noting that this aligns with the agency’s strategic priorities.
Item 14:
Irish Beekeepers Association
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Irish Government, and in particular the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, to urgently respond to the recent appeal from the Irish Beekeepers’ Association and associated national beekeeping organisations for:
1. The establishment of a properly resourced, dedicated and coordinated all-Ireland bee inspection service, to protect managed honeybees and wild pollinators from disease outbreaks, parasites and invasive threats;
2. The immediate reinstatement and expansion of professional bee inspection capacity in the Republic of Ireland, working in cooperation with counterparts in Northern Ireland, to ensure early detection, rapid response and effective biosecurity controls;
3. Enhanced national measures to combat invasive species and emerging parasites,
including the Asian hornet and the Tropilaelaps (Tropi) mite;
4. Proactive surveillance, preparedness and contingency planning for the potential arrival of the Tropilaelaps mite in Ireland;
5. Full and continued Government support for the All-Ireland Pollinator Plan;
6. Recognition that bees and other pollinators are essential to Irish agriculture, food
security, biodiversity and the wider environment.
This motion is to be circulated to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, the Minister of State with responsibility for biodiversity, all Oireachtas members representing County Clare, and local authorities in Ireland and Northern Ireland.”
(M)
The elected members advised that invasive species and parasites pose a severe, imminent, and notifiable threat to Irish honey bees. They noted increasing anxiety within the Irish Beekeepers’ Association and highlighted that the Association is calling on the Government to establish a dedicated national bee inspection service. Members further emphasised the vital importance of bees to food production, noting that approximately one‑third of the food we consume depends on pollination.
Item 15: Uisce Éireann Proposed Planning Application
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, C. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That the Planning section of Clare County Council will engage with and assist the elected members and the Killaloe MD in the preparation of a submission to An Coimisiún Pleanála in response to Uisce Éireann proposed planning application to extract water from the River Shannon.”
(M)
H. Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Placemaking and Economic Development replied as follows:
“The Planning Authority notes that the application for the proposed Water Supply Project for the Eastern and Midlands Region has recently been lodged with An Coimisium Pleanala. This application has been made as part of the Strategic Infrastructure Development (SID) process.
Under this process, similar to recent windfarm applications in the Killaloe MD, the Planning Authority will be preparing a Chief Executive Report to the Commission, setting out its views on the development.
As part of the preparation of this report, we will be holding a briefing for the elected members in February (date to be finalised) with a view to assisting them with a response.
It is intended that the CE report will be on the agenda at the March Council meeting.”
The elected members expressed significant concerns regarding the proposal to extract water from the River Shannon. They emphasised that the river is the region’s greatest natural resource and stressed the importance of protecting such critical infrastructure. Members stated that the proposal could have a detrimental impact on tourism in East Clare and voiced doubts about the accuracy of the figures and data provided by Uisce Éireann. Concerns were also raised about the proposed community fund associated with the project, as well as the potential implications for farm practices. In addition, members highlighted the extent of leakage within the Dublin water network and argued that repairing existing infrastructure should be prioritised before considering the extraction of water from the Shannon.
Item 16: Proposed Rail Link between Limerick and Shannon Airport
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to ask the relevant Minister for clarification on the
current policy and plan for the rail link between Limerick and Shannon Airport.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the scale of the infrastructure required for a rail link between Shannon Airport and Limerick but noted that such a project would be hugely beneficial. They highlighted that it would offer significant environmental advantages by reducing road traffic and removing a substantial number of cars from the network. Members further noted that the proposed rail link would support future development across the region. They emphasised the need for a definitive response from the Minister on the matter and they raised concerns that farmland is currently restricted due to the proposed route running through affected lands.
Item 17: Burial Ground Regulation
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“Call on Clare County Council to rescind the communication of Jan 28th “Burial Ground Information for burial grounds under the jurisdiction of Clare County Council”. For the Council to then engage with all elected members and stakeholders on any proposed changes to charges for burial plots, proposed introduction of a Headstone & Monument Permission Application Fee and discussion on all aspects of Burial Ground Regulation.”
(M)
L. O’Neill, Senior Executive Officer, Rural and Community Development replied as follows:
“In 2025, Clare Council Council undertook a review of non Bye-Law related income charges across a broad number of council services to both reflect the cost of provision of these services and to ensure that charges are in line with other local authorities.
As a result of this detailed review, amendments were made under Section 151 of the Local Government Act to fees charged by the Council.
In respect of Burial Grounds, these changes included changes to burial plots rates, a columbarium fee for Drumcliff (once constructed), and the introduction of a Headstone application Fee of €100 to support the ongoing administration cost in this area of activity in line with current Bye-Laws.
Correspondence issued out on the 28th January did not set out a new policy but rather clarified the expectations of Clare County Council under the existing Clare County Council’s Burial Ground Byelaws 2015 and normal site management practice, together with providing a clear, updated list of which burial grounds or sections thereof that this applies to.
The byelaws under section 8 state “Ownership of right of burial in a burial plot does not allow for the erection of a memorial without a separate application to the Council and written approval from the Council to this application”.
Section 16(b) also states that “No headstone or monument may be erected, renovated or removed except with the authority, in writing, from the Council and the purchaser/owner of the right of burial.”
Section 16 also set sets out that “A descriptive statement of what is proposed, together with a dimensioned drawing to a scale of not less than 1 is to 20 shall accompany all such requests for approval”.
The Headstone and Monument application has been a requirement for decades.
This clarification was issued to ensure a consistent approach across all burial grounds and all contractors and to ensure effective management of higher risk activities on Council lands.
Higher-risk works require controls on safety, access, adjacent memorial protection and reinstatement.
The communication for clarity also sets out low-risk works which are exempt for the Headstone and Monument application.
The Burial Grounds unit are in the process of formulating a new Burial Ground Policy which is currently being drafted with the Rural Strategic Policy Committee, which, if adopted by full council, may require new burial ground byelaws to be formulated.”
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy left the meeting at 4.20p.m., Leas-Cathaoirleach, Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy assumed the Chair.
The elected members expressed frustration with the correspondence issued, noting that it was impractical and did not appear to reflect the experience of those working directly on the ground. Members stated that, given an imminent review, that process would be the appropriate forum to examine the byelaws and implement any necessary changes. The members also disagreed with the €100 headstone application fee, commenting that it is unreasonable to impose additional charges at a time when families are coping with bereavement.
Members involved in the Rural Development SPC acknowledged that the 1888 Act is challenging to work with due to its outdated nature. They emphasised that open dialogue and effective communication are essential and expressed hope that the issues raised will be addressed through the forthcoming review.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy returned to the meeting at 4.27p.m.
J. Murphy, Director of Service for Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development, acknowledged the emotive nature of burial grounds and noted that the area is complex to manage. He highlighted the challenges arising from the outdated legislative framework. Referring to the headstone charge, Mr. Murphy advised that the fee was agreed as part of the 2025 income review and noted that, in comparison with neighbouring local authorities, Clare’s charge falls within the middle to lower range. Mr. Murphy reiterated that no changes have been made to the byelaws; rather, they were restated in the correspondence issued regarding the rates. He further noted that the review is ongoing and confirmed that the Council will continue to work with the elected members, the SPC, and relevant contractors as part of this process with a workshop to be held.
Item 18: National Ambulance Service
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating, P. Murphy, I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“We call on the National Ambulance service to provide as a priority additional service including rapid response vehicles to remote areas of county Clare in particular North and Western parts of the county.  I further request that National ambulance service be approved to bring patients to the injury's unit of Ennis hospital where their injuries are such that treatment can be administered there.”
(M)
The elected members expressed concern regarding delayed ambulance response times in remote parts of the county. They reiterated the need to identify a location closer to Ennis, noting that this is a matter of patient safety. Members acknowledged that while the ambulance service operates effectively in urban areas, the current model is not suited to rural locations. They emphasised that all patients should receive the same standard of care, regardless of where they live.
Item 19:
International Women’s Day
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. R. Hartigan, M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council establish a dedicated annual cultural and educational initiative to mark International Women’s Day from 2027 onwards, and formally assign responsibility for the development, coordination and long-term delivery of this initiative to a designated Directorate within the Council.
The annual programme would:
•
Identify and select a number of influential Clare women, past and present, reflecting the breadth and diversity of contribution across social, cultural, economic, sporting, community, political and historical life in County Clare.
•
Develop professionally designed exhibition panels or installations for each selected woman, incorporating biography, imagery and a clear account of her contribution to Clare and wider society.
•
Display these installations in all Clare County Libraries and at Áras Contae an Chláir, ensuring both local accessibility and a strong civic focal point.
•
Ensure exhibitions are installed in advance of International Women’s Day (8 March) each year and remain on public display for an appropriate period to maximise engagement, educational value and community participation.
Furthermore, that the Council examine opportunities to expand and evolve this initiative beyond a once-off exhibition model, ensuring it becomes a flagship countywide programme that promotes recognition, education and community engagement on an ongoing basis.”
(M)
S. McNulty, Director of Service,
Tourism, Festivals, Libraries and Cultural Services Directorate replied as follows:
“Thank you for the Notice of Motion. The request is for the establishment of an annual cultural and educational initiative marking International Women’s Day from 2027 onwards. We are willing to support the development of such a programme, subject to the assignment of an appropriate budget.
To deliver a high‑quality, professionally produced exhibition of the scale envisaged, we will require sufficient lead‑in time. This will include consultation with elected members and with the public to identify suitable candidates, as well as research and content development, image and rights sourcing, design and production. We can begin scoping and planning for a 2027 initiative, with a view to establishing a robust and sustainable annual programme from that year forward.
For 2026, Cultural Services has a number of relevant events and displays already scheduled that will ensure Clare women remain strongly represented in our International Women’s Day activity:
International Women’s Day falls on Sunday, 8 March
, coinciding with the Ennis Book Club Festival. Two festival events will take place in
De Valera Library
that weekend:
• A poetry event on Saturday featuring
Karen McDonnell
and two other female poets.
• A book‑club event on the Sunday as part of the festival programme.
We also have a
Cumann Merriman pull‑up stand
on Clare authors, including two female Clare writers. One of these is
Máiréad Ní Ghráda
, who also worked in 2RN, which marks its 100th anniversary this year. This exhibition is currently on display in Local Studies, and we will maintain the focus on women’s literary contributions throughout March.
We will work to action this Notice of Motion and continue to celebrate and promote great Clare women as part of International Women’s Day.”
The elected members welcomed the reply and the commitment to establishing a structured programme to celebrate International Women’s Day. They noted that Clare has been shaped by remarkable women across all sectors, including many who have not been in the public spotlight, and emphasised that their contributions should also be recognised and celebrated. Members further noted that this annual programme has the potential to become an important part of Clare’s cultural identity.
Item 20:
Occupied Palestinian Territory Bill
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Government to amend the Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Prohibition of Importation of Goods) Bill to include the prohibition of trade in services, in line with the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice and the Resolution which Ireland co-sponsored at the United Nations General Assembly, and to enact the Bill immediately.”
(M)
The elected members noted the ongoing atrocities in Gaza and expressed concern that the issue has not featured prominently in recent media coverage. They stated that the situation cannot be forgotten and that the Occupied Territories Bill should still be enacted with the inclusion of services. Members emphasised that the matter must be considered from a moral as well as an economic perspective. They also noted that if legislation can provide for the inclusion of goods, they see no reason why services could not also be included.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy read out an amendment to the motion, submitted by Cllrs. T. Mulcahy, J. Garrihy, P. Burke, G. Keating, M. Howard, P. Murphy, B. Slattery, C. Ryan agus J. Crowe:
“That Clare County Council:
1. Affirms its commitment to promoting peace, justice, and human rights in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict;
2. Condemns the humanitarian crisis and human rights violations in Gaza and the occupied Palestinian territories;
3. Supports a two-state solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security;
4. Calls on the Irish Government to continue advocating for an immediate ceasefire and peaceful resolution;
5. Requests a detailed briefing on the Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Prohibition of Importation of Goods and services) Bill and its implications;
6. Defer consideration of the motion pending this briefing and presentation.
We support efforts to address the humanitarian crisis and promote peace in the region.”
The members proposing the amended motion clarified that they were not opposing the original motion. Instead, they were seeking clarification on the term “services” and recommended that a briefing be provided to allow for a fuller understanding of the Bill and its implications.
Following discussion, it was agreed to withdraw the amended motion.
Item 21: Skin Cancer Awareness
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council notes that skin cancer is the most common cancer in Ireland, with over 11,000 diagnoses and approximately 270 deaths annually, and that prevention through public awareness and behavioural change is a key public health priority.
Further notes the HSE SunSmart campaign and a growing number of local authorities nationally following on from Cork City Council and Kilkenny County Council, that are introducing SunSmart measures in public spaces, as well as the current initiative by Ennis Tidy Towns in Lees Road.
Requests that Clare County Council develop a pilot SunSmart initiative across County Clare, to include a selected number of high-use outdoor amenities such as parks, playgrounds, walking trails and beaches, incorporating:
SunSmart awareness signage aligned with HSE guidance,
Automated UV Index readers
Free sunscreen dispensers
The pilot programme should be monitored and evaluated, with a report brought back to Council on usage, costs and outcomes, with a view to expanding the initiative to additional locations across the county where appropriate.
Council is also requested to explore funding and partnership opportunities with the HSE, Healthy Ireland and other relevant stakeholders to support delivery of this initiative.”
(M)
J. Tarmey, Healthy Ireland Co-Ordinator replied as follows:
“Healthy Clare welcomes this proposal.
A SunSmart campaign has been delivered nationally for several years through the National Cancer Control Programme and Healthy Ireland, with local authorities supporting its implementation to raise awareness and reduce the incidence of skin cancer.
Over the past two years, Clare County Council and the HSE has undertaken significant work to promote the SunSmart message to key groups, including outdoor workers and the farming community. This has included in-person information sessions, newspaper features, social media activity and competitions aimed at encouraging people to adopt protective behaviours. The Healthy Clare Co‑ordinator and the Employee Welfare Officer have collaborated closely with the HSE under the National Cancer Control Programme to advance this work.
As Healthy Ireland Co‑ordinator, I will explore the potential to further develop SunSmart initiatives in County Clare and engage closely with the Healthy Ireland Working Group in County Clare.
We will seek to identify potential funding and partnership opportunities to support a pilot project in the county. Skin cancer prevention remains a significant public health priority, and continued efforts to find effective ways of reducing risk are essential.”
The elected members acknowledged that skin cancer is the most common form of cancer, while also being one of the most preventable when detected early. Members noted that in other countries, sunscreen dispensers are available in shopping centres and at beaches, and that these initiatives have proven effective. They also suggested installing UV indicators in coastal areas to provide real-time information on UV levels. The members further proposed the introduction of signage reminding the public to wear sunscreen, along with sunscreen dispensers at lakes, beaches, and parks to encourage greater awareness and protection from harmful UV exposure.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. Guilfoyle, seconded by Cllr. D. Griffin and agreed by the members present that the time be extended by 30 minutes in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 22: Abolishment of the Triple Lock
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“In light of the recent decision by the Government Cabinet to proceed with the abolishment of the Triple Lock, that Clare County Council formally calls on the Irish Government to initiate a referendum to allow the public to determine this matter.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the purpose of the motion was to allow the people of Ireland to decide on the matter of the Triple Lock rather than the Government. They agreed that in the interest of democracy and fairness that the issue should be put to a referendum. Members further stated that Ireland should not be taking sides but instead should prioritise the protection and promotion of peace.
Item 23: Croi Conaithe Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“I request an update on the unique housing pilots in services sites (Croi Conaithe Scheme) in Lisdoonvarna and Feakle and call on Clare County Council to ensure this innovative housing opportunity is broadcast widely to our communities and those seeking to build their own homes close to towns and villages with amenities within walking distance.”
(M)
A. Headd, Senior Engineer, Housing Activation and Delivery replied as follows:
“The Ready to Build Scheme for new Homes Croí Cónaithe (Town Fund) provides for funding for serviced sites in towns and villages for the building of private principal residence and offers a discount off the market value of the site. The purpose of the scheme is to encourage building new homes in towns and villages.
Regarding the proposed Lisdoonvarna Croi Cónaithe Serviced Sites Scheme, the Elected Members of Ennistymon and Kilrush were briefed on the preliminary design on the 15th of July last. Since then, Clare County has engaged with relevant stakeholders and the design for the scheme has progressed and it is now proposed that a Part VIII planning application for the proposed scheme would come before the Elected Members for consideration in Q2 2026. In advance of the Part VIII application being lodged a public consultation event is scheduled to take place on the 18th of February 2026 in Lisdoonvarna and a further briefing will be held with the Ennistymon and Kilrush Elected Members to inform the final design. Separate correspondence regarding this scheduled public consultation event will issue to the Ennistymon and Kilrush Elected Members and will also be publicly advertised by Clare County Council in the coming days.
Regarding the proposed Feakle Croi Cónaithe Serviced Sites Scheme Consultants have now been procured by Clare County Council to develop a preliminary and final design. It is proposed that an initial briefing will be held with the Killaloe Elected Members on the preliminary design in Q1 2026. Thereafter a public consultation event together with another briefing with the Killaloe Elected Members will be held in advance of the proposed Part VIII application being lodged in Q3 2026.
Regarding both the proposed Lisdoonvarna and Feakle schemes Clare County Council shall ensure that this innovative housing opportunity is broadcast widely, and we will continue to work in collaboration with our Elected Members in this regard. Dependent on the success of the Lisdoonvarna and Feakle schemes we will continue to explore similar delivery options across the county, and we will brief all Elected Members in this regard.”
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy left the meeting at 5.55p.m., Leas-Cathaoirleach, Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy assumed the Chair.
The elected members acknowledged that this initiative represents a unique opportunity for private individuals to build their own homes. Members noted that, for the scheme to succeed, it will be important to promote the lifestyle benefits of living in rural towns and villages. They highlighted that the initiative will particularly support middle‑income households and help fast‑track their entry onto the housing market
Members further emphasised the importance of ensuring the continued growth and sustainability of rural towns. They expressed concern about rural depopulation and stated that any measure that facilitates the delivery of housing in rural areas should be supported.
G. Daly, Chief Executive advised that the variation to the County Development Plan will increase the supply of zoned land and that the opening up of serviced sites will happen in tandem. Mr. Daly advised that they are looking to see how they can roll this out to other towns and villages.
Cllr. T. O’Brien requested that a workshop be held for the members prior to the draft of the variation to the County Development Plan.
G. Daly, Chief Executive noted that he would discuss with the Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy returned to the meeting at 6p.m.
Item 24: Resignation of Chair of Bord Bia
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Agriculture to request Larry Murrin to resign from his position as Chair of Bord Bia”.
(M)
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy read an amendment to the original motion, which was proposed by Cllr. C. Ryan and seconded by Cllr. P. Burke:
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Agriculture to arrange a meeting between the Chair of Bord Bia, Larry Murrin, IFA, ICMSA and other farming stakeholders in the interest of dialogue. For the Chair to brief the stakeholders and answer fully and comprehensively all questions to the satisfaction of the farming organisations.”
Cllr. C. Ryan noted that he also wished to add the following line to the amended motion:
“Should the Chair of Bord Bia fail to answer the questions or fail to answer the questions to the satisfaction of the farming organisation that the Minister will request his resignation.”
This amendment was seconded by Cllr. T. Guilfoyle.
The elected members expressed their frustration, and that of farmers in rural Ireland, regarding reports that the Chair of Bord Bia is importing Brazilian beef for his personal business interests. Members stated that this represents a clear conflict of interest, as Mr. Murrin, in his role as Chair of Bord Bia, should be promoting Irish produce. They also highlighted the significant stress and pressure experienced by farmers each year when undergoing Bord Bia audits.
Item 25: Development Levies
This item was deferred to the March Council meeting.
“That Clare County Council would consider setting aside percentage of the development levies that are ring-fenced for public amenities and facilities for the community within which the development is taking place”
(M)
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
As the 30-minute extension had been reached the meeting concluded at 6.15p.m.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed:
____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed:
_____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:               _____________________________
Content managed by
Corporate Services and Governance
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback