Minutes of March 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of March 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams
on Monday 9th March 2026 at 3pm.
Present
Councillors
P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental & Emergency Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. R. Hartigan, C. Colleran Molloy, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided noting that it was Seachtain na Gaeilge and encouraged the members to use Irish throughout the meeting if they so wished.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Shannon Family, on the death of Senan Shannon, RIP.
The Lucey Family, on the death of James Lucey, RIP.
The Browne Family, on the death of Marie Browne, RIP.
The Coughlan and Barry Family, on the death of Elizabeth Coughlan, RIP.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy proposed the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect on the passing of colleagues Marie Browne and James Lucey. The was seconded by Cllr. A. Baker Bashua and agreed by the members present.
Approval to Travel
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. P. Daly and agreed by the members, that further to recommendation of the CPG and in accordance with Section 142 (5) of the Local Government Act 2001, approval be granted for Cllr. Mary Howard to travel to Phoenix to attend the Phoenix Global Forum taking place on 12–13 May 2026.
It was further noted that Cllr. Howard will provide a presentation to the members on the outcomes of the event at the June Council meeting.
Cllr. J. Ryan extended his best wishes to the elected members for a Happy Chinese New Year. The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy noted that the Chinese Ambassador recently visited Clare and that he had a productive and successful meeting with him.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the February Meeting of Clare County Council held on 9
th
February 2026 be adopted and signed.”
Cllr. S. Talty referred to Item 17 regarding Burial Ground Regulations from the February Council meeting and noted that it had been agreed that engagement with relevant stakeholders would take place. He requested an update on this.
J. Murphy, Director of Service, thanked the Councillors for their continued engagement on the matter. Mr. Murphy confirmed that the workshop previously scheduled will be postponed. Instead, a working group, including elected members, will be established to address and resolve the nuances within the current policy.
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 13
th
February 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Finance in relation to a 0% VAT rate on all remediation works in relation to houses affected by defective concrete blocks.
Correspondence dated 16
th
February 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to period poverty.
Correspondence dated 6
th
February 2026 from the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland in relation to the Israeli Bonds Issuance Programme.
Correspondence dated 23
rd
February 2026 from Minister of State, Timmy Dooley T.D. in relation to N85 Realignment Project.
Correspondence dated 24
th
February 2026 from the Minister for Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and Digitalisation in relation to Irelands Economic competitiveness.
Correspondence dated 10
th
February 2026 from Joe Cooney, T.D. in relation to beekeeping in Ireland.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
February 2026 from Minister of State, Timmy Dooley in relation to Beekeeping in Ireland.
Acknowledgement dated 12
th
February 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and Marine in relation to Beekeeping in Ireland.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
February 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to the Limerick to Shannon Rail Link.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
February 2026 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to the Occupied Palestinian Territory Bill.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
February 2026 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to the abolishment of the Triple Lock.
Resolution dated 12
th
February 2026 from Galway City Council in relation to funding for road safety initiatives.
Resolution dated 18
th
February 2026 from Westmeath County Council in relation to review of Income Thresholds for Social Housing and HAP.
Resolution dated 10
th
February 2026 from Wexford City Council in relation to legislation outlawing use of anonymous social media accounts.
Resolution dated 17
th
February 2026 from Wexford County Council in relation to insurance cover for residential and commercial properties.
Resolution dated 10
th
February 2026 from Wicklow County Council in relation to the ratification of CETA.
Cllr. S. Talty expressed his disappointment with the response received from TII regarding the N85 realignment project and stated that the Council would need to revert to the Oireachtas members on the issue.
Cllr. C. Ryan queried how matters should be handled in future where a meeting must conclude while a motion is still under discussion.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy, clarified that the motion in question had been proposed and seconded and, as no dissent was indicated, it was deemed carried. He noted his regret that the discussion could not be completed and stated that, in future, he would allow such discussions to conclude.
Cllr. S. Talty expressed his disagreement, noting that meetings must operate strictly in accordance with Standing Orders.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy, confirmed that he would consult with the Meetings Administrator on the matter.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 13 January
, 2026
be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 4 November
, 2025
be noted.”
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Adjourned Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 24 November
, 2025
be noted.”
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 11 November
, 2025
be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 3
rd
February, 2026 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Item 8:
Disposal of land at Drumbiggle Road, Ennis, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the land at Drumbiggle Road, Ennis, Co. Clare to Eir Property Services, 2 Heuston South Quarter, St. John’s Road, Dublin 8, D08 Y42N subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 17th February 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Drumbiggle Road, Ennis, Co. Clare to Eir Property Services, 2 Heuston South Quarter, St. John’s Road, Dublin 8, D08 Y42N subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 17th February 2026.
Item 9: Chief Executives Report in accordance with the requirements of Section 37E (4) and (5) of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) in relation to the Water Supply Project for the Eastern and Midlands Region.
The Chief Executive report dated 3
rd
March, 2026 was circulated with the agenda.
The report was prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 37E (4) and 37E (5) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, following on from the submission of a Strategic Infrastructure Development (SID) to An Coimisiún Pleanála (ACP).
The application documentation submitted to An Coimisiún Pleanála states that the proposed development is to provide a new source of drinking water for the Eastern and Midlands Region to meet a deficit in supply. The proposal involves the abstraction and pumping of raw water from the Lower River Shannon at Parteen Basin, the treatment of the water nearby at Birdhill, County Tipperary, and pumping of the treated water to a high point near Cloughjordan, County Tipperary. From this high point near Cloughjordan, the treated water will flow generally by gravity through the Midlands, to a termination point at Peamount, in County Dublin (within the administrative area of South Dublin County Council), where it will connect into the existing Greater Dublin Area water network. The development is to facilitate a maximum abstraction of 300 Mega litres per day (Mld) during the short-peak demand periods. The project is designed to have a lifespan of 80-100 years.
The main components of the development are as follows:
Raw Water Intake & Pumping Station at Garrynatineel, Ballina, Co. Tipperary;
Water Treatment Plant at Incha Beg, Birdhill, Co. Tipperary;
Break Pressure Tank at Knockanacree, Cloughjordan, Co. Tipperary;
Booster Pumping Station at Coagh Upper, Birr, Co. Offaly;
Flow Control Valve at Commons Upper, Celbridge, Co. Kildare;
Termination Point Reservoir at Loughtown Upper, Peamount, County Dublin;
172km of pipeline connecting the water infrastructure sites;
Uprating and associated works to the existing Ardnacrusha – Birdhill 38kV line and Ardnacrusha – Birdhill – Nenagh 38kV line.
Works at the existing Birdhill 38 kV electricity substation, power connections to infrastructure and all ancillary works above and below ground.
The application relates to a project which will require a water abstraction licence from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the Water Environment (Abstractions and Associated Impoundments) Act, 2022.
The application is accompanied by a Compulsory Purchase Order under the provisions of the Housing Act, 1966 as amended.
The application is accompanied by an Environmental Impact Assessment Report (EIAR) and a Natura Impact Statement (NIS).
G. Daly, Chief Executive, addressed the meeting and provided a summary of the Chief Executive’s Report. He noted that, in accordance with legislation, and following the submission of a Strategic Infrastructure Development (SID) application to An Coimisiún Pleanála, the Chief Executive is required to prepare and submit a report outlining the views of Clare County Council on the effects of the proposed development on the environment, as well as on the proper planning and sustainable development of the area.
Mr. Daly further outlined that the relevant legislation requires the Chief Executive to provide this report to the elected members in advance of its submission to An Coimisiún Pleanála, in order to seek their views on the proposed development. The members may, by resolution, attach recommendations to the report.
Mr. Daly highlighted that Section 5 sets out key concerns regarding the potential impacts of the proposed development i.e. infrastructure provision and balanced regional development, water abstraction, tourism and recreation, Water Framework Directive and the terms of the proposed community benefit scheme. He also confirmed that, given the complexity of the proposal, he has requested that a public Oral Hearing be convened.
The elected members engaged in an extensive discussion on the proposed development.
The members raised the following key points:
They expressed strong concern that the project primarily serves the interests of the greater Dublin area, with no direct benefit to County Clare.
They noted that the objective of the National Planning Framework is to promote balanced regional development; however, the proposal appears to disproportionately benefit the eastern and midlands regions.
Members highlighted the significant risk posed to tourism, given that Lough Derg is a key tourism asset for the East Clare region.
Concerns were raised regarding existing wastewater infrastructure deficits in County Clare and the resulting limitations on future development and the ability to attract industry.
Members questioned the resilience of the proposal during drought conditions.
They also noted the existence of alternative options that, in their view, have not been adequately explored by Uisce Éireann.
While they welcomed the preparation of the Chief Executive’s Report, members expressed the view that the wording was too lenient and did not fully reflect their opposition to the proposed project.
G. Daly, Chief Executive, acknowledged the concerns raised by the elected members but noted that the Chief Executive’s Report is limited by the provisions of the Planning and Development Act, to setting out its views on the effect of the proposed development on the environment and the proper planning and sustainable development of the area. He clarified that, as a result, it is not within the scope of the report to comment on the need for the project or on alternative options.
He advised that, in accordance with the Act, the elected members may, by resolution, attach recommendations to the report and that he was of the view that the wording of the legislation allowed the elected members a broader scope in outlining their views.
The elected members decided by resolution to attach the following observations and recommendations to the report.
The project presents credible risks to the integrity of several Natura 2000 sites within the Shannon Basin.
The hydrological and ecological impacts have not been ruled out beyond reasonable scientific doubt.
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process may be legally deficient in several respects, including issues that have previously resulted in successful judicial review challenges in Ireland.
Article 6 (3) of the Habitats Directive requires that any plan or project likely to significantly affect a Natura 2000 site must undergo an Appropriate Assessment  (AA). Consent may only be granted where it has been demonstrated that the project will not adversely affect the integrity of the site. Key EU caselaw has clarified this test, confirming that mitigation measures cannot be relied upon during AA screening and that any loss of protected habitats capable of undermining conservation objectives may constitute an adverse effect.
Ireland’s National Planning Framework (NPF), part of project Ireland 2040, promotes balanced regional development to counter over concentration of development in the greater Dublin and eastern and Midland region. This proposed abstraction of water from the Midwest region to the Midlands and eastern region is a transfer of natural resources from one region of the country to the benefit of another region. This does not comply with the stated aims of the National Planning Framework as set out.
Projects affecting Natura 2000 sites cannot proceed unless no less damaging alternatives exist. Potential alternatives include but not limited to:
Major leakage reduction in Dublin’s water network
Demand management policies
Rainwater harvesting systems
Grey water reuse
Decentralised water supply infrastructure
The precautionary principle requires refusal of projects where environmental risks cannot be ruled out with certainty. Given the ecological complexity of the Shannon Basin and the number of protected sites potentially affected, such certainty may not be achievable.
Where large-scale abstraction could alter river flows or hydromorphology, a detailed deterioration assessment is required. Failure to conduct this analysis has previously resulted in successful judicial review challenges.
The proposed Shannon Dublin water supply project raise significant legal and environmental concerns relating to:
Impacts on Natura 2000 sites in the Shannon Basin
Alteration of hydrological regimes supporting protected habitats
Compliance with the Habitats Directive and Water Framework directive
Climate obligations under Irish law
Procedure weaknesses with the environmental impact assessment process
Until it can be demonstrated beyond reasonable scientific doubt that the project will not adversely affect the integrity of protected sites, Permission should not be granted.
For these reasons the members of Clare County Council respectfully requested that An Coimisiun Pleanála refuse planning permission for the proposed development.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“To attach report, agreed by the Elected Members, which contains a number of observations and recommendations in respect of the proposed Water Supply Project for the Eastern and Midlands Region, to the Chief Executives report, already prepared under Section 37 E (4) and (5) of the Planning Act, and which is to be submitted to An Coimisiún Pleanála.”
Item 10:
Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2026
Report dated 9
th
March, 2026 from Leonore O’Neill, Senior Executive Officer, Rural & Community Development was circulated with the agenda together with details of the grant recommendations. The report states that a total of 526 applications were received under the Council’s Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2026. The total fund for 2026 is €694,500.
The report continues that at their meeting on 2
nd
March, 2026, the elected members of the ‘Grant Funding Working Group’ considered the grant recommendations under the following support schemes:
Support Scheme for Public Realm Initiatives, Amenity Projects & Tidy Towns Initiatives
Support Scheme for Maintenance of Open Spaces in Private Housing Developments
Support Scheme for Community Playgrounds
Support Scheme for Burial Ground Maintenance, Boundary Repair & Provision
Support Scheme for Christmas Lighting
Support Scheme for Maintenance and Upkeep for Local Authority Estates
Support Scheme for the Arts
Support Scheme for the Irish Language
Support Scheme for Tourism Marketing & Promotion
Support Scheme for Sustainable Tourism
Support Scheme for Community Project Development
Support Scheme for Age Friendly Initiatives
The elected members approved the Clare Local Area Grant Scheme 2026 (CLAGS) having been proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. S. Talty and agreed by the members present.
Item 11: Clare County Council Arts Plan 2026 – 2030 “Nourish”
Report from Siobhán Mulcahy, County Arts Officer, Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services was circulated with the agenda along with a copy of “Nourish” – Clare County Council Arts Plan 2026 - 2030.
Ms. Mulcahy gave a brief presentation to the elected members outlining the four strategic priorities for the Clare Arts Office:
Creative Communities and Places
Supporting Creative People
Supporting Creative Activity
Developing Artforms
The elected members thanked Ms. Mulcahy for the presentation and noted the great work they are doing in the Arts Office.
Cllr. J. Ryan acknowledged it is great to have an Arts Officer in the County and queried what they are doing in South East Clare.
Ms. Mulcahy noted the events being held across South East Clare such as:
Ballad of a Bandit – Touring Theatre Programme 2025/2026
Artists in School residency
Music Generation Activities
Creative Places Shannon 2026
The report was adopted by the members having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes and seconded by Cllr. J. Killeen
and agreed by the members present.
Item 12: LCDC Membership
Report from Leonore O’Neill, Senior Executive Officer, Rural and Community Development was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Clare PPN has advised of three membership changes of representatives on the LCDC to replace Dermot Hayes, RIP, Bedelia Collins and Emma Karran.
The reports noted the following:
Clare PPN has nominated Ann Marie Flanagan as Social Inclusion representative on the LCDC.
Health Service Executive have nominated Geraldine Quinn as their HSE representative on the LCDC.
Clare PPN has nominated Sharmilla Bano as the Environmental representative on the LCDC.
This was approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. J. Killeen, seconded by Cllr. B. Slattery and agreed by the members present.
Item 13: Development Levies
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. Mulcahy, P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council would consider setting aside percentage of the development levies that are ring-fenced for public amenities and facilities for the community within which the development is taking place.”
(M)
H. Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Placemaking and Economic Development replied as follows:
“
This notice of motion is welcomed.  Section 48 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, enables local authorities when granting a planning permission to include conditions requiring the payment of a contribution in respect of public infrastructure and facilities.
Section 48 specifically states that the application of contribution conditions relates to "development in the area of the planning authority" which is the entirety of the Council’s functional area. The legislation does not make provision that would enable a planning authority to ring fence any contributions received to any specific area of the county.
Clare County Council's Development Contribution Scheme 2025 - 2029, which was adopted by the members in July 2025, gives effect to Section 48 of the Act and sets out the charges that are applicable for all new developments within the county.
This Scheme specifies that contributions collected will benefit development "in the area of the planning authority" and sets out projects that may be funded under the Scheme.
Development Contributions are assigned to fund projects throughout the county and in prioritising the projects that receive funding, due regard is had to those towns and villages that are seeing significant development, and where there is a need to develop public infrastructural projects.”
The elected members noted that, as development activity continues to increase in towns and villages, the supporting infrastructure and local amenities are not keeping pace with this growth. They highlighted that allocating a proportion of development levies to the immediate area of each development would help address this imbalance.
The members further emphasised that housing cannot be prioritised in isolation. The delivery of essential services, such as childcare, sustainable transport links and safe connectivity is critical to creating sustainable, liveable communities.
Item 14: Ennis Inner Relief Road
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. O’Callaghan, A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council, further to previous motions adopted by this Council regarding the urgent need for an Inner Relief Road linking the Tulla Road (R352) to the Gort Road (R458), notes the written correspondence attached to this Motion received from local construction companies and developers operating in Ennis which highlight:
• The growing difficulty in delivering new housing developments due to existing traffic congestion and inadequate road infrastructure on the eastern side of Ennis;
• The increasing pressure on the Tulla Road, Gort Road, Roslevan and adjoining residential area arising from significant population growth;
• The view of local builders that the absence of this critical link road is now a major constraint on the sustainable expansion of Ennis; and
• The concern that further delays in progressing this project will negatively impact housing delivery, investment and economic development in the county town.
Accordingly, this Council requests a comprehensive and updated report from the Chief Executive detailing:
1. The current status of the proposed Ennis this Inner Relief Road, including route options, design work and any feasibility or traffic studies completed to date;
2. The steps required to advance the project to planning and construction stage, including land acquisition and statutory processes;
3. An indicative costing and timeline for delivery of this vital infrastructure;
4. Potential funding mechanisms through the recently announced major infrastructure funding packages, headlined by a record €1.5 billion for road infrastructure and a new €1 billion Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund (HIIF), forming part of a broader, updated National Development Plan (NDP) for 2026–2035.
5. How the project can be prioritised within Clare County Council’s capital programme in light of the representations received from the local building sector.
This Council further resolves to forward copies of the correspondence received from local builders, together with this motion, to the Minister for Housing and the Minister for Transport seeking their direct support for the prioritisation and funding of this essential infrastructure project for Ennis.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services and S. O’Donoghue, Senior Executive Officer, Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation replied as follows:
“The current status of the proposed Ennis Inner Relief Road, including route options, design work and any feasibility or traffic studies completed to date;
Clare County Council commissioned the development of a Local Transport Plan (LTP) for Ennis in 2023. The LTP will establish a strategic framework for transport investment in Ennis. The LTP was developed in line with the National Transport Authority’s (NTA) Area Based Transport Assessment (ABTA) methodology. This process has been defined to ensure a consistent, evidence based approach to the development of LTPs nationally.  The proposed Ennis Inner Relief Road is included as a proposal in the now completed LTP. The LTP has been developed at a strategic level in accordance with national and regional policies e.g. NIFTI - National Investment Framework for Transport in Ireland and sets out proposals which will undergo further stages including detailed design and planning before delivery. The Ennis LTP will be included in the upcoming proposed variation to the County Development Plan.
The steps required to advance the project to planning and construction stage, including land acquisition and statutory processes;
The Department of Transport Regional and Local Roads (RLR) Appraisal Guidelines are contained within the broader Transport Appraisal Framework (TAF) and provide guidance to Local Authorities (Sponsoring Agencies) through the appraisal process for regional and local road projects with particular emphasis on compliance with the Infrastructure Guidelines published in 2023.
The appraisal ensures that public investment in infrastructure meets strategic objectives, delivers value for money and is consistent with national and regional policy priorities.
The main steps in delivering this type of project are as follows:
Stage 1.
Proposal Initiation. This stage examines the intention for proposed projects and programmes and assesses their strategic fit with government policy. During this stage, a Project/Programme Outline Document must be submitted to the Approving Authority eg Department of Transport for review and feedback.
Stage 2.
Strategic Assessment and Preliminary Business Case (Approval Gate (AG) 1). This is a framework to assess costs, benefits, affordability, deliverability, risks, and sensitivities associated with potential project options. During this stage, a Strategic Assessment and Preliminary Business Case must be submitted to the Approving Authority for review and a decision on whether or not to proceed to the next Stage. This is Approval Gate 1.
Stages 3 and 4.
Detailed and Final Business Case (AG 2 and AG 3). This includes project design, environmental considerations, procurement, land acquisition and tendering. Awarding of contracts follows the approval of the Final Business Case.  During Stage 3, a Detailed Business Case, project execution plan, and Procurement Strategy must be submitted to the Approving Authority for review and decision on whether or not to proceed to tendering. This is Approval Gate 2.  During Stage 4, following tendering, a Final Business Case must be submitted to the Approving Authority for review and decision on whether or not to proceed to implementation. This is Approval Gate 3.
Stage 5.
Implementation. This is the delivery of the project. Main tasks at this stage are to award the contract, manage and monitor the project to ensure that it is executed satisfactorily, within budget, to standard and on time.
An indicative costing and timeline for delivery of this vital infrastructure;
The proposed route is adjacent to the Ballyallia Lough Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) which encompasses Lough Girroga. This may constrain the engineering design options for the proposed route.  An indicative timeline for the delivery of the overall project in such a sensitive area with favourable timely decisions would be of the order of 5-8 years. However other options under consideration are for a phased delivery of the project i.e potentially the section north of “The Maples” towards “Cluain Ros Leamhan” as Phase 1, followed by the section to the west which would include the railway crossing. Subject to funding approval Phase 1 could be potentially delivered in a 3-5 year period. The overall scheme would cost in the region of €10-15m at current market rates.
Potential funding mechanisms through the recently announced major infrastructure funding packages, headlined by a record €1.5 billion for road infrastructure and a new €1 billion Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund (HIIF), forming part of a broader, updated National Development Plan (NDP) for 2026 –2035.
In January 2026, the Government announced the first call for projects to be funded by the €1B Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund (HIIF). The HIIF is aimed at supporting direct investment in infrastructure needed to unlock the development of housing sites in towns and cities.
This first call for funding applications focuses on known obstacles to the early delivery of housing. The intention is to accelerate projects that are at an advanced stage of planning and design and can move to tender and construction. The stipulation in this round of funding is that the project must commence construction in 2026 or 2027 and be substantially complete by 2028.
As such, this project was not eligible to submit as a bid to the first call. However, the Council has actively engaged with the Housing Activation Office (HAO) (who administer HIIF) in relation to this and other projects. We will continue to liaise with the HAO regarding future HIIF calls to see how the fund might be utilised to fund projects such as the Ennis North Inner Relief Road as either a complete project or in a phased approach.
The proposed road would form part of the local road network and as such another source of funding would potentially be from the Department of Transport. The original proposal for this road was that it was to be Developer led and we will continue to engage with interested parties, including landowners, to explore all funding mechanisms.
How the project can be prioritised within Clare County Council’s capital programme in light of the representations received from the local building sector.
The project will be included in our strategic roads plan for the county which in turn will be an important component in informing our investment plan. It is our intention to hold a briefing with the Members later in March to review the strategic roads plan priorities. For Projects prioritised in the strategic roads plan we will engage with the relevant funding authorities NTA, TII, DoT and HIIF to deliver a pathway for their successful delivery
.
”
The elected members noted that the Inner Relief Road, linking the Tulla Road to the Gort Road, represents a critical piece of infrastructure. They highlighted that opening this route would significantly facilitate future housing delivery. The members emphasised the importance of identifying and securing appropriate funding mechanisms for the project. They further acknowledged the increasing pressure on the eastern side of Ennis, where population growth is outpacing the delivery of supporting infrastructure. Members expressed disappointment regarding the timelines currently outlined for the project.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy queried whether any projects are currently at a stage of readiness that would allow them to qualify for the Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund (HIIF).
A. Farrell, Director of Services, advised that the Inner Relief Road could not have been submitted under the recent call for the HIIF as the land had to be owned by the local authority.  He advised that a number of projects have been submitted for consideration under the fund, primarily for the delivery of road infrastructure that will enable housing on Council lands and some public realm and other infrastructure that would contribute to enabling housing.  Mr. Farrell noted the potential for the Inner Relief Road to unlock lands for housing development and confirmed that engagement had taken place with the Housing Activation Office in this regard. He added that the original proposal for the Inner Relief Road envisaged a developer-led delivery model but assured members that the Council will continue to work with stakeholders including the Housing Activation Office, developers, landowners and the transport department.
Item 15:
Dementia Specific Care Home
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the HSE to develop and support the development of additional dementia specific care home beds in the County.”
(M)
The elected members noted that dementia is the fastest‑growing illness and is projected to double by 2050. They emphasised that it is a profoundly debilitating disease and sought clarity on the long‑term strategic plans in place to address its increasing impact.
Members also acknowledged the emotional and practical difficulties families face when placing loved ones into residential care. They highlighted that, where possible, the strong preference is for individuals to remain in their own homes, supported by appropriate community‑based services.
Item 16: Alternative Accommodation in Tourist Areas
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“With the welcomed tourism business for County Clare fast approaching, what progress has been achieved in creating potential alternative accommodation to date and what is planned into the future.”
(M)
T. Hughes Lannon, A/Senior Executive Officer, Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services replied as follows:
“Thank you for your notice of motion.
Clare County Council recognises the increasing pressure on accommodation capacity in advance of the peak tourism season and has been actively progressing a range of measures to support the development of alternative accommodation options across the county.
Progress to Date:
Engagement with Fáilte Ireland and industry representatives:
Ongoing collaboration aimed at identifying gaps in capacity and supporting providers in expanding or diversifying their offering.
Promotion of phased short‑term solutions:
This includes facilitating temporary or seasonal accommodation under existing planning provisions where appropriate.
Support for development proposals:
Several applications for new glamping, and pod style accommodation have been advanced through the planning process in recent months, reflecting growing private‑sector interest in alternative models.
Planned Future Actions:
Continued strategic focus on sustainable accommodation development
as set out in the Clare Tourism Strategy and the County Development Plan, particularly in areas experiencing high visitor demand.
Exploration of pilot projects
for alternative accommodation types such as cabin-style units, serviced campervan facilities, and community‑based accommodation models, subject to feasibility and funding opportunities.
Strengthening supports for tourism operators
, providing guidance and assisting with points of contact relating to planning, regulatory compliance, and potential funding streams.
Ongoing monitoring of accommodation capacity
to ensure readiness for peak periods and to identify areas where additional intervention or facilitation may be required.
Clare County Council recognises the valuable contribution of alternative accommodation to increasing overnight stays in Clare with the aim of boosting economic activity in towns and villages throughout the county. Clare County Council will continue to work closely with tourism stakeholders to promote and facilitate maximising accommodation availability while ensuring high standards and sustainable development across the sector.”
The elected members welcomed the response and commended its innovative approach. They acknowledged the need to expand the range of overnight accommodation options, noting that such expansion will be essential for the continued growth of the tourism sector. Members suggested exploring successful accommodation models used across Europe that could be adapted for local use, emphasising that visitors will come if the county provides the necessary services and facilities.
They also expressed concern regarding the impact of the new planning legislation on short‑term letting and how these regulatory changes may further affect existing accommodation shortages. Members highlighted the importance of increasing the number of serviced campsites throughout the county to support a more diverse and sustainable tourism offering.
Item 17: Emergency Cost of Disability Payment
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“As elected members of this Council, we are deeply conscious of the financial pressure facing many people in our communities. For disabled people, that pressure is significantly greater.
Disabled people incur additional and unavoidable costs every single day. These include higher heating and electricity usage, transport costs, the running of essential equipment, personal assistance, and the practical realities of living in environments that are not fully accessible. These costs rise further during winter months.
These are not discretionary expenses. They are structural costs linked directly to impairment and to systemic barriers.
Across our county, disabled people are making impossible choices: between heating and participation, between mobility and food, between independence and debt. This is not acceptable in a society that claims to value equality and inclusion.
While local authorities do not determine national social protection policy, we are the closest tier of government to our communities. We see the impact of poverty in housing applications, in requests for supports, and in the growing strain on families.
We are therefore calling on this Council to formally request that Government introduce an immediate emergency cost of disability payment. This payment should recognise the additional costs borne by disabled people and be delivered in a way that does not exclude those who are in employment.
Disabled people should not be penalised for working. Nor should they be pushed into poverty because of unavoidable additional costs.
A national gathering is planned for 1pm on 28 February at the Garden of Remembrance to highlight this issue. Many would prefer not to have to gather in protest, but to see leadership and action instead.
As councillors, we have a responsibility to stand with our constituents and to send a clear message to Government that this matter requires urgent attention.
We respectfully ask our fellow elected members to support this call.
If successful, please forward this motion to all County Councils as correspondence.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged that people with disabilities remain among the most vulnerable groups in society and expressed concern that the poverty gap continues to widen. Members highlighted that individuals with intellectual disabilities, in particular, receive insufficient support.
They further noted that the additional, often hidden, costs borne by parents and caregivers cannot be addressed through a “one size fits all” model, and emphasised the need for a more tailored and fragmented system of supports.
Members also observed that recent national and global events have contributed to rising living costs and highlighted the ongoing limitations within state agencies to adequately assist people with disabilities.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy left the meeting at 5.08p.m., Cllr. A. Baker Bashua assumed the Chair.
Item 18: Promotion and Support of Small Businesses
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“We call on Clare County Council to continue to further promote and support small business set-up in the Towns and Villages of Clare.”
(M)
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Service, Finance, Investment and Enterprise replied as follows:
“Clare County Council fully supports the Notice of Motion and reaffirms its strong commitment to promoting and enabling small business development across all towns and villages in the county. Small businesses are central to community vitality, and the Council continues to prioritise initiatives that encourage enterprise, job creation, and the revitalisation of commercial premises.
1. Local Enterprise Office (LEO) Supports
The Local Enterprise Office Clare plays a pivotal role in supporting entrepreneurs and small businesses through a comprehensive suite of programmes and financial supports. In 2025 alone, LEO Clare directly supported 206 small businesses, sustaining 1,348 jobs, with 184 new jobs created during the year. The office provides:
Feasibility, Priming and Business Expansion Grants
suite of Research, Development and Innovation (RD&I) supports
Training and Mentoring supports
Export Supports:
Food & Craft Sector Supports:
Productivity Supports - Green for Business, Lean for Business and Digital Transformation programmes
Programmes such as Green for Business, Energy Efficiency Grants, Lean for Business, Digital for Business, and the Grow Digital Voucher help small enterprises reduce costs, improve efficiencies, and adopt digital and sustainable practices.
2. Commercial Rates Incentive Schemes
The Council operates a suite of rates schemes to encourage business start‑up and the reuse of vacant premises, including the Long‑Term Vacant Property Incentive Scheme, SME Rates Support Scheme, and the Hospitality Business Grant Scheme.
Long-Term Vacant Property Incentive Scheme
This scheme supports the re-occupation of long-term vacant properties by providing a three-year, step-in commercial rates grant, easing the financial burden on new or relocating businesses. The scheme is designed to help entrepreneurs refurbish and bring vacant units back into productive use, particularly in town and village centres.
SME Rates Support Scheme (5% Credit)
Approximately 87% of ratepayers in Clare qualify for this scheme, which provides a credit of 5% of the annual rates bill (up to €10,000 liability) once rates are paid by direct debit or in full by 31 August. This scheme provides practical financial relief for small businesses countywide.
Hospitality Business Grant Scheme
A 5% rates credit (up to €5,000) for hospitality providers in the tourism sector helps sustain village-based hotels, cafés, and visitor-facing businesses.
Together, these schemes help reduce costs for small businesses during their critical early years and support the revitalisation of main streets and village cores.
3. Broader Council Enterprise Initiatives
The Council continues to support enterprise through expansion of the DigiClare network, encouraging local entrepreneurship and reducing overheads for start-ups.
DigiClare is a countywide network of 11 digital hubs that offer reliable broadband, high-quality workspace, and a place for people to work, meet, and start new ideas. The hubs are located in towns and villages across Clare, making it easier for people to work locally instead of having to travel long distances. Our 12th hub will open in Scariff later this year.
Clare County Council will continue to:
Actively promote the supports available through LEO Clare
Enhance awareness of commercial rates incentive schemes
Collaborate with business networks, Chambers of Commerce, and community groups
Prioritise initiatives that encourage entrepreneurship and local job creation
The Council welcomes the opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to sustaining a pro-business environment and supporting new enterprise development throughout Clare’s towns and villages.
The Finance, Investment & Enterprise Directorate will host an information event with the Elected Members in Quarter 2 2026 to provide an overview of supports available for small businesses in County Clare.”
The elected members noted that Clare is a tourism‑orientated county and that small businesses play a crucial role in providing employment and essential services, emphasising the importance of supporting them. Members acknowledged the significant assistance provided by the Local Enterprise Office (LEO) and expressed their appreciation for this support, while encouraging continued and enhanced engagement. It was highlighted that small businesses rely heavily on footfall, and that attracting visitors requires creating appealing, vibrant places. Members emphasised that even small incentives, such as reduced rates for occupying long‑term vacant buildings, can make a meaningful difference to the sustainability of local enterprises. They further noted the key role of the local authority in shaping attractive environments, stating that well‑maintained public realms, clear signage, good connectivity, and adequate parking are all critical to making towns and villages more inviting for visitors and more supportive of business activity.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy returned to the meeting at 5.19p.m.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Service acknowledged the comments made by the members and noted that the Finance, Investment & Enterprise Directorate will host an information event with the Elected Members in Quarter 2 2026 to provide an overview of supports available for small businesses in County Clare. Ms. Fitzgerald noted that there is a common perception that the Local Enterprise Office primarily provides grants and that many businesses are not fully availing of the wider range of services on offer. She emphasised that this is a message that needs to be more strongly promoted.
Item 19: One Complete Solution Passenger Assistance Services
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Transport to request that the Irish Aviation Authority (IAA), the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) and the Shannon Airport Authority (SAA) undertake an immediate review of their current OCS (One Complete Solution) passenger assistance services.
Furthermore, this Council calls on the Minister to ensure that a statutory training module is developed and implemented for all staff and contracted personnel delivering OCS services across the State, with the objective of guaranteeing consistent, safe, dignified and rights-based assistance for passengers with reduced mobility and other accessibility needs.
Given the essential nature of OCS supports in enabling equal access to air travel, this Council believes that a standardised, statutory training requirement is necessary to ensure high quality service provision, compliance with national and EU accessibility obligations, and the protection of passenger welfare.”
(M)
The elected members expressed concern that people with disabilities are experiencing difficulties when accessing aircrafts, noting that the training currently provided to airport staff appears to be falling short of what is required. Members emphasised that every individual deserves respect, equal treatment and a travel experience free from discrimination. They observed that many European airports utilise air bridges that connect the gate directly to the aircraft and stated that Ireland should seek to improve its accessibility standards in a similar manner. The members stressed the importance of comprehensive and high‑quality training for airport personnel, given the significant level of trust placed in them by passengers with disabilities.
Item 20: Local Authority Marine Infrastructure Scheme 2026
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council proceed to prepare and submit funding applications under the Local Authority Marine Infrastructure Scheme 2026, including both the Harbour Development Scheme and the Marine Leisure and Marine Tourism Scheme, in accordance with the terms and conditions issued by the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine.
That the Council identify, prioritise and submit eligible capital projects—such as harbour infrastructure, piers, slipways, floating pontoons, and associated shore‑based works—which support fisheries, aquaculture, and coastal community development, and ensure all required planning permissions and consents are in place to meet the scheme deadlines.”
(M)
John O’Malley, Senior Executive Officer, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“The Local Authority Marine Infrastructure Scheme or LAMIS could be considered the successor to the old Piers and Harbours grant. It is a funding stream administered by the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine
(DAFM)
and Clare County Council has been invited by DAFM to apply for grant funding under the 2026 scheme.
The 2026 scheme is split into two sub-schemes –
(a) A Harbour Development Scheme and
(b) A Marine Leisure and Marine Tourism Scheme.
This is different from the 2025 scheme when the emphasis was very much on Fishing & Aquaculture activity.
Clare County Council have been working to identify suitable works for an application to DAFM for funding under the 2026 LAMIS stream. A number of applications will be made to continue the progress that has been made throughout the last number of years under the various iterations of this scheme and additional preparatory works for future projects will also be progressed.
Clare County Council successfully applied for grant funding under LAMIS 2025 and its predecessor
(the Brexit Adjustment Local Authority Marine Infrastructure – or BALAMI – grant in 2022 / 2023).
All works grant aided by the DAFM have been completed.”
The elected members noted that the number of fishing licences being applied for in the county is significantly lower than the numbers issued in Galway and Kerry. Members observed that the number of active fishermen has declined over time, with one of the key contributing factors being the extensive restrictions placed on what they are permitted to catch, coupled with the challenge of competing against large‑scale industrial fishing operations. They emphasised the importance of supporting local fishermen and sustaining this traditional industry. Members further noted that rising diesel prices present an additional burden and called on the Government to provide meaningful assistance to those remaining in the sector, given the vital role of local fishing in supporting quality of life, community vitality, and sustainable tourism.
Item 21:
Rising Home Insurance Costs
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“To ask the relevant Minister to ensure all home insurance companies are not rising prices above the rate of inflation.
Home insurance costs continue to rise across the country with explanations that weather and cost of repair are rising but with prices in places rising as much as 20% it will leave many households uninsured.
Though insurance companies are making big profits there are still many places in Clare that cannot get home insurance due to "flood risks" where in places like Shannon where no flood has ever occurred and will soon have flood defences added.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the cost‑of‑living crisis continues to intensify and is expected to worsen, placing additional pressure on households and businesses. Members expressed concern about the potential for insurance companies to engage in profiteering during this period and emphasised the need for safeguards to prevent such practices. They stressed that legislative measures may be required to ensure fairness and accountability within the insurance sector and to protect consumers from further financial strain.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. Mulcahy, seconded by Cllr. J. Ryan and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 22: Rightsizing Scheme for Homeowners
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council, following my discussions with the Clare Healthy Age Friendly Homes Programme, which has identified significant demand among older homeowners whose properties no longer meet their needs, establish a voluntary Rightsizing Scheme for older homeowners, drawing on best practice from other Irish local authorities, to support older people who wish to sell their privately-owned home and move to age-appropriate accommodation while remaining connected to their community.”
(M)
P. MacCormaic, Senior Executive Officer, Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation replied as follows:
“National Context
National research on Right Sizing is ongoing, with plans to introduce either a National Right Sizing Policy or guidance for Local Authorities. The implementation of a Rightsizing Policy would support national age friendly objectives and align with the Government’s Delivering Homes, Building Communities Strategy, helping to ensure that older people have access to safe, suitable and sustainable housing options that meet their evolving needs.
A small number of Local Authorities are piloting schemes where private homeowners sell their homes and make a financial contribution before being allocated a designated right sizing property.
These pilot schemes typically set the contribution at around 30% of net sale proceeds and allow certain properties to be designated specifically for right sizing.
Current Clare County Council Position
CCC welcomes the continued interest from elected members, the Clare Older People’s Council, the Clare Age Friendly Alliance and other Age Friendly groups on right sizing options. Right sizing and step down housing have been discussed at SPC level, and CCC continues to explore all potential housing solutions.
Allocation Scheme Review
The Department is reviewing all Local Authority Allocation Schemes nationally. CCC expects to be asked to review and update its own Allocation Scheme later this year. Any revised scheme must go through the SPC and Council, and right sizing will be included in discussions around proposed new scheme.
Existing Local Options
Right sizing options already exist for Council and AHB tenants through the local transfer system. Many tenants make use of these options as their housing needs change.”
The elected members noted that a significant number of older people have indicated that their current homes no longer meet their needs and acknowledged that there is an unmet demand for suitable housing options. Members stated that younger families are simultaneously seeking larger homes, highlighting the need for better movement within the housing market. They emphasised that people should be able to age safely and comfortably in their own homes without having to rely on nursing home care. Members also noted that the recent rightsizing workshop was very well attended and that many rural residents expressed interest in relocating to more urban towns, reflecting a growing demand for accessible, well‑located housing for older people.
Item 23: Review of Garda Divisional Structures
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. O’Brien, A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Justice Minister Jim O'Callaghan, and the Garda Commissioner Justin Kelly, to undertake an immediate review of the current Garda divisional structures affecting County Clare and neighbouring County Tipperary, and to take the necessary steps to realign policing boundaries so that County Clare is restored to a single, unified Garda division aligned with its established county boundary.
The current Garda divisional arrangements between County Clare and County Tipperary are not operating effectively, are causing administrative and operational inefficiencies, and are failing to adequately meet the policing needs and expectations of the communities of County Clare.”
(M)
The elected members expressed frustration regarding the amalgamation of the Clare and Tipperary Garda Divisions. Members acknowledged the excellent work carried out by An Garda Síochána but noted that the new divisional model has resulted in a reduced visible Garda presence and a corresponding increase in crime. They also highlighted that the role of the community guard has effectively disappeared under the new structure, which has impacted community engagement and reassurance. Members further acknowledged that pay and working conditions within An Garda Síochána remain significant issues and stated that the current model is affecting both the level of service Guards are able to provide and the communities they serve.
Item 24: Supporting Sustainable Rural Communities
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“In the context of supporting sustainable rural communities, I call on Clare County Council to adopt a cross-directorate approach, prioritising key actionable initiatives that deliver measurable outcomes, and ensuring our Rural Towns and Villages are revitalized as vibrant, multipurpose social living service hubs, serving their surrounding hinterlands.
Specifically, I propose the Council:
1. Identify and prioritize core Rural Towns and Villages for targeted investment and development.
2. Develop tailored, community-led plans for each hub, incorporating services, amenities, and infrastructure.
3. Allocate dedicated resources and funding to support these initiatives, leveraging cross-directorate collaboration and external partnerships.
4. Establish clear metrics and benchmarks to monitor progress and evaluate impact.”
(M)
L. O’Neill, Senior Executive Officer, Rural & Community Development replied as follows:
“Clare County Council has made substantial and strategic investment in the regeneration and development of our towns and villages through a wide range of national and local programmes. Program investment includes Town and Village Renewal, which has enhanced the public realm across the county; RRDF projects in Scarriff, Killaloe, Loop Head, Kilrush and Ennistimon; the URDF in Ennis; Community Recognition Funding; climate‑focused grants; and multiple community grant schemes at both MD and County level. Alongside our network of enterprise hubs, we have delivered a new county library, adding to our tourism offering and structures and are strengthening community resilience through a network of 30 community centres equipped to support communities in times of emergency.
This investment is guided by Clare County Council’s rural policy framework, including the Renewed Clare Rural Development Strategy 2030 and the national Town Centre First initiative, both of which support a coordinated, community‑driven approach to revitalising rural towns and villages. The strategy places emphasis on strengthening multi‑service centres, fostering co‑operation between communities, and developing tailored local actions to enhance quality of life. Its Mid‑Term Review reinforces the need for clear objectives, deeper community engagement, and alignment with wider policy and funding opportunities up to 2030.
The Town Centre First policy further supports this direction by providing a structured framework for towns to prepare locally led, place‑based plans through Town Teams, focusing on vacancy reduction, improved public spaces, and reinforcing the role of towns as vibrant centres for living, working and social activity.
Clare County Council delivers this work on a cross‑directorate basis, through the Management Team and various working groups such as the Rural Development Coordination Group and the Rural Grant Coordination Working Group, and the cross‑directorate Housing Delivery Working Group focused on housing activation. Community engagement remains central to our approach, whether through the Town Centre First initiative, Part 8 process, the work of our RCDOs, or engagement with stakeholders in shaping strategy and delivering projects.
We continue to work collectively to ensure our towns and villages remain thriving, resilient and forward‑looking.”
The elected members welcomed the reply and noted the importance of strategic investment aimed at achieving meaningful regeneration, supported by a multi‑layered funding approach. Members acknowledged that integrated investment initiatives help to build momentum, attract and facilitate private investment, and future‑proof rural towns. They stressed the need to identify key hubs while also recognising the potential of more peripheral rural towns. Members noted that supports for smaller enterprises should be prioritised to encourage innovation and local economic activity. They further highlighted that rightsizing initiatives can help reduce dereliction and emphasised the need to identify gaps within towns and villages to strengthen overall vibrancy. The members also noted the current window of opportunity presented by remote working, stating that this shift can significantly support rural sustainability.
Item 25: Community Monuments Fund
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. J. Garrihy, M. Howard, P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, James Browne to ensure that County Clare receives appropriate funding from the Community Monuments Fund (Stream 1) so that essential and urgent repair and capital works can be undertaken to preserve the historic vernacular architecture and heritage of our counties historic structures and monuments.”
(M)
The elected members noted the importance of the Community Monuments Fund and expressed concern that County Clare is currently lagging behind in securing Stream 1 funding. Members emphasised the duty of care to preserve native architecture and heritage, noting that once these structures are lost, they are gone forever. They highlighted the cultural and historical significance of such monuments and stressed that securing additional funding is critical to ensuring their protection and conservation.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
LAMA Spring Seminar, held in The Connacht Hotel, Galway on the 28
th
– 29
th
January 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €569.64 including conference fee of €245.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. C. Ryan, M. Howard, G. Keating, P. Murphy, T. O’Brien, A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman, T. O’Callaghan attend this conference.
AILG Module 1 Training Programme entitled “From Policy to Practice; What Local Authorities in
Ireland can offer to support disabled people and an ageing population”
, held in The Fairways Hotel, Dundalk on the 19
th
February 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €459.36 including conference fee of €100.00.
It was agreed that Cllr. T. O’Callaghan attend this conference.
AILG Module 1 Training Programme entitled “From Policy to Practice; What Local Authorities in
Ireland can offer to support disabled people and an ageing population”
, held in Hotel Kilkenny, Kilkenny, on the 21
st
February 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €453.48 including conference fee of €100.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. A. Baker Bashua, M. Begley, P. Burke, C. Colleran Molloy, J. Crowe, P. Daly, D. Gould, G. Keating, J. Killeen, P. Murphy,
T. O’Brien, P. O’Gorman, C. Ryan, M. Shannon, B. Slattery attend this conference.
AIR Annual Training Seminar, held in Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, County Donegal, on the 25
th
February 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €872.08 including conference fee of €160.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. M. Begley, J. Crowe, P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, T’ O’Brien attend this conference.
AILG Module 2 Training Programme entitled “Overview of new Housing or All action plan and tenancy rights implications for Local Authorities and Councillors
”
, held in Radisson Blu Hotel, Sligo on the 21
st
March 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €471.28 including conference fee of €100.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. A. Baker Bashua, M. Begley, C. Colleran Molloy,
J. Crowe, D. Gould, D. Griffin, M. Howard, J. Killeen, P. Murphy, T. O’Brien,
A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman, M. Shannon, B. Slattery attend this conference.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed:
____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed:
_____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:
_____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback