Minutes of June 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of June 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 9th June 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Garrihy, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Carmel Kirby, Director of Economic Development.
Ann Reynolds, Director of Rural Development.
Trina Rynne, Financial Accountant, Finance and Support Services.
Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
J. Ryan, B. Slattery, S. Talty
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Rouine Family, on the death of Éanna Rouine, RIP.
The O’Brien Family, on the death of Mary O’Brien, RIP.
The Collins Family, on the death of Jim Collins, RIP.
The Tuohy Family, on the death of Olivia Tuohy, RIP.
The O’Regan Family, on the death of Phil O’Regan, RIP.
The Griffin Family, on the death of Mary Griffin, RIP.
Cllr. S. Talty extended a vote of sympathy to the Rouine Family on the passing of Éanna Rouine, RIP, who was employed as a beach lifeguard at Lahinch beach, and he proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon and agreed by the members present.
The meeting resumed at 3.22p.m.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan welcomed Mr. Gordon Daly back to Clare County Council and wished him well in his new role as Chief Executive.  The Cathaoirleach acknowledged Mr. Pat Dowling and Dr. Carmel Kirby for the work they did as Chief Executive & interim Chief Executive respectively.
G. Daly, Chief Executive, expressed his gratitude for the warm welcome he has received over the past few weeks and stated that he was looking forward to working with all the elected members. Mr. Daly acknowledged his predecessor Pat Dowling and the great work he did as Chief Executive and Carmel Kirby for acting as interim Chief Executive. Mr. Daly noted that his first few weeks have been about listening and learning and to establish key priorities
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a.      Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the May Meeting of Clare County Council held on 12
th
May 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 7 May 2025 from Minister of State, Michael Moynihan T.D. in relation to the provision of clinical therapy supports.
Correspondence dated 20 May 2025 from the Office of the Minister of State, Christopher O'Sullivan, T.D. in relation to funding for the eradication of Hogweed.
Correspondence dated 26 May 2025 from the Department of Health in relation to Membership of the Regional Health Forums.
Resolution dated 15 May 2025 from Fingal County Council in relation to a ban on fox hunting on Council-owned land.
Resolution dated 29 May 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to the State of Israel Bonds Issuance Programme.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.         Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 8 April, 2025 be noted.”
b.         Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 26 March, 2025 be noted.”
c.         Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 21 March, 2025 be noted.”
d.         Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 4 April, 2025 be noted.”
e.         Ar moladh Cllr. D. Gould
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 20 March, 2025 be noted.”
f.          Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 31 March, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a)   Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Tourism Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 19 February, 2025 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 6
th
May, 2025 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management Report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the TII Safety Improvement updated in relation to the Clareabbey roundabout and requested more information be provided on this project.
Cllr. I. Lynch referred to the defective concrete blocks grant scheme and thanked the DCB team noting the great work they are doing. Cllr. Lynch stated that while the €15.12m that has been awarded to date sounds like a lot of money it was worth noting that people are out of pocket hundreds of thousands of Euros as a result and that there is concern amongst the public.
Cllr. Lynch raised queries in relation to the social housing targets.
Cllr. P. O’Gorman welcomed the sculpture to a damaged tree in Shannon Town Park and noted that it was a small initiative but very effective instead of cutting down the tree.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the hop-on, hop-off shuttle bus running across North and West Clare and noted it was a welcomed service and encouraged tourism operators to engage with and promote the initiative.
Cllr. McInerney referred to the vacant property refurbishment grant and noted that only 30% of the grants approved have been paid out. She stated that there needed to be an extension to the time frame for applying for the grant and sought to understand the issues people were encountering with the application process.
Cllr. McInerney noted her disappointment that section 3 and 4 of the West Clare Railway Greenway is on hold due to the funding pulled by TII, she noted that section 1 and 2 must be prioritised now.
Cllr. P. Burke referred to the Shannon Bridge Crossing (Brian Boru Bridge) and expressed disappointment that there wasn’t more coverage in the management report given the scale of the project.
Cllr. D. Griffin commended the flexible outdoor structure project. Cllr. D. Griffin referred to the Bus Stop Enhancement Programme and queried the rollout of stops.
Cllr. T. O’Brien complimented the opening of the Brian Boru Bridge and thanked all staff involved; he noted that it was transformational for the area. Cllr. O’Brien did note that the roads around the Bridge are still in need of repair.
Cllr. J. Killeen complimented the work being done in the Municipal Districts and LEAs and thanked the Director for the updates in the Management reports noting in particular the updates on seasonal staff and flexible structures.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to the meeting with the Chief Superintendent. Cllr. Hayes noted that the Local Community Safety Partnership was not up and running yet and sought an update on it. Cllr. Hayes noted the importance of having this forum set up as soon as possible to discuss critical issues and crime.
Cllr. G. Keating referred to the Cliffs of Moher and a briefing the elected members had there in recent weeks. Cllr. Keating acknowledged the wonderful work that is planned for the area and what a fantastic attraction it is to have in the county.
Cllr. A. Baker Bashua noted the correspondence that was sent from the Department.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan noted that as this was relating to correspondence she would have to wait until the headed items were completed and he would allow her to raise it under a variation to order of business.
Cllr. J. Garrihy referred to the Rural Development update and credited the rural development team with assisting in getting the Building Blocks Capital funding to support Community Childcare facilities. Cllr. Garrihy requested an update on the RRDF project for Doolin Pier and asked the Director for Rural Development to provide clarification on the recent announcement of Community Recognition Fund (CRF) for Clare.
Cllr. Garrihy acknowledged Cllr. Keating comments about the Cliffs of Moher and the tour they were given and noted he is looking forward to what it will deliver for the communities around the Cliffs of Moher.
Cllr. M. Shannon welcomed all the works being undertaken at MD level in West Clare. Cllr. Shannon was encouraged by the uptake of the hop on hop off bus in West Clare. Cllr. Shannon acknowledged a Foster Carers briefing that was held during the month and noted their contribution in County Clare.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development noted in relation to the N85 Clareabbey roundabout that a preliminary design report was sent to TII and that it was anticipated that they would provide their feedback soon.
In relation to Section 3 & 4 of the Greenway, Mr. Farrell noted that funding had not been allocated for these sections in 2025.  He advised that the issue had been raised with TII and stated that TII have been advised that the Council are anxious to ensure that these sections progress.
Mr. Farrell referred to the query on the Bus Stop Enhancement Programme and noted that the NTA have allocated €500,000 to each local authority and they will engage with the NTA on their allocation. Mr. Farrell noted that queries from the members should be raised through the MD and Road Design Office who will consider these with the NTA.
Mr. Farrell noted in relation to road works around the Brian Boru Bridge that a case was being developed for submission to the Department of Transport and that funding would be sought.
In relation to the query on Doolin Pier RRDF, Mr. Farrell noted that there was engagement with the various stakeholders and that certain works had been completed under the RRDF.  He noted that a cross-directorate team with staff from Rural, PMO, MD, Planning and Tourism working together to agree the best way forward using the grant funding available and to decide on the next steps.  Mr. Farrell stated that a briefing for the elected Members could be arranged if desired.
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Social Development noted in relation to defective concrete blocks that it does pose a risk to the social housing stock. Mr. Murphy noted he is keen to see the social scheme progress and the scope and criteria will inform how the local authority respond. Mr. Murphy noted that the €15.12m in grants issued were not divided into 50 equal amounts. He noted that each one received different remediation offers.
Mr. Murphy noted in relation to housing targets that the 2025 target is 833 and currently the figure stands at 563.
Dr. C. Kirby, Director of Service, Planning and Economic Development referred to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant and noted that she understands the cashflow issues people are experiencing when having to deal directly with contractors or if they have more complex issues. Dr. Kirby advised she would revert on the breakdown of issues experienced.
A. Reynolds, Director of Service, Rural Development noted in relation to the Local Community Safety Partnership that the Policing Security and Community Safety Act commenced on 2
nd
April and that the publication of the regulations and guidelines by the Department of Justice is awaited.  The Council is actively engaging through the Local Government Management Agency (LGMA) and the City and County Managers Association (CCMA) to provide feedback on the draft regulations and guidelines and will be in a position to commence forming the partnership once the regulations and guidelines are published.
Ms. Reynolds referred to Cllr. Garrihy’s request for clarification on the recent CRF funding announcement and noted that in the Community Recognition Fund 2023 €2.8m was allocated to Clare. There were three windows within which proposals could be submitted.  In window 1 the Council submitted proposals for 21 projects and secured a funding allocation of €1,802,000.  There were no proposals submitted in window 2.  In window 3, a further 8 projects were submitted and remaining €806,408 was allocated. Therefore, the full CRF allocation to Clare of €2.8m has been allocated.
Item 8: Disposal of property at No. 1, Crawford Street, Kilrush, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Julie Brosnan, A/Administrative Officer, Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map.  The report states that the property was a previously owned Council property which was purchased by the owner from the Council in 2007 under the tenant purchase incremental scheme. It was noted in the report that the freehold title is still registered to Clare County Council due to an error on the original land transfer map and to rectify the matter a deed of transfer and rectification is required to include a revised land transfer map.
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at No 1, Crawford Street, Kilrush, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 14
th
May 2025.
Item 9: Disposal of property (by lease) at Dough, Kilkee, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to lease an area of land measuring 0.0136 hectares at Dough, Kilkee, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 21
st
May 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property (by lease) at Dough, Kilkee, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 21
st
May 2024.”
Item 10: Disposal of land at No. 1, Dun an Óir, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 0.01 hectares at No. 1 Dun an Óir, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 27
th
May 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at No. 1 Dun an Óir, Shannon, Co. subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 27
th
May 2025.
Cllr. T. Mulcahy declared a conflict of interest in relation to this and excluded himself from the meeting for this item.
Item 11: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at Junction of L4159/L4158/R458, Barefield, Co. Clare.
Report from Paddy Tiernan, A/Senior Executive Engineer, Ennis MD and Chief Executive Report dated 30
th
May, 2025 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The report notes that the proposed development is a resulting project from previous representations in relation to road safety issues and the necessity for footpaths and traffic calming. The goal of the project is to provide increased pedestrian safety within the village especially for school children.
The nature of the proposed development includes the following;
1) Realignment of existing Junction.
2) Set back existing stone wall and provision of 100m of 2m wide concrete footpath to North West of the Junction.
3) Extension of existing 2m wide footway for 40m along existing macadam surfacing to South West of the junction.
4) 1 No. Raised uncontrolled pedestrian crossing across the L4158 (Ruan Road)
5) 1 No Raised uncontrolled pedestrian crossing the R458 to motorway.
6) 1 No. flush uncontrolled pedestrian crossing across R4159 to Ennis.
7) 1 No flush uncontrolled pedestrian crossing with separation island, R458 to Crusheen.
8) 2 No Additional public Lighting columns and associated ancillary works to tie into existing public lighting system.
9) Provision of, Gullies, drainage pipework and associated ancillary works to existing public system.
10) Provision of associated Signage and Road Markings.
11) All associated and ancillary site works.
The report states that in accordance with the Birds and Natural Habitats Directive, Screening for Appropriate Assessment has been carried out on the project. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) screening statement has been prepared and concludes that there is no real likelihood of significant effects on the environment arising from the proposed development
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
Item 12: Annual Report 2024
The Annual Report was circulated in advance of the agenda was noted by the members present.
Item 13: CLAR 2025 Shortlisted Projects.
Report dated 9
th
June, 2025 from Siobhán O’Reilly, Administrative Officer, Rural Development was circulated with the agenda.
The report states that a total of 39 Expressions of Interest were received under Measure 1 of the CLÁR Scheme 2025. This scheme provides funding for small-scale infrastructural projects in designated rural areas (CLÁR areas) that have experienced population decline. The report notes that at their meeting on Thursday, 29th May 2025, the Elected Members of the Grant Funding Working Group reviewed the Expressions of Interest received. Attached to the report was a list outlining 15 projects that have been selected to proceed to the Department of Rural and Community Development for consideration under the Scheme. It was noted in the report that these are funding recommendations only and that the final decision regarding funding approval rests solely with the Department of Rural and Community Development.
The CLAR 2025 Shortlisted Projects were noted by the members present.
Variation to Order of Business
Cllr. A. Baker Bashua acknowledged the reply from the Minister of State for Special Education and Inclusion, Michael Moynihan, T.D. Cllr. Baker Bashua noted what a serious issue this was, and stated it was great to see the Minister visit Clare recently.
Cllr. J. Ryan referred to the reply from the office of Minister Christopher O’Sullivan, T.D. in relation to Hogweed and noted that the National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS) provides funding annually for local authority-led projects to tackle invasive species. Cllr. Ryan noted that he hopes the local authority will look into this funding.
It was agreed to take item 18 first.
Item 18: Wind Farm Planning Applications
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“To ask that this Council take the position that no new onshore wind farm planning applications should be approved in Clare until the national guidelines on wind energy are updated and put into action.
I ask the Chief Executive to share this position with the Department of Housing, Local Government, and Heritage and to request a temporary pause, in line with this motion.”
(M)
H. Quinn
,
Senior Planner, Planning and Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“All valid planning applications are entitled to and must be assessed on their own merits against the plans and policies that are in place at a National, Regional and Local level. In considering an application for planning permission for any form of development including windfarm developments, the Planning Authority are obliged to assess and make a decision on the proposal in line with statutory requirements as set out in the Planning and Development Act 2000 as amended.
As part of the assessment process, a planner’s report will be prepared where all the relevant planning considerations will be set out and the development measured against same. Critically, the planning process is centred on the rights of interested parties to make submissions and observations on proposals, and these are also considered in the assessment process.
The Chief Executive or his designated official will then have the responsibility of making decisions on the application.  This decision-making process and the subsequent opportunities for appeals to be made to An Board Pleanála or Judicial Reviews to the court system allows for all participants in the process to have access to an impartial planning system.
The elected members are aware of the importance of maintaining this impartial and transparent planning process for the benefit of all participants in the planning process.
To that end it would not be appropriate that Clare County Council would interfere with the statutory processes around assessing and deciding on planning applications.
There will be an opportunity for the Elected Members to consider the planning implications of future windfarm guidelines at the next County Development Plan making stage or earlier depending on the timeline for publication of those guidelines.  As previously relayed to the elected members, the Planning Department are committed to reviewing the existing Wind Energy Strategy as soon as practicable following the publication of the guidelines.  It is this plan making function that is considered to be the most appropriate route for the Elected Members to consider policy around various land uses including renewable energy developments.”
Cllr. R. Hartigan submitted an amended motion to the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator read out the amended motion:
“To ask that this Council share the stance of the elected members of this Council that no new onshore wind farm planning applications should be approved until the national guidelines on wind energy are updated and put into action, with the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage.”
(M)
This amendment was agreed having been proposed by Cllr. M. Begley and seconded by Cllr. T. O’Brien and agreed by the members present.
The elected members noted that this motion was calling for fair, balanced and up to date guidelines. The members were in agreement that the current national guidelines on wind energy, that are nineteen years old, are outdated and not fit for purpose. The members stated that communities are divided by the community fund and noted that the fund does not go far enough to be worthwhile, and it is not fair to put this burden on communities. The members stated that this was not a motion against renewable energy or wind energy but rather a call for updated and fair guidelines. The members agreed that offshore renewable energy is the way forward and another example of why the DMAPs need to be accelerated for the West Coast.
Item 14: Rural Regeneration, Economic and Community Development of County Clare
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“At the commencement of our new Chief Executive term I am calling on the leadership, Management Team of Clare County Council, in a strategic and cross directorate manner, to refocus and to set priority for clear and measured strategies and initiatives that have as an objective the sustainability, success and where necessary the regeneration of the key towns and villages across county Clare, along with enabling and attracting private sector and community led SMEs to our settlements that are critical to the viability and future of the rural communities served by them.”
(M)
A. Reynolds, Director of Service, Rural Development, Clare County Council replied as follows:
“Clare County Council reaffirms its continued focus and commitment to Rural Regeneration and the Economic and Community Development of County Clare, as outlined in strategic policy documents including the Rural Development Strategy, Ennis 2040 Economic and Spatial Strategy, Local Economic and Community Plan, Clare Climate Action Plan, County Clare Tourism Strategy etc. all of which rely on cross directorate engagement and collaboration to create opportunities for the regeneration and sustainability of our towns and villages in the county. These are also reflected in the strategic objectives of Town Centre First and the range of supports available through the Local Enterprise Office. The Corporate Plan is the Council’s blueprint to support the implementation of these strategic plans for the period 2024 to 2029 and encompasses 5 key objectives as follows:
To facilitate the supply of housing, both public and private, in the county to provide sustainable, quality, and affordable housing options;
To facilitate a proactive, sustainable and carbon neutral economic environment where businesses locate and grow and create sustainable employment supporting our communities, thus enhancing our economic capacity;
To deliver, maintain, and protect key infrastructure to facilitate the economic, social, physical, rural and tourism development of County Clare in a manner that promotes sustainability, safety, accessibility, connectivity, and respect for the environment;
To make Clare a globally renowned sustainable and vibrant tourism destination, easily reached and traversed, and recognised for its rich cultural assets, its stunning and open-space landscapes, its compelling array of remarkable experiences, and for its welcome and exceptional hospitality;
To improve the social, cultural and economic wellbeing of people in Clare, facilitating access for all to housing, employment, education, healthcare, transport, recreation, amenities and cultural activities.
These objectives are being targeted through the collective ambition and commitment of management team working in collaboration with staff and elected members to deliver actions across all directorates.”
The elected members noted the important role that rural towns and villages play for the county as a whole. The members noted that access to local services is imperative to sustainable communities where people can live. The members noted that rural areas have huge potential and can be transformative if the rural strategy is adaptable and flexible. The members stated that regeneration of key towns and villages may be the best route forward, identifying key locations and start with regeneration there.  The members acknowledged that infrastructure and wastewater is a priority to encourage rural living.
G. Daly, Chief Executive thanked the members for the frank and honest discussion. He noted that he was still working through what the priorities were but he has a clear understanding of where the members priorities lie. Mr. Daly noted that housing is a priority and is key to stopping rural decline. Mr. Daly stated that it is hard to attract investment and jobs if there is a lack of housing.
Item 15: Cancer Patient Advocate
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council formally request the Department of Health for the appointment of a dedicated cancer patient advocate to support individuals undergoing cancer treatment in County Clare. Due to the unique arrangement in the Mid-West region - where chemotherapy is provided publicly at University Hospital Limerick (UHL) and radiotherapy is delivered privately at the Mater Private Hospital Limerick - there is a clear need for a designated advocate to help patients navigate between both services.
Relying solely on charities to fill this gap is not a sustainable or equitable solution, as it risks vulnerable patients falling through the cracks. A dedicated advocate would ensure continuity of care, provide guidance, and support patients through complex treatment pathways at a time when they are most in need.”
(M)
The elected members expressed disappointment that there isn’t a dedicated cancer patient advocate in the Mid-West region. The members noted that there was no communication between the private hospital providing the radiotherapy and the public hospital providing the chemotherapy, so the patient must cope with an illness and be the go-between for both services. The members noted there was a disparity between the services offered in Dublin and the Mid-West. The members acknowledged the fantastic work charities do in this space but felt that it shouldn’t all rest on their shoulders.
Item 16: Ennis Northern Inner Relief Road
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on Clare County Council to arrange an in-person meeting with the Department of Transport to discuss the Ennis Northern Inner Relief Road and to progress its development, as recently occurred with the TII to discuss issues which pertained to our national roads in the County.
This road is identified as an Infrastructure Safeguard for the Ennis Northern Inner Relief Road, from the Tulla Road to the Gort Road, in the last several Clare County Development Plans and has not been developed to date and which is included as a vital part of the Emerging Preferred Strategy (Section 6.4.3 Page 80) of our Draft LTP.
Especially pertinent in a housing crisis is the fact that it cuts through residential zoned lands impeding the development of same for the benefit of the people of Ennis and County Clare. This is because the footprint of the proposed link road (measuring in excess of 1 Ha) has been essentially sterilised from development via its designation as an Infrastructure Safeguard and for one developer in the affected areas, it cuts off access to approx. 7.5 Ha of zoned Residential lands which would have the potential to accommodate circa 260 houses based on the metric of 35 units/Ha as set out in the Development Plan. This area is also sterilised from development as it cannot be accessed without the road. Since access to the land is limited by the non-development of this road, request is being made by the developer to have these lands exempted from Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT).  This is entirely incongruent with Ministerial dictate that Local Authorities make all efforts to have zoned lands developed for housing.
In March 2024, I called on Clare County Council Executive Management Team to arrange an in-person meeting with the Department of Transportation to progress the funding for the traffic studies, design, environmental studies, the construction of the most immediate section of this strategic piece of infrastructure which is in part Council ownership, that being from the beginning of the existing built road that ends abruptly at the Clare Technology Park, to continue across the railway track so as to connect to the existing most westerly roundabout in Oakleigh Wood.
The Department of Transport needs to factor this strategic corridor reserved in our
County Development Plan into the transportation plan for our County Town, especially since a portion of it is already built, so as to bring the accessibility benefits of this infrastructure to the County, which are inter alia: alleviation of traffic on the Gort Road and the Tulla Road; improved connectivity to the Gort Road Industrial Estate, a venue of substantial employment in our County, where access (either by way of traffic lights or roundabout(s)) to the Gort Road Industrial Estate should be factored into this phase of development; improved both-way access from East Clare to North Clare without congesting the town centre; alleviation of congestion of the town centre; and amelioration of the active travel corridors, especially the immediate corridor planned for the Tulla Road from the motorway into Ennis, and finally, to accommodate provision of much needed housing.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The proposed route (R3) as identified in the Draft Ennis Local Transport Plan (LTP), the subject of this Notice of Motion, which would connect the Tulla Road and the Gort Road will not be without its delivery challenges.
The infrastructure safeguarded route (R3) is adjacent to the Ballyallia Lough Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) which encompasses Lough Girroga. This may considerably constrain the engineering design options for the proposed route.  In addition, the railway line will have to be traversed involving a significant increase in road elevation and will require consideration of likely noise and air quality impacts on local residents.
Notwithstanding, Clare County Council is committed to the delivery of this project which is identified as a key strategic aim in the County Development Plan 2023-2029.The first step for the delivery of this project is the completion of the public consultation for the Draft Local Transport Plan (LTP) for Ennis, which is currently underway.
Once the Ennis LTP is finalised in the coming months, we can then arrange to meet with the Department of Transport officials to develop a pathway for the delivery of the project.”
The elected members noted that there was a housing crisis in the country and the Government are calling for houses to be built but contractors won’t build on the 7.5 Ha of residentially zoned land because of this proposed link road. The members noted that this road currently serves no purpose and is holding up the building of potentially 260 houses. The members called for the local authority to start working on a plan now and not to wait for the Local Transport Plan to be finalised.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development noted that when the Local Transport Plan is finalised it will inform future investment. He acknowledged the housing element that the elected members raised and noted that while this would be very beneficial and is a priority of the Council, that the road faces challenges as per the reply and that significant funding would be required.
Item 17: Fair Contracts for Adult Educators
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to ask the Minister for Further and Higher Education to re-negotiate a fair contract with the TUI on behalf of adult educators working in Clare.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the Education and Training Board are offering part-time contracts instead of full-time contracts to adult educators which means they don’t get paid for the holiday periods and have to go on social welfare during these periods. The members noted that in a lot of cases these educators who have to apply for social welfare for the summer period don’t get paid until September due to delays. The members noted that part-time contracts also affects their pension entitlements. The members stated that this was very unfair and needed to be resolved.
Item 19: National Development Levy Waiver
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council supports the implementation of a national development levy waiver for rural one off and self-build homes.”
(M)
The elected members noted that there was a lack of services if you build in rural and one off areas and there aren’t developed service sites. The members stated that there is a need to add incentives for people to live rurally and encourage people to build and the implementation of a development levy waiver would act in some way as an incentive. The members acknowledged that anything that can be done to get people on the housing ladder and to fight rural decline should be done immediately.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. O’Callaghan, seconded by Cllr. P. O’Gorman and agreed by the members present that the conclusion time of the meeting be extended to 6.30p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 20: Need for Model 3 or 4 Hospital in Clare
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P. Daly, T. O’Callaghan, M. Shannon, S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“The HSE recognises that another hospital with an A&E is required in the Mid-West, and we are calling on all concerned such as the Taoiseach, Tánaiste, Minister for Health, HSE, HIQA, Clare Oireachtas and County Councillor members, Friends of Ennis hospital to put in place a strategy that will deliver a Model 3 or 4 hospital in the town of Ennis or a central location in the county, so that the people of Clare can experience a top-class health service for now and for future years.”
(M)
The elected members expressed their frustration at the need for Clare to have its own Model 3 hospital located in Ennis or in a central location in the county. The members noted that people living in West Clare are two hours from medical services and if in need of emergency care, they will not make the suggested necessary timeframe of 45 mins to get medical assistance. The members noted that the A&E in University Hospital Limerick (UHL) was not fit for purpose. The elected members acknowledged the work of Friends of Ennis Hospital who have been building the data and factchecking and are advocates for a Model 3 hospital in Ennis.
Item 21: Housing Activation Office
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council proactively engages with the newly proposed Housing Activation Office by identifying viable sites across the county suitable for both public and private housing-led development.
Furthermore, that the Council provides strategic and evidence-based feedback on its experience of current housing delivery schemes, both project-based and financial assistance initiatives, highlighting what is working effectively, the challenges being encountered by local authorities, home buyers, and builders, and recommending practical improvements to enhance the delivery and impact of these schemes at local level.”
(M)
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Social Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Thank you for your motion. The Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage have announced that they are establishing a ‘Housing Activation Office’ to help address barriers for the delivery of vital infrastructure to enable the delivery of housing across the country.  They are to be focused on infrastructure needed at a local level to support housing delivery including physical, social and community infrastructure.  The role of the Office is set out as follows;
To identify and seek to address barriers to the delivery of public infrastructure projects required to enable housing development, through (i) the alignment of funding; and (ii) coordination of infrastructure providers, to enable delivery of housing.
To engage and align stakeholders, including local authorities, infrastructure providers, industry and others to address barriers in a coordinated way.
To have a strategic function, delivering actions to coordinate and accelerate delivery of necessary public infrastructure and an operational function seeking to unblock issues on the ground.
The Minister has indicated that the Housing Activation Office will engage with public infrastructure agencies including Uisce Éireann, ESB Networks, the National Transport Authority, and the Local Government Sector.
Clare County Council has strong working relationships with our members, a range of state agencies and utility companies, Approved Housing Bodies, landowners, and developers. Working on a cross-directorate basis we continue to achieve our housing targets and are also engaged in providing affordable housing and activating and enabling private development through our schemes and networks.
We welcome the opportunity to engage with this newly established office and will assist it in its role by providing strategic and evidence-based insights to the local housing landscape and site-specific barriers. We will continue to understand the evolving situation, resolve barriers and identify opportunities for the county.”
The elected members noted the creation of a Housing Activation Office was a significant announcement, but that pressure needed to be put on the parties to deliver. The members noted that leadership was needed at a local level as there were many viable sites lying idle. The members stated that there was appetite and ambition for housing out there and that a cross-directorate approach must be taken within the local authority to deliver on this.
Item 22: Municipal Wastewater Infrastructure
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P. Burke, I. Lynch, P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“In the context of the lack of necessary municipal wastewater infrastructure in the vast majority of our towns and villages across the county we call on Clare County Council to accept the principle of developer led modular wastewater plants in towns and villages where there is a demand, desire and need for development.
We further call on Minister for Housing, James Browne to direct Uisce Eireann to support the local authority in overseeing and ensuring the treatment systems are of acceptable standard, have acceptable maintenance plans and will be constructed in a manner whereby full connection will be possible to municipal plants when delivered.”
(M)
H. Quinn
,
Senior Planner, Planning and Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 has made provision under objective CDP11.32 for developer provided infrastructure to be considered for proposals where the site is located in settlements which have limited or insufficient capacity to facilitate development. I have highlighted the relevant subsections of the development plan objective below for ease of reference.  The inclusion of this objective in the development plan demonstrates the acceptance in principle of developer provided infrastructure.
Development Plan Objective:
Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
CDP11.32
It is an objective of Clare County Council:
a) To support the implementation of Uisce Éireann Investment Plans and to advocate the provision, by Uisce Éireann, of adequate wastewater treatment facilities to accommodate the target population and employment potential of the County in accordance with the statutory obligations set out in the EU and national policy and in line with the Core Strategy and Settlement Hierarchy set out in this Plan;
b) To support the role of Uisce Éireann Investment Plans in taking into account seasonal pressures on critical wastewater treatment service infrastructure and climate change implications in the design of all relevant projects;
c) To advocate for the on-going provision, maintenance and upgrade of wastewater treatment infrastructure in the County;
d) To maximise the use of the existing capacity of wastewater treatment services in the planning of new development;
e) To protect existing way leaves and protection areas around public wastewater treatment services infrastructure through appropriate zoning and to facilitate the provision of appropriate sites for required wastewater treatment services infrastructure;
f) To support Uisce Éireann in the promotion of effective management of trade discharges to sewers in order to maximise the capacity of the existing sewer networks and minimise detrimental impacts on sewage treatment works; g) To permit the development of single dwelling houses in unserviced areas only where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Authority that the proposed wastewater treatment system is in accordance with the Code of Practice for Domestic Waste Water Treatment Systems (Population Equivalent ≤ 10), EPA (2021);
(h) Where settlements have no public wastewater treatment infrastructure, and in settlements which have limited or insufficient capacity to facilitate development, to consider alternative developer led/provided shared use wastewater treatment infrastructure, including those incorporating nature-based solutions, to serve development where it can be clearly demonstrated that the system is in compliance with relevant EPA Guidelines on design standards and which will allow connection to a public system when it is provided. Any such consideration will be subject to the following criteria:
i. Connection to an existing public wastewater treatment system is not currently available.
ii. Environmental and planning requirements are satisfied including plan adequacy, site suitability and a suitable means of sludge and treated effluent disposal.
iii. The land on which the treatment plant is located is transferred to Uisce Éireann on their request if/when a public system is provided.
iv. The management and maintenance of the shared wastewater treatment and disposal infrastructure following its completion shall be the responsibility of a legally constituted management company. This management company will be responsible for the adequate maintenance, operation and management of the shared infrastructure. It shall be a condition of sale of all elements of the permitted development that the purchaser become a shareholder in the management company and include a similar condition on any contract for subsequent disposal of the property.
v. Adherence to the environmental assessment criteria set out in section 11.4.3.1 of this plan.
vi. As a condition of grant of planning permission, new developments will be required to connect to the public network when connection becomes available, subject to a connection agreement with Uisce Éireann.
i) To permit the development of treatment systems for small businesses/community facilities in unserviced areas where they are in single ownership and where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Authority that the proposed wastewater treatment system is in accordance with
Wastewater Treatment Manuals-Treatment Systems for Small Communities, Business, Leisure Centres and Hotels
, EPA (1999) or any future versions;
j) To encourage and support a changeover from septic tanks/private wastewater treatment plants to public collection networks wherever feasible, subject to connection agreements with Uisce Éireann and to ensure that any future development connects to the public wastewater infrastructure where it is available; and
k) To ensure that any private wastewater treatment system proposed complies with the environmental requirements of Objectives CDP4.2, CDP4.5 and CDP3.3 of this plan.
It is anticipated that there will be an opportunity for Clare County Council to engage with the Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage through the proposed ‘Housing Activation Office’ over the coming months.  As part of their engagement Clare Co Council will raise the issue of the operation of developer provided infrastructure in the medium to long term in the absence of a public sewer network being provided.”
Cllr. J. Garrihy submitted an amendment to the motion to Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan, which was agreed by the members and read as follows:
“In the context of the lack of necessary municipal wastewater infrastructure in the vast majority of our towns and villages across the county we call on Clare County Council to accept the principle of privately delivered certified modular wastewater treatment systems in towns and villages where there is a demand, desire and need for development.
We further call on Minister for Housing, James Browne to direct Uisce Eireann to support the local authority in overseeing and ensuring the treatment systems are of acceptable standard, have acceptable maintenance plans and will be constructed in a manner whereby full connection will be possible to municipal plants when delivered.”
(M)
The elected members noted that Clare can’t wait any longer for Uisce Éireann to provide long term solutions and that these modular plants are being used in other counties successfully. The members stated that it is in the County Development Plan that Clare County Council will accept them, and they urged management to be creative in implementing solutions to accelerate housing within the county. The members acknowledged that the tone of the June Council meeting was housing delivery, and these plants would assist to deliver on that but suggested that a pilot is run in a few towns or villages first. It was agreed by the members that it should be under the remit of Uisce Éireann to take charge of them once up and running and can not be at the burden of Clare County Council.
G. Daly, Chief Executive noted that a number of the motions are interlinked with the general theme being housing. Mr. Daly advised the elected members that he has started conversations with Management Team about how the local authority can restructure to deal with the issue of housing. Mr. Daly advised that he is considering all possibilities with regards to building sustainable communities and housing and factoring in all issues and barriers but noted he needed to take time to ensure the right strategy is put in place.
Item 23: Occupied Territories Bill
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. C. Colleran Molloy, D. Griffin, A. Baker Bashua, R. Hartigan, R. McInerney, P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the elected members of Clare County Council call on the Ministers for Finance and Foreign Affairs to investigate and instigate appropriate actions that can be taken at National and European level to prevent the funding of Israeli war bonds, and that the Government fast track the Occupied Territories Bill into law.”
(M)
The elected members expressed deep regret at the scale of the atrocities that are taking place in Gaza currently. The members stated that the Irish Government should have nothing to do with Israeli bonds which fund their war. The members acknowledged that America’s support of Isreal has allowed these attacks to continue. The members agreed that it is not acceptable for Irish or European financial institutions to be in any way complicit in the funding of military action which has led to the killing of innocent civilians. The elected members held a minute’s silence in solidarity with the people of Palestine.
As the time had reached 6.30 p.m. it was agreed that the remaining item would be
deferred to the July Council meeting.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. A. O’Callaghan informed the members that this was his final meeting as Cathaoirleach of Clare County Council and extended thanks to all present for the courtesy shown to him during his term as Cathaoirleach.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
AILG Annual Training Conference held in the Limerick Strand Hotel on the 2
nd
to 3
rd
of April 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €205.06 including conference fee of €175.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs M. Begley, T. O’Brien and T. O’Callaghan attend this conference.
AILG May Training Module entitled “Emergency Response – Councils Supporting Communities in Weather Crisis”, held in the Radisson Blu Hotel, Sligo on the 22
nd
of May 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €420.34 including conference fee of €90.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs A. Baker Bashua, P. Murphy, G. Keating attend this conference.
AILG May Training Module entitled “Emergency Response – Councils Supporting Communities in Weather Crisis”, held in the Rose Hotel, Tralee on the 24
th
of May  2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €393.39 including conference fee of €90.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs M. Begley, P. Burke, J. Crowe, P. Daly, D. Gould, M. Howard, J. Killeen, T. O’Brien, T. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman, M. Shannon and    B. Slattery attend this conference.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:               _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback