Minutes of July 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of July 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 14th July 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Cllrs. P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Mr. Seán Lenihan, Senior Engineer, Ennis MD.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, A/Director of Rural Development.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Mr. Pádraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy, I. Lynch
Absent
Cllr. J. Crowe
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Aherne Family, on the death of Paddy Aherne, RIP.
The Fahy Family, on the death of Philip Fahy, RIP.
The Wilson Family, on the death of Frances Wilson, RIP.
The Quinn Family, on the death of Evelyn Quinn, RIP.
The Madden Family, on the death of Ann Madden, RIP.
The McMahon Family, on the death of Mary McMahon, RIP.
The McCormack Family on the death of Kevin McCormack, RIP.
The Lane Family, on the death of Noel Lane, RIP.
The Houlihan Family, on the death of Pat Houlihan, RIP.
The McInerney Family, on the death of Murt McInerney, RIP.
Cllr. P. Hayes extended a vote of sympathy to the McInerney Family on the passing of Murt McInerney, RIP, father of Cllr. Rita McInerney, and he proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect. This was seconded by Cllr. G. Keating and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. R. McInerney thanked all the members for their condolences and support over the last week. Cllr. McInerney noted that her father cherished family and his local community and was passionate about politics and his faith. She noted the importance of people within communities and the roles they play.
The meeting resumed at 3.25p.m.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a.      Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the June Meeting of Clare County Council held on 9
th
June 2025 be adopted and signed.”
b.      Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the AGM of Clare County Council held on 27
th
June 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 3rd July 2025 from the Office of the Minister of State John Cummins in relation to local authority funding.
Correspondence dated 12th June 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Agriculture in relation to funding for a Deer Management Programme.
Correspondence dated 17th June 2025 from the CEO of Eirgrid in relation to a motion requesting a presentation from Eirgrid.
Acknowledgement dated 12th June 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to a dedicated cancer patient advocate.
Acknowledgement dated 17th June 2025 from the Office of Minister James Lawless T.D., in relation to contracts with TUI.
Acknowledgement dated 17th June 2025 from the Office of Minister James Browne T.D., in relation to national wind energy guidelines.
Acknowledgement dated 13th June 2025 from the Office of Minister Darragh O'Brien T.D., in relation to a national technology testing hub at Shannon Airport.
Acknowledgement dated 19th June 2025 from the Office of the Tánaiste in relation to a requirement for another A&E hospital in the Mid-West.
Correspondence dated 12th June 2025 from HIQA in relation to a requirement for another A&E hospital in the Mid-West.
Acknowledgement dated 11th June 2025 from Minister Timmy Dooley T.D., and Minister Jennifer Carroll MacNeill T.D., in relation to a requirement for another A&E hospital in the Mid-West.
Correspondence dated 12th June 2025 from Cathal Crowe T.D., in relation to a requirement for another A&E hospital in the mid-West.
Acknowledgement dated 16th June 2025 from the HSE in relation to a requirement for another A&E hospital in the Mid-West.
Acknowledgement dated 12th June 2025 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to a requirement for another A&E hospital in the Mid-West.
Acknowledgement dated 12th June 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to a requirement for another A&E hospital in the Mid-West.
Acknowledgement dated 12th June 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade in relation to the funding of Israeli war bonds.
Acknowledgement dated 13th June 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Finance in relation to the funding of Israeli war bonds.
Acknowledgement dated 8th July 2025 from the Office of Minister James Browne in relation to developer led modular wastewater plants.
Resolution from Carlow County Council in relation to the Occupied Territories Bill.
Resolution from Carlow County Council in relation to the Tenant-in-situ Scheme.
Resolution from Carlow County Council in relation to paediatric coeliac disease screening.
Resolution dated 13th June 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to dismantling of the triple lock.
Resolution dated 12th June 2025 from Galway County Council in relation to a review of affordable housing policy
Resolution dated 6th June 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to use of smartphones.
Resolution dated 6th June 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to the tenant incremental purchase scheme.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the correspondence from Donegal County Council in relation to dismantling the triple lock and noted the importance of this.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.         Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 13 May, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a)   Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. Hartigan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 25 March, 2025 be noted.”
(b)   Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 5 March, 2025 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 3
rd
June, 2025 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management Report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the deputation held with TII in May and queried if TII had given an update in relation to the N85 Clareabbey Roundabout.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development noted that the proposal is still with TII, and the local authority is waiting on the response from them.
Cllr. J. Garrihy expressed disappointment that sections 3 and 4 of the West Clare Greenway did not receive a funding allocation under Transport Infrastructure Ireland’s 2025 budget. Cllr. Garrihy noted that this needs to proceed quickly and sought an update on what plans are in place to progress this.
Cllr. Garrihy referred to the Community Climate Action Programme and noted the great work being done. He queried when the next round of Climate Action funding is planned.
Cllr. A. O’Callaghan referred to the briefing from National Broadband Ireland (NBI) that was held in June and noted that NBI also held their board meeting in the Áras that day and had sent word of thanks to the Management of Clare County Council for hosting them and stated that they were very impressed with the set up and support received.
Cllr. P. Hayes referred to the Active Travel update noting that a lot of funding has been awarded for active travel but in Clare it is only being progressed in Ennis while other towns within the county would like to avail of this funding.
Cllr. P. Burke referred to the opening of the Inis Cealtra Visitor Experience and noted that the feedback has been very positive. Cllr. Burke thanked the Director S. McNulty and her team for all their work and noted that Mountshannon has been a hive of activity since its opening.
Cllr. Burke referred to the Mountshannon mobility plan and stated that the works have been completed, and the town is looking very well.
Cllr. M. Begley supported Cllr. Hayes comments in relation to the active travel funding.
Cllr. Begley noted a typo on page 69 of the management report where resurfacing works occurred at Athlunkard in Westbury not Meelick as the report states.
Cllr. P. O’Gorman referred to the mattress amnesty day that was held in Shannon and noted what a great success it was, and he complimented staff involved on the day.
Cllr. T. O’Brien referred to the Shannon Bridge Crossing and noted what a great asset it is for East Clare and the county. Cllr. O’Brien thanked all the staff and noted that a review would need to happen to assess what the outcome is for the town mobility plan.
Cllr. J. Killeen referred to the derelict sites update and noted the great work happening in this area with a total of 35 files opened in total in 2024. Cllr. Killeen welcomed the volume of applications approved through the vacant property refurbishment grant.
Cllr. Killeen complimented staff on the recent Men’s Health event in Drumbiggle.
Item 8: Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2025 - 2029 and associated Chief Executive’s Report on submissions received.
Report dated 4
th
July, 2025 from Gordon Daly, Chief Executive was circulated with the agenda together with the Chief Executive’s Report on the submission received on the Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2025-2029 and the Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2025 – 2029.
The report states that following on from the preparation of a Draft Development Contribution Scheme, the Draft Scheme was subsequently advertised and placed on public display from Friday 25th April 2025 to Monday 9th June 2025, in accordance with Section 48(4) of the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended). A copy of the Draft Scheme was also sent to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in accordance with Section 48(5) (a) of the Act. The report notes that Mr. Daly has considered the submission received and prepared a response under Section 48(6) of the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended), taking account of the proper planning and sustainable development of the area.
The report was noted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. P. Burke and seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon.
Item 9: Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements for Glór Music DAC for financial year ended 31
st
December 2024.
Report dated 4
th
July, 2025 from Ann Reynolds, Director of Rural Development was circulated with the agenda together with the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements for Glór Music DAC for the year ended 31
st
December, 2024, as approved by the Board of Directors at its AGM on 26
th
June, 2025.
The report states that as Clare County Council has 100% shareholding in the company, the attached report is presented to the elected members in accordance with Section 391 of the Companies Act, 2014.   The report continued that Clare County Council is represented on the Board of Glór by Cllr. M. Shannon and Cllr. Paul Murphy and two members of the Executive, currently Ann Reynolds, Director of Service and Helen Walsh, County Librarian.
The report was noted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. M. Shannon and seconded by Cllr. A. Baker Bashua.
Item 10: League of Ireland Soccer Team
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“The appropriate personnel in the Clare County Council will come together and set up a discussion to explore the possible setup of a League of Ireland soccer team in the Banner County with all the relevant stakeholders. The findings of this think tank will be brought back to this chamber for further debate.”
(M)
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Social Development, Clare County Council replied as follows:
“A strategic priority during 2025 is the delivery of the County Sports Plan which is to be presented to the Social Directorate SPC later this year. Funded as a pilot project by Sport Ireland, this plan is being developed in collaboration with Clare Sports Partnership.
Clare County Council is also committed to the development of sport and sporting facilities across the county with several infrastructure upgrades planned over the coming 18 months.
The creation of a League of Ireland soccer team in county Clare should be considered through the local and national governing structures such as he FAI and Clare County Council would be willing to participate as a stakeholder in a working group.”
The elected members noted that there is sufficient demand for a League of Ireland team in the county. It was noted that young and promising players who want to progress must go outside the county to Limerick or Galway to be able to play at that level. It was also stated that avid soccer supporters have no team to support in the county and have to travel to Sligo, Limerick and Galway to watch games. The members noted that it was an aspirational motion, and funding would be an issue, but they felt that it warranted consideration given the economic and tourism benefits that could follow.
It was agreed to take motions 11, 12 and 13 together.
Item 11: Road Network Maintenance
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“After Storm Eowyn and growth levels high for the last number of months there is an urgency for maintenance on our road network around the county to get it back to a standard to make it safe for all roads users. I am asking that we write to the Minister requesting that firstly all roadside hedges would be exempt from the Wildlife Act and more funding allocated to sort out our roads once and for all.”
(M)
Item 12: Maintenance of vegetation
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“We call on Clare County Council to explain/establish on whom the responsibility rests for the cutting back of vegetation on our roadsides which is undertaken in the interest of health and safety.
We ask that a campaign be launched in advance of the new cutting season to ensure that those who are required to complete this work understand their role and responsibility.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Under Section 70 of the Roads Act 1993, landowners are responsible for trees and hedgerows on or inside their boundaries adjacent to public roads. The Act obliges landowners and occupiers to take all reasonable care to ensure that such trees, hedges and other vegetation are not or could not become a danger to people using or working on a public road. Where landowners are not in compliance with the provisions of Section 70 of the above act, hedge cutting notices are served by the relevant Municipal District office.
It should be noted that all hedge cutting must be carried out between September 1
st
and the last day of February. Under Section 40 of the Wildlife Act (as amended) (incorporating Section 46 of the Wildlife (Amendment) Act 2000) hedges must be cut while they are dormant to avoid disturbance to nesting birds.
A Community Hedge cutting Scheme is also operated by the Council which enables landowners and community groups to access funding to assist with the cutting of hedgerows to meet their responsibilities under the Roads Act. A total of 42 grant applications were approved in 2024 under the scheme. The Community Hedge cutting Scheme for 2025, with an allocation of funding of €25,000, will be advertised in August and as part of the media campaign for the scheme, landowner’s obligations is respect of hedgerow management will be highlighted.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it should be noted that the Council does provide a budget in the schedule of municipal district works on an annual basis (€225,000 in 2025) to facilitate hedge cutting along the most strategically important routes across the county and to carry out hedge cutting where there is a significant road safety issue such as at junctions to provide clearance of sightlines . A verge cutting contract is also carried out each year on the national secondary road network (N19/N85/N67/N68) which is funded by Transport Infrastructure Ireland.”
Item 13: Hedge Cutting Season
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“I am calling on Minister Darragh O’Brien and the Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment as well as the Department of Transport to bring forward by one month from September 1st to August 1st, the period allowed for cutting roadside hedges in the interest of road safety.”
(M)
The elected members noted that there has been a lot of heavy growth over the last few months, and it has become very dangerous on smaller roads. The members acknowledged that more funding is required but also debated the need to either remove roadside hedges from the Wildlife Act or allow cutting season to begin a month earlier on the 1
st
August. The members noted that farmers and landowners are fearful to maintain their hedges during summer months due to the Wildlife Act. The members acknowledged that hauliers are having to replace wing mirrors on trucks and lorries a couple of times a year as a result of overgrown hedgerow. The elected members also discussed options to increase awareness around responsibilities such as an educational programme, community trimming days and a community recognition programme.
Cllr. J. Killeen queried whose responsibility it was to look after vegetation between the road verge and wall.
A. Farrell, Director of Service, Physical Development Directorate noted that there is 4,450 kilometres of road within the county and the local authority carries out maintenance works on approximately 250 kilometres of regional and local roads and 190 kilometres of national secondary roads. Mr. Farrell advised that it is the responsibility of the landowner to maintain vegetation of their land and that the local authority can cut hedgerow if deemed a road safety issue. Mr. Farrell noted that if landowners have concerns, they can contact their local Municipal District for advice.
Cllr. J. Killeen requested that a legal opinion is sought for the next Council meeting.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy agreed that a legal opinion would be sought.
Item 14: Experience Clare Initiative
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“As a key component of generating increased bed-nights within the county to ask Clare Tourism to develop a specific “Experience Clare” initiative; working with high quality activity providers to create an activity passport, similar to the Wild Atlantic Way passport, but based on booking and completing a series of representative activities from a menu of high-quality providers around the county.”
(M)
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Thank you for your considered and timely notice of motion. Over the past six months, the tourism department has been working with the tourism industry in Clare to capture all attractions and activities in one brochure. The brochure as compiled features 99 Attractions and Activities across the County is now ready for print distribution and is available online as a flipbook -
Visit Clare Visitor Attractions and Activities
.
The brochure is a quick reference guide for locals and visitors to discover Clare’s attractions, activities and natural wonders. It will guide and encourage one to truly experience all that Clare has to offer as a County with extraordinary seascapes, lakescapes and landscapes.
In promotion of this brochure and with this notice of motion in mind, the Tourism department will develop an interactive competition whereby overnight visitors to the County who experience the attractions and activities as listed on the brochure within a set period of time can enter a competition for a prize.
We continue to work with the SPC, Tourism Forum and tourism industry to further develop initiatives around increasing bed nights in the County and we will harness this exercise to gain feedback from visitors on their holiday experience in Clare.”
The elected members welcomed the reply from the Director and noted that County Clare has a lot to offer, and it is imperative that the county has a standout experience that is attractive and viable but also adaptable. The members stated that it is critical to work towards increasing footfall and this will benefit local businesses greatly. The members acknowledged that the lack of accommodation is a major issue that needs to be addressed so as to retain tourists for more bed nights.
Item 15: Review of Defective Concrete Block Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Housing Local Government and Heritage, James Browne T.D, to review and amend the terms of the Defective Concrete Block Scheme to allow for applications, where individuals are living long term in supported housing provided by charitable bodies. These are the homes of these individuals & deserve equality of treatment with all other homeowners. If passed, that the motion be circulated to all LA’s.”
(M)
The elected members noted that charities providing housing are excluded from this scheme. The members stated how unfair this was given that the people in these homes are some of the most vulnerable of society. The members noted that it is a good scheme but that it needs to be expanded.
Item 16: Presentation on Modular Certified Wastewater Systems
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Murphy agus glacadh leis
“As an opportunity to open up zoned lands, currently locked out of development due to the lack of waste water, I ask that Clare County Council would seek a presentation by the manufacturer/provider of modular certified waste water systems to the Economic Development SPC and relevant council staff, including, but not limited to, the Planning and Environment section to provide clarity on installation best practice, usage and requirements”
(M)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Planning and Economic Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Under Objective CDP 11.32 of the Development Plan, there is provision whereby the Planning Authority will consider alternative developer led/provided wastewater treatment infrastructure, to serve developments where it can be demonstrated that the system is in compliance with the relevant EPA Guidelines and which will allow for a connection to the public system when it is provided. This policy is subject to a number of criteria including for the management and maintenance of the system.
In 1999 the Environmental Protection Agency published their guidance manual entitled “
Treatment Systems for small Communities, Business, Leisure Centres and Hotels (P.E 10-500
).” The purpose of this manual is to provide the relevant guidance in the selection, operation and maintenance of small wastewater treatment systems (i.e. for population equivalents between 10 - 500). The manual provides practical guidance to those involved in plant selection, operation, use, management, maintenance and supervision. The Physical Development Directorate (Environment and Water Services) are familiar with this guidance manual with over 20 years’ experience in its implementation.
However, it is considered that it would not be appropriate to invite a particular supplier of such systems to present to the Economic Development SPC in case it could be interpreted as endorsing or indeed excluding any manufacturer or system.
To date, such a system has not come forward for assessment under the current Development Plan. Nevertheless, the Planning Authority and the Physical Development Directorate would be willing to engage with the providers of such systems in any future planning application.
It should also be noted that the Council is no longer a Water Services authority and so does not have any role in the future maintenance and taking in charge of such systems.
Overall, it is considered that there is merit in the proposal as set out in this Notice of Motion and the request shall be referred to the Economic SPC for its progression.”
Item 17: Domestic Violence Register
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“In recognition of the ongoing epidemic of domestic and gender-based violence in this country, that we call on Government to progress Jennie’s Law and to implement a Domestic Violence Register similar to that in the UK.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that violence against women is an epidemic, and preventative measures need to be put in place. The members acknowledged that the domestic abuse figures have increased since COVID and there is a duty of care to protect these women and raise awareness and support for those affected. The elected members referred to the UK register and how effective that has been and noted that it needs to be implemented here as soon as possible. The members noted that abusers follow patterns, and it is important to be able to recognise early warning signs. The members warned of the impact of social media on young people and the influence it can have.
Item 18: Grass Cutting Disposal Service
This item was deferred to the September Council meeting.
Item 19: Student Fee Increase
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon Cuidithe ag Cllrs. J. Killeen, A. O’Callaghan agus P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“I call on Clare County Council to engage with the Department of Higher Education and Department of Public Expenditure (Minsters James Lawless and Jack Chambers) to reverse the proposed increase of €1,000 in student fees for September, the fees should be retained at current rates and should not be linked to cost of living measures. Parents and students are deeply challenged by accommodation costs and availability.”
(M)
The elected members advised that a high percentage of students will be going onto third level education in six weeks’ time with no clarity on what will be charged. The members noted the huge cost to parents in sending their children to college and agreed that it was unfair to burden them with this further increase. The members acknowledged the quality of education in this country and the economic benefits that come from educating students to this high standard but agreed that increasing third level fees could be a deterrent for many wanting to continue their education. The members called for clarity and better communication from Government officials.
Item 20: Funding for Grants
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“To ask the Director to update this Council on the Disability/ Mobility/ Elderly Grant budgets for both private and County Council houses and to ensure we have enough funds in place to meet the needs of our ageing and disabled community.”
(M)
P. MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The Council received our initial allocation for the Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and Disabled People scheme, for private homes, on 12th May last. The funds available to be claimed from the Department of Housing amount to €2,699,530. As you will be aware the match funding requirement from the Council’s own resources was reduced on all applications received after 1st December last. Under the old Scheme the input from the Councils own resources was 20%, and this has now been reduced to 15% under the revised Scheme. The estimated combined capital allocation is €3,175,918, and the final figure claimed will depend on the number of grants paid and claimed under each of the Schemes. This compares favourably to the 2024 overall allocation. The matter will be examined further in the Autumn and a submission can be made to the Department if further funding is required.
In relation to the adaptation works to Council-owned properties, we sought an initial allocation of €552,526, which includes 10% input from our own resources. To date an allocation of €427,053 has been received. This is used for disability related works such as ramps, bathrooms modifications and level access adaptations. In previous years an extra allocation has been made available to Councils towards the latter end of the year and the Council will be seeking such additional funding again in 2025.”
The elected members noted that Clare has an ageing population and that there has been an increase in the volume of calls being made to elected members regarding housing grants. The members stated the importance of keeping people in their own homes and adapting the homes instead of having to move to nursing home facilities. The members noted that these grants help people prepare for the future and allows them to keep their independence.
Item 21: Nursing Home Sector
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. R. Hartigan, T. O’Callaghan, A. Baker Bashua, R. McInerney, P. O’Gorman, P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“In light of the recent failings in nursing home care identified by Prime Time, Clare County Council calls on the Minister of State for Older People, Kieran O'Donnell TD, the Minister for Health, Jennifer Carroll MacNeill TD and the wider Government to:
Deliver a commissioner for older people to work across Government to protect and promote policies for an ageing population.
Deliver a statutory Home Care scheme.
Urgently progress safeguarding regulations.
Comprehensively review current regulatory frameworks for nursing homes and ensure HIQA provides adequate oversight of care in our nursing home sector.”
(M)
The elected members expressed their shock and disappointment at the lack of basic humanity that was displayed on the Prime Time Investigates show. The members noted that making the decision to put a loved one in care is one of the most difficult decisions one will ever make and to see how they were treated was disturbing. The members called for urgent reform and accountability and questioned the role of HIQA. The elected members stated that protecting the dignity of older people in care must be the main priority and that society needs to advocate for the young and elderly when they can’t speak for themselves.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. Mulcahy, seconded by Cllr. J. Garrihy and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 22: N68 Ennis to Kilrush Road
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council formally recognises the strategic importance of the N68 Ennis to Kilrush road and agrees that, given its critical role in regional connectivity, economic development, and in particular the future transformation of the Moneypoint site, the N68 should be designated a strategic route by this local authority.
Furthermore, that the Council commits to prioritising the N68 in all relevant infrastructure planning, funding applications and strategic transport assessments, ensuring that future upgrades and investment are pursued with urgency and ambition to meet the needs of West Clare and the wider county.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The County Development Plan 2023-2029 under
Section 11.2.9.1
- Development Plan Objective: Motorways, National Roads and Strategic Inter-Urban Roads
makes specific reference to the N68 National Secondary route.
Under the County Development Plan Objective 11.11 it is an objective of Clare County Council to a) safeguard the motorway, national roads and strategic regional inter-urban road connections between cities, settlements, ports and airports, and their associated road junctions, in line with national policy and under Section d) To advocate for and support improved road connectivity and, in particular, to advocate for an upgrade of the Ennis to Kilrush N68 National Secondary Route.
The N68 is therefore clearly designated as a strategic route in conjunction with the other national routes and regional roads.
Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) are the road and funding authority for the national route network including the N68 Ennis to Kilrush road. At a recent meeting with TII, attended by both Members and Council officials, TII outlined their commitment to increasing funding for the national secondary road network in county Clare. TII also allocated €250,000 of funding to address works at Tullagower on the N68.
We will continue to advocate for additional funding to safeguard and build upon this strategic route.”
The elected members noted that the N68 upgrade must be treated as a top infrastructure project. The members stated that it is the keystone to future jobs and development of West Clare. It was also noted that accessibility is a key factor to any industry set up. The members advised that the road is not fit for purpose and wasn’t designed to carry the levels of tourist traffic and heavy trucks that are travelling it currently. The members stated that upgrading the route would alleviate pressure on other routes such as the N67 and N85 and would bring West Clare closer to reaching the “Golden Hour” in emergency situations. The members noted as there is no rail network back to West Clare, they are dependent on road network, and it needs to be made a strategic project.
Item 23: Public Orthodontic Care for Children
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council asks the Minister for Health to review public orthodontic care in the Mid-West as the current waiting list for children to receive public orthodontic care is 2 – 4 years.”
(M)
The elected members noted that there is no public orthodontist in Clare and families have to travel to Limerick to be seen. The members stated that middle income families are under pressure financially and cannot afford to go privately but have no choice due to either being on a long waiting list or deemed not severe enough to qualify for the public system.
Item 24: Regulations in Beef Processing Factories
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Martin Heydon, to introduce regulations requiring the live weighing of cattle and installation of live-streaming cameras in beef processing factories, allowing farmers to observe the slaughter of their cattle in real time. This will ensure transparency, uphold animal welfare standards and strengthen trust within the agricultural supply chain.”
(M)
The elected members noted that farmers were previously allowed to view live weighing of cattle but due to health and safety concerns this has now been curtailed. The members stated that they are hoping that the motion will build trust again with the meat industry and farmers are entitled to grading and weighing information. The members acknowledged that the technology is there and needs to be used for full transparency.
Item 25: Extension of Vacant Home Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan Cuidithe ag Cllrs. J. Garrihy, M. Howard, P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, James Browne, to extend the current Vacant Homes Scheme by relaxing the eligibility criteria to include prospective purchasers who are required to reside in the property once acquired.”
(M)
The elected members noted that people who buy vacant properties but move into them immediately are exempt from the vacant home scheme. The members stated how unfair this was as not everyone can afford to rent while renovating their homes especially now with inflation driving up the price of materials and labour. The members acknowledged what a huge success the scheme has been but noted that the scheme is under review and that this should be the next enhancement to it.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
Celtic Conference entitled “Health Entitlements” held in the Four Seasons Hotel, County Louth on the 7
th
to 9
th
March 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €700.00 including conference fee of €130.00.
It was agreed that Cllr P. Burke attend this conference.
International Social Housing Festival Conference, held in the Convention Centre Dublin on the 4
th
to 6
th
June 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €699.76 including conference fee of €40.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs M. Begley, D. Gould, T. O’Callaghan, T. O’Brien and           B. Slattery attend this conference.
AILG Training Programme Module 4 entitled “Planning 2025 -The Councillor and the New Context for Development Plans”, held in the Radisson Blu Hotel, Cork on the 19
th
June 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €481.59 including conference fee of €90.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs P. Burke, D. Gould, D. Griffin, G. Keating, P. Murphy,     B. Slattery and T. O’Callaghan attend this conference.
AILG Training Programme Module 4 entitled “Planning 2025 -The Councillor and the New Context for Development Plans”, held in the Hillgrove Hotel, Monaghan on the 21
st
June 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €629.50 including conference fee of €90.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs J. Crowe, T. O’Brien, M. Shannon, J. Killeen, M. Begley, M. Howard, A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman and P. Daly attend this conference
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________ Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________ Cathaoirleach
Date:               _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback