Minutes of October 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of October 2025 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 13th October 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, I. Lynch, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Mr. Cyril Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility, Health & Safety.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. C. Colleran Molloy, J. Garrihy, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Carrig Family, on the death of James Carrig, RIP.
The O’Dea Family, on the death of John O’Dea, RIP.
The Browne Family, on the death of Mike Browne, RIP.
The McCarthy Family, on the death of Pat McCarthy, RIP.
The Leyden Family, on the death of Anne Leyden, RIP.
The Taylor Family, on the death of Joe Taylor, RIP.
The Keating Family, on the death of Maura Keating, RIP.
The Hanrahan Family, on the death of Jack Hanrahan, RIP.
The Vaughan Family, on the death of John Vaughan, RIP.
The Mullane Family, on the death of Caroline Mullane, RIP.
The Conroy and Fitzgerald Families, on the death of William Conroy, RIP.
Approval for Travel
It was proposed by Cllr. A. O’Callaghan, seconded by Cllr. P. O’Gorman and agreed by the members that the Cathaoirleach accept the invitation to attend the Clare Association Dinner in New York from the 6
th
to 10
th
November.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a.                  Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the September Meeting of Clare County Council held on 8
th
September 2025 be adopted and signed.”
b.                  Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Adjourned September Meeting of Clare County Council held on 15
th
September 2025 be adopted and signed.”
c.                  Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Clare County Council held on 22
nd
September 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 12 September 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to road funding and roadside hedges.
Correspondence dated 4 September 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration in relation to a Domestic Violence Register.
Correspondence dated 12 September 2025 from the Office of the Minister Transport in relation to funding for roads and footpaths.
Correspondence dated 4 September 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Wastewater infrastructure.
Correspondence dated 30 September 2025 from the Commission for Communications Regulation in relation to request to conduct a survey of mobile coverage.
Correspondence dated 3 October 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration in relation to Garda Vetting.
Correspondence dated 23 September 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Education and Youth in relation to return to school following summer holidays.
Acknowledgement dated 18 September 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine in relation to the On Farm Market Valuation.
Resolution dated 18 September 2025 from Kerry County Council in relation to ban on vaping in all workplaces.
Resolution dated 30 September 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to ash dieback disease.
Resolution dated 26 September 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to increased investment in counselling and psychotherapy.
Resolution dated 25 September 2025 from Roscommon County Council in relation to development fee waiver.
Resolution dated 18 September 2025 from Sligo County Council in relation to a Town and City Gift Card.
Resolution dated 3 October 2025 from Wexford County Council in relation to ash die back disease.
Maintaining Momentum, Delivering Homes for All, ICSH Biennia National Social Housing Conference, 15-16 October 2025, The Slieve Russell Hotel, Cavan.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the correspondence from ComReg in relation to mobile coverage and noted that it is evident from the reply that the privatisation of public services is not working.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the correspondence from the Department of Transport in relation to funding for roads and footpaths. Cllr. McInerney noted the importance to keep highlighting the need for funding for roads and footpaths and noted that funding for big projects is not being received.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.         Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 8 July, 2025 be noted.”
b.         Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 16 July, 2025 be noted.”
c.         Ar moladh Cllr. P. O’Gorman
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 15 July, 2025 be noted.”
d.         Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 15 July, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a)   Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 25 April, 2025 be noted.”
(b)   Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Special Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 24 June, 2025 be noted.”
(c)   Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Brien agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 4 June, 2025 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 1
st
September, 2025 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management Report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. P. Hayes sought an update on the review of the County Development Plan and noted it was timely given key strategic issues arising around the future development within the county.
Cllr. S. Talty welcomed the TII Safety Improvements progress update and noted it was great to see progress with these projects.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle commended the Executive on the Management report and queried if it is available to the public.
Cllr. Guilfoyle welcomed the Tourism newsletter and the importance of the Tourism offering in Clare and sought an update on the industrial relations issues ongoing with outdoor staff and with staff at Bunratty Castle.
Cllr. Guilfoyle referred to the low-cost safety scheme in Clarecastle and noted that the Lissane Junction is too narrow.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the West Clare MD update and welcomed the repair of defect on the N68 at Tullagower but noted more work is needed.
Cllr. McInerney commended the Derelict Sites team on their work and referred to the before and after pictures of properties that have been refurbished. Cllr. McInerney noted there needs to be a balance within towns of commercial properties and residential and reiterated the need to maintain the fabric of the town centre.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy noted in relation to the Lissane Junction that he has been speaking with the Engineer in charge, and it is still under construction and will be fit for purpose when completed.
G. Daly, Chief Executive noted that as mentioned previously it is his intention to commence the process of varying the County Development Plan due to new Ministerial guidelines on housing requirements. He added that as part of this process a review of the Ennis 2040 Plan could take place, incorporating the Local Transport Plan. Mr. Daly advised the elected members that he has met with Jason Murphy, Director of Service, Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development and Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Placemaking and Economic Development and will be including an item on the agenda for the November meeting which will set out how the Council intends to give effect to the Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines including setting out his intention to commence a variation process. Mr. Daly noted that the decision to commence the variation process is an Executive function, but the making of the variation is a Reserved function and advised that workshops with the members will be arranged prior to any formal variation being put on public display.
Cllr. P. Hayes queried what was being brought before the Council at the November meeting and as public representatives how they feed into this process.
G. Daly, Chief Executive advised that workshops with the elected members will commence in the coming weeks ahead of any draft variation going on public display.
A. Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services referred to the industrial relations matter raised by Cllr. Guilfoyle and noted that the local authority is due to participate in a Workplace Relations Commission conciliation process on Tuesday 14
th
October and is hopeful that this process will assist in resolving the matter.
S. McNulty, Director of Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services assured the members that Management continue to engage with SIPTU on matters raised with ongoing negotiations through established channels and continue to work together in the spirit of collaboration to support employees in securing sustainable solutions for the long-term success of tourism assets.
Item 8: Disposal of land at No. 1 The Crescent, Miltown Malbay, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 0.01865 hectares at No. 1 The Crescent, Miltown Malbay, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 19
th
September 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at No. 1 The Crescent, Miltown Malbay, Co. Clare to subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 19
th
September 2025.
Item 9: Disposal of land (by Deed of Exchange) at Tullyvarraga, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map.
The report states that it was determined that an area of ground within the Shannon Town Park is in a Folio acquired by Clarecare CLG for the development of their new Community Care Centre. In order to rectify this, it is proposed to enter into a Deed of Exchange whereby Clare County Council will transfer a portion of land to Clarecare CLG in exchange for the area occupied by the Town Park.
It is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 0.09 hectares at Tullyvarraga, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 19
th
September 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Tullyvarraga, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 19
th
September 2025.
Item 10: Disposal of land at Drumbiggle Road, Ennis, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land at Drumbiggle Road, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 12
th
September 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr.  P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Drumbiggle Road, Ennis, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 12
th
September 2025.
Item 11: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at N85/Shanaway Road Junction, Claureen, Ennis, Co. Clare.
Report from Seán Lenihan, Senior Engineer, Ennis Municipal District and Chief Executive Report dated 2
nd
October, 2025 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Economic, Rural and Community Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The proposed development consists of:
Construction of Mini Roundabout at the junction of the NBS and the L4601 Shanaway Road.
2 No. raised controlled pedestrian crossings on the NBS with central Islands.
1 No. uncontrolled pedestrian crossing on the L4601 Shanaway Road.
Installation of additional public lighting columns and associated ancillary works to tie into existing public lighting system.
Installation of new gullies, tapping into existing surface drainage system.
Provision of associated Signage and Road Markings.
All associated and ancillary site works.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
Item 12: Overdraft Approval 2026
Report dated 12
th
September, 2025 from Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment and Enterprise was circulated with the agenda.
The report states that an overdraft facility is required to be in place for the twelve-month period commencing January 2026 to December 2026 in line with Departmental guidelines.  The members approved an overdraft facility up to December 2025 at the October 2024 Council meeting up to a maximum of €20 million.  It is proposed to seek approval of the Minister to retain this facility of €20 million for the calendar year January 2026 until December 2026.
The report continues that the Council incurs a cost when the overdraft facility is utilised as no cost arises by having the facility in place and the availability of the overdraft facility is deemed necessary in the current climate with a revenue and capital programme in excess of €300m annually where expenditure is incurred in advance of the “expenditure claims process”.  This facility will manage cash flow by addressing issues such as seasonal fluctuations or grant claims timelines.
Cash flow continues to be reviewed on a daily basis and any overdraft facility will only be utilised to the extent that it is required.
The report noted that Circular Fin 03/2009 requires Local Authorities to maintain a neutral impact on the GGB - the net bank position at the end of 2025 on the council’s capital account should be similar to the net position at the end of 2026. This in effect means that this council cannot commit to incurring expenditure on projects where the funding has not been identified and secured.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That pursuant to the provisions of Section 106 of the Local Government Act, 2001 Clare County Council hereby approves of borrowing up to a maximum of €20 million by way of overdraft facility from the Council’s Treasurer for the year ending 31
st
December 2026.”
Item 13: Agree date for Budget meeting
It was agreed that the Budget meeting will take place on Wednesday, 26th
November, 2025 at 3.00 p.m. having been proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien, seconded
by Cllr. P. Burke and agreed by the members present.
Item 14: Milwaukee Review Report
Report from Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy and Siobhán McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services was circulated with the agenda. The report outlines the International Promotion of County Clare at Milwaukee Irish Fest in Wisconsin in August 2025.
The report gives a summary of the key highlights from the visit to the Milwaukee Irish Fest and the key learnings from the trip.
The elected members noted the report.
Item 15: Briefing from Eirgrid
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy welcomed Jason Kenna, Head of Network Projects Ireland and David Noronha, Head of Future Networks & Strategic Offshore planning to the Chamber.
Jason Kenna addressed the Council and thanked them for the opportunity to present on Eirgrid’s Grid Development.
Mr. Kenna introduced who Eirgrid are and what they do and noted that Eirgrid send power from where it is generated to where it is needed. Mr. Kenna stated that they operate the wholesale electricity market and the electricity interconnectors with neighbouring countries, but they do not generate electricity.
Mr. Kenna and Mr. Noronha discussed in further detail:
Ireland electricity grid
Eirgrid’s roadmap at a national level and strategic framework at regional and County level.
2030 Electricity Demand
Electricity Grid in Co. Clare
Current projects and Transmission projects in Co. Clare
Clare Wind Energy Strategy
Future Networks Longer Term Planning
Challenges being faced with demand and capacity.
Long term Network Planning
The elected members thanked Mr. Kenna and Mr. Noronha for their presentation and raised questions and noted the following points:
Ensuring Co. Clare has access to the grid to attract large industries.
Engagement with communities and the agricultural sector.
Storm Eowyn and damage to overhead wires and poles, whose responsibility is it to cut trees.
Resilience of networks and number of outages.
Ensuring balanced regional development, keeping demand in Mid-West.
Having one central port and not a number of separate lines to avoid disruption to communities.
Collaboration with wind energy providers.
Grant options for solar panels.
Mr. Kenna and Mr. Noronha answered all queries raised by the members.
Item 16: Inheritance laws
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. P. O’Gorman agus A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council request both Minister for Finance, Mr. Pascal Donohue and Minister for Equality Ms. Norma Foley address the current legal anomaly regarding inheritance laws for those without children. Over one million Irish citizens are childless, the current inheritance laws are inequitable and discriminatory and are skewed against childless people, with prohibitive tax obligations.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged the way families are formed has changed substantially and there needs to be an amendment to inheritance laws to reflect this change. The members noted the burden that is left on people when an asset is left to them from a childless aunt or uncle and has to be sold in order to pay the inheritance tax and they noted that this can be heartbreaking for the family if the asset has been in the family for a long time.
Item 17: Briefing from AirNav and Shannon Airport
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“That we would invite representatives from AirNav and Shannon Airport to brief the Council on the issues the industry is facing with regards to onshore windfarms planned in the county.”
(M)
J. Corry, A/Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services & Governance replied as follows:
“Should the members wish to facilitate this request for a presentation from AirNav and Shannon Airport it will be scheduled at the earliest opportunity.”
The elected members noted the importance of Shannon airport to Clare and the Mid-West and acknowledged the impact the wind farms are having on the aviation industry. The members stated that communities need to be protected and were supportive of inviting Shannon Airport and AirNav officials in to present their concerns to the members.
Item 18: Review of the Provision of Additional Needs Placements
Ar moladh Cllr. I. Lynch
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council requests that the Minister for Education initiate an immediate review of the provision of additional needs placements in primary and secondary schools. This review should ensure the availability of appropriate and sufficient spaces for all students with additional needs within County Clare. The scope of the review should encompass both current capacity and projected future requirements, particularly addressing the transition of students from primary to secondary education. Furthermore, the review should prioritize the provision of adequate facilities and staffing levels within the local area to minimize the burden of travel on families.”
(M)
The elected members noted the burden that is being felt by families of kids with special needs trying to get places in primary and secondary schools. The members noted that a whole of Government approach needs to be adopted to ensure that all needs are being met and guarantee the proper capacity is built over the next few years. The members noted that there isn’t a clear pathway post primary school and in some secondary schools there is no provision at all for children with special needs. The members further noted that children are having to travel too far each day to get to and from the schools they have been placed in and it isn’t fair on the child or the parents.
Item 19: NCSE SNA Review Guidelines
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Ryan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council requests that the Department of Education and the Minister for Education urgently intervene to resolve the issues arising from the NCSE’s SNA Review Guidelines and to protect the essential work of SNAs in our schools.
Clare County Council requests the Minister to call for:
The immediate redrafting of the NCSE’s SNA Review Guidelines,
An emergency meeting with the NCSE,
The removal of all non-essential paperwork requirements,
A pause on the review deadline pending consultation,
A review of Circular 30/2014, and
The publication of the revised Assault Leave Circular.
These measures are essential to ensure that Special Needs Assistants can continue their vital work in schools without unnecessary administrative burdens, safeguarding the education and wellbeing of students who rely on their support.”
(M)
The elected members noted that Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) are the backbone of schools, and their role is under threat as they are buried under a pile of paperwork. The members stated that SNAs are not administrators they are carers, they help children learn life skills. The members noted the growing concern around administration and red tape and stated that the protection of the child is the most important part of an SNAs role. The members noted that the Minister needs to intervene with regard to the NCSE’s SNA review guidelines and work with the goodwill of the Special Needs Assistant.
Item 20: Housing Solutions for Aging Population
This item was deferred to the November Council meeting.
“That this Council resolves to prioritise the development of housing solutions for the aging population in County Clare, with a specific focus on those living alone in isolated rural areas.
This Council notes that:
The most recent Census highlights a significant challenge in rural areas of Clare, particularly in the North and West, where high levels of isolated living among the aging population are evident. There is a pressing need for innovative housing solutions that cater to the unique needs of older people, enabling them to live independently and safely. This Council calls on the relevant departments and agencies to:
Develop models of independent living housing that incorporate support services, community engagement, and accessible design.
Incorporate mixed housing types in future developments, including age-friendly and accessible units.
Prioritise the needs of older people living alone in isolated areas, ensuring that housing solutions are tailored to their specific requirements.
That this Council further resolves to:
Work with relevant stakeholders, including community groups, healthcare providers, and approved housing bodies, to deliver innovative and responsive housing solutions.
Conduct a comprehensive review of existing housing stock and infrastructure to identify opportunities for adaptation and retrofitting.
Develop a Clare-specific strategy for aging-in-place, incorporating the needs and
preferences of older people.
By passing this motion, Clare County Council can demonstrate its commitment to
supporting the aging population and addressing the unique challenges faced by older people in rural areas.”
(M)
Item 21: N85 Realignment Project
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council requests that the TII ensure that the N85 realignment project (Ennis to Inagh) be recommenced, and project development funding be allocated in the 2026 roads budget. The motion be copied to Clare Oireachtas members.”
(M)
The elected members acknowledged what a critical piece of infrastructure the N85 is and noted that funding hasn’t been forthcoming over the last number of years. The members stated the dangers faced on the stretch of road and reiterated their calls for a strategic road plan for the county. The members noted the huge density of traffic including tourist buses that travel the road every day and in order to develop a tourist product the infrastructure needs to be robust.
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety addressed the meeting and noted that the Executive shares the desire and need to upgrade the N85. Mr. Feeney noted that a delegation met with TII earlier in the year and outlined their concerns and TII explained the complexities with funding but noted the investments that have been made in local transport. Mr. Feeney advised that with the realignment of the roads function there will be a strategic review of all roads and will be meeting with the Department in the coming weeks.
G. Daly, Chief Executive advised that a document will be prepared which will allow the Executive to make a case outlining the need for investment. Mr. Daly noted that he has written to the Department of Transport for short term investment for the international events being held in 2026.
Item 22: Rural Depopulation
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
“Recognising the impact of rural depopulation on small GAA clubs in Clare, and the need to focus on growing the rural population in the county, thus increasing the vibrancy of local communities. I wish to ask has Clare County Council engaged with Clare GAA on this matter as part of the new Chief Executive’s commitment to an increased focus on Housing Activation.”
(Q)
G. Daly, Chief Executive replied as follows:
“As increased housing delivery in towns, villages and rural parts of County Clare is a key enabler to address rural depopulation, all relevant stakeholders including Clare GAA will be engaged with by the Housing Activation Team being established in the Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision and Land Activation Directorate. I wish to confirm that some early discussions have taken place with Clare GAA and further engagement is planned in the near future.”
Cllr. G. Keating welcomed the reply from the Chief Executive and noted that rural depopulation is a major problem. Cllr. Keating stated that in towns and villages you may lose a pub or shop, but the GAA club will remain a constant.
Item 23: HIQA Review
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. J. Ryan, M. Begley, D. Gould, I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council warmly welcomes the publication of the HIQA Review into urgent and emergency care services in the HSE Mid-West. This comprehensive report highlights the significant inpatient bed capacity shortfall and the pressing patient safety risks facing the region, particularly at University Hospital Limerick (UHL). We recognize the extensive work of HIQA, the Economic and Social Research Institute, community campaigners, healthcare staff, and elected representatives who have tirelessly advocated for improvements in healthcare provision for the people of Clare and the wider Mid-West.
The Council acknowledges the three options outlined by HIQA to address this critical capacity challenge, including expanding UHL’s current site, developing a second campus nearby, and constructing a new Model 3 hospital. While short-term solutions are urgently needed to alleviate immediate pressures, Clare County Council affirms that only the establishment of a new Model 3 or 4 hospital in Ennis can sustainably meet the growing demand for urgent and emergency care in the coming decades. This is vital given the current inequity, with many Clare residents facing long travel times to emergency departments and the region having the lowest number of Model 3 hospital beds nationally.
Therefore, Clare County Council calls on the Government to commit without delay to the planning, funding, and construction of a new Model 3 or 4 hospital in Ennis. This investment is essential to secure equitable, safe, and timely healthcare access for the people of Clare and the wider Mid-West region. We further request that this motion be communicated to the Minister for Health, the HSE, and Oireachtas members representing the region to ensure coordinated progress on this urgent healthcare priority.”
(M)
The elected members expressed concern over the current healthcare facilities in the Mid-West and noted that Clare is repeatedly side-lined when it comes to healthcare. The members called for the addition of a Model 3 hospital to be built in Clare in a site suitable to be upgraded to a model 4 hospital in time. The members noted that University Hospital Limerick (UHL) is unsafe, and patients are made feel uncomfortable by being crowded along corridors on trollies.
The members noted that currently if someone from West Clare was to have a stroke, they wouldn’t make it to an emergency hospital on time.
Item 24: HIQA Review of Emergency Healthcare Services
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin, M. Shannon, R. McInerney, R. Hartigan, P. Daly, P. Hayes, J. Killeen, T. O' Callaghan, T. O'Brien, S. Talty, C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Health to ensure that the new hospital recommended in the HIQA review of emergency healthcare services in the Midwest is located in County Clare.
The recent HIQA report has confirmed that conditions at University Hospital Limerick (UHL) are unsafe, with persistent overcrowding and risks to patient safety.
A new hospital in Clare would directly address this crisis by providing safe, modern, and adequately resourced acute care for the Midwest region.
Clare is centrally located within the Midwest, ensuring equitable access for patients from Clare, Limerick, Tipperary, and surrounding counties.
The county offers excellent transport connectivity via the M18 motorway, Shannon Airport, and regional rail links, making it the most accessible site for a regional hospital.
Unlike the constrained UHL site, Clare has sufficient land available for a purpose-built, future-proofed facility with space for expansion to meet long-term demand.
Locating the hospital in Clare would also support balanced regional development in line with the National Planning Framework, preventing further overconcentration of critical infrastructure in one city.
While HIQA has recommended a Model 3 hospital for the Midwest, many of us on Clare County Council feel that this does not go far enough to address the scale of the crisis in emergency healthcare provision. The people of this region deserve nothing less than a fully resourced, future-proofed Model 4 hospital. We therefore call for that hospital to be located in County Clare, where the infrastructure, land availability, and central location make it the most suitable and sustainable option to deliver safe and effective healthcare for the entire Midwest.”
(M)
The elected members agreed that the conditions in UHL are unsafe, and staff are working in impossible conditions. The members noted that the people of Clare, Limerick and Tipperary are being left without suitable healthcare. The members noted that Clare offers the most suitable and sustainable solution given the land availability and would alleviate the pressure in both Limerick and Galway University Hospitals. The members acknowledged that all three option in the report are required in order to reform the Mid-West Healthcare system. The members stated that the Health Minister will be making a decision based off the report in the coming weeks and as public representatives they need to be seeking support from all Government officials and patient advocates to try get the right outcome.
Item 25: Provision of Support for Females in Sport and Recreation
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“We call on Clare County Council, State Agencies and our Oireachtas Members to further progress the provision of support for females in sport and recreation to bring about resultant improvements in health and wellbeing.”
(M)
E. Troy, Senior Executive Officer, West Clare MD North replied as follows:
“Clare County Council welcomes and fully supports the motion calling for enhanced provision of support for females in sport and recreation. We recognise the vital role that inclusive participation plays in improving health and wellbeing across our communities.
In alignment with national policy frameworks such as the Sport Ireland Strategy 2023–2027 and the Participation Plan, our forthcoming Clare Local Sport and Activity Plan 2025–2030 places a strong emphasis on removing barriers to participation and targeting priority groups, including women and girls, people with disabilities, and disadvantaged communities.
We are also working closely with Clare Local Sports Partnership, who are in the final stages of delivering the Clare Outdoor Recreation Plan 2025–2030. This plan will further strengthen our collective efforts to promote outdoor recreation as a key driver of participation, particularly for those who may not engage in traditional sports settings.
Together, these strategic documents will guide our investment and programming to:
Increase opportunities for women and girls to engage in sport and physical activity across all life stages.
Enhance infrastructure, including the planned upgrades to Tim Smythe Park and John O’Sullivan Park, Lees Road, which will improve accessibility, safety, and comfort for all users.
Promote outdoor recreation as a means of engaging more women and girls in physical activity in a flexible and inclusive way.
Clare County Council remains committed to working with our Oireachtas Members, State Agencies, and local partners to ensure Clare continues to lead in fostering a vibrant, inclusive, and active county for everyone.”
The elected members referred to the big drop off in girls participating in sport from primary school to secondary school and noted the importance that sport plays for a healthy lifestyle and stated that there needs to be a shift in both culture and opportunity. The elected members indicated that there was a need to create a space where women feel included and supported in sport. The members suggested that the Government look at incentives for women playing sport at a professional level, noting that if women could see that it could be a career like it is for men it might encourage them to remain in sport.
Item 26: BreastCheck
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council request that the HSE and NSAC (National Screening Advisory Committee) extend the BreastCheck service to women aged 40-74 as per the European Guidelines on Breast Cancer Screening.
Also, we request the HSE to roll out an educational programme advising women and men on effective self-check procedures.”
(M)
The elected members noted that one in seven women in Ireland are affected by breast cancer, but the wider family and community is also impacted by the diagnosis and that investing in a wider screening programme would be an investment in women’s health. The members noted that knowledge is power, and early intervention is key to a better outcome. The members welcomed the call for an educational programme and noted the importance for men to be aware that they too can be diagnosed with breast cancer.
Item 27: Utilising Deep-Sea Water Port
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Gould
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Is it possible for Clare County Council to explore an opportunity to boost tourism in West Clare and capitalise on Moneypoint port.  Could we utilise the deep-sea water port to attract cruise ships to dock and explore our Wild Atlantic Way in West Clare?
In the past I have seen big cruise ships dock in Foynes and are then bussed via Limerick to Bunratty and North Clare, is this something we can investigate with the use of Moneypoint now that we no longer have coal ships docking.”
(M)
D. O’Shea, Senior Executive Officer, Tourism, Festivals and Events replied as follows:
“A key strategic objective of the Clare Tourism Strategy 2030 is to explore the feasibility of attracting an appropriate segment of the cruise sector in a sustainable manner to County Clare and to this end it is intended to undertake a comprehensive evaluation of this measure.
Moneypoint site is in the ownership of ESB with whom we have a strong working relationship and indeed we have collaborated with them on a potential tourism promotional package specifically for West Clare.
We continue to work with Shannon Foynes Port Company to provide both full day and half day itineraries for Clare with a focus on West Clare to disperse tourists across the County.”
The elected members welcomed the response from D. O’Shea and noted that with the lack of overnight stay accommodation in the county this would be an ideal addition to the tourism product.  The members highlighted that there is c. 2000 people on the cruise ships that dock in Foynes, Co. Limerick and that volume of visitors would be very welcome to West Clare where they could disembark and visit attractions such as Vandeleur Gardens, Loop Head Lighthouse and the Cliffs of Moher.
It was proposed by Cllr. M. Shannon, seconded by Cllr. C. Ryan and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 28: Speed Limits
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to ensure all newly changed speed limits on Clare roads also correspond with Google Maps.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“The Road Management Office co-ordinate the local authority sector in the mapping of speed limits. Once the new speed limit data has been validated across the country it is intended that the information would be available under the Open Data Directive. The Open Data Directive mandates the release of public sector data in free and open formats. The Directive was transposed into Irish law by
SI 376/2021
on July 22nd 2021. The overall objective of the Directive is to continue the strengthening of the EU’s data economy by increasing the amount of public sector data available for re-use, ensuring fair competition and easy to access public sector information.
However, it is important to stress that the speed limits designated by the local authorities are the legal speed limits in the country. Google Maps and other navigation technology companies, although providing a service to the public, may not be always fully accurate and therefore it is important for motorists to abide by the actual posted speed limit signs. The onus is not on the local authority to ensure the accuracy or otherwise of Google maps.”
The elected members welcomed the reply and stated that they hope people take the signs seriously and don’t rely on phone maps. The members suggested that social media could be utilised to inform people that the signs are the legal speed limits and should be observed over phone maps.
It was agreed to take item 29 and 30 together.
Item 29: Emergency Response Plans
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“I call on Clare County Council to ensure that our county and communities are fully prepared and "Winter Ready" to deal with any extreme weather events similar to those experienced over the last number of years.
To achieve this, I request that Clare County Council:
Conduct a comprehensive review of emergency response plans to identify areas for improvement.
Develop and implement robust measures to mitigate the impact of extreme weather events on infrastructure, communities, and essential services.
Provide training and resources to council staff, emergency responders, and community volunteers to ensure effective response and recovery efforts.
Engage with local communities, agencies, and stakeholders to raise awareness about emergency preparedness and response plans.
Communication and Outreach
To ensure that our communities are informed and prepared, we request that Clare County Council:
Develop a clear communication plan to inform the public about emergency response procedures and protocols.
Establish a dedicated webpage or platform to provide updates on weather alerts, road conditions, and emergency response efforts.
Engage with community groups, schools, and local organizations to promote emergency preparedness and provide resources for vulnerable populations.
To ensure effective response and recovery efforts, we request that Clare County Council:
Develop and regularly update emergency response plans that account for various weather-related scenarios.
Identify and designate emergency shelters and warming centres for vulnerable populations.
Establish protocols for emergency communication, resource allocation, and coordination with emergency services.
Implementation and Review
To ensure the effectiveness of these measures, we request that Clare County Council:
Establish a working group to oversee the implementation of winter preparedness measures.
Conduct regular reviews and updates of emergency response plans and procedures.
Provide annual reports to the council on winter preparedness and response efforts.
By passing this motion, we can ensure that Clare County Council is proactive in preparing for and responding to extreme weather events, protecting the safety and well-being of our communities.”
(M)
A. Kelly, Chief Fire Officer, Fire Service, Building Control and Major Emergency Services replied as follows:
“The Council is committed to ensuring the safety and resilience of our communities in the face of increasingly frequent extreme weather events.  There is a robust response strategy in place to deal with emergencies that includes:
Clare County Council Major Emergency Plan
Severe Weather Plan
Winter Maintenance Plan
Flood Plans
Regional Communications Plan
These plans incorporate various functions, that enables engagement with relevant agencies through Local Co-Ordination Groups, Crisis Management Teams, interagency communications, and links to national level at the National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management, and to Met Éireann.  As part of an overall Major Emergency Management strategy, Clare Council are involved at regional and national level, with senior management on Regional Working and Steering Group Committees, with the other Principal Response Agencies in the Mid-West Region.
Many of the issues that were seen in the aftermath of Storm Éowyn (and other similar events) such as prolonged power outages and communications failures are outside the remit of the local authority, however as part of the overall co-ordination of the response, the Local Co-Ordination Group, led by Clare County Council, included representation from ESB Networks and Uisce Eireann, in addition to An Garda Síochána and the Heath Services Executive.
The national Major Emergency Management Framework is currently being reviewed, and once developed, Clare County Council will consider the updated Framework and implement changes where required, to align with national guidance.  A public-facing summary can be developed to ensure households and community groups understand the steps to take and the contacts available during future emergencies.
For Storm Éowyn in particular, once the extent of damage caused by the storm was determined, as part of a national strategy, the Council provided assistance to communities by establishing community support hubs at a number of locations around the County.  In addition to the news updates and social media messaging provided by the communications teams, formal briefings were delivered to Councillors on a number of occasions during the days immediately after the storm.  It is intended that supports to the local communities will be strengthened further based on lessons learned following this event, with assistance and guidance being provided at a national level.
In preparation for the coming winter season, if the Members see benefit in having a full briefing on this area, we would propose holding a Winter Ready Briefing for all Elected Members, providing an overview of our preparedness measures and response protocols.”
Item 30: Clare Emergency Management Plan
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council publish a report on the update to the Clare Emergency Management Plan, incorporating the key learnings from Storm Éowyn. This report should specifically address: (i) how inter-agency coordination could be strengthened as required, (ii) how communication with the public might be improved, and (iii) the role of elected members in reporting and escalating community issues during weather-related emergencies.
Storm Éowyn caused significant disruption across Clare, particularly in rural areas where prolonged power outages, blocked roads, and communications failures left many households vulnerable. In light of the increasing frequency of extreme weather events due to climate change, it is vital that the Council demonstrates how it is applying these lessons to future preparedness.
The updated plan should be aligned with the National Emergency Management Framework and the Council’s Climate Adaptation Strategy. It should also include a clear public-facing summary so that households and community groups understand the steps to take, and the contacts available, in the event of future emergencies.
Finally, the report should set out a defined protocol for how Councillors, as first points of contact for many residents, can efficiently escalate local issues to the relevant Council sections and external agencies, with timelines and feedback mechanisms built in. An annual awareness campaign to inform the public and community organisations of emergency protocols should also be considered.”
(M)
A. Kelly, Chief Fire Officer, Fire Service, Building Control and Major Emergency Services replied as follows:
“The Council is committed to ensuring the safety and resilience of our communities in the face of increasingly frequent extreme weather events.  There is a robust response strategy in place to deal with emergencies that includes:
Clare County Council Major Emergency Plan
Severe Weather Plan
Winter Maintenance Plan
Flood Plans
Regional Communications Plan
These plans incorporate various functions, that enables engagement with relevant agencies through Local Co-Ordination Groups, Crisis Management Teams, interagency communications, and links to national level at the National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management, and to Met Éireann.  As part of an overall Major Emergency Management strategy, Clare Council are involved at regional and national level, with senior management on Regional Working and Steering Group Committees, with the other Principal Response Agencies in the Mid-West Region.
Many of the issues that were seen in the aftermath of Storm Éowyn (and other similar events) such as prolonged power outages and communications failures are outside the remit of the local authority, however as part of the overall co-ordination of the response, the Local Co-Ordination Group, led by Clare County Council, included representation from ESB Networks and Uisce Eireann, in addition to An Garda Síochána and the Heath Services Executive.
The national Major Emergency Management Framework is currently being reviewed, and once developed, Clare County Council will consider the updated Framework and implement changes where required, to align with national guidance.  A public-facing summary can be developed to ensure households and community groups understand the steps to take and the contacts available during future emergencies.
In preparation for the coming winter season, if the Members see benefit in having a full briefing on this area, we would propose holding a Winter Ready Briefing for all Elected Members, providing an overview of our preparedness measures and response protocols.”
The elected members welcomed the reply and the offer of a public facing summary. The members noted that Clare County Council was commended on its response to Storm Éowyn but noted that hubs need to be made accessible going forward. The members referred to the failure of mobile networks and the lack of communication in rural areas and that in an emergency this is a vital piece of infrastructure. The elected members stated that they are the first port of call in weather related emergencies so they need to be kept updated on plans being rolled out and for information to be shared with them to allow a transparent and inclusive approach to these events.
Item 31: Funding for Physical Infrastructure Improvements
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“I call on Clare County Council to secure funding for physical infrastructure improvements to roads, footpaths, lighting, signage and all other ancillaries to ensure Clare's unique and beautiful image is portrayed around the world during the Irish Open in Doonbeg next September.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Transportation, Mobility and Health and Safety replied as follows:
“Clare County Council has welcomed the announcement of the forthcoming golf events in 2026. The first is the DP World Tour Amgen Irish Open Golf tournament which will be held in Doonbeg on the 10
th
to 13
th
September 2026. This will be preceded by the 51
st
Walker Cup between Great Britain and Ireland against the United States of America in Lahinch on the 5
th
-6
th
September. Council officials will be engaging with the event organisers, local stakeholders and government departments in the coming months to ensure the appropriate targeted infrastructure investments are made to deliver these world class events. The funding investment required was also highlighted by the Members with TII officials in our meeting with them held in May of this year. The events will also provide an opportunity to show case county Clare and its many extraordinary cultural assets and amenities to a world audience through television and social media networks.”
The elected members welcomed the news that the local authority has contacted the Government for short term funding for the events. The members agreed that this is an opportunity for Clare to display all it has to offer as a county and boost the Tourism market. The members noted that road infrastructure needs to be brought up to standard and the timeframe to get this done is tight.
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer addressed the meeting and noted that a committee is being set up to deliver an event similar to the event held in Lahinch in 2019. Mr. Feeney noted that the Department of Transport has been contacted to target necessary investment and advised that they are looking to hold a Championship village in Doonbeg similar to that in Lahinch.
Cllr. G. Keating wished S. Lenihan, Senior Engineer well in his future endeavours.
Cllr. P. Daly congratulated Eire Óg on winning both the Senior Hurling final and the Senior Football final.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy congratulated Limerick Pride and QuareClare for their successful application to host EuroPride 2028.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
AILG October Training Module entitled “Local Authority Finance and Budget Process”, held in the Horse and Jockey Hotel, Tipperary on the 11
th
October 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €434.18 including conference fee of €90.00
It was agreed that Cllrs C. Colleran Molloy, P. Daly, J. Killeen, M. Shannon attend this conference.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:               _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback