Minutes of September 2025 Adjourned Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of September 2025 Adjourned Meeting of Clare County Council
Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams on Monday 15th September 2025 at 3:00 p.m.
Present
Councillors
Councillors P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services.
Bernie Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development.
Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance and Support Services.
Alan Farrell, Director of Physical Development.
Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism Development
Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development.
Seán Lenihan, Senior Engineer, Ennis Municipal District.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. M. Howard, P. Hayes, I. Lynch, T. O’Brien, S. Talty
Absent:
Cllr. P. Daly
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
a.      Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the July Meeting of Clare County Council held on 14
th
July 2025 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 25 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Hedgerows.
Correspondence dated 5 August 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to hedge cutting.
Correspondence dated 29 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to grant aiding of generators.
Correspondence dated 20 August 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Further and Higher Education in relation to Adult Educators.
Correspondence dated 24 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Further and Higher Education in relation to higher education costs.
Correspondence dated 26 August 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to a Model 3 or 4 Hospital in County Clare.
Correspondence dated 8 August 2025 from the Minister of State for Older People and Housing, Kieran O'Donnell T.D. in relation to the RTE Investigates programme.
Correspondence dated 7 August 2025 from the Office of the Minister of State, Michael Moynihan T.D. in relation to clinical therapy supports.
Correspondence dated 30 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to public orthodontic healthcare services.
Correspondence dated 22 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Residential Tenancies Act 2004 - 2025.
Acknowledgement dated 16 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to road network funding.
Acknowledgement dated 16 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration in relation to gender-based violence.
Acknowledgement dated 25 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister of State, Kieran O'Donnell T.D. in relation to nursing home care.
Acknowledgement dated 16 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to nursing home care.
Acknowledgement dated 16 July 2025 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to public orthodontic care.
Acknowledgement dated 16 July 2025 from Office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine in relation to regulations in beef processing factories.
Correspondence from the AILG President Cllr. Kieran O'Hanlon.
Resolution dated 15 July 2025 from Waterford City and County Council in relation to Carers Allowance Budget.
Resolution dated 1 July 2025 from Waterford City and County Council in relation to the sale of Israeli bonds.
Resolution dated 14 July 2025 from Wexford County Council in relation to eliminating bans on pets in tenancy agreements.
Resolution dated 24 July 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to college contribution fees.
Resolution dated 8 August 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to Community Welfare Liaison Officer.
Resolution dated 8 August 2025 from Limerick City and County Council in relation to ribbon development rules.
Resolution dated 14 August 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to the Equal Status Act.
Resolution dated 14 August 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to affordable housing schemes
Resolution dated 1 July 2025 from Waterford City and County Council in relation to the sale of Israeli bonds.
Resolution dated 22 July 2025 from Galway County Council in relation to the downgrade of Portiuncula Hospital.
Resolution dated 8 August 2025 from Galway County Council in relation to dismantling the triple lock.
Resolution dated 13 June 2025 from Donegal County Council in relation to dismantling the Triple Lock.
Resolution dated 14 August 2025 from Offaly County Council in relation to the Tenant Purchase Scheme.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle referred to the correspondence from Donegal County Council in relation to dismantling the Triple Lock and noted his support for this effort.
Cllr. A. Baker Bashua referred to the correspondence from the Minister of State, Michael Moynihan T.D. in relation to clinical therapy supports and noted that it was a positive reply but stated that it was important to follow up with the Minister on Strand II of the Educational Therapy Support Service (ETSS) to ensure it is delivered as promised.
Cllr. M. Shannon welcomed the reply from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to grant aiding of generators and noted that Kilamley Inagh Group Water Scheme have recently purchased generators resulting from Storm Éowyn.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.         Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 10 June, 2025 be noted.”
b.         Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District AGM held on the 26 June, 2025 be noted.”
c.         Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M Begley agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 27 May, 2025 be noted.”
d.         Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District AGM held on the 20 June, 2025 be noted.”
e.         Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slatttery agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 20 May, 2025 be noted.”
f.          Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District AGM held on the 27 June, 2025 be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
(a)   Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Rural Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 11 March, 2025 be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 7
th
July, 2025 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management Report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme (ORIS) 2024/2025 and queried when the next round of funding is expected and if there are more projects in the pipeline.
Cllr. R. McInerney referred to the Clare Maritime Economic Zone (MEZ) and queried if there was any update and noted that this project is vital if we are to be prepared for offshore wind.
Cllr. P. Burke referred to the pedestrianisation trial for Killaloe Bridge and noted what a success it is and that people seem to be realising the benefits of it being pedestrianised.
Cllr. M. Begley noted an error under the Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme (ORIS) 2024/2025 update under Project Development Measures. This was noted by the Cathaoirleach.
Cllr. M. Shannon referred to the Built Heritage Investment Scheme (BHIS) 2026 and BHIS Historic Thatched Buildings Scheme noting that the closing date is approaching and that the grant is very important in order to protect these heritage structures that are left.
Cllr. J Garrihy referred to the Town Centre First update and commended the team on the work they are doing and suggested that there is an opportunity for a cross-directorate town centre first project that could encourage private investment and draw on infrastructure in other towns and villages.
B. Haugh, Senior Executive Officer, Rural Development noted in relation to the ORIS that there is no indicative date as of yet, but the rural development team are seeking dates from the Department and will circulate as soon as they hear back.
G. Daly, Chief Executive noted in relation to the Clare MEZ that he will be meeting with each of the Directors as they move into the new organisation structure and will see where progress is with this proposed project. Mr. Daly acknowledged the importance of the Maritime Economic Zone to Clare.
Item 8: Disposal of land at Baile Uí Loideain, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Adrian Headd, Senior Engineer, Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 5.71 square meters at Baile Uí Loideain, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 16
th
July 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Begley agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Baile Uí Loideain, Sixmilebridge, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 16
th
July 2025.
Item 9: Disposal of land at Droichead Nua, Scariff, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Adrian Headd, Senior Engineer, Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 5.85 square meters at Droichead Nua, Scariff, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 22
nd
July 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Droichead Nua, Scariff, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 22
nd
July 2025.
Item 10: Disposal of land at Ballybrohan, Killaloe, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of an area of land measuring 0.135 hectares at Ballybrohan, Killaloe, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 21
st
July 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of land at Ballybrohan, Killaloe, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 21
st
July 2025.
Item 11: Disposal of land at Dough, Spanish Point, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Planning and Economic Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of a derelict bungalow and surrounding site at Dough, Spanish Point, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 16
th
July 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of a derelict bungalow and surrounding site at Dough, Spanish Point, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 16
th
July 2025.
Item 12: Disposal of property at 23 Boyne Park, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of a property that was purchased under the Shared Ownership Scheme at 23 Boyne Park, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at  23 Boyne Park, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2025.
Item 13: Disposal of property at 46 Finian Park, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of a property that was purchased under the Shared Ownership Scheme at 46 Finian Park, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at  46 Finian Park, Shannon, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2025.
Item 14: Disposal of property at Drumeer, Ruan, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Jason Murphy, Director of Social Development Directorate was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of a property that was purchased under the Shared Ownership Scheme at Drumeer, Ruan, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2025.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of disposal of property at Drumeer, Ruan, Co. Clare subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 1
st
August 2025.
Item 15: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at 4 and 5 Lower Drumbiggle Road, Ennis, Co. Clare.
Report from Padraig MacCormaic, A/Senior Executive Officer, Social Development Directorate and Chief Executive Report dated 28
th
August, 2025 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The report notes that the proposed development is located within the Ennis Architectural Conservation Area.
The proposed development consists of:
The demolition of existing rear extensions, and upgrade works to the existing cottages, including two new extensions to the rear.
Connections for both cottages and proposed extensions to existing site services.
All ancillary and associated site works pertaining to the upgraded cottages and proposed extensions.
The upgrade and extension of an existing footpath.
The proposed dwellings are necessary to address housing needs in Ennis town.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
Item 16: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at Clare County Council Machinery Yard, Beechpark, Ennis, Co. Clare.
Report from Michael McNamara, A/Senior Executive Engineer, Physical Development Directorate and Chief Executive Report dated 20
th
August, 2025 from Aisling Leahy, Senior Executive Planner, Planning & Economic Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination).
The proposed development consists of:
Construction of a new 162m
2
storage shed located to the rear of the site (northern extents)
Re-roofing and Re-Cladding of the existing workshop and office building
Provision of car parking spaces, 7no van parking spaces, 7no rigid lorry parking bays, 3no articulated lorry parking bays and 2no accessible parking spaces.
Provision of 9no. EV Charging Spaces
Removal of existing boundary fence to the front of the site (southern extents) and provision of new palisade boundary fencing and with sliding
Demarcation of new internal pedestrian crossing area.
Installation of Solar PV panels on the southwest facing side of the main existing workshop and office building roof structure
Provision of rainwater harvesting system and new surface water attenuation
Provision of Service Area for Mobile Library
All ancillary Site Works and Services
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
Item 17: Interim Financial Report to 30 June, 2025.
Financial Report for half year to 30
th
June, 2025 was circulated with the agenda.  The report set out a financial review of the Council’s income and expenditure account for the first six months of 2025, in both the day-to-day operational services and capital infrastructure delivery.  The members noted the report as presented having been proposed by Cllr. M. Shannon seconded by Cllr. P. Hayes and agreed by the members present.
Cllr. P. Hayes noted that it was positive to see the collection of commercial rates increasing again and queried the operation of Clare Tourism East sites following the positive outturn in 2023.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Service, Finance and Support Services addressed the meeting and noted that the interim financial report provides an overview of the Council’s financial performance for the first six months of 2025. Ms. Fitzgerald noted it is positive in relation to income collections across the main income sources but flagged to members the increasing level of government debtors increased in the first six months of 2025 to €41.6m, Ms. Fitzgerald noted that this reflects expenditure that the council has incurred on various central government grant schemes and initiatives and are awaiting recoupment of at June 2025.
Ms. Fitzgerald discussed the financial impact of Storm Éowyn and the absence of central government funding for these costs incurred. The operation of Clare Tourism East following the loss returned in 2024 are under ongoing review in 2025 to date Ms Fitzgerald also highlighted the reduction in income from the planning development contributions due to developments being accelerated in 2023 and 2024 to avail of the national incentive around the waiver of planning contributions.
Cllr. P. Hayes noted that €41.6m was a lot to be owed to the council from central government.
N. Fitzgerald acknowledged that while it is a significant amount owed to this council and it is cashflow of the council being used, it is a rolling figure, and this is right across the board now on all schemes where you pay first then claim payment from central government.
Cllr. G. Keating referred to the planning development contributions noting that this is a further cost to people building and it needs to be kept in mind as we move forward.
Item 18: Presidential Election Special Meeting
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy stated that it was planned to hold the special meeting to consider nominations for the Presidential election on Monday 22
nd
September at 2p.m. This was agreed having been proposed by Cllr. P. Burke seconded by Cllr. A. O’Callaghan and agreed by the members present.
Item 19: Briefing from Public Participation Network
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy welcomed Mary O’Donoghue and William Hedderman from the Public Participation Network (PPN) to the chamber.
William Hedderman addressed the council and thanked them for the opportunity to present on the work the PPN undertakes.
Mr. Hedderman explained that the PPN’s came about following the report of the Working Group on Citizen Engagement with Local Government, published in 2013, which recommended that communities be given more of a say in decisions taken by Local Authorities. The recommended way to do this was through the PPNs, which were written into law in the Local Government Reform Act 2014.
Mr. Hedderman explained that PPN’s are above party politics, with membership open to all volunteer-led and not-for-profit groups that are non-party political and that fulfil membership criteria.  PPNs are wholly independent entities, but remain accountable for their use of public monies and the activities they undertake on
behalf of their communities.
Mr. Hedderman and Ms. O’Donoghue discussed the PPN funding and oversight noting that they are funded jointly by the Department of Rural and Community
Development and the Gaeltacht (DRCDG) and Local Authorities. This annual funding is specifically allocated to meet the cost of staff, along with their ongoing operational costs such as office accommodation, rep expenses, training and events.
Each PPN has a voluntary advisory group called the Secretariat which oversees
expenditure. Clare PPN submits quarterly reports to Clare County Council, annual reports to DRCDG and as a CLG is audited annually.
Mr. Hedderman noted that the PPN currently represents 460 active member groups from throughout Clare and explained that there are 3 colleges:
Community and Voluntary (367 member groups)
Social Inclusion (63 member groups)
Environmental (30 members groups)
Mr. Hedderman and Ms. O’Donoghue discussed in further detail:
Linking grassroots to local government – involvement in public consultations and committees.
PPN Structure
PPN Principles and Values
PPN involvement with Strategic Policy Committees and other committees.
PPN achievements over the past ten years:
Training and support
Local Election Hustings 2019
Towards an anti-poverty strategy for Clare
Fair Clare – securing socio-economic rights & a just transition in Co. Clare
Clare Local Economic and Community Plan 2024-2030
Co-ordinated voter registration events in 2019 & 2024
Covid-19 and Ukrainian community response
Traveller pride and Quare Clare events.
The elected members thanked Mr. Hedderman and Ms. O’Donoghue for their presentation and for all the work they do with the PPN. The members noted that the PPN provide phenomenal support to communities and acknowledged their response and support during Covid-19 and the Ukrainian crisis. The members noted that the PPN represents voices on the ground that can be difficult to hear.
Ms. O’Donoghue thanked the members and noted that they appreciate all and any collaboration and as with most organisations greater funding is needed.
Mr. G. Daly, Chief Executive thanked Mr. Hedderman and Ms. O’Donoghue and acknowledged the excellent presentation. Mr. Daly advised he was familiar with their efforts and that excellent work has been achieved in Clare in the last ten years. Mr. Daly committed to continuing the close collaboration with the PPN and agreed to arrange a meeting with the Executive.
Item 20: Grass Cutting Disposal Service
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council initiate a grass cutting disposal service to assist resident groups in the appropriate, environmentally responsible disposal of grass clippings, and similar organic waste, generated when maintaining their community public areas. This service would promote sustainable waste practices, reduce illegal dumping, and support resident groups in maintaining their local area.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council currently provide a green waste disposal service at the Ennis and Shannon Civic Amenity Sites and the Central Waste Management Facility, Inagh. These facilities are fully authorised by the EPA to accept green waste and provide a regulated and secure environment for composting and recycling activities.
In addition, we should always look to explore more sustainable practices such as Grass-Cycling. This process is the natural recycling of grass by leaving grass clippings in-situ after mowing. The grass clippings, which contain 80-85% water, decompose quickly returning valuable nutrients back into the soil and the overall process has a reduced carbon footprint compared to traditional lifting and disposal methods.”
The elected members acknowledged that this is a major problem for local community and resident groups as the volume of grass and cuttings during the summer months is too much for regular compost bins. The members recognised that the central waste management facility is a fantastic amenity but also noted that transporting to the facility can be difficult for these groups.
Item 21:  Public Spending
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council:
Supports the principle of stronger transparency and value for money in public spending, recognising that every euro of taxpayers’ money must deliver real benefit.
Calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce consistent national standards across all 31 local authorities for contract-level transparency and regular reporting of project expenditure, ensuring that waste, duplication, and overruns are identified and prevented.”
(M)
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Service, Finance and Support Services replied as follows:
“Clare County Council fully supports the principle of strong transparency and value for money in public spending, that every euro of taxpayers’ money delivers tangible public benefit. This commitment is embedded in our statutory responsibilities under the
Local Government Act 2001
(as amended, Part 12), Local Government ( Financial and Audit Procedures) regulations 2014( as amended) and reinforced by the
Local Government Code of Governance
, published by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in July 2024 which all emphasises accountability, efficiency, and transparency in the discharge of our functions.
In the context of governance and oversight, we highlight the following :
Local Government Code of Governance
, published by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in July 2024 outlines seven core principles for good governance in local authorities, including:
Integrity and Accountability
Transparency and Openness
Leadership and Strategic Direction
Effective Risk Management and Internal Control
Stakeholder Engagement
Capacity and Capability
Compliance with Legal and Regulatory Obligations
These principles guide our operations and ensure that governance structures are robust, responsive, and aligned with public sector values. One of the requirements is the annual publication by all councils of a
Statement of Internal Financial Controls and a Governance Statement
. Both documents for 2024 were completed and published in Clare County Council 2024 annual report.
Existing Frameworks and Oversight Mechanisms
Local authorities operate under a robust governance framework, including internal audit functions, the Local Government Audit Service, and oversight by the National Oversight and Audit Commission (NOAC). These bodies ensure that financial management, procurement, and project delivery are subject to regular scrutiny and performance evaluation.
Following the Local Elections 2024, the elected members of this council under the Local Government (Audit Committee) Regulations 2014 and S.I. No. 244/2014 formed the Audit Committee for the term of this council. In addition to the afore mentioned oversight and controls this body consisting of both internal and external members bring additional scrutiny and evaluation to council activities.
Clare County Council's policy in relation to the Freedom of Information Act is to give members of the public access to information held by this authority, to the greatest extent possible, in accordance with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Acts 2014, and consistent with the public interest.
Transparency in Procurement and Expenditure Reporting.
Clare County Council adheres to national public procurement guidelines, established frameworks and publishes contract award notices via eTenders and the Council’s website. We also report on capital and revenue expenditure through our Annual Financial Statement and the Three-Year Capital Programme, which are publicly accessible.
Infrastructural guidelines.
The Infrastructure Guidelines (which replaced the Public Spending Code for capital expenditure) set out value for money criteria for the evaluation, planning and management of public investment projects. The Infrastructure Guidelines include review requirements at the preliminary business case stage of a project with due consideration given to risk, delivery and governance in the preliminary business case. Post project reviews area also a requirement of the guidelines.
There is an annual requirement for this council to complete a Public Spending Code assurance reporting to NOAC. The primary aim of the Public Spending Code (PSC)Quality Assurance process is to gauge the extent to which the Council is meeting the obligations outlined in the Code. The 2024 report and prior year reports are published by this council and are available on the council’s website.
Value for Money Obligations May 2025
Value for Money obligations apply to all civil and public servants across all grades. Every public body and official is obliged to adhere to the established legislation and guidance to treat public funds with due care and pursue optimal value for money (Circular 18/2025). In May 2025 the Department of Public Expenditure NDP delivery and reform reiterated in a paper Value for Money Obligations Regarding Public Expenditure Management and Oversight (
Circular 18/2025 Value for Money Obligations
). This reinforces existing governance arrangements and reiterates to all government departments the requirement in this area.
Separately the Local Government Audit Service (LGAS), incorporating the Value for Money (VFM) Unit, being an external audit service, provides independent scrutiny of the financial stewardship of local authorities. These reports are available on the Local Government Audit Services section of the department’s website.
All of the legislation, regulations, standards and guidelines listed (the list above is not exhaustive) apply across all 31 local authorities. We will continue to reinforce, audit and communicate these standards and implement any further guidance or policy developments in this area.
We will also write to the Minister of Local Government in relation to your motion to introduce consistent national standards across all 31 local authorities for contract-level transparency and regular reporting of project expenditure, ensuring that waste, duplication, and overruns are identified and prevented.”
The elected members welcomed the reply from the Director and noted that they are calling for strengthened reporting standards at government level to allow for greater transparency in project expenditure ensuring that waste, duplication, and overruns are identified and prevented. The members noted a number of projects that have had substantial delays and major cost overruns and stated that the ask is for improved accountability and greater transparency in such projects going forward.
Item 22: Clare Comhairle na nÓg
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council invite the Clare Comhairle na nÓg to present their short film on period poverty at the next available Council meeting.”
(M)
J. Corry, A/Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Rural Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Should the members wish to facilitate this request a presentation by the Clare Comhairle na nÓg will be scheduled at the earliest opportunity.”
Item 23: Inheritance Laws
This item was deferred to the October Council meeting.
“Clare County Council request both Minister for Finance, Mr. Pascal Donohue and Minister for Equality Ms. Norma Foley address the current legal anomaly regarding inheritance laws for those without children. Over One million Irish citizens are childless, the current inheritance laws are inequitable and discriminatory and are skewed against childless people, with prohibitive tax obligations.”
(M)
Item 24: Designated Dog-Friendly Areas and Hours on County Beaches.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. Hartigan
“Creation of Designated Dog-Friendly Areas and Hours on County Beaches.
Currently, dogs are prohibited from Clare County beaches between 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. This restriction limits access for residents and visitors who wish to enjoy the beaches with their family pets, particularly during peak daylight hours. Families travelling with dogs are therefore unable to fully enjoy some of our coastal walking areas, despite beaches being a shared and valued public space.
I propose that Clare County Council:
Review existing restrictions on dog access to county beaches to balance the needs of dog owners, non-dog-owning beach users, and environmental protection.
Identify and designate specific dog-friendly areas on selected beaches, allowing dogs to be exercised safely during the day, subject to responsible ownership rules (e.g., leash requirements where appropriate, proper waste disposal, and control of behaviour).
Consider adjusting current time restrictions to provide more flexibility, for example: Allowing access earlier in the evening (e.g., from 5:00 p.m. instead of 6:00 p.m.) Providing mid-day access to designated dog areas, away from main bathing zones
Ensure appropriate signage and waste disposal facilities are installed at these areas.
Undertake community consultation, including residents, beach users, local businesses, and animal welfare groups, to determine the most suitable approach.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“The permissible hours for dogs to be allowed on Blue Flag beaches in county Clare are outlined in the Clare County Council Beach Bye Laws 2021. In accordance with the Bye Laws dogs are permitted on Blue Flag beaches up to 11am in the morning and after 6pm in the evening. The Bye Laws were adopted by the Members following a full public consultation process and in addition were informed by the Blue Flag criteria. The Blue Flag programme is funded by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. In order to qualify for the Blue Flag award, a series of stringent
environmental, educational, safety-related and access-related criteria
must be met and maintained. In particular one of those criteria deals with dogs and restricting their access to the beach within peak usage hours which would typically be late morning to early evening i.e 11am-6pm. A single dog fouling event can have a significant impact on the bathing water quality as the tide ebbs and flows around it. A dog fouling event has the potential to fail an area with respect to water quality equivalent to two tennis courts in size. This is particularly concerning in shallow waters where small children could be splashing and playing. Dog faeces contain many dangerous pathogens that can pose a significant threat to public health.
Therefore, in order to maintain Clare County Council’s 9 no. Blue Flag beach awards, it would not be appropriate at this time to revisit the permissible access hours which responsible dog owners currently enjoy.”
A number of elected members noted that dogs are an important part of many families and that outdoor recreation benefits both pets and their owners. The members acknowledged that by having a designated dog beach it would support local tourism by making Clare’s beaches more attractive to visitors travelling with pets.
A number of elected members noted that supervision would be essential and that over the past summer dogs were let off on the beach and knocked over children and elderly people. The members also noted that the dog warden did a wonderful job but was treated poorly by some members of the public when advised they could not take their dogs onto the beach.
Cllr. D. Gould stated that he could not support the motion as he felt that there should be a complete dog ban on beaches.
Item 25:  Dog Park
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“Following a recent petition for a dog park in Shannon, I would ask that this Council gives fresh consideration to providing a dog park in this County. I would ask that we invite the relevant staff or a representative from Limerick City and County Council to brief the members as well as the executive on how they developed and now operate the very successful dog parks in Mungret, Baggot Estate, and Newcastle West.”
(M)
C. Feeney, Senior Engineer, Physical Development Directorate replied as follows:
“We welcome the suggestion of inviting staff from Limerick City and County Council to better understand and explore the option of creating a dog park in the county. We will engage with staff in Limerick and consider the most appropriate means/forum for discussions on the matter, enabling members and staff to get an understanding of the key issues.”
The elected members noted that Limerick County Council have successfully opened dog parks in a number of towns and that there are a lot of responsible dog owners in Clare that would benefit from this initiative. The members felt that this is very achievable as it wouldn’t require much space and would be relatively inexpensive. The members acknowledged that dog ownership has changed over the years and dogs play a more central role in the family unit now.
Item 26: Commission for Communications Regulation
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council formally calls on the Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg) to conduct a comprehensive survey of mobile coverage across County Clare, identifying blackspots and areas of poor service. Furthermore, the Council urges the Commission to work with mobile network providers to implement targeted infrastructure improvements, ensuring equitable access to reliable mobile connectivity for all residents, businesses, and emergency services.”
(M)
The elected members noted that mobile coverage is unreliable in some parts of the county, and they called for a survey to be conducted by ComReg to identify these blackspots. The members noted that it is a serious issue especially for elderly people, businesses and emergency services who are reliant on mobile networks for communication purposes and to provide their services.
It was agreed to take motions 27 and 28 together.
Item 27: Motor Home Camping Facilities
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“A strategic development of motor home camping facilities in Co. Clare is urgently required ensuring much needed economic growth in alternative tourism is created for our many businesses countywide. Are there any proposals currently being considered or provide any update on progressing this model further.”
(M)
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate replied as follows:
“In response to Councillor O’Callaghan’s Notice of Motion regarding the need for a strategic development of motorhome camping facilities in County Clare, Clare County Council acknowledges the growing demand for suitable motorhome parking facilities across the county, particularly in areas of high tourism activity. We recognise the challenges currently faced by both visitors and local communities due to the limited availability of designated spaces and the resulting pressure on existing infrastructure.
In response, the Council is open to exploring and pursuing supports to facilitate the development of appropriate motorhome parking solutions. This includes working collaboratively with private landowners and operators, and providing guidance through our Enterprise, Tourism, and Planning Departments.
Following the completion of the Campervan Review Report and the Fáilte Ireland-led Accommodation Audit for Clare, a series of webinars were held to incentivise potential private developers to expand alternative accommodation provision across the county. This work is being augmented through the development of a Business Prospectus for Clare, which aims to highlight investment opportunities and position the county as a prime location for accommodation development.
Any future developments will be aligned with the objectives of the Clare County Development Plan and will take into account the availability of essential services, environmental considerations, and community impact. We are committed to identifying suitable locations and supporting initiatives that enhance the visitor experience while safeguarding the interests of local residents and businesses. The Council is actively reviewing sites in its ownership that may be suitable for motorhome parking.
At present, there are no formal incentive schemes in place to support private development of motorhome parking facilities. However, consideration may be given to potential funding applications under the LEADER programme, and from the enterprise side, Microfinance Ireland for early-stage start-ups. Notably, Clare Local Development Company (CLDC) has received 25 expressions of interest for a mix of private and social enterprise tourism accommodation projects across Clare, including five campervan facilities. These projects are at various stages of development—planning, business development, and financing—and will take time to come to fruition. LEADER 2023–2027, under Local Objective 2 (Sustainable Development and Promotion of Tourism), includes limited provision for supporting the development of innovative accommodation.
Clare County Council remains proactive in seeking balanced and sustainable solutions to meet the evolving needs of tourism in the county and is committed to working with stakeholders to identify and progress opportunities that support local economic development.”
Item 28: Motor Home Parking Facilities
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. I. Lynch agus glacadh leis
“We call on Clare County Council to revisit the overall plan for motor home parking facilities in the county with a view to incentivising the provision of privately owned parking bays with assistance and advice from the Enterprise, Tourism and Planning Departments.
In the absence of private investment, I ask that the Local Authority explore the possibility of providing facilities at various location around the county.”
(M)
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council acknowledges the growing demand for suitable motorhome parking facilities across the county, particularly in areas of high tourism activity. We recognise the challenges currently faced by both visitors and local communities due to the limited availability of designated spaces and the resulting pressure on existing infrastructure.
In response, the Council is open to exploring and pursuing supports to facilitate the development of appropriate motorhome parking solutions. This includes working collaboratively with private landowners and operators, and providing guidance through our Enterprise, Tourism, and Planning Departments.
Following the completion of the Campervan Review Report and the Fáilte Ireland-led Accommodation Audit for Clare, a series of webinars were held to incentivise potential private developers to expand alternative accommodation provision across the county. This work is being augmented through the development of a Business Prospectus for Clare, which aims to highlight investment opportunities and position the county as a prime location for accommodation development.
Any future developments will be aligned with the objectives of the Clare County Development Plan and will take into account the availability of essential services, environmental considerations, and community impact. We are committed to identifying suitable locations and supporting initiatives that enhance the visitor experience while safeguarding the interests of local residents and businesses. The Council is actively reviewing sites in its ownership that may be suitable for motorhome parking.
At present, there are no formal incentive schemes in place to support private development of motorhome parking facilities. However, consideration may be given to potential funding applications under the LEADER programme, and from the enterprise side, Microfinance Ireland for early-stage start-ups. Notably, Clare Local Development Company (CLDC) has received 25 expressions of interest for a mix of private and social enterprise tourism accommodation projects across Clare, including five campervan facilities. These projects are at various stages of development—planning, business development, and financing—and will take time to come to fruition. LEADER 2023–2027, under Local Objective 2 (Sustainable Development and Promotion of Tourism), includes limited provision for supporting the development of innovative accommodation.
Clare County Council remains proactive in seeking balanced and sustainable solutions to meet the evolving needs of tourism in the county and is committed to working with stakeholders to identify and progress opportunities that support local economic development.”
The elected members acknowledged the growing demand for motorhome parking facilities in the last number of years. The members noted that there is a loss of hotel beds and people are moving towards motorhomes and campervans. It was noted that providing these facilities would generate substantial economic activity across Clare. The members stated that enforcement is needed to control where there is an influx of motorhomes as it causes congestion and disruption in popular coastal destinations. It was also acknowledged that not having adequate facilities leads to unauthorised camping and anti-social behaviour which is very disruptive for residents.
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate noted that they recognise the need for such facilities given the lack of accommodation especially in high tourist areas and advised that the LGMA has a working group on campervans where the wider national picture is being considered.  Ms. McNulty also advised of a report from December 2023 that was undertaken to identify sites in Co. Clare which the Tourism department is now in discussions with the Planning Department to explore sites for development. Ms. McNulty referred to Lisdoonvarna Fáilte and how they made these facilities available for the festival and the success it has been.
Mr. G. Daly, Chief Executive noted this was a great opportunity for the county, but it was important to note that there is an insufficient provision of these facilities nationally.  Mr. Daly noted that direct provision of these facilities would have its challenges such as adequate sites, funding and investment. Mr. Daly noted that the local authority would speak to Coillte and Waterways Ireland about opportunities and would come back through the Tourism SPC with an update.
Item 29: Uisce Éireann
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“In light of the strategic importance to the county I am calling on Uisce Eireann to outline the works that have been undertaken in the last five years in West Clare to alleviate the frequent bursts on the water network and what other works they are proposing to undertake to ensure the people of West Clare have a secure and proper water supply going forward.”
(M)
The elected members noted that with one of the largest Green Energy hubs being located in Moneypoint it is important to safeguard investment in Clare. The members stated that having robust infrastructure is necessary and they referred to the number of burst pipes that occur locally and the impact it has for businesses and residents. The elected members acknowledged that they had a very productive and informative workshop with Uisce Éireann last year and would welcome another update from them.
Item 30: Ennis Kilrush Rugby Club
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“As Ennis/Kilrush Rugby Club team make history with their debut in the Energia All-Ireland League (AIL), becoming the first men’s or women’s team from County Clare to qualify for the All-Ireland League, I am asking that Clare County Council
co-ordinate with the Club PRO through the Council public relations department to promote this County Clare involvement; and
with nine away games scheduled for Belfast, Dublin, Cork and Galway, that the Tourism Department make efforts to have the “Visit Clare” logo displayed on the kit of the Team; and
that banners equivalent to those erected to support County Clare GAA teams be erected in Ennis, Kilrush and other key towns in the County.”
(M)
J. Corry, A/Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Rural Development Directorate replied as follows:
“Clare County Council recognises the importance of supporting local sporting achievements and leveraging such opportunities to promote community pride and tourism. We remain committed to working with stakeholders to ensure this historic achievement is celebrated and supported appropriately and accordingly we can promote on social media.
The Tourism Department will engage with the Club to explore the feasibility of featuring the “Visit Clare” logo on the team’s kit. With nine away fixtures scheduled in key cities including Belfast, Dublin, Cork, and Galway, this presents a valuable opportunity to promote Clare as a tourism destination to a national audience.
Clare Co Council have historically only supported county teams in finals by erecting banners.”
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy requested an amendment to the wording of her motion as follows:
“As Ennis/Kilrush Rugby Club team make history with their debut in the Energia Ladies All-Ireland League (AIL), becoming the first men’s or women’s team from County Clare to qualify for the All-Ireland League, I am asking that Clare County Council
co-ordinate with the Club PRO through the Council public relations department to promote this County Clare involvement; and
with nine away games scheduled for Belfast, Dublin, Cork and Galway, that the Tourism Department make efforts to have the “Visit Clare” logo displayed on the kit of the Team; and
that banners equivalent to those erected to support County Clare GAA teams be erected in Ennis, Kilrush and other key towns in the County.”
(M)
The elected members noted the importance to highlight the teams’ achievements and how wonderful it was to see a ladies county team doing so well nationally and acknowledged what fantastic role models they are. The members noted that it was a fantastic opportunity to have the “Visit Clare” logo on the teams’ kit and agreed it was an inexpensive way to promote the county.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy queried if Tourism would be engaging with the club regarding the “Visit Clare” logo.
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism Development Directorate advised that D. O’Shea has already been in contact with the PRO of the Club.
G. Daly, Chief Executive advised that the spirit of the initiative is well intended but would need to be explored further and that the Tourism Department would take the lead and revert to the members.
Item 31: On Farm Market Valuation
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“In light of current market values for cattle, that Clare County Council calls on the Minister of Agriculture to review the On Farm Market Valuation (TB compensation scheme) regarding the current ceiling of €3,000 per non pedigree bovine.”
(M)
The elected members noted that todays’ beef prices are excellent, and the value of stock is increasing but farmers are being penalised by not getting market value for their cattle when they go down with TB. The members noted that TB in herds is increasing with no willingness to investigate the reasons behind the spread, and it is one of the most destructive things that can happen a farmer.
Item 32: Just Transition Funding Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney agus glacadh leis
“I call on Minister for Climate, Energy and the Environment, Darragh O'Brien to make the Just Transition Funding Scheme available to Clare. This funding could facilitate and increase the development of innovative projects that contribute to the economic, social, and environmental sustainability of the county. Projects of scale that are required to be transformative to the economic development of the area could be developed and attract investment through a dedicated funding stream.”
(M)
The elected members stated that the Just Transition Funding Scheme was brought in to compensate areas transitioning away from using fossil fuels. The members noted that Moneypoint has transitioned away from fossil fuels and are on track to be one of the country’s largest renewable energy hubs with plans to utilise its deep-water port for offshore wind energy. The members agreed it was important to use the funding to re-train on renewable energy and be strategic about the vision for Clare.
Item 33: Garda Vetting Process
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to ask the relevant Minister to devise a new, more efficient and secure system for Garda vetting.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the current system is flawed, and an efficient secure system needs to be implemented in its place. The members noted that the onus is on the person to tell the truth, and it can take up to 8 weeks to get the application processed and a separate vetting application needs to be applied for every organisation. The members felt that the system needs to be streamlined, with regular updates and where one application will cover all organisations.
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Garrihy, seconded by Cllr. A. Baker Bashua and agreed by the members present that the time be extended to 6.30p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 34: EnergyCloud Schemes
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, P. Daly, T. O’Brien, S. Talty, A. Baker Bashua, D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council take immediate steps to support families in Clare who are in or at risk of energy poverty, similar to EnergyCloud schemes in place with Galway County Council, Offaly County Council, Cork City Council and others, where they use smart technology to harness the power of curtailed renewable energy and provide it for free to those facing fuel poverty; and to request the Executive to contact all existing renewable energy generators operating in Clare to seek their support to use the dumped renewable energy, to help tackle energy poverty and to provide an update to the Council within a two-month timeframe.”
(M)
A. Headd, Senior Engineer, Social Development Directorate replied as follows:
“This initiative is led by a not-for-profit company whose mission is to make use of surplus electricity generated by renewable means on the Irish network to alleviate fuel poverty in Ireland.
This otherwise wasted electricity has the potential to deliver a heated tank of water to our social properties when surpluses are available.   This could provide relief on the cost of heating water within the home and support our tenants where they are at risk of fuel poverty.
The housing section has contacted the initiative provider, and a meeting has been arranged to explore technical feasibility, cost, and other requirements.  Should these be found suitable a pilot project will be undertaken to examine the benefits to our tenants.
An update will be issued to the elected members within a two-month timeframe.”
The elected members expressed concern that energy poverty was increasing with people not being able to heat their homes or water. The members noted that there are storage issues with the excess energy that is being generated and that this would help in a small way with dealing with that issue. The members acknowledged that if the air to water system is not used properly it can end up being expensive and suggested that local authority tenants get guidance on how to use the systems efficiently. The members welcomed the EnergyCloud scheme and the reply from the Directorate.
Item 35: Return to School Dates
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council write to the Minister for Education requesting that the return to school for all primary and secondary school children be regulated so that it does not occur earlier than the 1st of September each year.
An earlier return shortens the summer season and directly impacts families, holiday homeowners, and those paying significant site fees for mobile homes, who deserve to get value from their investment. More importantly, it undermines the viability of local businesses in tourism-dependent areas.
Many hotels, restaurants, cafés, shops, activity providers, and seasonal attractions in Clare and across Ireland rely heavily on a strong summer trade to carry them through the lean nine months of the off-season. Curtailing the school holidays cuts short this vital window, reducing visitor numbers at the peak of the season, and ultimately threatening the survival of businesses that form the backbone of our local economy.
By ensuring the return to school does not take place before September 1st, families will be able to fully avail of the summer break, while rural and coastal communities will benefit from an extended, more sustainable tourist season.”
(M)
The elected members noted that with schools now returning in August it is cutting the season short which is having serious impacts in the tourism communities. The members noted that the Department of Tourism is trying to extend the tourism season while the Department of Education is trying to cut it short and there must be a happy medium. The members stated that a week at the end of August is more beneficial to families and students instead of a week off in February.
Cllr. J. Killeen noted that the current system was introduced for children’s welfare and that the mid-terms in October and February allow families the chance to holiday in Ireland. Cllr. Killeen noted that he supports the motion but that there is a statutory requirement for the amount of days the schools have to be open.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
AILG SPC Chair Training, held in Hotel Kilkenny, Kilkenny on the 3
rd
September 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €513.89 including conference fee of €90.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs J. Crowe, S. Talty and P. Daly attend this conference
AILG Autumn Training Seminar, held in Westport Woods Hotel, Westport, County Mayo, on the 17
th
to 18
th
September 2025.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €760.16 including conference fee of €175.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs A. Baker Bashua, M. Begley, P. Burke, C. Colleran Molloy, J. Crowe, D. Gould, D. Griffin, G. Keating, J. Killeen, T. O’Brien, A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman, M. Shannon, P. Murphy, T. O’Callaghan and B. Slattery attend this conference
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed: ____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed: _____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:               _____________________________
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback