Minutes of May Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of May Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Location:  Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams
On:  	Monday 11th May 2026 
Time:  	3pm
Present
Councillors P. Daly, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, J. Crowe, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, J. Ryan, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, R. McInerney, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental & Emergency Services.
Mr. Alan Farrell, Director of Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. M. Howard, I. Lynch
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Kinnane Family, on the death of Michael Kinnane, RIP.
The Mullins Family, on the death of Tony Mullins, RIP.
Cllr. T. Guilfoyle proposed the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes as a mark of respect on the passing of colleague Tony Mullins. The was seconded by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy and agreed by the members present.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the April Meeting of Clare County Council held on 13
th
April 2026 be adopted and signed.”
Item 2: Matters Arising
Cllr. P. Hayes requested an update on the rollout of CCTV to address illegal dumping.
A. Reynolds, Director of Service, advised that Data Protection Impact Assessments and business cases are currently being developed for two pilot sites by the Environment Department. Following the completion of same a meeting of the Oversight Committee will be convened to consider the business cases.
C. Kirby, Director of Service, further advised that the pilot sites in Tulla and Kilrush are presently under consideration.
Public Consultation will go live in the coming days to gather feedback on the proposed use of CCTV at these pilot sites. GDPR compliance is being addressed with the preparation of a draft Data Protection Impact Statement.
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 10
th
April 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Ennis Inner Relief Road.
Correspondence dated 24
th
April 2026 from the Office of the Minister of State, John Cummins in relation to judicial reviews.
Correspondence dated 15
th
April 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration in relation to the Garda Divisional Structure in Clare.
Correspondence dated 20
th
April 2026 from Cathal Crowe T.D. in relation to funding for road maintenance in Clare.
Correspondence dated 28
th
April 2026 from Cathal Crowe T.D. in relation to funding for road maintenance in Clare.
Acknowledgement dated 27
th
April 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to Derelict Sites Levy.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
April 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to the national cardiovascular policy and strategy.
Acknowledgement dated 17
th
April 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to the Limerick Northern Distributer Road.
Acknowledgement dated 20
th
April 2026 from An Garda Siochana in relation to Anti-Social Behaviour.
Resolution dated 20
th
April 2026 from Carlow County Council in relation to ESB Networks.
Resolution dated 21
st
April 2026 from Monaghan County Council in relation to a Business Grant.
Resolution dated 24
th
April 2026 from South Dublin County Council in relation to Bessborough Mother and Baby Institutions.
Resolution dated 5
th
May 2026 from Roscommon County Council in relation to a Commission for the Validation of Planning Objections.
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy referred to the correspondence dated 10
th
April 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Ennis Inner Relief Road. She welcomed the reply and the traction that was received from the motion, she advised that the Council are progressing plans to submit applications for funding.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 10 March
, 2026
be noted.”
b.
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Howard agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Special Meeting held on the 24 March
, 2026
be noted.”
c.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery
Cuidithe ag Cllr. G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 20 January
, 2026
be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on the 5 December
, 2025
be noted.”
Item 6: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 7 April, 2026 as presented.
Item 7: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Cllr. T. O’Brien referred to the Killaloe Bridge, Bypass and R494 Upgrade, noting that it is a significant and welcome piece of infrastructure. However, he highlighted that considerable damage was caused during the construction process and that local residents are frustrated with the current condition of the pedestrian bridge and local roads. He appealed to management to address the issues outlined.
Cllr. B. Slattery referred to the integration update and noted that a significant proportion of Ukrainian beneficiaries are located in North Clare. He sought reassurance, in light of reports regarding the withdrawal of State-provided accommodation, that such accommodation would not be replaced with IPAS provision.
Cllr. J. Garrihy referred to the Capital Infrastructure Delivery update and queried whether there was an update on the Doolin Pier project. He also commended the team on the work being undertaken.
Cllr. P. O’Gorman referred to Councillor O’Brien’s earlier comments and noted that raw materials for the Killaloe Bridge, Bypass and R494 Upgrade were sourced from a quarry in Shannon. As a result, he stated that the surrounding roads now require repair.
Cllr. M. Begley supported the comments made by Councillors O’Gorman and O’Brien.
Cllr. P. Hayes requested an update on the Safe Routes to School Programme, noting that progress to date has been slow and does not reflect the needs of local communities.
Cllr. Hayes also sought an update from Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) regarding the Tulla Road Junction and when works are expected to commence.
Cllr. M. Shannon referred to the roads network in West Clare and highlighted the poor condition of many roads. He stated that the roads budget needs to be increased and called for a renewed focus on physical infrastructure over the next 12 months.
Cllr. Shannon congratulated Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy on the Europe Day Transition Year EU Summit that was held on Friday 8
th
May, he noted it was a fantastic event. This was seconded by Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy.
Cllr. P. Burke referred to the installation of new bollards in Mountshannon, funded through his General Municipal Allocation (GMA). He noted that the cost was higher than anticipated and had a significant impact on his allocation, illustrating the substantial increase in material costs.
Cllr. R. Hartigan referred to the Active Travel update in relation to the Ardnacrusha to Athlunkard Bridge and queried when is it expected that the National Transport Authority (NTA) will revert on the approval?
A. Farrell, Director of Service, advised that the contract for the works is substantially complete and that minor snags are being finalised. He acknowledged that the condition of the roads has been raised on a number of occasions and confirmed that the local Municipal District is working on the matter with support from the PMO. He noted it would have to be clearly demonstrated that the works in relation to the Killaloe Bridge contract impacted negatively on the condition of the roads and that any funding for these works is separate and that the matter has been raised with the Department and he advised that he will liaise with Carmel Kirby and her team to progress the issue.
C. Kirby, Director of Service, acknowledged the points raised in relation to the Safe Routes to School programme and confirmed that engagement with the NTA will continue with a view to securing additional funding. Dr. Kirby advised that she will revert on the queries concerning Junction 13 and the Ardnacrusha to Athlunkard Bridge. She also noted that further detail will be provided at the forthcoming Investment Plan workshop.
Item 8: Chief Executives Report in accordance with the requirements of Section 37E (4) and (5) of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) in relation to the Cahermurphy Windfarm Application.
The Chief Executive report dated 1
st
May, 2026 was circulated with the agenda.
The report was prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 37E (4) and 37E (5) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, following on from the submission of a Strategic Infrastructure Development (SID) to An Coimisiún Pleanála (ACP), in relation to the Cahermurphy Windfarm application.
The development consists of 8 no. wind turbines with an energy output between 50.4MW to 57.6 MW, with a 35-year operational lifespan. A 10-year permission is sought and the application is accompanied by
an Environmental Impact Assessment Report (EIAR) and a Natura Impact Statement (NIS)
. A separate, concurrent application for underground electrical cabling (110kV), which will connect the wind farm to the existing Moneypoint 110kV electrical substation, has also been lodged with the Commission (
VA03.324156
).
The specific components of the subject development are as follows:
Construction of 8 no. wind turbines with a blade tip height range from 180m to 185m inclusive, a hub height range from 98.5m to 110.5m inclusive and a rotor diameter range from 149m to 163m inclusive with associated foundations, hard-standing and assembly areas;
Construction of 1 no. permanent 110 kV electrical substation including 2 no. control buildings, lightening protection, welfare facilities, car parking, and all associated electrical plant and apparatus, security fencing, external lighting, underground cabling, wastewater holding tank and all associated infrastructure, apparatus and landscaping;
Underground electrical cabling (33kV) and communications cabling connecting the wind turbines to the proposed on-site 110kV electrical substation and associated ancillary works;
Erection of 1 no. Meteorological Mast of 100m metres above existing ground level for the measuring of meteorological conditions, including a lightning rod which will extend above the mast;
Construction of new permanent access roads and upgrade of existing roads to provide access within the site and to connect the wind turbines and associated infrastructure;
Upgrade of 1 no. new existing agricultural/forestry access to the site, off the L6254 local road, to serve as the sole entrance to the wind farm during its operational phase and to facilitate the delivery of the construction materials and turbine components to site during the construction and operational phases (including the installation of security fencing and gates);
Development of 2 borrow pits;
Construction of 2 no. temporary construction compounds and associated ancillary infrastructure including temporary site offices, staff facilities and car-parking areas, all to be removed at end of construction phase;
Temporary works at 6 no. locations along the N68 national road, R484 regional road and L-2074, L-2082 and L 2048 local roads associated with the facilitation of turbine component and abnormal load delivery to site. These works will primarily include the trimming of vegetation and strengthening of road verges;
Permanent and temporary site drainage;
Operational Stage Site Signage;
Ancillary forestry felling over an area of 21.87ha to facilitate construction and operation of the proposed development;
Biodiversity enhancement measures including the permanent removal of commercial forestry (deforestation) over an area of 56.3ha and restoration of farmland habitat to good quality hen harrier foraging habitat through diversifying the range and extent of habitats over an area of 67.4ha
All related site works and ancillary development including landscaping considered necessary to facilitate the proposed development.
The report concludes that the proposal is broadly supported by the designations in the existing Wind Energy Strategy and the Development Plan noting however that there has not been any updated national Section 28 guidelines. In this instance there is a serious concern in respect of the visual impact of this development having regard to the height and number of turbines, and the spatial extent of the development. In addition, there are serious concerns in respect of the impact of the development on the carrying capacity of the road network in the area by reason of the extent of vehicle movements proposed. Impacts on residential amenity are highlighted noting CDP 11.47 which seeks to strike an appropriate balance between facilitating renewable and protecting residential amenity. The impact of the development on the Hen Harrier and peat management on site is also of concern.
The Elected Members noted that communities across West Clare recognise the importance of renewable energy and the need for Ireland to transition towards cleaner and more sustainable energy sources. However, they expressed growing concern that rural communities are bearing a disproportionate burden in accommodating large-scale wind energy developments, without sufficient consideration of cumulative impacts or the long-term sustainability of those communities.
Members highlighted that there are currently 119 existing or permitted turbines in the West Clare area, with a further 42 turbines awaiting decisions and an additional 15 turbines presently proposed.
They further noted that the concerns being raised locally are reflected in the report prepared by Clare County Council’s Planning Authority. While the report indicates that the proposal is broadly supported by the existing Wind Energy Strategy designations and the current Development Plan, it also clearly expresses concern that national guidelines have not been updated.
The following specific concerns were raised by Members:
The visual impact of the development, particularly in relation to the height, number of turbines, and the overall spatial extent of the proposal.
The carrying capacity of the road network, having regard to the scale of proposed vehicle movements, along with concerns relating to residential amenity, particularly in the context of Policy CDP 11.47, which seeks to balance renewable energy development with the protection of residents’ quality of life.
Potential impacts on the Hen Harrier population and issues relating to peat management on site.
The Elected Members acknowledged the importance of renewable energy but emphasised that this must be balanced with protecting the viability of rural communities, avoiding the sterilisation of land for future development, and safeguarding landscapes, biodiversity, infrastructure, and residential amenity.
Item 9: Annual Financial Statement 2025
The Annual Financial Statement for 2025 together with a report was circulated in advance of the agenda.
N. Fitzgerald, Director of Service, Finance, Investment and Enterprise addressed the members and gave a brief presentation which addressed expenditure, Government Debtors, collection rates, net variances to Budget
& Capital expenditure.
The Elected Members noted that it had been an exceptional year for the Council, reflecting strong financial management by the executive team. However, they emphasised that, as public representatives, it is important to thoroughly interrogate the financial figures. Members expressed a desire for a greater involvement in the process and requested additional workshops, noting that the Annual Financial Statement (AFS) process is complex.
Queries were raised in relation to the overspend vs Budget, public lighting and commercial rates collection which were addressed by N. Fitzgerald.
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator then read out the resolutions to be approved:
In accordance with Section
108 of the Local Government Act 2001 and the Local Government (Accounting) Regulations 2014, the Annual Financial Statement of Clare County Council for the financial year ended 31 December 2025 be hereby adopted by the Council.
In accordance with Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001, Council approval is required for additional expenditure incurred by Divisions, as detailed in Note 16 (page 38) of the Annual Financial Statements, and for the approval of transfers as outlined in Note 14 (page 37), with further explanatory detail included on pages 8 and 9.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. O’Brien
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
That in accordance with S. 66 of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended by S. 43 of the Local Government Reform Act, 2014 Council approval is required for the payment to Clare Care Shannon.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Crowe
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
J. Corry, Meetings Administrator advised that in order to continue with consideration of reports, a suspension of Standing Orders was required, as the time for dealing with reports had exceeded the time allocated as per Standing Orders. This was agreed by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. P. Hayes.
Item 10: LCDC Annual Report 2025
Report dated 28
th
April, 2026 from Leonore O’Neill, Chief Officer, Clare LCDC was circulated with the agenda along with a copy of the Annual Report.
The report states that the Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) is a statutory committee of Clare County Council and includes representatives from local state agencies, the community voluntary sector as well as other local development and interest groups. The LCDC has prepared and oversees the implementation of the community elements of the Local Economic and Community Plan 2024- 2030 (LECP) which is a 6-year strategy for the County. The committee is also responsible for the Healthy Clare Action Plan and oversight of the Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme (SICAP) for Clare.
The report notes that the annual report has been prepared in the context of Chapter 2 Section 128B (1) (i) of the Local Government Act 2001, as inserted by the Local Government Reform Act 2014, which states that one of the functions of a Local Community Development Committee is: "to prepare, adopt and submit to the local authority a report in relation to the performance of its functions during the year immediately preceding the year in which the report is submitted".
The LCDC Annual Report 2025 was adopted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. J. Killeen, seconded by Cllr. S. Talty and agreed by the members present.
Item 11:
Climate Action Plan Progress Report 2026
Climate Action Plan Progress Report 2026 was circulated with the agenda.
The report gives an update on the progress and implementation of the Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029.
The report outlines progress on the following:
Clare Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029
Annual Progress Report 2025
Policy and Legislation
Sustainable Development Goals
Strategic Goals
Emissions and Energy Targets
ISO50001 Energy Management
Monitoring and Reporting
Climate Action in Practice highlighting:
Governance
Built Environment
Transportation
Communities & Partnership
Natural Environment
Decarbonisation Zone
The Climate Action Plan Progress Report 2026 was noted by the members present.
Anne O’Sullivan, Senior Engineer, Climate Action, Environment and Water Services gave a presentation to the elected members on the progress and implementation of the Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029.
Item 12: Annual Energy Review
Chris Dixon O’ Mara, Energy Officer, Climate Action, Environment and Water Services gave a presentation to the elected members on the Energy Performance Review.
The presentation covered the following:
Overview of Energy Management – ISO 50001 Accreditation.
Energy Consumption and Costs – Annual Energy Consumption 2019 – 2025 and consumption by Energy type.
Target and Legislation – Climate and Energy targets
Energy Projects in Transportation and Public Lighting
The Energy Performance Review was noted by the members present.
The elected members thanked Ms. O’Sullivan and Mr. Dixon O’Mara for their presentations, and they raised queries in relation to public lighting, arterial drainage, the Crusheen and Ballycar rail corridor, rollout of EV chargers and role of tidy towns.
Ms. O’Sullivan and Mr. Dixon O’Mara replied to queries raised by the elected members.
Item 13: Civic Reception
Report dated 5
th
May 2025 from John Corry, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services & Governance was circulated with the agenda. The report states that at the May meeting of the Corporate Policy Group (CPG) the members considered a nomination for a Civic Reception from Cathaoirleach Paul Murphy to honour Clare Civil Defence.  The nomination was made to the CPG in accordance with Standing Order Number 72.
The report notes that the proposal for the award of a Civic Reception is to acknowledge Clare Civil Defence and for over 70 years they have provided vital voluntary support to emergency services and the wider community. Their contribution spans emergency response, public event safety, search and rescue, and severe weather operations. In light of the national recognition of the organisation’s 75th anniversary in 2025, he proposed that a Civic Reception would be an appropriate acknowledgement of the outstanding service, professionalism, and commitment of Civil Defence volunteers in County Clare.
Having considered the nomination, the Corporate Policy Group recommended to Council the Award of a Civic Reception to Clare Civil Defence in recognition
of their outstanding voluntary support to emergency services and the wider community in Co. Clare.
This was approved by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. T. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. M. Shannon and agreed by the members present.
Item 14: Footpath Maintenance
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
“That Clare County Council confirms the kilometres of footpaths under Council responsibility across the county, breaks them down by Municipal District and outlines in the response the resources spent to upgrade, improve, clean and maintain these footpaths per Municipal District in 2025 and the projected spend per Municipal District in 2026.”
(Q)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“Under Section 10(5)(a) of the 1993 Roads Act each Local Authority as a road authority is required to maintain a roads register which provides a unique reference number and details the length and category of each road across the county. However, there is no such statutory requirement to maintain a footpath register and as such the level of detail required by the Notice of Motion i.e kilometres of footpath per Municipal District is not currently available or easily ascertainable.
The upgrading and improvement of footpaths in each Municipal District is typically a reactive maintenance approach and the funding allocated is detailed in Table 1. The funding for footpath remediation is from the Council’s own resources as detailed in the Schedule of Municipal District Works (SMDW). This funding can be further supplemented by both the Development Contribution scheme, for specific projects, and Active Travel measures.
Footpaths are predominantly a feature of urban settlement areas of which there are a total of 83 across the county consisting of key towns, small towns, large villages and small villages.
Footpath Programme SMDW
2025 Expenditure
2026 Budget
Ennistymon Footpath Programme (WCMD)
113096.32
97000
Kilrush Footpath Programme (WCMD)
103724.03
123000
Killaloe MD Footpath Programme
88704.8
111000
Shannon MD Footpath Programme
55302.62
35000
Ennis MD Footpath Programme
34000
34000
Table 1.
The resources required for the ongoing cleaning and maintenance of footpaths ie street cleaning is detailed in Table 2.
The variation in service delivery, resourcing and expenditure for footpath/street cleaning is due to the varying demands, number of settlements and geographic extent of each Municipal District.”
Municipal District
Expenditure (€) 2025
Budget (€) 2026
Staffing Resources
Vehicles Assigned
Ennis MD
966,440
1,069,000
10 full-time staff plus weekend cover
4 vehicles
Shannon MD
258,737
258,000
3 full-time staff
2 sweepers, 1 bin truck
Killaloe MD
136,104
132,000
1 full-time staff member
1 hired sweeper
Ennistymon (WCMD)
345,655
305,000
5-6 staff members
1 sweeper, 1 pick-up
Kilrush (WCMD)
312,907
299,000
5-6 staff members
2 sweepers, 2 pick-ups
Table 2
Cllr. D. Griffin thanked the Director for the reply and highlighted the need for a more robust and clearly defined policy on footpath maintenance. He noted the variance in the figures provided and emphasised that a more data-driven approach would be beneficial. Cllr. Griffin also referred to the disparities across the Municipal Districts and stated that the information provided would be useful in advance of upcoming budget discussions.
Item 15:
Tenant in Situ Social Housing Acquisition Programme
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to urgently review and address the under-utilisation of funding allocated under the Tenant in Situ Social Housing Acquisition Programme. Notwithstanding the significant allocation of €375 million by Government in 2025 for this scheme; as of 1 December 2025, only two local authorities had fully drawn down their allocations; and many local authorities have failed to utilise the full extent of ring-fenced funding available for second-hand home acquisitions. For County Clare the amount allocated by Government was €4m and the actual spend to date as of December 1, 2025 was €1,454,089.00.”
(M)
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy stated that where the local authority acquires a house, there is often no funding available to carry out necessary upgrades. She noted that if the Government is committed to increasing housing supply, this issue needs to be addressed.
It was agreed to take item 18 next.
Item 18: Tenant Purchase of Local Authority Homes
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council review its policy regarding the tenant purchase of newer local authority homes. Many tenants are paying significant rent and could be better supported through home ownership. Allowing suitable tenants to purchase their homes would provide long-term security for families while generating additional revenue for the Council to reinvest in the delivery of new social and affordable housing across County Clare.
The review should assess whether current restrictions on newer homes remain proportionate in the context of the ongoing housing crisis.”
(M)
A.
Farrell, Director of Service, Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation replied as follows:
“Clare County Council welcome the motion from Cllr Lynch in relation to Tenant Purchase Scheme. The existing Tenant Purchase Incremental Scheme allows for tenants to purchase their homes at discounted prices from market value at a discount based on household income and since the introduction the new scheme in 2016 eighty-six households in Clare have availed of the opportunity to purchase their homes.
Legislation prohibits the sales of certain properties under the scheme including apartments, houses specifically designed for occupation by elderly persons, houses specifically designed in a group setting for occupation by members of the Travelling community, houses in a private development transferred to the local authority under Part V Planning regulations.  In addition, at least one tenant in the household must be availing of social housing supports for ten years or more.
Clare County Council decided in 2023 to restrict sales to properties built or acquired pre 2016 in order to maintain new stock for a number of years before being sold. We are currently reviewing this restriction and reviewing other opportunities around the scheme. It is intended that the executive will bring proposals forward to the SPC in coming months for consideration.”
Item 16: Alternative Accommodation in Tourist Areas
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Shannon
Cuidithe ag Cllrs.
I. Lynch, R. McInerney, D. Gould, G. Keating
agus glacadh leis
“
Following yet another road traffic incident at Darragh and further to a recent resident group meeting with the Minister, we call on Clare County Council to exercise its reserved function powers under the relevant Road Traffic legislation to introduce a reduced speed limit of 60km/h at Darragh, in the interests of improving road safety for residents, pedestrians, cyclists, school traffic and all road users.”
(M)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“The making and adoption of bye laws, including speed limits, is a reserved function of the Members under section 199 of the Local Government Act 2001. However, in relation to speed limit bye laws on the national road network, consideration must also be given to the Road Traffic Act 2004 as amended. Section 9 (7) of this Act states that a County Council or City Council shall not make bye-laws under this section relating to a national road or a motorway without the prior written consent of the National Roads Authority (Transport Infrastructure Ireland TII).
Clare County Council are working with TII, the Members and the local community to deliver a safety scheme at this location. The Council have submitted a Safety Scheme Feasibility and Options Report to TII in December 2025 for their review.”
The Elected Members raised concerns regarding the number of serious accidents occurring at this junction. They noted that a public meeting was held last October, at which a committee was established to address the significant public safety issues associated with the junction in Darragh.
Members highlighted the strong level of community support for improvements and emphasised the need for urgency in implementing measures to prevent further accidents and enhance safety.
They also noted that lorries parking along the roadside are adversely impacting visibility and should be addressed as part of the overall safety response.
It was proposed by Cllr. M. Shannon, seconded by Cllr. J. Garrihy and agreed by the members present that the duration of the meeting be extended to 6.30p.m. in order to complete the business of the meeting.
Item 17: EV Charging Facilities
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Guilfoyle agus glacadh leis
“To ask Clare County Council to ask the relevant Minister to advise how best to allow people that live in flats and terraced houses or houses without driveways how they can safely charge their EV cars.
A great deal of people are now choosing to use EV cars but many people in high rise flats or those that have no driveways have no way to charge their cars. The placing of cables across public pathways is a trip hazard. Is there a possibility of setting up communal chargers in areas where people cannot safely charge their cars on their own property?”
(M)
The elected members noted that residents of terraced or landlocked properties, as well as those living in high-rise apartments, have indicated an interest in purchasing electric vehicles but currently lack access to suitable charging infrastructure. Members referenced the Climate Action Plan and emphasised that, for its objectives to be achieved, it is essential that the Government progresses the necessary supporting initiatives.
Members agreed that the provision of EV charging facilities across local authority housing stock would represent a positive and practical step forward. They also noted that while local community groups have expressed an interest in facilitating such developments, concerns have been raised regarding the potential impact on their insurance premiums.
C. Kirby, Director of Service, advised that the Private Wires Bill is currently being drafted by the Government and is expected to address the issues raised by members, including enabling provisions for domestic charging infrastructure.
Item 19: Vacant Homes Scheme
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Ryan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Killeen agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, James Browne, to expand to the current Vacant Homes Scheme by extending the timescale for completion of works from the current 13 months to 18 months.
Also, to further expand the scope of the grant by relaxing the eligibility criteria to include prospective purchasers who, due to the current housing crisis, are required to reside in the historically vacant property once acquired.”
(M)
The elected members referred to the Vacant Homes Scheme and noted that the motion seeks to improve accessibility and uptake of the scheme. Members observed that many of these properties are relatively habitable; however, challenges in securing tradespeople have impacted the timely completion of works.
Members proposed that the current 13-month timeline for completion should be extended to 18 months to better reflect these challenges. They further noted that the renovation of older properties is significantly more labour-intensive than the construction of new homes, and this should be considered in the administration of the scheme. The elected members highlighted the ongoing shortage of skilled labour, which is contributing to delays in project delivery.
Item 20: Housing Roadshow
Ar moladh Cllr. R. McInerney
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council build on its previous consideration of outreach housing information clinics by establishing a coordinated series of multi-agency housing support roadshows across the county, to be delivered from September 2026, aimed at assisting individuals, couples and families in navigating the wide range of housing supports now available.
These roadshows should bring together relevant national and local stakeholders including the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland, Revenue Commissioners, the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, and approved housing bodies, alongside Clare County Council’s Housing Directorate.
The clinics should provide clear, accessible, and practical guidance on schemes including but not limited to: the Help to Buy (HTB) Scheme, First Home Scheme, Local Authority Home Loan, Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant, Croí Cónaithe (Vacant Property) Scheme, Above the Shop Living Scheme, SEAI energy upgrade grants, and other relevant supports for home purchase, construction, refurbishment and retrofit.
The objective of these roadshows would be to ensure that members of the public are supported in understanding eligibility, application processes, and how multiple schemes can be combined to make home ownership or refurbishment viable.”
(M)
A.
Farrell, Director of Service, Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation replied as follows:
“Clare County Council welcome the suggestion from Cllr McInerney in relation to a outreach clinics. Over the past 18 months we have run a number of external workshops ourselves in relation to various housing issues including Affordable Housing, Croi Conaithe, Defective Concrete Blocks, Vacant Home Refurbishment Grants. These workshops were very focused on individual aspects that were relevant in particular areas at a given time.
It is proposed to engage with other key stakeholders and agencies in relation to future opportunities to organise regional clinics which can be organised to provide guidance to members of public on multiplicity of housing options and housing supports available. We will keep the elected members informed in relation to such planned events and look forward to your ongoing support around same”.
The elected members welcomed the positive response and acknowledged the significant value in expanding outreach in relation to housing supports. Members noted that many individuals were unsure where to begin when seeking housing assistance and often experience confusion and uncertainty regarding the overall process.
Members further highlighted that some of the available schemes can be complex, leading to a lack of clarity around eligibility criteria and how the various supports interact with one another.
Item 21:
Road User Visibility
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“Calling on Clare County Council to write to the Minister for Transport to introduce legislation making it mandatory for pedestrians and cyclists to wear Hi-Vis Jackets/Vests in the interest of public safety.”
(M)
The elected members noted that, as daylight hours increase, pedestrians and cyclists may be less likely to wear high-visibility clothing. Members noted that this may give rise to safety risks, particularly at dusk, when individuals may set out in daylight but return in darkness, thereby increasing the risk to personal safety where appropriate visibility measures are not in place.
Members suggested that an awareness campaign could help address this issue, while also acknowledging the challenges associated with changing established behaviours. They further noted that schools could play an important role in raising awareness among children regarding the importance of road safety and the use of high-visibility clothing.
Item 22: Rural Planning Guidelines
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“We compliment the Planning Section on their work on the proposed variation to the County Development Plan and welcome the huge volume of submissions received.
We call on the Minister to release the Rural Planning Guidelines as soon as possible which we hope will ease up restrictions on one off rural houses.”
(M)
The elected members noted that, with the process to carry out a variation to
the County Development Plan currently underway, there has been a significant level of interest in Clare, as reflected in the volume of submissions received. Members commended the work of the planning team in managing this process.
Members further observed that certain areas within the county are experiencing rapid growth and emphasised the importance of putting strategic plans in place to effectively manage and support this development into the future.
The members noted that Ireland would benefit from a more transformative approach to planning, with members highlighting an overreliance on ad hoc developments, which can result in a mismatch of services. In this context, members advocated for a more co-ordinated, inter-agency approach to planning and service delivery.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed:
____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed:
_____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:
_____________________________
Content managed by
Corporate Services and Governance
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback