Minutes of the June 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council | Clare County Council
Skip to main content
Minutes of the June 2026 Monthly Meeting of Clare County Council
Location:  Held in the Council Chamber, Áras Contae an Chláir, New Road, Ennis, Co. Clare and via MS Teams
On:  	Monday 8th June 2026 
Time:  	3pm
Present
Councillors
Cllrs. P. Daly, M. Howard, P. Murphy, A. Baker Bashua, T. Guilfoyle, C. Colleran Molloy, T. O’Callaghan, P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. Burke, T. O’Brien, C. Ryan, D. Griffin, R. Hartigan, P. O’Gorman, M. Begley, T. Mulcahy, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, S. Talty, J. Killeen, D. Gould, G. Keating, M. Shannon.
Officials
Mr. Gordon Daly, Chief Executive.
Mr. John Corry, Meetings Administrator.
Ms. Aoife Coote, Assistant Staff Officer, Corporate Services & Governance.
Ms. Ann Reynolds, Director of People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services.
Ms. Noeleen Fitzgerald, Director of Finance, Investment & Enterprise.
Mr. Jason Murphy, Director of Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development.
Dr. Carmel Kirby, Director of Transportation, Climate Action, Environmental & Emergency Services.
Mr. Adrian Headd, Senior Engineer Housing Activation and Delivery.
Ms. Siobhan McNulty, Director of Tourism, Recreation, Libraries & Cultural Services.
Present via MS Teams:
Cllrs. J. Crowe, I. Lynch, R. McInerney
Absent:
Cllr. J. Ryan
Presiding
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy presided.
Votes of sympathy
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following:
The Dillon Family, on the death of Danny Dillon, RIP.
The Brosnan Family, on the death of Justin Brosnan, RIP.
The Myles Family, on the death of John Myles, RIP.
The McInerney Family, on the death of Gerard McInerney, RIP.
The Harris Family, on the death of Charlie Harris, RIP.
The McCarthy Family, on the death of Margaret McCarthy, RIP.
The O’Halloran Family, on the death of Thomas O’Halloran, RIP.
Cllr. P. Burke commended Cathaoirleach Cllr. P. Murphy on his “Mind over Miles” charity cycle, which took place on Saturday, 6 June in aid of the Clare branch of the Samaritans. Cllr. Burke noted that it was a significant achievement in support of a very worthy cause.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy expressed his gratitude to all members for their support and acknowledged those who participated in the event, as well as the volunteers who contributed throughout the day.
Item 1: Minutes of Council Meetings
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the May Meeting of Clare County Council held on 11
th
May 2026 be adopted and signed.”
Cllr. P. Hayes requested an update on the upgrade of the Junction 13 Tulla Road off-ramp, noting that while TII had previously agreed to the works, no progress has been evident to date.
C. Kirby, Director of Services, advised that planning documentation is currently being prepared by TII; however, there is no confirmed timeline for the project at present.
Cllr. P. Hayes requested that a further update be provided at the July Council meeting.
Item 2: Matters Arising
There were no matters arising
Item 3: Correspondence/Comhfhreagras
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda.
Correspondence dated 29
th
May 2026 from Taoiseach Micheál Martin, T.D. to Timmy Dooley, T.D. in relation to cost of living measures.
Correspondence dated 21
st
May 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in relation to EV Charging Facilities.
Correspondence dated 25
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant.
Correspondence dated 25
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Tánaiste and Minister for Finance in relation to home insurance.
Correspondence dated 28
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Health in relation to Cardiovascular Health.
Correspondence dated 7
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine in relation to the Chair of Bord Bia.
Correspondence dated 21
st
May 2026 from the Minister for Transport in relation to Funding for the N68.
Correspondence dated 12
th
May 2026 from the Director of the National Ambulance Service in relation to ambulance response times.
Correspondence dated 12
th
May 2026 from the Chief Executive of the National Screening Service in relation to the BreastCheck programme.
Correspondence dated 28
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Agriculture in relation to fuel tax relief and support for farmers and contractors.
Correspondence dated 25
th
May 2026 from the Minister for Transport in relation to the Limerick Northern Distributor Road (LNDR).
Acknowledgement dated 21
st
May 2026 from the Office of the Taoiseach in relation to cost of living measures.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Tánaiste and Minister for Finance in relation to cost of living measures.
Acknowledgement dated 14
th
May 2026 from Joe Cooney T.D. in relation to cost of living measures.
Acknowledgement dated 14
th
May 2026 from Minister of State, Timmy Dooley T.D. in relation to cost of living measures.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in relation to the Tenant in Situ Social Housing Acquisition Programme.
Acknowledgement dated 13
th
May 2026 from the Office of the Minister for Agriculture in relation to tax relief on electricity, gas and all fuels.
Resolution dated 28th May 2026 from Galway County Council in relation to CETA Trade Agreement.
Resolution dated 18
th
May 2026 from Longford County Council in relation to the Just Transition Tourism Activators.
Resolution from Waterford City and County Council in relation to the Disability Act 2005.
Resolution dated 16
th
April from Waterford City and County Council in relation to Bus Éireann’s Expressway Services.
Item 4: Minutes of Municipal District Meetings
a.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Daly agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Ennis Municipal District Meeting held on the 14 April
, 2026
be noted.”
b.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Burke
Cuidithe ag Cllr. A. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Killaloe Municipal District Meeting held on the 25 March
, 2026
be noted.”
c.
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Begley
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. O’Gorman agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the Shannon Municipal District Meeting held on the 20 March
, 2026
be noted.”
c.
Ar moladh Cllr. B. Slattery
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That the Minutes of the West Clare Municipal District Meeting held on the 26 March
, 2026
be noted.”
Item 5: Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meetings
The members noted the minutes of the meeting held on 5 May, 2026 as presented.
Item 6: Monthly Management Report
The Monthly Management report attached to the agenda included key activities in the principal service areas and was noted by the members.
Item 7:
Disposal of land at Kilferagh, Kilkee, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property Management Department was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the land (by Deed of Exchange) at Kilferagh, Kilkee, Co. Clare to Martin Costello subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 21
st
May 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves, pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of the disposal of the land (by Deed of Exchange) at Kilferagh, Kilkee, Co. Clare to Martin Costello subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 21
st
May 2026.”
Item 8:
Disposal of land at Shannon Hibernians FC Grounds, Riverside Park, Shannon, Co. Clare pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000.
Report from Carmel Greene, Senior Executive Officer, Land Activation, Derelict Sites and Property Management Department was circulated with the agenda together with a map. The report states that it is proposed to dispose of the land (by Lease) at Shannon Hibernians FC Grounds, Riverside Park, Shannon, Co. Clare
to Shannon Hibernians FC, Riverside Park, Shannon, Co. Clare
subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 27
th
May 2026.
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Mulcahy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“Notice having been served pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, Clare County Council approves, pursuant to the powers vested on it at Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended, of the disposal of the land (by Lease) at Shannon Hibernians FC Grounds, Riverside Park, Shannon, Co. Clare
to Shannon Hibernians FC, Riverside Park, Shannon, Co. Clare
subject to the conditions as set out in the notice served on the members dated 27
th
May 2026.”
Item 9: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed Serviced Sites Development on Council Lands at Rooska Lisdoonvarna Co.Clare.
Report dated 2
nd
June, 2026 from Morgan Lahiffe Acting Director of Service, Housing Delivery, Infrastructure Provision & Land Activation and Planning Report dated 22
nd
May, 2026 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination) and map. The reports outline details of proposed development at Rooska Lisdoonvarna Co.Clare, which includes the following improvement works:
A new access and internal access roads and associated footpaths. The main spine road would have a width of 5.5 metres and the side roads would have widths of 5 metres. The adjacent footpaths would be 2 metres wide. The proposed footpath provision would connect to the existing footpath at the front of the Rooska housing estate. The existing roadside boundary in the east of the site would be setback and the area between the new roadside boundary and the road would be levelled and grassed.
Within the site 3 vehicular turning heads are to be provided.
The provision of a
“native meadow area”
in the west of the site with pedestrian access to same. The development would also accommodate a number of communal open space areas that would be grassed.
The alteration of the site boundaries of the existing dwellings to the immediate south and east of the proposal site and the provision of private access and parking areas for the dwellings.
Connection to the public water main and sewer. The water main is located on the public road to the front of the site. The sewer connection would be to the existing combined sewer which passes through the rear of the site.
Two onsite hydrocarbon interceptors and surface water attenuation areas. These would be located beneath the communal open space areas.
Landscaping works which would include hawthorn, buckthorn, holly, spindle, and blackthorn along the bank of the Knockaunvickteera Stream to the rear. Hedgerow planting is proposed to the side and rear boundaries of the individual serviced sites. Terraced gabion basket retaining wall structures are required at the rear of plot numbers 5 to 8.
The installation of 12 6-metre-high external lights both within the site and along the roadside footpath.
Each site would be provided with front and rear amenity areas and access onto the internal estate roads. Plot number 1 at the entrance to the estate would also be provided with a pedestrian gate for accessing the adjacent footpath.
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Garrihy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. B. Slattery agus glacadh leis
Cllr. J. Garrihy welcomed the serviced sites initiative, noting that it has taken four to five years and significant effort by the housing team to bring it to this stage. He described it as a positive development and expressed hope that it can be replicated across the county.
Cllr. Garrihy further stated that the initiative will provide young people with confidence in their ability to build their own homes and has the potential to revitalise towns and villages. He urged the Council to closely review this pilot scheme, with a particular focus on affordability and long-term viability.
Cllr. M. Shannon also welcomed the initiative, describing it as an excellent concept and highlighting the positive community benefits associated with the scheme.
Item 10: Report in accordance with Part XI, Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2013 for the proposed development at Raheen Road, Tuamgraney, Co. Clare.
Report dated 22
nd
May, 2026 from Eoint Troy, Senior Executive Officer, Killaloe Municipal District and Planning Report dated 19
th
May, 2026 from Helen Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development was circulated with the agenda (including Clare County Council’s appropriate assessment and determination). The reports outline details of proposed development at Raheen Road, Tuamgraney, Co. Clare, which includes the following improvement works:
Construct new footpath linking Tuamgraney village to existing amenity trail at Raheen Road, Tuamgraney, Co. Clare
Construct new raised zebra crossing
Provision of pedestrian counter and outdoor seating area
All ancillary site works
As the Chief Executive’s report had been duly considered by the members, in accordance with Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, and Part VIII, Article 80 and 81 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended, and as there was no proposal to vary or modify the development, and as there was no proposal to refuse the development, accordingly, the development can proceed as outlined.
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Hayes
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Burke agus glacadh leis
Item 11: Consideration by the Members of the Proposed Variation No. 1 to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy invited J. Murphy, Director of Service to introduce the variation. Mr Murphy outlined the variation as follows:
The proposed variation was commenced on 6
th
March 2026 with a public consultation stage which ran to 7
th
April in line with Section 58 (4) of the Planning and Development Act 2024, as amended.
The content of the proposed variation that was placed on display included:
Introduction and Description of the Proposed Variation
Volume 1 Written Statement
Volume 2 Maps
Volume 3a(i) Ennis and Clarecastle Settlement Plans
Volume 3a(ii) Ennis Municipal District Settlement Plans
Volume 3a(iii) Ennis 2040 Economic and Spatial Strategy
Volume 3a(iv) Ennis Local Transport Plan
Volume 3b Shannon Municipal District Settlement Plans
Volume 3c Killaloe Municipal District Settlement Plans
Volume 3d West Clare Municipal District Settlement Plans
Environmental Report – Strategic Environmental Assessment
Environmental Report Non-Technical Summary – Strategic Environmental Report
Natura Impact Report – Appropriate Assessment
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
J. Murphy outlined the reasons for the proposed variation were:
To align the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 with the NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirement’ Guidelines for Planning Authorities issued under Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended (2025).
To implement the decision to propose a variation to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 to change the zoning of lands in accordance with the Finance Act 2021, as amended by the Finance Act 2024, and the policy and guidance in the Residential Zoned Land Tax - Change in zoning of land subject to existing economic activity Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2024).
To incorporate ‘Ennis 2040 Economic and Spatial Strategy’ into the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 to inform future patterns of land-use zoning in Ennis and support the effective implementation of the NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirement’ Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2025).
To incorporate ‘Ennis Local Transport Plan’ into the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 to inform the future comprehensive pattern of land-use zoning of Ennis and support the effective implementation of the NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirement’ Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2025).
To align the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 with the Sustainable Residential Development and Compact Settlements Guidelines for Planning Authorities issued under Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended (2024).
As part of the public consultation stage 701 submission were received.
Under Section 58 (11) of the Planning and Development Act 2024, as amended - the CE circulated his report on the submissions to the Elected Members on 30
th
April 2026.  This report summarised each submission received, gave the CE response to the issues raised taking account of the proper planning and development of the area, the statutory obligations of the planning authority and any relevant policies or objectives.  The report also set out his recommendation to the Elected Members.
The Elected Members were asked to consider the proposed variation as advertised along with the CE report furnished to them and it was opened to the floor for discussion and consideration. The elected members confirmed their consideration of proposed Variation and CE Report.
The members then considered that a modified version of the proposed variation should be made
By Resolution:
“a) The proposed Variation No.1 to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029, dated 6th March 2026;
b) The associated Strategic Environmental Assessment (Environmental Report); Appropriate Assessment (Natura Impact Report) and the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, dated 6th March 2026;
c) The "Chief Executive's Report to the Elected Members on submissions received to the Proposed Variation No.1 to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029, dated 30th April 2026, (issued in accordance with the provision of Section 58(11) of the Planning and Development Act 2024, as amended;
d) The modifications made at this meeting in the Variation No. 1 Resolution Booklet, dated 8th June 2026;
e) Project Ireland 2040: The National Planning Framework;
f) The Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy of the Southern Assembly;
g) The National Marine Planning Framework;
h) The policies and objectives of the Minister contained in the Guidelines prepared under Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended);
i) The statutory obligations of the local authority in this area; and
j) The proper planning and sustainable development of the area;
k) The Council's determination, in accordance with Section 177V of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), that the proposed variation is not likely to have any adverse effects on the integrity of any European site within, or adjacent to, the plan area the Council hereby resolves, in accordance with the provisions of Section 58(12) of the Planning and Development Act 2024, as amended, to make a modified version of proposed Variation No.1 to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029:
1)
To include all recommendations in the Chief Executive's Report to Elected Members of 30th April 2026 on submissions received with respect to the proposed Variation No.l to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029, except where altered or modified by resolutions set out in the attached resolution booklet:
Variation No.1 Resolution Booklet, dated 8th June 2026:
Part A- Shannon Municipal District
Part B - Killaloe Municipal District
Part C - West Clare Municipal District
Part D - Ennis Municipal District
2)
To amend the proposed Variation No. 1 to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 to correct various identified errata:
General formatting and spelling corrections where they do not materially change the effect of the text or objectives;
Updating information, tables, mapping and site labels.”
Provide or arrange assistance and guidance to people with disabilities
Act as a point of contact for accessibility issues within the organisation
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. Mulcahy agus glacadh leis
Following the agreed modification and resolution, J. Murphy confirmed the following:
Clare County Council (as the Competent Authority) has determined pursuant to Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive and in accordance with Section 177V of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) that there is no risk of adverse effects on the integrity of any European Site as a result of the making of the Variation to the Clare County Development Plan 2023-2029 including the proposed minor modifications subject to the implementation of the mitigation measures identified within the Natura Impact Report contained in Volume 10 (a) of the CDP and the Natura Impact Report which accompanies the Variation. In preparing this determination, the Council has considered the relevant matters specified under Part XAB of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended).
Item 12: Annual Report 2025
The Annual Report was circulated in advance of the agenda was noted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. P. Hayes and seconded by Cllr. D. Griffin.
Cllr. P. Hayes remarked that, upon reviewing the Annual Report, he was struck by the scale of work undertaken by the Council. He commended the Executive and the team responsible for preparing the report, noting that it provides a valuable insight into the range of activities carried out by Clare County Council.
Cllr. M. Begley noted an error on page 117 of the report, where reference is made to “Belfast Councillors”; he clarified that this should instead read “Shannon M.D. Councillors.”
Item 13: Strategic Management Plan for Clare Museum.
The Strategic Management Plan for Clare Museum 2026 -2030 was circulated with the agenda. The plan sets out the clear vision for Clare Museum and notes that Clare Museum stands as a cornerstone for regional heritage and cultural pride, serving as one of twelve local authority-run museums in Ireland.
The plan states that the development of this Strategic Management Plan for Clare Museum has been grounded in a comprehensive and collaborative consultative process. Recognising the Museum’s important role in safeguarding and interpreting the rich cultural heritage of County Clare, the process sought to ensure that the direction set out in this document reflects the insights, needs and aspirations of those who work closely with, contribute to, and are served by the Museum.
The report was noted by the members present having been proposed by Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy and seconded by Cllr. G. Keating.
Item 14: Section 66 funding to Kilrush Amenity Trust.
Report from Siobhán McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services was circulated with the agenda. The report states that Kilrush Amenity Trust CLG is a company limited by guarantee wholly owned by Clare County Council. The Company operates as a designated vehicle through which the Council delivers and supports community, tourism and amenity-based services in Kilrush.
The principal activity of the Company is the operation and maintenance of the Vandeleur Walled Gardens and associated facilities in Kilrush. The ongoing operation of the facility aligns with the Council’s broader strategic objectives in relation to tourism development, community amenity provision and regional economic activity.
The report states that the Company is currently operating at a deficit and has not achieved a sustainable break-even position as originally envisaged. The expanded scale of operations has resulted in recurring operational shortfalls and there remains an intercompany debt position between the Company and Clare County Council arising from previous funding arrangements.
A review of business operations based on the finalisation of the 2025 accounts has identified that, while there are opportunities for improved performance over time, the Company will require continued financial support in the short to medium term.
In light of the financial position outlined above, approval is sought for the provision of a subvention to Kilrush Amenity Trust CLG pursuant to Section 66 of the Local Government Act 2001. The report notes that this will support ongoing operations, address the current deficit position, and protect the Council’s investment in the asset.
Ar moladh Cllr. G. Keating
Cuidithe ag Cllr. M. Shannon agus glacadh leis
“That in accordance with S. 66 of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended by S. 43 of the Local Government Reform Act, 2014 Council approval is required for the payment of €120,000 to Kilrush Amenity Trust Ltd.”
Item 15: Glór Policy
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan, A. Baker Bashua agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council seek a report from the management of Glór, Ennis outlining the current policy governing the use of the publicly funded venue for political, civic, religious, cultural and community events, including clarification on whether any categories of events or organisations are excluded from access to the facility.
The report should further detail:
1. The criteria applied when assessing booking applications;
2. Any restrictions currently in place regarding political or religious events;
3. The rationale for such restrictions, if they exist; and
4. Whether the current policy is considered consistent with the role of Glór as a
publicly funded cultural and community venue serving all sections of the
community.”
(Q)
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services replied as follows:
“glór is a Designated Activity Company (DAC) wholly owned by Clare County Council. It operates with charitable status, with the primary purpose of advancing the arts, culture, heritage and science in the County through the management and operation of the arts centre.
glór delivers a busy year-round programme of artistic, cultural, educational and community activity and aims to serve a broad and diverse public.
Clare County Council will seek a report from the management of glór in relation to the matters raised. The requested report will outline the current practice governing use of the venue and will be circulated in due course.”
Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy queried if the report will be brought forward as an item on the Council agenda.
S. McNulty, Director of Services confirmed that the report will be circulated to the elected members when it is received from glór.
Item 16:
Public Safety
Ar moladh Cllr. C. Colleran Molloy
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Justice, Jim O'Callaghan TD, further to his recent visit to County Clare,
to:
1. Roll out a national public information and awareness campaign to ensure that members of the public are fully informed that the emergency numbers 999 and 112 should be used to report all forms of public disorder, anti-social behaviour, threats to public safety, and criminal activity witnessed in communities;
2. Recognise the growing policing demands associated with Ennis being the largest town in Munster and the largest town on Ireland’s western seaboard, and accordingly commit to enhanced Garda resources and sustained high-visibility policing in Ennis and County Clare into the future;
3. Outline when, how, and under what operational circumstances the rollout of body-worn cameras for members of An Garda Síochána will commence in County Clare and nationally, together with the anticipated implementation timeline and resource commitments associated with same.
AND
4. That the County Clare Chief Executive, provide clarification as to why unlike many other local authority areas, County Clare has not seen the same level of local authority-supported rollout of public CCTV infrastructure in Ennis and other built-up communities across the County, and to outline what measures or supports may be required to facilitate such expansion in the interests of public safety and crime prevention, so that the elected members can authorise allocation of said resources.”
(M)
J. Murphy, Director of Service, Planning, Economic, Rural & Community Development replied as follows:
“County Clare has a strong and well-established sense of community, with a long-standing tradition of people looking out for each other. This has contributed to a strong sense of safety across our towns, villages and rural areas. While this remains a defining strength, it is acknowledged that perceptions of safety may not be the same in modern times, and it is appropriate that measures which can enhance reassurance are actively considered.
Clare County Council acknowledges the role that CCTV can play in supporting community assurance, enhancing a sense of safety, and assisting An Garda Síochána in the prevention and investigation of crime.
We are also cognisant of the need to balance these benefits with legitimate considerations regarding privacy, proportionality and data protection.
In addressing the question raised, the position in County Clare reflects the current statutory framework governing CCTV, rather than any unwillingness to progress provision. The Garda Síochána (Recording Devices) Act 2023 has established a new legal basis for CCTV in public places for crime-related purposes. Under this framework, any new scheme must be formally applied for by either a local authority or An Garda Síochána and approved by the Garda Commissioner, with robust evidence required to demonstrate necessity and proportionality.
A central requirement of the 2023 Act is the preparation of a statutory Code of Practice by the Garda Commissioner, in accordance with Section 47, which must be approved by the Minister before the framework can be fully operationalised. The draft Code of Practice has been subject to public consultation, and the local government sector made a submission through the Local Government Management Agency (LGMA). This Code of Practice is pending formal approval.
As soon as the Code of Practice is finalised and the pathway for applications is fully established, the Council will be in a position to assess the requirements, supports and resources necessary to facilitate any potential Community CCTV expansion and will bring forward proposals for consideration by the elected members.
Notwithstanding these constraints, Clare County Council continues to explore all appropriate options to strengthen community safety, including alternative solutions in technology where they can be demonstrated to be effective and compliant with the statutory frameworks. These options and initiatives are being actively progressed in collaboration with partners in the Local Community Safety Partnership and beyond, as part of a coordinated and evidence-based approach to enhancing safety across County Clare.”
The elected members noted that the visit by the Minister for Justice was productive, highlighting that the Minister emphasised the importance of reporting all incidents via 999/112 to assist in the creation of a “heat map,” thereby enabling the effective allocation of resources. Members further stressed the need for increased high-visibility policing, particularly as Ennis is the largest town in Munster. They also noted that the installation of CCTV can have a significant impact on reducing anti-social behaviour. In addition, members queried when it is anticipated that the Code of Practice will receive formal approval.
J. Murphy, Director of Services, welcomed the motion and advised that the Garda Commissioner is leading the project, with input from the CCMA. Mr. Murphy acknowledged that this is a pressing issue for the local authority and confirmed that a range of additional options are currently being explored which may assist in addressing the matter.
Item 17: Garda Presence throughout County Clare
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. R. McInerney, I. Lynch, B. Slattery, J. Garrihy, J. Killeen, D. Gould, M. Shannon, G. Keating agus glacadh leis
“Following on from recent meetings with Garda Management; Chief Supt Magner, Supt Ryan and the Justice Minister Jim O’Callaghan, we re-iterate our call on the Garda Commissioner and local Garda management to increase the Garda numbers throughout the county and to ensure that each area of the county is fully resourced in its own right. It is untenable that areas of the county are routinely left without their own Garda presence, so that more “strategic” locations are covered.”
(M)
The elected members noted that Gardaí are being redeployed from West and North Clare to support strategic policing requirements in areas such as Shannon Airport. Members highlighted that there are approximately 90 fewer Gardaí stationed in Clare compared to ten years ago, despite ongoing population growth and further seasonal increase due to tourism.
Members emphasised that public safety must remain a priority for all communities across County Clare and not solely for designated strategic locations. Concern was also raised regarding the current amalgamation of the Tipperary and Clare Garda divisions, with members expressing frustration and the view that Clare warrants its own dedicated division.
Item 18: Sewerage Schemes
Ar moladh Cllr. A. O’Callaghan
Cuidithe ag Cllr.
T. O’Callaghan
agus glacadh leis
“With over 50 villages currently unsewered in Co. Clare and in light of the potential development of privately led sewerage schemes, can an update be provided on the progress of the overall programme? Furthermore, can an update also be given on the status of the proposed pilot schemes for Broadford and Cooraclare”.
(M)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“Following the commencement of the Water Services (Amendment) Act 2022, Uisce Eireann is now the statutory authority with responsibility for wastewater services since 2014.
As highlighted, many of our towns and villages are unsewered and wastewater infrastructure deficits are identified as a constraint in the delivery of housing.
S.I. No. 65 of 2026 (European Union (Water Policy) (Small Wastewater Discharge Registration) Regulations 2026)—aims to unlock these rural housing bottlenecks.
As the relevant statutory body Uisce Éireann has put in place arrangements to manage developer engagement under the initiative, including a structured pre-connection process and ongoing technical engagement on proposed developments. The developers submit their planning application for the housing development to the planning authority in the normal manner, demonstrating that the proposed infrastructure is in compliance with EPA Guidance, national, regional and local planning policy and relevant European Directives.
The intent of this Developer Led Initiative is to allow developers to construct localised wastewater treatment facilities for schemes up to 40 homes (or a 150 population equivalent). These smaller systems would operate under a streamlined registration system managed by "General Binding Rules". Once built to baseline standards, ownership would transfer directly to Uisce Éireann who will manage their ongoing operation, maintenance and regulatory compliance. Larger projects will be subject to the standard EPA authorisation process.
With respect to Broadford and Cooraclare Wastewater Treatment Plants, these are demonstration projects for delivery in partnership with Uisce Eireann through the National Measure A8 Schemes for the provision of wastewater in unsewered towns and villages.
Clare was one of five Local Authorities with successful bids under the scheme. There have been numerous engagements between the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage and the five Local Authorities to advance the projects. Final discussions are currently underway to reach agreement on the delivery mechanism and funding arrangements.”
The elected members expressed disappointment that the pilot schemes for Broadford and Cooraclare have not progressed to date. Members acknowledged that, while the allocation of €50 million is significant, delays may result in increased costs over time. Concern was also raised that, of the approximately 50 villages requiring wastewater treatment systems, only a small number may ultimately be delivered. Members further noted that they have received feedback indicating that Uisce Éireann has been slow to respond to queries, contributing to delays in the process.
C. Kirby acknowledged the members’ frustration but advised that there has been substantial engagement between the three principal parties: the Government, Uisce Éireann, and the five local authorities involved. She stated that the scheme design required review and discussions are underway to agree the mechanism for delivery between the three partners. Ms. Kirby reassured members that progress is being made as efficiently as possible and expressed confidence that the schemes will be delivered as planned.
Item 19: Ballycar Railway Flood Alleviation Works
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllr. P. Hayes agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council request an update from the Department of Transport on the Ballycar Railway flood alleviation works”
(M)
The elected members noted that approximately 800,000 passengers use this rail service line, highlighting its importance as a critical piece of infrastructure. They further observed that the line can be rendered unusable for periods of up to two to three months each year.
Members expressed frustration that the issue remains unresolved and noted that, had it been addressed in earlier years, the cost of remediation would likely have been significantly lower than at present.
Members queried whether there is ongoing engagement between Clare County Council and Irish Rail in relation to this matter.
In response, C. Kirby, Director of Services, advised that Clare County Council had convened a stakeholder group which reports to an Oireachtas Committee. She further advised that a meeting of all relevant agencies is being convened and that a report on the outcome will be brought back to the Council.
Item 20: Walking Trails Review
Ar moladh Cllr. A. Baker Bashua
Cuidithe ag Cllr. S. Talty agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council, in partnership with the Tourism Department, Fáilte Ireland, the Burren & Cliffs of Moher Geopark, Coillte, and local community groups, undertake a review of visitor information and wayfinding infrastructure on walking trails across County Clare.
The review should examine:
• improved and standardised trailhead signage and maps;
• clearer waymarking and safety information;
• QR-code digital trail information;
• accessibility grading and visitor facilities;
• enhanced heritage and environmental interpretation;
• and the development of a unified “Walk Clare” information system.
County Clare is internationally recognised for its walking routes and natural scenery, including the Burren, Cliffs of Moher, Loop Head, and East Clare Way. However, the quality and consistency of visitor information varies considerably between locations. Improved signage, navigation, accessibility information, and trail interpretation would enhance visitor safety and experience, support local tourism businesses, and further strengthen Clare’s reputation as a leading walking destination.”
(M)
S. McNulty, Director of Service, Tourism, Festivals, Libraries & Cultural Services replied as follows:
“Clare County Council welcomes this Notice of Motion and supports the ongoing enhancement of visitor information and wayfinding across the county’s walking trail network. The Council recognises the importance of clear, consistent and accessible information in supporting visitor safety, experience, and the wider tourism economy.
Any consideration of the matters raised should be guided by existing national and local policy frameworks, including
Embracing Ireland’s Outdoors: National Outdoor Recreation Strategy
, the Clare Outdoor Recreation Plan, and the Clare Tourism Strategy 2030, to ensure a coordinated and sustainable approach. The Council also notes that many walking routes in County Clare are registered under the National Walks Scheme, which supports their development, maintenance and promotion to an agreed national standard.
The Council acknowledges that the development and management of walking trails involves multiple stakeholders, including state agencies, community groups and private landowners, and operates within a complex delivery and maintenance environment. In this context, opportunities to enhance signage, wayfinding, interpretation and accessibility will continue to be considered where appropriate, having regard to available resources and relevant funding programmes.
Clare County Council will continue to work with relevant stakeholders to support the sustainable development and promotion of the county’s outdoor recreation offering for the benefit of local communities and visitors.”
The elected members noted that walking tourism is a growing sector and considered that the introduction of QR codes would be highly beneficial. The members advised that the provision of clearer and improved signage to better assist users of walking trails would be welcomed.
The members called for a comprehensive review of walking trails throughout County Clare and further noted that Clare Local Development Company should be engaged in this process and recommended that consideration be given to a rebranding of walking trails in Clare.
Item 21:
Derelict Sites Act 1990
Ar moladh Cllr. J. Killeen
Cuidithe ag Cllr. T. O’Callaghan agus glacadh leis
“We call on the Minister for Housing and relevant Ministers to update the Derelict Sites Act 1990 to reflect the situation in the county and country in 2026.”
(M)
The elected members noted that a significant number of derelict sites across County Clare are currently being progressed and commended the Derelict and Vacant Sites Team for the substantial improvements achieved throughout the county.
Members further observed that the relevant legislation, enacted in 1990, is in need of updating and highlighted that existing loopholes should be addressed.
They also acknowledged that, in some instances, derelict properties are inherited, which can result in the asset becoming a burden for the owner.
Item 22: Emergency Location Identifiers
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr. D. Griffin agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council should examine the installation of an Eircode or designated area reference, along with the relevant Emergency Service contact numbers, on all lifebuoy stations and water-safety points across the county. This may be delivered through a durable sticker QR code to assist the public, and particularly visitors, in quickly identifying their exact location when contacting emergency services at beaches, rivers, lakes, piers, and coastal walkways.”
(M)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“Clare County Council acknowledges the importance of maintaining and promoting water safety infrastructure across the county and welcomes the focus of this Notice of Motion on ring buoy provision, maintenance and public awareness.
The Council currently maintains a comprehensive register of ring buoys, which forms the basis for the structured management and monitoring of these critical life-saving devices.
Clare County Council’s Water Safety Development Officer (WSDO) will carry out an assessment of potential enhancements to the existing system. This may include the use of QR codes as suggested with a unique identifier for each ring buoy location and other relevant information.
The WSDO will develop and implement a targeted ring buoy awareness campaign, to be delivered on an ongoing basis throughout the year. This awareness initiative will seek to foster a sense of shared responsibility among the public, encouraging vigilance and appropriate use of safety equipment at aquatic environments.”
The elected members noted that including a designated area reference on all lifebuoy stations would be a low-cost measure with the potential to significantly reduce response times. They emphasised the importance of having this information readily available in emergency situations.
Members also sought clarification on the role of Water Safety Officer, and C. Kirby confirmed that Meabh Collins currently holds this position.
Item 23: Family Law Reform
Ar moladh Cllr. M. Howard
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council calls for urgent reform of Ireland's family law system.
Across Ireland, victim-survivors of intimate partner violence, abuse and coercive control are navigating family law proceedings that are deeply misaligned with the realities of abuse.”
(M)
The elected members noted that the Right to Transparency campaign is advocating for targeted reforms, including the removal of the in-camera rule while preserving the anonymity of those involved. Members acknowledged that rates of domestic violence are increasing and that such cases can be difficult to substantiate. However, they agreed that survivors must be supported and protected from further trauma.
The members also emphasised the importance of fostering open discussion around domestic abuse, free from fear of retribution or stigma.
Item 24: Flexible Coastal Plan
Ar moladh Cllr. S. Talty
Cuidithe ag Cllr. J. Garrihy agus glacadh leis
“Clare County Council put in place contingency plans to open toilets and have seven-day lifeguard cover at coastal locations in the event of fine weather in May or September.”
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“Under current legislation, the bathing season is formally defined as 1st June to 15th September, in accordance with S.I. No. 322/2024 – Bathing Water Quality (Amendment) Regulations 2024. The Council’s lifeguard service is structured and resourced in line with this statutory framework, which determines both operational planning and resource allocation.
A key factor in the delivery of the lifeguard service is the availability of suitably qualified personnel. For the 2026 season, Clare County Council employ 54 lifeguards, the majority of whom are recruited from a student cohort. This cohort is generally available only during the peak summer period, coinciding with the established bathing season.
As a result, the Council’s capacity to provide lifeguard cover outside these dates, specifically in May and September, is significantly constrained. The availability of trained, qualified, and experienced lifeguards during these periods cannot be reliably predicted in advance and is subject to considerable variability.
Any extension of services must ensure that adequate numbers of appropriately qualified and experienced lifeguards are available; all operational safety standards are maintained in full and that the service can be delivered in a consistent and effective manner.
It is recognised that there may be increased beach usage during favourable weather conditions in May and September, it is not currently feasible to plan or guarantee a full lifeguard service outside the statutory bathing season due to the constraints outlined above.
However, Clare County Council remains committed to taking a practical and flexible approach where possible.  In this regard we provided additional Lifeguard cover at Lahinch and White strand Milltown in May during the recent good weather. This approach balances public safety, operational capacity, and regulatory compliance, ensuring that any lifeguard service provided meets the required standards.
Clare County Council currently operates public toilet facilities at eleven coastal locations and other locations across the county. The majority of these operate on a seasonal basis from 1st June to 30th September, with year-round facilities provided at Lahinch, Spanish Point, and Diamond Rocks. Facilities at Doolin Pier operate on an extended seasonal basis, opening from early March through to November, aligning with the period during which ferry services are in operation. In terms of staffing, the service is currently supported by 4 permanent beach operatives, 14 seasonal staff, and local arrangements, including subcontractors, at 3 sites across the county.
In light of increasing variability in seasonal weather patterns, along with a growing number of visitors availing of coastal amenities outside the traditional peak summer season, Clare County Council is actively considering measures to extend the opening period of these facilities. The Council will seek to extend the operating season from 2027 onwards, where feasible and subject to additional resourcing of this important service to the public.”
The elected members welcomed the response from the Director and the level of services provided at these amenities. They noted that the objective is to ensure visitors have a positive experience at coastal locations beyond the traditional summer season. Members also acknowledged the significant work being carried out across coastal communities and highlighted the need for flexibility in service provision.
C. Kirby, Director of Service, acknowledged that the tourism season has extended and that Clare has been successful in attracting visitors to its coastal areas. Ms. Kirby advised that there are over 50 staff dedicated to beach-related duties, including lifeguards and general operatives, and that recruitment is ongoing for beach operatives. She further indicated that a review would take place at the end of the 2026 summer season, with a view to further enhancing the toilet facilities at these locations.
Item 25: Affordable GAA Coverage
Ar moladh Cllr. P. Daly
Cuidithe ag Cllrs. M. Begley, J. Crowe agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Arts, Media, Communications, Culture and Sport, Patrick O’Donovan T.D. and the Minister of State for Sport, Charlie McConalogue T.D. to utilise the public service broadcasting finances to facilitate, in providing more extensive live coverage of Gaelic games and better value for the customer especially older people, emigrants and those who can’t afford to attend live games.”
(M)
The elected members noted that RTÉ is a large organisation and that the GAA provides entertainment for all age groups. However, concerns were raised that certain key matches are not being broadcast on RTÉ and are instead only available via GAAGO on a paid basis.
Members highlighted that viewers are already required to pay an annual television licence fee and expressed concern at the additional cost of accessing these games. They further noted that older individuals, who may no longer be able to attend matches in person, may also lack access to Wi-Fi services and are therefore at risk of missing important fixtures.
Item 26: Local Improvement Scheme Applications
Ar moladh Cllr. D. Griffin
Cuidithe ag Cllrs.
P. Hayes, A. O’Callaghan, P. O’Gorman
agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council provides an overview of the current Local Improvement Scheme applications approved in the county and calls on the Minister for Rural Development to provide additional funding for the scheme by way of a mid-year allocation and increased funding in the years ahead.”
(M)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“In 2018 the Local Improvement Scheme (LIS) was re-introduced by
The Department of Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht
following its suspension for several years due to the economic downturn. Approximately 250 No. LIS applications were received under the LIS in 2018. Because the scheme was significantly oversubscribed, it had to be closed to new applications following that initial intake in 2018 and this remained the case until 2023 when the scheme re-opened briefly to new applications.
Since 2018, works on 169 No. non-public roads under the LIS have been completed. There are currently 99 No. LIS applications on file that are awaiting funding following the distribution of the initial 2026 funding allocation. An overview of these remaining applications is set out in the table below.
West Clare MD – Kilrush
West Clare MD Ennsitymon
Killaloe MD
Shannon MD
Ennis MD
2018 Applications
23
11
1
1
0
2023/2024
Applications
16
27
13
5
2
Total
39
38
14
6
2
Currently applications dating back to 2018 in the West Clare Municipal District are receiving priority and the majority of funding that is made available is currently allocated to West Clare.
An initial LIS funding allocation of €941,790 has been provided by the Department of Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht for 2026 which is facilitating works on 18 No. roads. In 2025 the total funding allocated under the LIS amounted to €1,658,399 and was received in two tranches (Round One €869,901 and Round Two €788,498).
It is estimated that approximately €6m is required to fund the current backlog of applications so an additional funding allocation for this year and increased funding going forward would be very beneficial to the delivery of the local improvement scheme.”
The elected members noted that the Local Improvement Scheme is a valuable initiative; however, they expressed concern that it is significantly underfunded. Members commended the team for the progress achieved to date but emphasised the need to highlight the funding shortfall.
They further stated that a six-year waiting period is excessive and stressed the importance of addressing the existing backlog to facilitate new applications. Members also underscored the vital role these roads play in supporting local communities.
Item 27: Access and Inclusion Officer
Ar moladh Cllr. T. Guilfoyle
Cuidithe ag Cllr.
A. Baker Bashua
agus glacadh leis
“That Clare County Council identifies a funding source for the appointment of a dedicated, full-time and fully resourced Access and Inclusion Officer.
This motion formally supports the Irish Wheelchair Association's Access It's No Joke Campaign, which highlights the critical need for a dedicated professional in every local authority to improve disability access to public services and amenities in our communities.
This appointment is sought to ensure the council fully meets its statutory obligations under Section 26 of the Disability Act 2005 and to align with the European Union (Accessibility of Websites and Mobile Applications of Public Sector Bodies) Regulations 2020.
This motion calls on Clare County Council to prepare a report on additional measures it has taken to enact the provisions of the Disability Act 2005, in the last 5 years, and this report to be shared with councillors and disability groups in the county.”
(M)
A Reynolds, Director of Service, People & Culture, Corporate Services & Governance, ICT & Digital Services replied as follows:
“Under Section 26(2) of the Disability Act 2005 each head of a public body is required to authorise at least one of his or her officers as an “Access Officer” to provide or arrange for and co-ordinate the provision of assistance and guidance to persons with disabilities in accessing its services.
The Access Officer’s role is to:
Senan Killeen, Acting Executive Architect, is assigned the role of Access Officer in Clare County Council. This role is fully funded by Clare County Council and is deemed sufficient for the duties as set out above.  All posts are reviewed periodically as part of the Council’s workforce planning process.
Other key public contact persons available within the organisation for assistance for people with disabilities and or disability/access related queries are:
Kennas Fitzsimons, Administrative Officer is the assigned Customer Care Coordinator
and Deirdre Power, Administrative Officer, is the assigned Equality Officer.
These posts are also fully funded by Clare County Council.
The principles of universal design and accessibility are embedded throughout the organisation, informing and guiding the delivery of all services and communications, as well as the planning and implementation of infrastructure projects. In that regard, as with all other relevant legislation, all staff have a responsibility to comply with the provisions set out in the Disability Act.
One of the key guiding principles of the development of the Council’s Workforce Plan is that the public are at the centre of everything the local authority does.  The quality of their interaction with us in accessing services, in participating and engaging in the local policies, projects and decisions that affect them is paramount.  A commitment to quality customer service, open communication and partnership working are fundamental to how our Council works.
There is no specific government funding source available for the post of Access Officer, it must be funded within the local authority’s own revenue budget process.
As requested in this motion, the Council will prepare a cross-directorate report on all actions/measures undertaken over the last five years to enact the provisions of the Disability Act 2005.”
The elected member emphasised that they do not wish to see an access office operating as a procedural formality, but rather support the establishment of a dedicated, full-time Access and Inclusion Officer. The member highlighted the importance of the local authority taking all possible measures to promote inclusivity and provide meaningful support to those in need.
It was further noted that local authorities are not currently receiving adequate funding from central government to effectively deliver on these initiatives. Members welcomed the review and requested that the findings and outcomes be communicated to all Councillors.
Item 28: Public Lighting Policy
Ar moladh Cllr. R. Hartigan
“That Clare County Council provide a report outlining its current public lighting policy, including the criteria used in assessing requests for new public lighting, the funding streams available for the provision of additional lighting, and any constraints which may prevent the installation of public lighting at locations identified by elected members or local communities as requiring same.”
(Q)
C. Kirby, Director of Service, Transportation, Climate Action, Recreation, Environmental and Emergency Services replied as follows:
“
Clare County Council
maintains
a Public Lighting Live Works Policy which is implemented through its Public Lighting Maintenance Works
contractor
.
The main priority for our
Public Lighting Maintenance Works
contractor is to maintain the existing lighting network and continue to deal with legacy issues such as concentric cabling.
In addition we assess and take in charge lighting infrastructure in new estates which have been taken in charge under the Planning and Development Act.
The criteria and constraints for assessing requests for new public lighting are as follows;
The existing lighting in the area is firstly analysed to determine if the luminescence meets the relevant design standard.
The availability of existing infrastructure such as ducting and power supplies are then located to determine if a connection of additional lighting is economically viable and feasible. The existing lighting infrastructure must also be in charge by the local authority if additional lighting units are to be added to that network.
Another consideration is where the proposed lighting is to be located i.e inside a 50/30 km/h speed limit zone serviced by footpath/active travel infrastructure or is the proposal in a more rural un-serviced area.
Any lighting proposal for the road network will also have to be reviewed by the road design section to ensure it does not inadvertently create an additional hazard or require vehicle restraint system protection (crash barrier) depending on the speed limit of the road in question.
The proposal is then reviewed under environmental considerations with our Biodiversity Officer in particular in relation to foraging patterns of nocturnal animals such as bats. We have recently carried out works with Transport Infrastructure Ireland to reduce the luminescence of lighting on the N85 as it could potentially interfere with the foraging and commuting area of the lesser horseshoe bat which a protected species under the Habitats Directive. We would also look to avoid unnecessary lighting (lighting pollution) in environmentally sensitive or rural areas.
It is important to note that public lighting can only be erected in areas under the control of the local authority.
We must also be mindful of our Climate Action Plan emissions targets and therefore minimise where possible any additional lighting units.
There is no dedicated funding stream for the provision of additional public lighting. Any requests will be assessed with our lighting maintenance contractor and the Municipal District engineering staff bearing in mind the criteria and constraints outlined.”
Cllr. R. Hartigan observed that the current focus appears to be on existing, older lighting infrastructure and highlighted that a number of areas requiring new public lighting are being overlooked. The Councillor noted that funding remains a significant challenge, with Municipal Districts already operating under considerable financial constraints. Cllr. Hartigan suggested the establishment of a dedicated fund for new public lighting to enhance public safety.
Conferences.
Reports on Seminars/Conferences attended.
With regard to seminars/conferences attended, reports completed in accordance with Section 142 of the Local Government Act 2001 were made available at the meeting.
Celtic Conferences “The Evolving Role of AI in Public Relations”, held in the Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford on the 6
th
to 8
th
March 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €699.63 including conference fee of €130.00.
It was agreed that Cllr. P. Burke attend this conference.
Cross Border Tourism Conference, held in the Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford on the 15
th
April 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €662.43 including conference fee of €24.60.
It was agreed that Cllrs. J. Crowe, D. Gould, B. Slattery, T. O’Brien, M. Begley,
G. Keating, T. O’Callaghan attend this conference.
AILG Annual Training Conference, held in Hotel Minella, Clonmel on the 22
nd
to 23
rd
April 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €514.59 including conference fee of €190.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. A. Baker Bashua, M. Begley, P. Burke, J. Crowe, P. Daly,
D. Griffin, J. Killeen, M. Howard, T. O’Brien, A. O’Callaghan, T. O’Callaghan,
P. O’Gorman, P. Murphy, M. Shannon, attend this conference.
AILG Women’s Regional Caucus Network, held in Tipperary County Council on the 29
th
April 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €101.13. There was no conference fee.
It was agreed that Cllrs. A. Baker Bashua, C. Colleran Molloy, M. Howard, attend this conference.
AILG Module 3 Training Programme entitled “Supporting Councillors: Responding to Mental Health, Suicide and Addiction Issues”, held in Hotel Kilmore, Cavan on the 21
st
May 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €584.10 including conference fee of €100.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. J. Killeen, T. O’Callaghan, M. Shannon, attend this conference.
AILG Module 3 Training Programme entitled “Supporting Councillors: Responding to Mental Health, Suicide and Addiction Issues”, held in The Whites of Wexford Hotel, Wexford on the 23
rd
May 2026.
The Meetings Administrator informed the Members that the estimated average cost per Councillor attending this Conference was €626.20 including conference fee of €100.00.
It was agreed that Cllrs. M. Begley, P. Burke, C. Colleran Molloy, J. Crowe,
P. Daly, D. Gould, G. Keating, T. O’Brien, B. Slattery attend this conference.
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. P. Murphy advised the members that this was his final meeting in the role of Cathaoirleach of Clare County Council and expressed his appreciation to all present for the courtesy extended to him throughout his term.
Conclusion
The meeting then concluded.
Signed:
____________________________
Riarthóir Cruinnithe
Signed:
_____________________________
Cathaoirleach
Date:
_____________________________
Content managed by
Corporate Services and Governance
Back to top
Was this page helpful?
Use our online form to tell us what you think of this page.
Give your feedback