 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY 3rd OF FEBRUARY 2020 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
 
ELAINE MCCARTHY 
ELAINE MCCARTHY 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Ordinary Meeting of the Wicklow County Council 
February 3rd, 2020 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon everybody. 
Just looking for votes of sympathy, if there's any?  
Cllr Dermot O'Brien. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Just like to express 
sincerest condolences of the family to Philip Doyle 
who passed away, I've known him since I was a child 
and I know the family very well, so I'd like to 
express that thanks. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, for Henke Didjkman, for Tom 
Finucane, who is father of our colleague Suzanne 
in Bray. 
And for Eugene McCann, brother of our colleague 
Catherine McCann   Just Cllr Miriam Murphy has 
given her apologies, her aunt passed away so if we 
remember sympathies as well. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To confirm and sign the minutes of 

ordinary meeting ... 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Two suspension requests, Cllr Gail 
Dunne, first. 
  
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you, I wish to suspend standing 
orders of the republic lighting around the county 
at the moment, 700 hundred lights out and we had 
a meeting with the municipal district and agree we 
would suspend standing orders to discuss this 
situation, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: 
MS GALLAGHER:  Seconder. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  I will. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Sorry, I hit Joe by mistake. 
  
CLLR BEHAN:  A number of members in north Wicklow 
know there's a crisis in school places in Colaiste 
Chraobh Abhann where we had a dreadful situation 
where a number of people who attend the local 
primary school who live in the village were not able 
to take part in the entrance exams because there 
aren't sufficient places in the local school so I 

would like to that we get an opportunity to discuss 
it for a few minute with a proposal that we would 
write to the Department of Education, to ask them 
to expedite their plans for proposed extension 
there, but perhaps we could discuss it for a few 
minutes at 4.30. 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  I support the proposal, it is 
basically a disaster what is going on, and the 
paperwork for the extension was signed of six years 
ago. 
So, the fact it hasn't happened in the past six 
years, for want of a better word is disgraceful, 
so we need to act on it and act on it now. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If we take suspension on standing 
orders although 4.30pm. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Can we extend that to other schools 
who have difficulties in place, like Templecarrig, 
St Andrew… 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We can have that discussion.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Can we bring it forward a bit rather 
than 4.30, this is something that we're probably 
all going to be in agreement with, we all know 
there's an issue with education and school 

provision in the county. 
MS GALLAGHER:  NTA, we are expecting them at 3pm. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  As soon as they're finished.  
Thank you. OK, item two on the agenda to consider 
the disposal of the ... 
We've done the minutes, excuse me to confirm and 
sign the minutes of the ordinary meeting of Wicklow 
County Council held on Monday, 13th of January.  If 
we proposed. 
MS GALLAGHER: Cllr O'Connor and seconded by Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke is that agreed?  Yes, thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item two to consider the disposal 
of 1.71 metres squared of Unit R4, First Floor, 
Bridgewater Shopping Centre Arklow which has been 
previously circulated by way of a 25-year lease to 
Arklow Maritime Heritage Museum, Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  It gives me great pleasure to 
propose this disposal.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed?  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr John Mullen. 
CLLR MULLEN:  The next one. 
Just in regard to the disposal of the Tinahely item, 
I'm connected to the committee, so I'd like to be 

excused for that please. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item three, to consider the 
disposal of 1.3086 hectares of land at Lugduff 
Tinahely, Community Area Projects Company Limited 
as previously circulated. 
Cllr Blake and Cllr Glennon are that agreed? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK, item four to consider the 
report in accordance of section 179 of the planning 
and development act Part 8 of the planning 
development regulations - the development of an 
enterprise hub at Wicklow County Campus Rathnew 
report is ... 
  
LINDA: I just like to say that I'm presenting this 
on behalf of Miss Delahunt, she's head of 
enterprise. 
The Chief Executive's report has been circulated 
for the Part 8 approval on the development of 
Enterprise Hub at Wicklow County Campus in Rathnew, 
a presentation was also made to the members of which 
OMD at their December meeting. 
As you all know County Wicklow has been associated 

with the film industry for a long time now and the 
development of this Enterprise Hub is only building 
on that success. 
Wicklow County Campus was bought by Wicklow County 
Council in 2006, it situated on 55 acres.  This 
slide shows the architect's impression of the final 
development. 
The hub will consist of 10,000 square feet and 
provide a mixture of hot desks, creative pods, 
co-working spaces, screening facility, a Podcast 
studio, Conference centre, and private office 
space.  There will also be meeting rooms and 
training facilities in the larger campus. 
What do we want the hub to achieve? 
We want it to provide a central one-stop shop for 
all the necessary supports are there for start-up 
and established screen content businesses. 
We want it to leverage the skills and expertise 
already present in the county and the region, and 
to support and strengthen the screen sector in the 
region resulting in a strong regional level 
enterprise ecosystem and cluster. 
And to contribute to the positions of Ireland as 
a global hub in the screen content creation sector. 

The time frame for the proposed works the 
architects were appointed in late 2019, and grant 
approval of 1.6 million was received from 
Enterprise Ireland in January, this year, and the 
completion of the Part 8 planning process hopefully 
this month February, construction tender Q1 to Q2 
this year, construction to commence in Q3 and 
appointment of manager in Q1 2021 with the opening 
of the Enterprise Hub in Q4. 
Yes, Q3 to Q4 2021, over the first five years of 
the Enterprise Hub we would hope that it will create 
and 150 new jobs, 40 and new and growing businesses, 
15 clients to grow to high potential start-up 
status, that's just some of the statistics. 
The closing date of submission was the 16th of 
January and we received four submissions. 
The first was from an Taisce which welcomed the 
project.  Gerry Johnston is interested in 
establishing a training facility for film and TV 
on the caplets.  Irish Water who asked that the 
applicant Wicklow County Council, would engage 
with them via the submission of a pre-connection 
inquiry and the fourth submission was received from 
the Department of Culture and Heritage and the 

Gaeltacht and they wanted a Bat Survey and 
Archaeology Impact Assessment to be carried out 
prior to works commencing.  The Chief Executive 
accepts the above submissions and recommend the 
proposed development of the Enterprise Hub proceed 
with a one modification that swift bricks be 
incorporated into the new build. 
The next few slides show the drawings that would 
have been on display and you're all very familiar 
with them at this stage. 
If you've any questions I'm happy to answer same 
and James O'Donoghue, our architect is here with 
me and he will answer any technical questions you 
may have.  
CLLR CULLEN: Thank you Linda for your presentation. 
I suppose first of all I want to welcome this Part 
8 proposal it has already come to the Wicklow 
Municipal District, and was greeted with certainly 
approval. 
I suppose, we have as has been said funding has been 
sought and receive for 1.4 million for this project 
from Enterprise Ireland, I suppose we have a 
potential of creating 150 jobs over five years 
which has to be welcomed for County Wicklow.  The 

development comprises of over 10,000 square foot 
of offices and coworking space, again which is 
something that certainly east and north Wicklow 
have been longing for quite a while particularly 
the part with the coworking spaces to avoid travel 
on the N11 and try to create more jobs in Wicklow. 
And I know a lot of work has been done by the 
architect on this over a number of years and that 
has to be welcomed and finally I want to 
congratulate O'Donoghue Architects, I know James 
is here with us with the wonderful design of the 
building, it certainly really modern and welcoming 
from the point of view of architectural point of 
view so I want to congratulate everybody involved 
thank you.  
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Again, I 
suppose through the Municipal District we were 
lucky to have a lot of engagement on this project 
along the line and we certainly did have the 
presentation that the members are receiving here 
today at our last Municipal District meeting, I 
want to commend everybody involved in this.  If it 
was only 15 jobs, I would welcome it.  But it is 
1350 jobs, I think it is a win/win. I welcome this 

to the village of Rathnew and this is a great 
project not just for east Wicklow and I know members 
are thinking it would be great to get 150 into your 
own Municipal District but this is a good news story 
for County Wicklow.  Ultimately it will grow and 
grow I want to take James, thank James for his input 
I know I would have had concerns initially in 
regards to the historical aspect to the 
outbuildings and that, the architectural theme, 
certainly took all that on board and come up with 
a fantastic design.  As I say, my only question 
would be Linda thanks for the presentation but just 
in the timescale of the delivery if you could give 
us a run down on how quickly, I know there's 
architectural questions and about the bat survey 
and that, but if we could have a timescale on this 
project thank you. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks for the presentation, indeed 
this is an exciting project for the county and item 
that is regularly voiced on our SPC, economic 
development SPC over the last two years in 
particular. 
And, you know, I'm glad to hear it is a one stop 

shop for startups and knock-on effect it will 
mitigate against and help with the long distance 
commutes, we have the NTA so I'm sure it is on that 
agenda but this will address some of the problems 
faced by long distance commuters and also the fact 
that we'll be with the supporting this the green 
sector, reading there over the weekend the huge 
potential of the green sector for the country as 
a whole, I think the profits and figures have 
doubled in recent years so there's massive 
potential for Wicklow and for the surrounding areas 
thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I have a proposer for this, 
Cllr Shay Cullen and seconder? 
Cllr Paul O'Brien. 
MS GALLAGHER:  We'll take a vote:    Excellent 
that's 34 and two not present. 
Thank you.  
JOHN:  Thank you members executive.  The time 
frame is summarised in the presentation at proposed 
works time frame, currently, if it is approved 
today I think it has been, or will be, then we go 
straight into the process of detail designed for 

preparation for tender documentation, there will 
be an E-tender competition notified, and aligned 
for the period of time before return of tenders 
assessment, of tenders and all of that.  We 
anticipate that the construction stage would 
commence in Q2/3. 
So construction commencing then, we have a fire 
safety certificate to receive and disability 
access to receive, they're well advanced we've no 
concerns about those, on the issues of the 
archaeology, we provided in the E-tender 
documentation for the design brief, the services 
of archaeologist were required so that's on hand. 
And that's, there's one section of the site to the 
north where there's some buildings, owned defunct 
buildings to be removed. 
That would be the subject of archaeological 
monitoring, while that work is going ahead so we 
envisage that. 
The type of construction and the existing buildings 
is not really about habitat per se but as precaution 
we're having a bat survey carried out on it.  It 
is not of great concern to us; we will be adding 
to the habitat with the swift boxes in terms of 

fauna. 
And construction Q3, all going well, then, that 
will lead to completion in the Q3-4, 2021 
comfortably. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much indeed. 
Item five on the agenda, to consider the Wicklow 
County Council Audit Committee Annual Progress 
Report.  And we're joined today by John the chair 
of the Audit Committee, Mary Savage and Noel 
Geraghty.  And while they're making their way up 
we'd like to say that this is the last official 
meeting for our director of services tomorrow Mr 
Murphy, he is retiring this Friday, and he has been 
I'm sure to everybody will agree, a fantastic 
member of staff here, has always been available and 
courteous and friendly and most helpful to all 
members and we wish him very well in his retirement.  
I'm sure he is going to be twice as busy now he's 
not going to be here all day. 
(APPLAUSE)  
CLLR BEHAN:  I know you want to get on with the rest 
of the meeting, I won't have the opportunity to meet 
Mr Murphy who will attend his last meeting in Bray, 

I want to wish him well in his retirement.  I first 
met him when I was elected in 1985 and he very 
shortly after came to Bray council as staff officer 
in the housing section, and as you have said, in 
all the time I've worked with him and we haven't 
always agreed on everything, let's be honest, I 
always found him to be a person of very amenable 
disposition and someone who would be very difficult 
to have a row with in fairness, and I genuinely 
appreciate all the time I spent working with him 
and I wish him very well and Joyce and family into 
the future. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Again on behalf of myself and 
staff I think Tom made an enormous contribution 
since he came here in 1979, I think as the 
Cathaoirleach said the personality we'll all miss 
and the professionalism, the work ethic, courteous 
manner and the way he supported staff and mentored 
staff and myself and all the elected members, he 
has overseen numerous election counts, and you 
know, he always remained calm any time we had a 
crisis so appreciate that.  We'll have something 
on Friday 4.00 in the canteen in any case but the 
advice best luck to him and his family. 

And just a point of information, Lorraine will be 
acting director services from Monday week thank 
you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK, and now, sorry Tom if you want 
to go ahead with your report.  
TOM:    Cathaoirleach, Chief Executive, members 
of the press, ladies and gentlemen, thank you 
Cathaoirleach to give us the opportunity to give 
you our report for the period up to 31st of 
December, 2019 the committee is a statutory 
committee established in accordance to section 59 
with the local government reformat 2019 it has five 
members which is:    We wish Edward well for the 
time he will be away.  And then we have a 
replacement of Cllr Mary Kavanagh, and Mary is an 
outstanding committee.  As I say Mary hit the 
ground running and she's very au fait with our remit 
and doing very well.  And then we have Cllr Gerry 
Walsh, and I made myself as chair.  The role of the 
Audit Committee is to support the elected members 
by providing an independent assessment of the 
corporate governance environment the quality of 
the risk management financial reporting financial 

management and internal audit. 
The committee is supported by assisted by Mr Thomas 
Murphy, director of services, Mr Gleeson ... 
  Internal audit assignments for 2019:  Following 
a tendering process in early 2018, Crowleys, DFK 
were appointed in March by Wicklow County Council 
to provide internal audit services to the council.  
And the following audit reports were finalised and 
reported on to the Audit Committee during the year. 
And they are:  Accounts payable, stores and 
machinery yard operations and value for money.  
Pre-letting repair costs, staff travel and review 
of the operation of low value purchase cards. 
All audits are assigned on assurance rating which 
represents the objective assessment of the control 
environment operating in the area under review.  
Further details on the audit are provided in 
appendix 1 to this report. 
Report to the national oversight and Audit 
Commission - public spending code and quality 
assurance report:    Internal audit in 
collaboration with procurement section completed 
with the annual quality assurance report as part 
of Wicklow County Council's compliance with the 

public spending code, the public spending code 
requires a number of project are selected in review 
in accordance with the objectives of the public 
spending code.  The report submitted included the 
required in-depth checks on the following areas.  
Wicklow Port Access and town relief road.  Coastal 
erosion protection works.  Part V agreement of the 
Thorndale, Delgany and housing grant schemes.  
Further details on the in-depth checks are also 
provided in appendix 1 to this report. 
Then we have the annual audit plan:  That sets out 
the proposed assignments of the coming year.  The 
plan has been drafted following consultation with 
the Chief Executive, directors of service heads of 
function and list of assignments reflects the 
ongoing objectives of achieving efficiencies in 
our process, adding value assessing the control 
environment and contributing towards the 
organisations strategic objectives.  Progress on 
these assignments will be reported to the council 
in due course. 
And then next item is meeting with the local 
government auditors, we are pleased to welcome to 
Mr Daragh McMahon, local government Auditor to the 

December meeting.  The members were circulated 
with the copy of the statutory audit report 2018 
from the local government Auditor in advance of the 
meeting. 
I am pleased to report to the members that the audit 
report is "unqualified" and in the opinion of the 
local government Auditor represents fairly the 
financial position of the council as at the 31st 
of December 2018. 
Furthermore, no audit adjustments arose as a result 
of the audit.  The local government auditor 
outlined the main elements of report to the 
committee.  In keeping with the best practice, the 
committee discussed the findings of the audit 
report with the local government auditor in the 
absence of the executive management.  Part of the 
discussion focused on the ring-fencing management 
environment.  Management have recognised the 
requirement to develop this area of expertise and 
are aware of the constantly changing environment. 
To this end, management are embarking on a series 
of training engagements which will provide the 
organisation with the appropriate skill set to 
update the risk register. 

As required by section 121 of the Local Government 
Act 20001, as amended by section 60 of the Local 
Government Act 2014 I have attached to a report to 
the council on the committee's consideration of the 
local government auditor's report in appendix 2. 
Another important item is procurement.  The 
members will be aware that adherence to procurement 
regulations and ongoing development and 
implementation of good procurement practitioner 
diss are crucial from the legal, value for money 
and efficiency and perspectives.  Wicklow County 
Council's Audit Committee has constantly been a 
strong advocate for the continued development of 
expertise in the procurement function. 
The December meeting received a report on the 
developments in the procurement section and we note 
and welcome the ongoing progress being made by the 
council in this area. 
The Audit Committee will of course continue to 
maintain oversight and stress the importance of 
good procurement practices 
The committee acknowledges the very positive audit 
report on the operation of the low value purchase 
cards.  This report compliments the strong and 

monitoring environment in the operation of the low 
value purchase cards which is resulting in improved 
payment times for our suppliers and reduced 
administration costs in invoice processing 
training day.  The committee certainly always 
welcomes, the regulation 5 of the local government 
regulation, 2014 requires the training needs of the 
Audit Committee are reviewed on 
ANNE:  Newly basis and reported to local 
authority.  I can advise the members that a 
training day was held in October in collaboration 
with the Institute of Public administration.  The 
key themes addressed were:  Audit Committee 
functions Audit Committee appraisals, annual 
operational plans, risk management and the role of 
audit committees in corporate governance. 
Audit Committee effectiveness:  Regulation 13 of 
the local government regulations 2014 states the 
Audit Committee shall undertake annually a review 
of its own effectiveness and report to the local 
authority and its findings.  The Audit Committee 
has complied with this requirement, through the use 
of an extensive evaluation questionnaire.  The 
Audit Committee has reviewed its own performance 

and effectiveness in relation to:  The role of the 
Audit Committee.  Membership independence and 
objectivity.  Relationship with the executive and 
the other stakeholders. 
Training and development, annual work programme, 
member contribution. 
I can confirm that the Audit Committee conducts its 
business in accordance with the local government 
regulations 2014. 
So, annual work programme:  The committee involves 
regular meetings throughout the year.  Annual work 
programme may be summarised as follows.  Periodic 
meetings as required by statutory regulation, 
consideration and approval of the internal audit 
plan.  Dedicated meetings with members of the 
management team.  Annual training day. 
Review of the proposed risk management system.  
Consideration of internal audit reports including 
those prepared in connection with the public 
spending code. 
Consideration of reports issued by the national 
oversight and Audit Commission. 
Consideration of relevant departmental value for 
money report.  A review of annual financial 

statement.  Meeting with local government Auditor 
and consideration of the statutory audit report.  
The members of the Wicklow County Council can be 
assured of the committee's ongoing commitment to 
these important tasks.  The annual work programme 
as outlined above is submitted for adoption by the 
local authority in accordance with the section 9 
of the local government audit regulations 2014. 
And in conclusion:  On half of the members of the 
Audit Committee, I would like to thank you.  And 
your members of the Wicklow County Council for your 
ongoing support and assistance.  We would also 
like to acknowledge the continuous support of the 
Chief Executive Mr Frank Curran, along with the 
members of his management team.  And in addition, 
we would like to express our appreciation to Mr 
Daragh McMahon, Local Government Auditor for his 
continued corporation.  We would like to assure 
the members of our ongoing commitment to the work 
of the committee and that we will continue to focus 
our attention on significant areas such as value 
for money, promoting good accounting practices, 
information of management and monitoring the 
control environment. 

And just before Cathaoirleach I sign of, I too would 
like to take this opportunity on half of my 
colleagues on the committee, to pay a special word 
of thanks to Mr Murphy, who has served us as 
secretary since our inception. 
I would like to add a note of personal thanks to 
Mr Murphy for his unfailing courtesy and assistance 
to me as chairman.  And I wish him and Joyce and 
family many years of health and happiness in his 
retirement which I don't think:  And finally, 
Cathaoirleach, I would like to take this 
opportunity on half of the Audit Committee to wish 
the Chief Executive and management team every 
success in their efforts in the year ahead and we 
look forward to working with you all constructively 
towards achievement of your objectives.  So now 
Cathaoirleach maybe there may be some questions. 
Thank you very much. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much Tom, do 
members have any questions in relation to that?  I 
think you've been very comprehensive and covered 
the questions, thank you to all of the members of 
the audit team to the work they do.  Thank you. 

item six. 
MS GALLAGHER:  The elected members have been 
circulated with the Wicklow County Council Audit 
Committee Charter 2020. 
The Audit Committee, this is based on the statutory 
244 of the 2014 Audit Committee regulations, and 
the statutory objectives with relevant local 
government legislation, Audit Committee guidance 
June 2014 and guidance and good practice, in 
authoritative codes and report so it sets out the 
criteria which the audit, the charter which we buy 
into as an organisation.  So, if we could get a 
proposer and seconder to adopt a resolution to sign 
this charter? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Proposer, Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and 
Cllr Vincent Blake seconder.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that agreed? Agreed.  
MS GALLAGHER:  OK. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item 7 is from NTA but they're not 
here at the moment. 
MS GALLAGHER:  They're on the 133! Really, they 
are! 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  In fairness they're not due here 

until 3.30, so we'll see. 
Item number 8 to discuss process proposal 
circulated by Cllr Stephen Matthews at council 
meeting held on 13th January 2020, copy attached.  
Cllr Stephen Matthews do you want to wait until 
after the NTA presentation for that? 
 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Do we have expected time of 
arrival?  
MS GALLAGHER:  3.25. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  I'm happy enough to do it with the 
NTA. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Can we do the suspension? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Chief Executive, and after we will 
go to the suspension so to consider the Monthly 
Management Report from the Chief Executive, ... 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  One or two questions, one or two 
items, we received our roads grants from DTTAS, so 
it is 11.61 million, it is up, so that includes the 
specific improvement grants in Glendalough and 
Ballinaclash which officially opened the 114 homes 
with corporate housing Ireland in Ballybeg in 
Rathnew last week and signed contracts for the 

Fitzwilliam Scheme and Bray Harbour improvements 
consultancy work involved there. 
We have seven nominations in the All Ireland 
Council Awards, you have Wicklow Gaol, Gates of 
Hell Experience, Cliff Walk in Wicklow, eco-trail 
which is successful last September, and the library 
side community literacy support scheme.  And 
there's three down from the sports partnership, the 
Bray Sailing Club Inclusion in Sport, the Wicklow 
Warriors Inclusive Club, Wicklow Rugby and Power 
Parkinson’s Physical Activity Programme.  I'll 
take anything that is read and take any questions? 
CLLR BOURKE: Just something cropping up in Arklow, 
and we're disappointed that you haven't mentioned 
anything about the signoff of the transport study 
that was promised over a year ago now, for the 
Arklow area. And we'd like, I'd like to see 
something coming on that issue, and also some 
clarification on the there's a fund there you were 
saying we're qualifying for funding for twelve 
projects in the Social Enterprise Fund, could you 
elaborate a little bit within the report? Thanks. 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  I want to welcome the Ballinaclash 

junction and cross on the main road, I want to thank 
the engineers that worked on this, specifically 
Michael Flynn, and the landowner because I've been 
bringing this up for six years with former director 
Sean Quirk and I'm delighted that funding has been 
made available for this, because the amount of 
accidents that happen at that junction is 
unbelievable.  That's at a 33-degree angle when it 
should be at a 90-degree angle so delighted it is 
going to be finally resolved and thank you for the 
management for putting the application forward and 
being successful with the funding that has been 
allocated. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Chairman.  Just two things:  
Firstly, the houses in Baltinglass at Whitehall P 
ark delighted to see they're completed now.  But 
I would ask could the 58 cases be moved ahead as 
quickly as possible, there may be an issue with 
Irish Water so I ask if that's expedited as quickly, 
there's a long list of people waiting will you go 
people who are at risk of homelessness and the issue 
of allotments in Blessington, there's potential 

site available that's been identified in 
Blessington, I ask that that process be moved 
along, engagement with local residents with that 
particular site with work, if not move on and find 
another site but allotments, a worthy project that 
that's continues to be promoted and that it 
actually moves along, and act quickly, it is not 
that complex so I'd like to see that moving along 
thank you. 
  
CLLR O'CONNOR:  Just want clarity on the housing 
section, because for our Bray housing report Kilmac 
and Kilbride are a lot earlier and I'm wondering 
which one is correct if we could get that for the 
municipal meeting tomorrow. 
  
CLLR BLAKE:  Thank the manager for the report as 
well.  Just a few questions, particularly in 
regard to the Turnkey Project we have, lined up. 
And I know we've been a very successful the last 
few years in terms of the Turnkey in the houses 
we've got, particularly in the small towns and 
villages.  There's a lot of projects there, 
particularly in regard to the 40 units in Dunlavin, 

and they are what percentage of them will be Turnkey 
for the council in that regard? 
And secondly, the issue of which has been ongoing 
for fifteen years or maybe more, is this the final 
phase of the actual reconstruction or renovation 
of the houses in Blessington and what stage do we 
have completion in that project.  And finally in 
the house purchase, I say we have 66 applications, 
only four were approved, twelve I think were turned 
down and the remaining number - are there in 
abeyance at the moment so a small number of 
successful applications, before there was 66 now 
is there a policy there we don't, it wouldn't 
proceed with these or what policy, what are the 
issues with regards to the fact that only four out 
of 66 have been approved for purchase? Thanks. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks very much, a couple of 
things, I'm still waiting for the report on the 
quarries in relation to whether Wicklow County 
Council has any business arrangements with any 
operators of unauthorised quarries within the 
county. And second point is I know the large scale 
sports fund stream was announced and there's a huge 
amount of disappointment in west Wicklow the 

community pool wasn't part of that funding stream 
and they've asked I express their disappointment 
with it, and just ask the executive about what the 
next steps are. I'm aware they would like to, they 
would like to have the support of the council moving 
forward on this to have a meeting with the officials 
plus any of new TDs that will be in place, so if 
they could think about next steps, site 
identification are keen on progressing as well. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks Cathaoirleach and thanks to 
the Chief Executive for a comprehensive report, 
just looking at the housing section and welcome to 
social housing stock, 307 onsite and 20, if the 
manager can comment on any plans we have in place 
for the provision of a affordable housing in our 
county just reading a report there over the 
weekend, stating that 
housing - sorry - affordability, is a key, 
apologies, a report over the weekend in relation 
to residential property prices falling and this is 
down to a constrained demand in relation to the 
demand and down to affordability the Bank of 
Ireland requirements and borrowings so there's a 

lack of affordable housing not just in Wicklow but 
across the greater Dublin area, in the range of 200 
plus, 200 to 250, so young couples are falling 
between the cracks and caught in the rent trap and 
can't afford to get on the housing market and 
afford, the answer to that is the supply of quick 
supply of affordable houses, is there any plans in 
the pipeline that we can, for the county?  And just 
on another point, page 15 large scale sports 
infrastructure fund, great to see us getting some 
funding there, 864 for Wicklow swimming pool and 
athletics track but the full cost, a I think it is 
1.64 for Wicklow project and 590 for Charlesland 
athletic project so I assume we have budgeted for 
the match funding in relation to the two project, 
could you comment on that thank you. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Yeah, there are many people who are 
in older council houses right around the county who 
are constantly concerned about the cold in their 
houses because of the substandard windows and 
doors. 
And there is a national grant aid scheme and we're 
supposed to be on phase two of that. 
And it seems to be progressing extremely slowly and 

I'd like the Chief Executive to explain to me why 
is it going so slowly because 70 or 75% of the money 
comes from the Government and other counties, seem 
to have progressed a lot quicker, is it down to 
staffing? 
Is it down to the fact there are other priorities 
that this can't be addressed because we're, and 
more importantly our tenants are missing out on the 
fact that their homes are absolutely freezing and 
specifically I want to talk about there's one 
particular estate in Arklow, Glendale, I think 
there are 30 houses, 30-40 houses in it, but also 
estates in Bray, Wolfe Tone Square is another 
example and what the council is doing is picking 
of a couple of houses in each electoral area and 
then leaving the rest and no-one seems to know when 
the rest are going to be done.  So, is this, is 
there some kind of plan to actually get ahead and 
use this money as soon as possible and relieve the 
situation for our tenants, but specifically I'd 
like to ask about Dublin deal please. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thank you and just on Council Cllr 
Joe Behan's point we said a letter would be sent 
out from the council to tenants in Wolfe Tone to 

explain what works are done because there's 
confusion who is getting what, so I would row behind 
what he's saying there. Thank you to the Chief 
Executive for the detailed breakdown of the child 
homelessness figures, I think, they're useful and 
until we have a space to talk about them, I'm going 
to have to ask some detailed questions now.  From 
what I can gather there was 35 presentations 
between November and December and 31, no 296 those 
children, I think went into owned or temporary 
accommodation so can I ask what happened to the 
other six? 
And can I also ask in terms of children in direct 
provision centres in Wicklow, called I know DP 
doesn't fall under the remit per se, are they 
included in the homeless figures, I would say 
children in direct provision don't have permanent 
accommodation so maybe we can have that information 
every month. 
And finally on the 1916 Commemorative Medals for 
fire service I had the privilege for being there 
for the Bray service and I learnt so much about what 
that fire service does, I didn't know that it is 
Centre of Excellence and people travel from all 

over the country to train there.  And I think it 
really highlighted to me the dedication of the 
people involved there, and the need I think with 
many of us are in agreement for a full time fire 
service for Bray, but, I just wanted to commend the 
welcome we got there, we felt really part of it, 
and we were privileged to be there. 
  
CLLR CREAN:  Thanks, can I just ask in the planning 
section, there was no mention of the permission 
given to the strategic housing development in 
Greystones. 
And just to raise in relation to that, that I'm 
surprised that I read the Chief Executive's report, 
and his recommendation that permission should be 
granted but I'm concerned slightly about the whole 
process because we met as members and gave our views 
and certainly my submission was saying it wasn't 
sustainable development for the area, we're going 
to be discussing shortly the fact we're completely 
oversubscribed in school places so I'm querying 
what members are engaged in the strategic housing 
process when it is not listed here when it will have 
a major impact on the Greystones area. 

  
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thank you. 
Actually, I want to throw out highlights from the 
chief's report that stood out for me.  The local 
development companies again LCDC, we had a chance 
to do phenomenal work they're doing, great to see 
the healthy Ireland fund with healthy Wicklow 
strategy, all these ties into positive potential 
for the county.  The integration strategy that 
someone is coming on board to put that in place 
again, all the jigsaw pieces coming together in a 
positive way, and finally I'd like to give 
recognition to the franchise department for all the 
absolutely phenomenal and I'd say serious number 
of hours that they've been putting in to be ready 
for next Saturday. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Again, at the last meeting I did ask about the 
upcoming announcement to west Wicklow swimming 
pool and since then it is very disappointing, 
considering promises were made. 
I'm wondering what next steps are to do with the 

swimming pool project because there's a lot of 
disillusionment but praise for the council's 
involvement with it really because the council 
weren't involved there.  Secondly I want to know 
what the status of the Greenway project is, it is 
supposed to be going towards a planning process and 
wondering if that's been submitted and finally I 
want to echo, Cllr Joe Behan's words there on 
windows and doors, it is we've all been out and 
about in the last few weeks for some reason, and 
you know, it is becoming obvious in winter that a 
lot of ourselves states and we're the landlord, a 
lot of our estates are in bad repair with windows 
and doors, if we could comment on that, thank you. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Just on the fabric upgrading 
there, we got a list of some houses that were to 
be done in Arklow Municipal District in 2020, there 
was a note that it is gone to 2021, but I notice 
some of the houses built in the 1940s, and 350s in 
Arklow they're still not completed, the upgrading 
has gone back and then I notice one built in the 
about fifteen years ago is proposed to go ahead.  
Now, Cllr Joe Behan mentioned again deal, every 
councillor is aware of that, the issue in Glendale 

is when there's a re-let they get a fabric upgrade 
of windows and doors which seems to be the case, 
but, unfortunately, I'm well-tuned into that 
estate, there's so many, many houses have been 
measured up, and costed but there's no funding, I 
don't see the reason why we should measure up if 
there's no funding. 
But, at least four or five houses now, have got new 
windows and doors out there, because they're sublet 
to their tenants.  But I've been out there weekly, 
twice weekly, there's winds going through it, it 
is like the dessert out there, you can't heat the 
houses out there, that's the problem, it is gas 
heating, but the houses, the residents are telling 
me you just can't keep the houses heated. 
So, effectively we've done measuring but, we can't 
do them. 
And people get false hope there. 
If it is a re-let as I've seen over the weekend, 
they're all done.  So, what is the thinking there? 
We get money for the re-let's obviously from the 
department, but we haven't got the money for the 
people living out there since 1999, it doesn't make 
sense to me. 

CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and for the 
Chief Executive to his report and can I just like 
to commend on the council on the buildings of the 
houses, we've had 144 built in Rathnew, about now 
land is at a premium including council land and has 
the council started to look at their current 
housing estates, because myself and a colleague of 
mine went to Ashford and we identified over ten site 
within the estate for one-of builds so while land 
is at a premium would the council consider looking 
at estates where more houses can be built but is 
not overpopulating them either. 
  
CLLR FERRIS: Thanks Cathaoirleach, just in 
relation to the report Chief Executive's report 
Kilmac parallel service road as you know yourself 
there was a letter sent to the members of the 
council from the Bray Wheelers Cycling Club who as 
everybody knows who is out on a Saturday or Sunday 
morning use that road regularly and they have 
highlighted their concerns in their e-mail to the 
councillors, but they would, what I want to know 
is, has the roads section met with groups like Bray 
Wheelers? 

The users of this, because it is going to impact 
on their use of the road and I think it is very, 
very important that they are consulted with. 
Thank you. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thank you.  Just in relation to 
Cllr Sylvestor Bourke the Arklow Transport Study 
we have provided funding for that in the budget so 
it is due to start, John is moving in here, senior 
engineer to he is agency going to look at those 
schemes and that will be his number one project.  
The twelve projects on solely Enterprise Hub prize 
fund, Michael might have them, if not I'll get it 
to you first thing tomorrow. 
Cllr Edward Timmins Whitehall it is close to 
completion we'll follow through on that, and make 
sure they're allocated as soon as possible, 
similarly the site for the allotments, we'll come 
back to you on that one, the dates for Kilmac and 
Kilbride is August 2020, Jo may have more 
up-to-date on that, but I think that's what we're 
looking at the moment.  And in relation to 
Turnkeys, we're from this year on, it is our own 
builds are the ones that will kick in, we won't be 

reliant on the Turnkey so rapid build schemes are 
starting to kick in now and that will be the main 
source of our delivery.  So, delivery is going to 
be 1350 by the end of 2021 over the period of 
rebuilding Ireland so we're confident, that's 
exceeding our target so cost of 400 million that 
what we will have delivered in housing construction 
between the various delivery streams.  Glendale 
that's the final stage, due to be completed 
mid-2021.  The rebuilding Ireland home loan, 
again, we have to adhere to the rules it goes to 
our credit committee and housing agency, and people 
have to have the ability to pay, and have the income 
limits et cetera.  Some of them are, some 
applicants do apply to a number of different local 
authorities, so that can be misleading sometimes 
but certainly we're committed to it, rebuilding 
Ireland home loan funding has been provided at 
national level for 2020, so we'll take every 
application we get and process it.  But again, it 
is the ability to pay has to come into it.  And in 
relation to the quarries policies that will come 
out in the next, they are working on it.  On the 
swimming pool:  The swimming pool is ten million 

euro project for west Wicklow, what we looked for 
was design fees of 400,000, it is not a project we 
can with fund on our own, we thought the first step 
of that, if they funded us for the design of it would 
be a good start to go through the planning process.. 
But, look all we can do now is get feedback, see 
what went wrong, we'll have to reapply, simple as 
that, and go for it again next year, they did come 
back with queries, identifying a site, we gave 
feasibility study and extra information so we have 
to sit down with the department and look why we 
didn't get the funding and try and get it again next 
year.  In relation to affordable housing, the ones 
that we are looking although I suppose is Kilcoole 
as you know and Greystones, Wicklow Town here 
there's a scheme we're looking at, and now, the 
department have produced a scheme in relation to 
the allocations and how we'd allocate the 
affordable housing but it is something that you 
know for the next programme of government could be 
high on the agenda and there may be further details 
coming from the department but those are the ones 
we're looking at the moment.  The infrastructure 
scheme the swimming pool in Wicklow and Charlesland 

running track the match fund will go come from money 
ring-fenced from the local property tax and 
development levies, in relation to the phase two 
of energy retrofitting, we have a team working on 
those, I might ask Jo to give indication of numbers 
and estates we're doing at the moment.  If you want 
to do that now Joe.  
CLLR BEHAN:    The estates, I haven't got the 
details of the estates, to clarify the phase one 
was insulation, as we were and that was a 100% 
funded, as we were extending and investigating for 
the phase two, in some houses could have fallen in 
and can fall into the phase one which is more direct 
scheme and doesn't require a scheme-specific 
application to the department, co-funding is not 
required.  So, as we're going back, and looking at 
units that we, as we went in and investigating units 
phase one, units we thought to date were phase two 
can now be on done on phase one and more direct.  
If they're specific questions regarding estates, 
like in Arklow at some stage I'll come back to you, 
there was one, the one this Arklow was St Peter's 
place and Wolfe Tone were the two specific ones done 
and one looked at in Wicklow, but they're quite 

labour intensive - resource intensive, and the mix 
isn't as simple because it depends what each house 
or estate wants and that develops, and then the 
department gives us a limited amount of money so 
your max is about 21,000, or sorry, 2,000 and 3,000 
could be the co-funding but depends on the mix of 
each unit.  So, specific questions and specific 
schemes if you send them in, we'll answer them, but 
some are drifting back to phase one which is more 
direct and make schemes easier.  Single glazing 
window has been included, if units have single 
glazing they're allowed to be included in phase one 
and that's making some of those issues that you 
brought up, but it would be better asking specific 
questions rather than again one because it involves 
as we're investigating the units. 
The number is correct, Pat's correct, as re-lets 
are brought up to full standard, unless they're 
avoiding, there is no money provided for those 
under the budget process so we don't release 
houses, we put them up for the good standard for 
the next 20-25 years, that's the answer to my 
specific question thanks. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thanks.  Just in relation to the 

homeless presentation, the one that is, don't go 
to owned are either go back to members of the family 
or they're dealt with solutions like that, or else 
emergency accommodation.  The direct provision 
doesn't come into our homeless figures.  Just in 
relation to HSD, the members' views are taken on 
board because the scheme is presented to members, 
those submissions from the members and points 
raised are submitted and go in as a report to the 
An Bord Pleanála.  The swimming pool Arklow 
Shillelagh, we will be submitting for funding, 
there's a scheme open at the moment which allow 
design fees for preliminary designs for 
progressing to appropriate assessment and impact 
statement which is required in this case, and the 
preparation for environmental impact assessment 
and open to An Bord Pleanála, that's expensive so 
application will be made for that.    And then in 
relation to the Kilmac parallel service road, I 
might ask Colum if they've met with the Bray 
Wheelers on that, or Michael, come back in a second, 
in terms of identifying sites we're looking after 
2021, in terms of housing and what we'll do after 
that, so absolutely that's the first step, look at 

existing estates and sites available.  Yeah. 
  
Michael:    Sorry, yes in relation to the Kilmac 
parallel service road.  The letter of submission 
from Bray Cycling Club has been provided to the 
contractor and their consultants who will take into 
account and devising the traffic management plan 
for when the works are ongoing in Kilmac, just to 
say that intention is that both lanes, on the 
southbound direction will remain open for the 
majority of the works.  We don't expect it to be 
restricted.  At any stage, maybe at night-time if 
there are certain works carried on, but we hope that 
both carriageways will remain open during the works 
and that the traffic management plan will address 
all concerns including those of Bray cycling club. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Can I ask for clarification, from 
the Chief Executive, is there a fund open at the 
moment for potential for the design and feasibility 
for swimming pools? 
And can the west Wicklow one goes forward to that 
rather than wait a year before we progress? 
The difficulty with the pool in west Wicklow is 

there was a lot of promises made and expectations 
were high and the community's very disappointed and 
if there was an rather than waiting entire year to 
put in application if there was an opportunity to 
get one, in the next month or so, that would be 
welcome. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Yes, we'll try but that's what 
we applied for was design fees and we didn't get 
it so we'll have to sit down with them and look where 
we were unsuccessful and it there was something we 
can do or we can do with the department we'll try. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We have 25 minutes, before the NTA 
are due here so if you want to take the suspension 
standing orders so I'll take Cllr Gail Dunne's 
first. 
 
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Recent Municipal District meeting, it was brought 
up about the public lighting around Wicklow Town 
and the victual the members agreed how it should 
be raised at county council level. 
As most of us are out canvassing at the moment we're 

seeing how many lights are out.  One area of the 
town, this week, I went down and found out that 
lights had been out for over three-and-a-half 
months. 
Now, I don't care who we are what you are, I don't 
think that's good enough.  I'm very tired of 
hearing excuses from Airtricity, we're putting 
more men in the area, we're working on this, we're 
waiting on LED lights, et cetera, and it is not good 
enough.  If the lights are out there should be a 
time when it is fixed and that should be adhered 
to, and it is not. 
Any time we report things, we report it two or three 
times.  This is not a reflection of Declan O'Brien 
who has been very helpful to me and I'm sure all 
the other members as well, trying to get this 
problem, this is Airtricity problem.  And I feel 
Airtricity need to come to a council meeting and 
explain what is going on.  With over 700 lights out 
throughout the county, 700 lights out throughout 
the county, this is a disaster. 
All people are afraid to open their doors because 
there's no lighting within the areas. 
I'm really tired, I brought this up so many times 

both municipal level and county council meeting B 
I'm upset over there, we're not listened to, when 
we go around and come to the council with problems 
we should be listened to.  Airtricity to me have 
got away with murder here and I want this looked 
into, because it is not good enough for the people 
of this county to have no light.  It is like a black 
hole of Calcutta.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and I want 
to thank Cllr Gail Dunne for bringing this as a 
suspension because it is a serious mark.  And I 
asked a couple of meetings back about our contract 
with Airtricity, and where they are meeting the 
terms of the contract and when the contract was due 
for renewal and would we assess the level of service 
we've gotten.  It is not just Airtricity when you 
have cable supplies issues or you've got cable 
damage or supply issues, ESB networks have to be 
brought into the equation, we don't seem to have 
any reach in ESB at all to address the issues. 
There's an issue about access to poles where 
Airtricity are not allowed to climb a pole and if 
they can't get elevated platform in, they have to 

rely on ESB, so it is not supply and cable damage 
it is access issues as well and that needs to be 
tidied up.  We have street lighting in 
inaccessible areas.  As part of this, get update 
where exactly the national LED roll out is, and when 
we're likely to see, how we're going to see the roll 
out through Wicklow and what percentages we're 
likely to hit this year. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, I would 
like to agree with Cllr Gail Dunne. 
There is a contract there, I don't know when the 
contract runs out but, and I don't know if there's 
too many people in the field throughout who could 
be possible possibly viewing for the contract as 
well, it seems that they may have a fairly much a 
shoe-in to have the contract renewed, I'm not sure, 
I don't know what the competition is like out there 
but I think they should be brought down here to 
answer a few questions because it really is not good 
enough. 
Is there any clause in the contract whereby we, get 
a refund for work that is not being carried out? 
Because it is just completely unacceptable.  There 
are some lights that have been out for over a year.  

As far as I'm concerned, it sounds like to me 
somebody isn't doing their job and they're not 
upholding their end of the contract so I just want 
to know is there any claw back on the contract and 
I'm certainly would like to second Cllr Gail 
Dunne's proposal to invite a representative from 
Airtricity down here thank you.  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Yeah, this has been an ongoing 
issue for the last few years, but I don't think I've 
seen it as bad as it is now, I reported one on 18th 
of March and it was fixed 20th of December. 
We've a small little townland outside of Arklow 
with two lights, two are out of order for the last 
two months so the excuse that people are not trained 
up or can't go up ESB poles or whatever, cable fault 
that doesn't fit with me to be honest, and only for 
the intervention for the staff of Colm and Declan 
O'Brien, we got an influx, a lot of lights fixed 
before Christmas but we're back to square one.  
Airtricity are working the clock will change in the 
next few months and the weather will be finer so 
there won't be as many issues with lights but, I 
have to say and going around canvassing there, the 
number of people who are scared in their homes 

anyway and then, you have no lights outside their 
house, I think it is absolutely dreadful the way 
people are being treated.  I know there's an 
extension of the contract, if Colm can confirm 
that, but there's no-one else bidding I presume so 
it is a difficult situation for people and it is 
one that's coming up on the doors so effectively, 
we need to get Airtricity on board and we need, this 
thing about we have to train up people, they got 
the contract they should have enough people to do 
the work and I don't run with their excuses.  Now 
they have, as I say done a bit of work in the last 
month but gone back to square one again 
particularly in Arklow and outside of Arklow, so 
something has to be done urgently. 
CLLR MULLEN:  Again, I'd like to thank Cllr Gail 
Dunne for this motion, again it is January, so it 
is still winter and become an obvious to a lot of 
us how dark our villages are getting.  My 
predecessor, Cllr Doran had four lights put up last 
April in Carnew and they were only turned on last 
Wednesday 
Nearly a year later.  I think, we should be talking 
about breach of contract with Airtricity.  And we 

also have instance when people report a light fault 
either to a councillor or on-line on the on-line 
system, it is logged and there it sits, and when 
the contractors come out to repair a light if it 
is not on their job list it doesn't get done, even 
if you can show them the app saying the light beside 
you is also gone, and he's replacing, but it is 
somehow not making their job list, which is 
extraordinary, if they're in the same village 
repairing one light that they can't see the other 
two lights beside it are gone as well so, there's 
a management failure here from the patient pathway  
of that contract and I just want that noted thank 
you. 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thank you and thanks to Cllr Gail 
Dunne for raising this, I was going to raise this 
under the Chief Executive's report, my question, 
and I've been own to Declan O'Brien on this faulty 
lights in not big fixed, we're talking about 
contracts, I presume, that in the contract there's 
a specific time that lights are supposed to be 
replaced or repaired within.  And I'd like to know 
whether or not anybody is monitoring the average 

time it is taking to repair lights, we're all 
hearing, all in the room are hearing anecdotal 
evidence and people telling us, and we know it is 
taking months and up to a year, but is there being 
monitored, do we have concrete figures to report 
back to Airtricity? 
Have we lodged formal complaints, is there ability 
for the consumers to lodge complaints, they can 
lodge it on-line but then follow it up, ten days 
expired he ought to be flagging it again.  The 
contract is coming up for renewal and there needs 
to be audit of performance and quality of assurance 
before we enter to another one. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'd say that, I think we've talked 
about lights, in the Wicklow Municipal District for 
three years and the Airtricity contract has come 
up here as well, it is shocking, and in the last 
couple of weeks have been five municipal districts 
and equally shocking in all five districts the 
amount of lights that are out and the lengths of 
time the lights are out for, I know we have a new 
LED programme coming on-line but not an excuse for 
repairing the lights in existence and we had the 
Audit Committee here earlier and if Cllr Gerry 

Walsh and Cllr Mary Kavanagh could flag it with the 
Audit Committee and look if the contract can be 
looked at if we have a claw back that the service 
the people expect for the money that's been paid 
is not being met thanks. 
  
>>:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
I suppose, just on the outset to point out that 
there are approximately 15,000 public lights 
throughout the country. 
As Cllr Gail Dunne indicated the last data there 
was 700 of those that were out so we're looking at 
4% or just over of the lights that are out at any 
one time.  While this is, it is small in percentage 
terms I can understand the frustration with the 
length of time it can seem to take get lights fixed. 
I suppose, we have rolled over the contract with 
Airtricity utility services to bring us to the 
stage where the national retrofit, energy retrofit 
programmes takes place.  That is, we're hoping 
that will go to tender in Q3 this year, and we hope 
to be bringing a section 85 agreement and request 
to borrow for the project to a meeting very soon 
probably next month's meeting, to allow for 

Kilkenny which is the lead local authority to roll 
out and tender for the LED retrofit.  There are a 
number of reasons, and some of them are sighted as 
to why it takes so long in certain instances to get 
lights up and working.  In the contract that's been 
referred to, AUS are required to turn them around 
within ten days.  At the moment, it's taking 13 
days where there are no other issues, and that's 
no issue with ESB coming out or ESB being required 
to fix cable faults, which is taking quite a 
substantial amount of time to get ESB out.  I 
suppose, we're in contract with us on a daily basis, 
and we're trying to get the number of faults down 
as quickly as possible. 
The service provider has five crews, full time 
crews operating in the county.  Three in the east 
of the county and two in the west. 
On average, a crew should fix ten lights within a 
day. 
But this has opinion hampered by the unavailability 
of sock lamps available so where a sock lamp has 
to be replaced it requires the contractor to 
replace it with a LED fitting so it is not a matter 
of replaying the bulb they have to replace the whole 

head and work involved in that, and that limits each 
crew to fix between two and five sock lamps a day. 
Also, we, from our contact with the company, 
they've indicated there's a number of issues that 
are limit in ability to fix lights as quickly as 
they would like, a lot of what is logged on the 
system are cases where people are not happy with 
the current light they have, where LEDs have been 
fitted they're either complaints they're either 
not bright enough or in certain instances they're 
too bright.  There's also repeat callouts as well 
where they go out to a lamp that has been fixed, 
and they find that the lamp is currently working 
and they've point out that given that the system 
is in an ageing condition, that it leads to more 
faults than would normally be the case.  So, our 
intention is obviously to move as quickly as 
possible in pushing Kilkenny to fit on the national 
retrofit.  If we were to tender again for the 
contract that Airtricity currently holds it would 
take probably four to six months to tender for that 
project, but which that time we would hope that 
Kilkenny County Council have issued the tender for 
the national retrofit programme. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Joe Behan 
CLLR BEHAN:  I outlined it, there's concern for 
students and pupils in Kilcoole primary school 
about the fact their local school just down the road 
can't accept their application to enrol. 
Now I spoke to one of the planning departments here 
this morning about this, because I'd emailed 
separately after a public meeting to find out if 
there had been contact between the Department of 
Education and the planning section here with regard 
to a proposed extension to Colaiste Chraobh Abhann 
and there hasn't been pre-language consultations 
about the planned extension, but, it may be the case 
that work is being done to bring that to a stage 
where there would be preplanning consultation, but 
unfortunately for the parents and young people, you 
know, time is moving on very rapidly.  This is 
February.  They would have hoped to be in school 
at the end of August. 
And what I'm asking and proposing here today is that 
we write to the Department of Education and ask them 
to urgently move to provide temporary 
accommodation for those pupils to allow them to at 

least enrol in the school. 
and also, to bring forward the planning application 
to build the required extension to the school. 
Because I think nothing else will satisfy, will do 
in this situation 
Could I also say separately to that and again 
something I discussed with the planning department 
here this morning, Newtownmountkennedy is a feeder 
area for Colaiste Chraobh Abhann for historical 
reasons and Newtown is getting a secondary school 
and there's major implications for young people 
from Newtown and Kilcoole if something isn't 
happening in Newtown as well.  So, as part of the 
proposal I want to ask that the department be 
required to tell us have they plans to develop a 
second level school in Newtownmountkennedy as well 
because I think it is going to be absolutely 
necessary 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  I fully support what Cllr Joe Behan 
is proposing so I second the proposal.  This 
situation really as I intermitted earlier is really 
crazy. 
The work that was to be done in that school as I 

said the paperwork was signed six years ago.  And 
why nothing has happened, and I mean, there's 
members here who were involved over the last five 
years, why nothing has happened I'm at a loss.  The 
school is bursting at the seams, there's a PE 
storeroom used as a classroom, some of the classes 
are used to look after students in certain 
circumstances, and there's already six porta 
cabins onsite.  There's no room for anymore, and 
even if there was there's no resources.  I've been 
in touch with the KWETB they're driven by the 
Department of Education so actually what we need 
and there was a meeting in Kilcoole village last 
week, we really need the TDs in the county to come 
together and to go and find out exactly what is 
going on, because, the extension is certainly going 
to be fast-tracked.  There has been comment in the 
last few weeks that the department are saying now 
they want the school extended to a thousand pupils. 
But, right now there are, like up to last week there 
were 40 children who had basically no place.  Now 
hopefully that number will drop with a bit of luck 
over the next week or so.  But it is really, really 
serious 

And you know, there's no point, I know there's an 
election four days away and everyone is trying 
to - we'll do this and that, this is not going to 
go away and does need to be sorted and there needs 
to be an answer given back to the very sensible 
committee put together to try and make something 
happen.  And they need feedback from all TDs and 
want a be TDs this week.  Not like when Saturday 
or Sunday's over, the sizzle could go out but that 
can't be allowed to happen, this is crazy stuff and 
on the bigger picture it appears the whole 
education, I don't talk that often, but the 
education system is out of control in the same way 
other departments are out of control.  It is a 
crazy situation, and it is so unfair, it really is. 
  
CLLR CULLEN:  I want to agree with Cllr Joe Behan 
but he left out a significant part of the feeder 
schools, we have a very serious situation arisen 
in Roundwood which has been a feeder school for the 
last ten years, and indeed there's a meeting 
tonight about, to do with the concerned parents but 
not only sixth class but also fifth class, we 
absolutely need a secondary school to be built in 

Newtownmountkennedy the explosion of population 
has everybody's aware for the Newtown area with 
almost a thousand houses to be built over the next 
couple of years with no planning for a school, 
secondly school, and in terms of Roundwood students 
and Newtown students I have no doubt that they would 
make up a large majority of a school in Newtown, 
if that was to be the case. 
But, in terms of CCA, in Kilcoole, will is no doubt 
it is overextended even it is moment, as far as I 
was aware it was built to cater 600 students and 
to my mind there's 800 currently in there.  As was 
said by previous speakers, there's been prefabs on 
the site to micro classrooms the planning 
permission has been agreed but there's no sign of 
the extension of the school being built and if 
anything comes out of this, maybe you know, a 
fast-tracking of this building and getting this 
school built needs to be looked at. 
I have regular contact with the staff there, 
they're doing a fantastic job in CCA under very 
difficult circumstances but my final point this is 
a situation that is affecting Kilcoole, Newtown and 
Roundwood, and I think whatever the discussions are 

taking place need to incorporate all three areas. 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Is it me or 
Jennifer? And again, thank you to Cllr Joe Behan 
for having raised this issue.  And I completely 
back what everyone has said so far.  It is a huge 
issue in Kilcoole and with CCA and rather, instead 
of repeating what everybody has said which I 
completely agree with, I'm aware of the situation 
with the Roundwood students, it strikes me this is 
even wider than Newtown Kilcoole and Roundwood 
problem.  The issue of secondary school places, 
it's a huge issue in Greystones at the moment as 
well, there are students without places, for this 
September.  It is also widely acknowledged in all 
of these areas there's going to be a bigger issue 
getting school places in 2021, and this is known 
from eight years ago when there was a similar issue 
with these children entering primary school and the 
department had to instruct primary schools in the 
area to put on three junior classrooms.  So this 
has been known and flagged but still we're in the 
situation where, local children in Kilcoole can't 
get in local school, students in Roundwood are left 

in no man’s land, we've a new school that that is 
after sustained community and pressure was brought 
forward to open in September 2020, instead of 2021, 
that still has no clarification where the temporary 
accommodation will be, it need to be fast tracked 
by the time the permanent solution will be, 
otherwise we're talking about prefabs going in for 
the next three years, we had Templecarrig and other 
schools had its application for extension refused 
by the department, why I do not know. 
And in addition, we have the situation where the 
north Wicklow educate together in Bray, which is 
languishing without any sort of a permanent home 
since 2016. 
And, that school which does take in students from 
primary schools in Greystones will have to cap its 
numbers at 60 pupils per year until next year and 
that's not getting on, to I won't have time, get 
on to the provision of ASD services for very 
vulnerable students and particularly speaking with 
the principal in north Wicklow Educate Together 
they were hoping to open a second ASD and now 
they're not able to due to lack of accommodation.  
My question is to the chamber here do we need to 

extend Cllr Joe Behan's proposal and get officials 
from the Department of Education down to talk with 
us, and look at strategic overview, as to what are 
we doing with secondary school provision in the 
north of the county? 
It seems that we can send in letters until the day 
is long, and nothing will be done. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks Chair.  And actually, what 
counsellor Scott has spoken to is what I want to 
speak about, this is an issue that affects the 
entire county. 
And particularly areas that have had high 
population increases the investment in education 
hasn't kept up with it.  And the difficult why my 
experience with the department is that, it takes 
parents and politicians shouting and contacting 
them and continually lobbying for something that 
they should be providing anyway.  They have the 
data there, they know exactly when they're going 
to need particular school to be expanded or new 
schools and rather than have everyone waste their 
energy, chasing them for things, they should be 

proactive and provide them when they're needed.  I 
think we need to have, I would concur, we should 
be inviting the department to come and address us, 
to show us what their strategic plan for the area 
is, based on the population statistics because they 
will have access to this.  None of us here in the 
chamber have oversight over all the children that 
are coming through the system, everyone is in 
different districts we don't know what is happening 
the only people who do know that are department and 
that's important they come down because what 
happened is that you know in some instances the 
schools are used as political footballs, and that's 
not fair, they deserve an education and they should 
have education preferably within their home towns 
and the department has the oversight so I would 
absolute lie like to second the proposal that we 
invite the department to talk to us thank you. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you, we go through and have 
an extensive planning process on local area plans 
and county development plans and what we take 
account is population growth and we look at CSO data 
and demographic profiles throughout various towns 

and villages.  And with that information, we zone 
land for the provision of schools, community and 
educational zoning in certain towns and villages.  
It is my understanding then it is up to the 
department to provide that infrastructure.  And 
they're working with the same data that we are.  
So, I think it is critical we bring the department 
in here to explain why they're not keeping pace with 
the planning process that we put forward here.  We 
set the blueprint out the town or county should grow 
and proper planning and sustainability development 
but it seems the department is not feeding into it 
and the department we're following a model, 
public-private partnership model and we know 
Caribbean collapsed and that's set the department 
in turmoil in there, you can't get any answers on 
anything at all.  And what's happening is, 
students and teachers and parents are suffering 
because of this and it is placing tremendous stress 
on families not knowing where their children are 
going to go to secondary school or if they're going 
to go a junior school placement or close or walking 
distance or have to drive miles.  We really do need 
to get the department in here to explain the process 

on why they're not keeping pace and what we're doing 
about the model they were providing and how to 
provide school places for Wicklow.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  I won't repeat what has been 
articulately versed by everyone else, you wonder 
how did we get here? 
This, young people haven't appeared out of nowhere, 
it is not rocket science to manage a need and 
respond to that need so I wonder and one thing I 
know we've all been on the doors but it feels very 
disempowering when a so-called elected rep 
standing at a door, and we don't have an answer, 
and people are wondering why, and I know the powers 
have been taken away from county councils and we 
won't go down that road but whoever the five TDs 
will be, and need to stand with the 32 councillors 
in this chamber and try and take ownership of the 
people in this county and what, and push for the 
response to the needs that are out there.  There's 
touch a disconnect between the department and 
what's happening on the ground.  And we really need 
to build, a very quick bridge between the 
department and the - it is so hard to look at a young 

person and wonder and explain to them why we can't 
provide because they expect us to, because we're 
elected reps and then when schools are pitted 
against third level institutions as well, as a side 
show to needs not being responded to, that doesn't 
sit well either again as an elected rep.  So, I 
fully endorse both, all proposals but it is 
critical that the department sit with the 32 
councillors and five TDs and we take a little bit 
of ownership what Wicklow needs. 
  
CLLR MITCHELL:  Yeah, I'm supporting the idea the 
department should be asked here because, it is 
difficult to get a grasp on this, each individual 
only knows its own applications it seems to me.  
And I don't think the ATB either has figures for 
schools which are not related to it, which are many.  
So, there's no sort of overall source of numbers 
except for the department.  15 years ago, myself 
and other councillors at that time zoned sites for 
two schools in Charlesland, one primary and one 
secondary and that was done then because the 
numbers in the town development plan showed that 
we needed schools of that volume. 

And it is just disappointing to me, and obviously 
even more anguish to the parents of the pupils that 
even though that was done fifteen years ago, we're 
behind in getting these schools up and running.  
Now, a lot of political pressure was applied by 
numerous people including myself and I probably 
everybody around the area involved in political, 
to get the new secondary school in Charlesland to 
open this September, a year early and applications 
I believe closed on the 31st of January for that.    
But still it is not good we don't see what the 
overall picture is, there's talk of extensions to 
St David yes, Templecarrig, all the schools really, 
and I think, it would be useful to have a summary 
where it was actually at from a department 
official.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR CORRIGAN:  I won't repeat what everybody else 
says but I totally agree back up from the department 
we're all from different areas and this is 
county-wide, in Enniskerry there's several 
children they have no place to go, and when you're 
told you don't fall in the catchment area it is 
distressing to the child and family.  I'm getting 

reps from people who don't have places for primary 
schoolchildren, it is not going to go away and we 
should get the department out here, it has to be 
dealt with for the future. 
  
CLLR FERRIS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Again, as Cllr Melanie Corrigan said this is 
county-wide issue, I'm particularly concerned in 
my own area in Bray that the pupils, the students 
in St Andrew's school have no feeder school to go 
to.  Some of my neighbours have children in sixth 
class in there and in September are being faced with 
either a very long travel to New Park School, while 
they still have children going to schools in Bray. 
I suppose, I wonder sometimes the fanfare that we 
get when a minister says you know agrees that 
there's going to be a new school opened, a new 
waver, and then the whole process happens as to who 
is going to get the patronage of that, and you know, 
some people are delighted and some are 
disappointed, unnecessarily 
But at the same time, I don't think the department 
put in the work to find out where the schools are 
going to go to 

That has been already mentioned about the north 
Wicklow educate together secondary school who has 
been languishing in temporary place, their lease 
was supposed to expire but it was extended there's 
the row between that school and BIFE in Bray as to 
the location of it.  The department and minister 
are saying one thing, and the BIFE they have their 
own needs and concerns for the future, as to why 
they need that campus, but nothing is solved. 
And, you know the members of the KWETB, we're not 
given a clear I suppose steer on this.  No fault 
of theirs, but, you know, it is through the fault 
of the department and minister for education 
I would urge that the five TDs coming in to 
represent this county, go to the department and the 
new minister for education and just say what is 
going on? 
As I say there's two issues in Bray the locations 
of the north Wicklow Educate Together Secondary 
School and the problem with the feeder school 
because Templecarrig, of their admission policies 
will not take the amount of children from St Anne 
drew he is that wish to go there.  Templecarrig.  
And it is imperative we get senior official from 

the Department of Education here, but also, it 
needs to be worked on by our new TD, when they were 
elected. Thanks.  
CLLR FORTUNE:  I'll be brief. 
Just this is such a crisis Cathaoirleach that I 
don't think we can wait until our next scheduled 
council meeting, I think the department needs to 
be invited down urgently to meet us, because this 
really, really is a crisis of great proportion. 
And it does need to be dealt with, it is not going 
to go away and time is so important because the 
schools will open in September, so if we don't get 
work actual work done solutions done now, we'll run 
out of time.  And we do need to get our TDs, 
involved and really involved, and to tell and 
explain to us exactly what they're going to do and 
when they're going to do it 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  So, Cllr Joe Behan your original 
proposal is that we would write to the department 
and then addition could do that is we would ask the 
department to come to the council as well.  And 
Cllr Tom Fortune you're saying we can't wait for 
a council meeting.  We will write I'm we are agreed 

write to the department and asking them what the 
outline is, and maybe cross party delegation of the 
councillors, if the department aren't willing to 
come here, say for our next meeting, which is 
three-and-a-half weeks away, then, rather than 
wait until April or May, and lose all that time, 
if maybe we get a delegation to go to the 
department? 
Cllr Joe Behan ... 
  
>>:  OK just, again, acknowledge that this is a 
Department of Education issue, but despite that, 
the planning staff have been in a lot of engagement 
with the Department of Education trying to get them 
to move on, particularly now when we're doing the 
review of the County Development Plan.  So, 
information that staff in this section this morning 
on foot of Joe's original question in the 
department, this is through conversation not 
through notes, or e-mail, but, they did say the 
expansion of Colaiste Chraobh Abhann is in the 
department six-year capital programme and in this 
stage they're working on a brief design consultants 
and on land acquisition, they don't have anything 

developed to show us in let's say for preplanning.  
Discussions, so, the school has permission to 
expand to a thousand over the coming years, and is 
currently at 800 and these are partly, I think as 
Cllr Tom Fortune pointed out in temporary 
accommodation. 
So, we understood that the school extension project 
is in the Capital programme and the department are 
working away on the same, but they really aren't 
ready to come with us yet. 
But just to let you know they aren't, this issue 
isn't being ignored.  There's a new school as 
you've mentioned there, it would be opening in 
September in Charlesland south Greystones for the 
Greystones will be Kilcoole catchment but that 
really doesn't solve the question for people who 
want to go to Kilcoole. 
And with respect for secondary school in Newtown, 
it is agreed it is needed and planning have 
regularly had informal conversations with the 
department about population house numbers in the 
developing of Newtown. 
So, they seem to be watching the same. 
We do have land zoned for secondary school use in 

the Newtown plan. 
The department have been looking at these lands 
with as a possible location for a new primary school 
in Newtown.  Opened up this year in temporary 
accommodation, near the existing primary school. 
So, we don't know if the department's acquisition 
team has contacted the owners of the land yet but 
our planners are suggesting in order to 
future-proof themselves they buy larger block of 
land not just for primary but secondary schools, 
so those discussions are going on at our department 
but it is basically their remit to provide.  But 
just to let you know, it isn't that they aren't 
considering Wicklow, they do seem to be in the 
background so maybe when they're down here they can 
provide a bit more clarity of what they're actually 
doing for Wicklow as a county. 
  
CLLR CULLEN:  Thank you, I just want to agree with 
Cllr Tom Fortune for that this is so serious we 
can't wait and with respect to Brede it seems to 
me it is put on the long finger and I don't think 
that's acceptable, there's a lot of parents across 
north Wicklow that are really, really concerned 

about their situation, and I think the sooner we 
get the department engaged in this council the 
better.  But there's one other point and I wanted 
to make it earlier, there is also an issue over the 
bus catchment area and this has come to light over 
the last couple of weeks with CCA, in particular 
from the Roundwood area where there's at this 
moment in time Roundwood isn't in any bus catchment 
area as far as I gather, so I don't know whether 
the Department of Education and the Department of 
Transport are working together on this, but there 
certainly is an issue that needs to be teased out 
on that front. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks chair. 
Yeah, I have concerns with the departmental 
response on this, because it seems they're relying 
on the new school for Greystones and Kilcoole to 
meet the demand and I have a fear that actually the 
demand is going to be greater.  That new school is 
in temporary accommodation, probably portacabins, 
it is limited in what curriculum it can offer 
because it is a temporary accommodation, but there 
were 120 expressions of interest for that school. 

And my understanding is there's something like 930 
children who applied for Colaiste Chraobh Abhann 
who didn't get that, and they didn't put in 
expression of interest, so if the department is 
relying on the new school to meet the demand we 
could be in a big, big problem.  So I think, what 
councillor fortune said we need to move that 
meeting up and I would suggest not only delegation 
of councillors go in, if the department can't come 
here but the new TDs be requested to attend that 
meeting as well and to schedule it for the next 
maybe two weeks' time or something like that, and 
actually go in the department and sit down and get 
this resolved because it is really not fair that 
children don't know who they're going to be school 
with, what uniform they're wearing, it is a 
stressful time making that transition and the fact 
the department is sitting on the data and isn't 
moving is just not acceptable. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  So, we're going to request a 
meeting with the Department of Education and 
members agreed to that, obviously we invite the TDs 
whoever they are, to come along, I'm sure they will 

be delighted to come along, but we'll ask for 
ourselves 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Just to be clear, you're talking 
about cross party delegation, who will be attending 
that meeting? 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Once we've the date of the 
meeting, each of the groupings can nominate to 
attend.  Members happy with that? OK. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Just before we leave, we had, move 
on, we had a proposal from Cllr Gail Dunne, seconded 
by Cllr Mary Kavanagh to invite Airtricity to our 
next meeting is that agreed.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  And I'd like to welcome Anne 
Graeme from the NTA and Hugh and commiserate them 
with the lateness of the service 133, but we're used 
to that, so you're very welcome. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Considering the motion on the N11, 
returns put from the NTA, would it not be beneficial 
to discuss the motion so the NTA can answer queries 
that can arise from the discussion of that motion. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Will we take that presentation and 
see what they will say.  Rather than full 
discussion without input from them first of all? 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  The whole N11, Transport for 
Wicklow needs discussion, I agreed at the end of 
the last meeting I put it forward to this meeting 
because it was such an important matter, I didn't 
want it condensed in ten minute suspension, if you 
assure me we will have enough time for us to have 
full discussion on the presentation and the motion 
and put questions to the NTA I'm happy to go with 
whatever you propose. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  How long is the presentation? 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Again, I don't want to scoot 
through National Transport Authority 
presentations, public transport is critical issue 
in Wicklow this, is part of the problem, we have 
ad hoc addressing of public ... 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  What I'll do, is have the NTAs 
presentation and then let you make your discussion, 
and then we'll take questions on the whole thing. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Don't scoot through it NTA, will 

you the we have time we've waited a long time thank 
you. 
  
Anne:  Good afternoon members and apologies for 
the delay, in getting to you today. 
So, I'm just going to go through and what I'll scoot 
through is possibly slides that some members have 
seen before but for the benefit of new members of 
this council, just going to not scoot, but speak 
on what we do generally, and what we do as an 
authority is that we procure bus rail and Light Rail 
services, across the state so they're the 
subsidised services right across bus rail and Light 
Rail.  We also regulate the taxi services, and the 
commercial bus services public transport services, 
services provided for example Wexford Bus that come 
through Wicklow County Council and Air Coach as an 
example of the type of services that we regulate. 
We invest then in the greater Dublin area in 
transport infrastructure, we're also the body then 
responsible for integrated ticketing the Leap 
Card, real time passenger information and 
technologies that can bring about I suppose 
integration of our services. 

We also have role in transport planning and policy 
so we are state obliged to put together transport 
strategy for greater Dublin area that includes 
Wicklow and then we run on behalf of the dement of 
transport, some educational and schemes like 
smarter travel workplace smarter travel campuses 
to encourage employers and their employees to use 
sustainable transport where possible. 
So, that's a slide that summarised what I said, 
delivery of public transport services nationally, 
regulation, we also have been the national taxi 
regulator and we've already spoken about that. 
So, in terms of looking at what we do, and what 
strategies are in place from strategic point of 
view, in terms of national strategies, ones we 
certainly are obliged to be mindful of, there are 
the three now national strategies, National 
Development Plan, national planning framework and 
now we have obligations under the Action Plan 2019 
as well. 
Below that then, are the key regional strategies, 
the first one being regional spatial and economic 
strategy, our own transport strategy for greater 
Dublin area published in 2016 and Beth of those 

plans obviously have to feed now what will be the 
new Wicklow development plan, and from our point 
of view, Wicklow development plan has to align with 
the objectives set out in the transport strategy 
for the greater Dublin area. 
So, just to remind you what the transport strategy 
includes is objectives related to Park and Ride, 
Luas and Metro, heavy rail and also bus and bus 
corridors as well. 
And the rail network, which is included here, shows 
the new Luas lines and I suppose the one sorted or 
of interest to Wicklow County Council is the 
extension of the Green Line to Bray. 
And obviously the DART expansion has impact on 
Wicklow County Council as well. 
So, moving into National Development Plan:  The 
key project allocations under that plan is 
BusConnects 2.4 billion allocated to BusConnects, 
2 billion to DART explanation and 3 billion to Metro 
link and other funds for cycling infrastructure as 
well. 
So just on the BusConnects programme and I think 
we presented last year what is BusConnects, but 
just in summary, it is about looking at every aspect 

of the bus service and trying to improve it, so it 
is improving the bus priority so providing bus 
corridors dedicated bus priority along as many 
corridors as possible, completely redesigning the 
bus networks, focusing initially on Dublin Bus's 
network or services, in go ahead and looking at Bus 
Eireann as well.  Improving the ticketing system, 
having a simpler fare structure, and cashless 
payments on bus services and providing Park and 
Ride facilities, and logging at delivery stops and 
then moving to using of low emission fleet as well.  
So, every aspect is what we improve.  In terms of 
Park and Ride, bus space Park and Ride will 
supplement the current network of rail-based Park 
and Ride sites, a number of locations have been 
identified along key road routes in Dublin and 
Wicklow and more locations maybe added as long as 
linked to bus priority of we have Park and Ride 
office to accelerate plans in Park and Ride.  In 
terms of cycling, we want to construct the greater 
Glyn area in cycling network those plans have been 
in place for a number of years now, the key routes 
are to be segregated routes where the cyclist is 
segregated from motorised secular traffic.  We set 

up a cycle design office to acknowledge sell Kate 
the delivery of schemes alongside our local 
authority partners. 
So, the next steps in terms of delivery of 
BusConnects in terms of the network, the 
consultation on Dublin's bus network, and Wicklow 
is completed, the final network is to be published 
in Q2, 2020 and we commence implementation of the 
new network in 2021.  In terms of bus corridors, 
the second round of consultation on the 16 bus 
coarse doers will commence in Q1, 2020 and commence 
in Q3 of this year. 
The next steps then in the delivery of the National 
Development Plan, in terms of Metro Link planning 
application is expected in Q4, 2020, and DART 
explanation, we are going to complete the 
procurement of a combination of fully electric and 
fleet for expansion of the rail services, we want 
to develop the electrification programme with 
Iarnrod Eireann and move to have enhanced DART 
service to Greystones.  Just looking at the public 
transport services we currently have, and that 
we're managing:  We have direct award contracts in 
with Bus Eireann, Dublin Bus and Irish Rail since 

1st December 2009, they're renewed twice in, 2019 
for the bus services. 
We have a periodic and quarterly performance 
reports, their funding is conditional on meeting 
performance targets, reliability and 
functionality targets are continually 
strengthened for all the commuters.  And the NTA, 
then regulates the fares for both Bus Eireann and 
Dublin Bus.  So, just focusing on Bus Eireann:  
Overall across the country they saw 14% increase 
in passenger numbers across all services in 2019.  
However, this growth is not reflected in the 133 
service. 
The 133 has consistently the highest am in of 
complaints of all complaints in the Dublin commuter 
area.  The main issue is reliability of the 
services, and despite Bus Eireann's best efforts 
the punctuality of the service is poor.  New 
timetables have been designed and will be 
implemented by them by the end of March. 
On rural transport services the local link office 
services tendered last year, there's no changes in 
the service provider, for that Wicklow local link.  
We have 25 demand responsive services and five 

evening services in Wicklow.  The local link 183, 
Glendalough to Roundwood Wicklow Town commenced in 
2019 have just shown you a patronage graph that 
shows, good growth across the services, 
particularly in the summer months so we've seen a 
peak of 2,000 passengers, so, which is very 
significant for local link service so we're happy 
with how that service has been operating. 
So again, just focusing on Wicklow's public 
transport services for the future:  I've taken 
this map again from your own core strategy from your 
development plan, and showing I suppose the fact 
that the geography in Wicklow makes service 
provision quite difficult in terms of where your 
two main loads are located on either side of the 
county and then the rail line being located along 
the sews.  So, in terms of our response to the 
challenges in Wicklow, as I said, the county's 
geography makes service provision difficult. 
In terms of road congestion, on along the N11, M11 
agreement is now in place with TII, and Wicklow 
County Council to examine the potential of 
widenings the sections of hard shoulder to provide 
for bus priority. 

Within towns, we want to try and put in place bus 
priority where possible.  And in terms of 
BusConnects the Bray corridor will certainly serve 
not just Bray but also try and remove the congestion 
on the 133 service as well. 
In terms of the rail, the single Railtrack 
feasibility study on the track changes between 
Greystones and Bray to assess the potential for a 
20-minute DART has been completed, the sum 
additional work required.  And additional rail 
services south of Greystones is subject to the 
availability of additional fleet. 
And just to finalise the NTA recognise public 
transport to and from wick slow month optimal we'll 
continue to work with the county council letters 
to raise the operational and frequency of our 
services.  That's the presentation, happy to take 
questions 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Are members happy? Cllr Derek 
Mitchell's question and Cllr Stephen Matthews's 
question, if we take those two, and take questions 
from everyone. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  And 

Hugh and Anne you're welcome back to Wicklow, 
you've been here before and very good at responding 
to queries and I appreciate that thank you.  I 
don't know, really where to start on this, we seem 
to have so many people have responsibility for 
transport.  The NTA as one remit, TII another remit 
department is somewhere there in the mix the 
service providers are somewhere there in the mix, 
there seems to be huge confusion. 
If we look at the N11 proposal for a moment it is 
TIA proposal, however NTA have to have input into 
it.  You had input into the Bray Transport Study 
in 2019, I don't see that being considered in the 
N11 upgrade.  TII, produced a report in 2017 and 
needs assessment on the M50 N11, it didn't see any 
requirement of growth below junction 8 south, 
there's discussion on express bus ways and how they 
could be incorporated into the N11, I don't know 
if you're looking at the smart motorway models 
they've used in the UK but they're retreating back 
from using that because of dangerous and collisions 
and fatalities over there, Bus Eireann were in last 
month and I asked them are they engaged in any 
process on discussing or using hard shoulders for 

bus services, and they're not.  So, therefore, 
there's either no discussions have taken place or 
Wicklow is to be a trial run on it.  I don't know 
which is worse. 
The NTA, the greater Dublin area strategy, there's 
words in it a sound positive, like we will continue 
to work and strive to improve, that's good, it is 
good to have ambition, but Wicklow has been lacking 
concrete and nuts and bottles engineering to give 
transport in the county, we're not getting it.  The 
NTA strategy, apart from some far of aspirations 
ends at Bray so anything south of pray is not 
getting any increase in service and that includes 
Greystones, I appreciate you're working on a 
20-minute turn around Bray/Greystones, that will 
require significant engineering works, in relation 
to the NTA and corridor F aspect of greater Dublin 
strategy when it comes up for review, I asked you 
at previous meeting will you look at feasibility 
assessment at electrification, you said you would 
look at it so now I want a feasibility and include 
it in the strategy or public consultation part of 
the strategy.  Will you agree to fund the 
engineering works that are required substantial 

engineering works as my understanding, for the DART 
to get that 20-minute service between Bray and 
Greystones.  We don't want it to be something that 
goes out of the area to be decided between either 
the East Midlands region planning assembly or 
yourselves or department. 
And will you seek extra carriages for the Wicklow 
rail line to increase capacity.  There's three 
trains in the morning and down in the evening, and 
that curtails people's ability, not only to reach 
employment but for all other aspects in life, to 
visit people, he can creation, access to anything, 
employment, and education, it really restrict 
people in Wicklow to the N11. 
I'm on the East Midlands Regional Assembly as our 
members here, so you will be aware there's a 
considerable clash between the members and the 
NTA's objectives in the greater Dublin area 
strategy where the members included a number of 
objectives and the minister stepped in and reject 
the objectives and it points to an issue that we 
don't appear, we have very well-meaning people in 
the NT A&E MRA and TI I agrees on this, I will finish 
and move on to the motion, will we - however to what 

it points to is there's smart people in there, you 
have slightly different remits but don't seem to 
have a cohesive strategy and all sitting down.  
This is the one thing I requested notice of motion, 
that we'll discuss now, that we get all the 
authorities to sit together to discuss, a really 
cohesive well thought out plan for public transport 
for Wicklow.  Thank you for allowing me that 
opportunity Cathaoirleach.  
CLLR MITCHELL: Thank you. 
Thank you for the presentation earlier, just at the 
last meeting of the transport strategic policy 
group which a committee which I'm chair, the study 
leader from the TII study on the N11 spoke, and did 
not give me a strong impression that the public 
transport and particularly rail was going to be 
studied in detail in relation to the study of the 
N11. 
And as chair of the meeting and other people, most 
people there, everybody basically agreed that I put 
detail point together and objectives which I think 
should be covered by the study on the N11.  
Because, to the NTA and I'll put them on everybody's 
desk here.  But, simplifying it, we have empty rail 

line south of dray tones with actually two trains 
in the peak period in the morning.  And, a jammed 
N11 and those facts are connected. 
The two trains are the least of any services of any 
station in the greater Dublin area and something 
needs to be done about that. 
Now, in the various studies and strategies I've 
seen Bray has been come out quite well of it with 
the Luas coming and with the ten minute, maybe six 
minute DART, but that's only one kilometre into the 
county so the rest of the county really, has a major 
problem and that's what the problem is on the N11 
that people have taken to cars in massive numbers 
because there's no alternative.  And, 
concerningly there's no strategy either.  So, 
better public transport should reduce the scale of 
the N11 improvements needed it maybe not remove 
them and maybe for bus lanes on them, but, so, I 
think it is important that things I'd like to see 
a study done which has the objectives which I 
mentioned under road, and also, to list the delays 
in the study area for the buses and in County 
Wicklow in general and in county Dublin so we can 
work to get them fixed. 

Bus Eireann told us they will increase the 
scheduled journey time from Wicklow by 20 minutes 
at the peak reality to reflect the reality of the 
traffic that exists now.  So, I'd also like to 
recommend bus right measures and consider very 
large number of people commute along the M50 from 
Wicklow and it is important that somehow, they have 
public transport method of getting there. 
And identify Park and Ride sites.  Now in rail, I 
got the impression that the TII study was not going 
to deal with that issue at all so there would be 
no real study of how the rail could contribute to 
reducing the need for the N11 expansion and the 
points which have been mentioned, earlier, I think 
are useful, I'm glad to hear NTA is looking at 
20-minute DART proposal to Greystones and we would 
like to hear of a proposals on that.  But I would 
be worried for instance we need longer trains to 
Wicklow, and for that to happen it may well be the 
carriages, 600 carriages which are going to be 
ordered apparently have selective door opening may 
well be the way that is needed.  As far as I can 
tell, it is not in, I don't know but it doesn't seem 
nobody will confirm that if or without the spec and 

it would be difficult to operate eight car trains 
on the Wicklow line.  So, those matters I think 
should be included in detail there.  A few other 
details there, a study by Irish Rail themselves 
suggest said that the level crossings in Sandymount 
have to be closed to provide a better service to 
us here. 
On the train.  And, also recommend the fact that 
the trains are very slow, the average speed from 
Dublin to Bray is 28 kilometres an hour and that 
seems very slow, and the most recent change in the 
trains which was solid as improvement, actually 
delayed the trains by 10% which was nine minutes 
in Wicklow Town. 
And made them less reliable.  So, I want to see a 
study with that included, and I had thought that 
the N11 study was going to deal with this, so, I 
just like to know if this can be done. 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank 
you the representatives of the NTA for coming down 
here today I warrant to urge discussion when 
discussing N11 upgrade and we should have a grownup 
conversation and certainly not pitting communities 

against each other like Delgany who don't want the 
upgrade and Wicklow who do want the upgrade.  We 
should have a grownup conversation and one thing 
we don't want to create is an atmosphere of his 
toilet.  We all concur on the public transport and 
how bad it is, I happen to be canvassing in 
Greystones from 6.30 onwards and I was amazed the 
service they have compared to other parts of the 
county especially the south and the west.  We 
certainly need and I concur with Cllr Stephen 
Matthews, sorry, Cllr Derek Mitchell in terms of, 
I've only been up since 6.30, two in the morning 
and two in the evening is not good enough and it 
is the number one complaint I'm getting in terms 
of transport.  In terms of the Leap Card, a lot of 
people are happy about the Leap Card because you 
can use it on the different services but in Dublin 
you have a tax server card where you can use all 
three, Bus Eireann, Dublin Bus Luas, but in Wicklow 
you can't get that you only use Leap Card, so 
although you have the card for the three transports 
you can't have a tax saver card.  We might as well 
have a closed sign on Wicklow train station up here 
because especially for the elderly people because 

they can't get across the tracks.  I happened to 
be again canvassing and this is again is coming up 
on the doors steps that they love to use the trains 
but can't because they can't get over, I did bring 
it up with Irish Rail because they told me it is 
yourselves that have to look after the 
infrastructure within the stations. 
In terms of the 133, we could spend all day here 
talking about that. 
And still go around in circles and still wouldn't 
arrive so I'm not going to talk about it, because 
I awe consume it will be addressed and we heard good 
news from Bus Eireann there at the last one.  What 
we really need from Wicklow Town south is shuttle 
service with the south of the county into 
Greystones, especially if they come on a board with 
the 20 minute DART and it would leave all the 
congestion on the N11, from my point of view it 
starts from the Glen of the Downs onwards.  So, if 
you could take some of that of it, going in 
Greystones and use the rail service here that is 
empty in the morning, just while I have you here, 
the Wicklow Town as you can see coming is built on 
a hill and one of the most exposed bus stops in the 

town is on the top of this hill and it is a terrible 
shame to be driving past and seeing old people again 
or elderly citizens standing in the lashing rain 
under a tree.  We have to shelter on one of the most 
exposed stops in the county as far as I can see, 
I'll let the councillors in the west talk about 
that, because I believe they need to have their 
answers as well thank you. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks very much.  And thanks to 
Anne and Hugh for coming in today. 
It is mentioned previously but I do think from 
looking at your presentation and you talk about the 
234 billion for BusConnects and 3 billion for the 
DART upgrade, all of these improvements will only 
benefit the very north of the county and I also, 
fear they will only actually play catch-up so our 
services, already underfunded, the service that 
people get is not good enough for the population 
that is here at the moment but we are a very 
fast-growing population and I think we need to be 
more forward-planning in what we're doing in 
relation to this.  Because, by the time these 
improvements are in place, my fear is that we will 

need to restart on another series of improvements 
very quickly. 
I think, we there's two issues when it comes to 
public transport in Wicklow - we need transport for 
commuters to get in and out of Dublin and also for 
communities. 
Now I've already met with both of you previously 
about the local link buses, I think the local link 
buss are a fantastic service and think they should 
be all over the county.  I don't think they should 
only be rural targeted; I think every single town 
whether Bray or Greystones or Wicklow or Arklow or 
Blessington should have one of the buses doing 
regular loops around and between villages as well.  
What that would do is it would be a very quick way 
to address our traffic issues and will take a lot 
of the one to two-kilometre journeys of the road, 
that's something I would like to see a focus on.  
We need to be very targeted in what we are doing, 
I agree with Cllr Stephen Matthews I called for a 
task force, a traffic task force to be set up for 
Wicklow, where we bring all the main players in, 
including jobs creations, agencies Wicklow County 
Council yourselves the rail, everybody that has 

anything to do with reducing the car load in this 
county need to be sitting at the one table.  We need 
to set ambitious target for reduction in car 
journeys in the county, not sure if it has already 
been done but we should look for 30 or 40% reduction 
in car journeys and how to achieve that, and that's 
the only way we're going to address the traffic 
congestion issues that we have in the county.  I 
have heard recently from some constituents that the 
N11 road programme is of the table that one of our 
TDs, has spoken to NTA and they said it is of the 
table, so I want clarification on that.  And also, 
just with the current progress reality of progress 
I'm wondering how many years things will get better 
before they get better in the county. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and thanks 
very much to the reps from the NTA for coming down 
here today. 
It is hard to know where to start.  There isn't an 
area of transport in this county that isn't 
problematic. 
If you're lucky enough to live in Bray you have some 
choices and same in Greystones, in Wicklow or 
Arklow, your chances are of commuting are reduced 

quite considerably.  We really, really need to 
start having a big picture vision for where we want 
to see transport in the country. 
Let alone the county 
We have roads that are choc block with cars, they're 
creating all kinds of carbon in the atmosphere, we 
have a very, very poor rail service to Wicklow.  We 
had a representative down here last year from 
Iarnrod Eireann and asked her if there was 
consideration to bringing the DART to Wicklow.  
And she said no.  She just shook her head, just no, 
there had never been any consideration.  Now, my 
question is why not? 
It would be expensive yes, but in the long-term it 
would certainly solve so many problems, first of 
all, you talk about the climate adaptation strategy 
it would reduce the number of cars that are going 
to be on the roads.  The second thing that it would 
do is it would enable people get to their places 
of work without the stress that they're constantly 
going through and trying to deal with buses that 
don't turn up on time. 
Or at all. 
We need to start, this is a game-changer, a DART 

in Wicklow could be a game-changer for transport.  
We wouldn't have to widen roads or upset 
communities are trees are knocked down and damage 
has been done to golf course that is have been there 
for hundreds of years, we need to start looking at 
problems that are going to, or solutions to these 
problems, not what it costs but we need to start 
getting the solutions on track. 
We've had huge population growth in Ireland in the 
last 30 years and I would hazard a guess the biggest 
population growth has been in the east of the 
country. 
So, we need to start moving with the times 
And just to pick up on something, I would like to 
second Cllr Stephen Matthews's proposal for 
feasibility study for the DART to Wicklow, and with 
regard to the shelters I also have been asked about 
shelters, there should be shelters at every bus 
stop, nobody should have to stand in the rain 
especially when buses don't turn up so if you could 
address that problem please.  There's also very 
busy bus stop in Rathnew that people are just 
standing in the rain, any time they're waiting for 
buses thank you. 

  
CLLR BOURKE:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank 
you very much to Anne and Hugh there for their 
presentation. 
I'm very pleased that you're looking to solutions 
to the problems we have, you outlined some of the 
things you're hoping to do, but I'm disappoint you 
don't have time lines added in your presentation 
as to when these things will happen for example you 
mentioned a bus corridors, and when are we going 
to expect bus corridors on the N11 to ease the 
morning congestion. 
Park and Ride you're looking at that but when is 
that going to happen? 
There's Park and Ride proposed for where I live in 
Arklow which hasn't been built yet, it is a private 
one and I was going to ask you do development 
charges apply to the Park and Ride facility? 
If so perhaps, it should be exempted from, 
development chars charges or will you pay the 
development charges to Wicklow County Council and 
if so, then the private developer who wants to build 
the one beside me shouldn't have to pay, so I'd like 
clarification on that, because we're anxious to get 

this built as soon as possible in cash low, we're 
crying out for it we haven't the space pulled up 
at the Wexford Bus stop as it is and it is going 
to become a serious hazard.  You mentioned the 
cycling scheme and I'm delighted you mentioned 
that, you mentioned it before, I had motion in the 
county council to draw down funding for you can I 
ask you how much funding had a the Wicklow County 
Council applied for the cycling infrastructure 
improvements in Wicklow? If any. 
And finally with regard to the local link service 
which I commend you for, it is very popular, 
recently the one from Aughrim to Arklow which is 
every Friday, I was talking to some residents in 
Avoca who would like it diverted from Avoca rather 
than the vale road where nobody gets on the bus, 
because there are people in the village who like 
to access that service as well. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank 
you for your presentation. 
I just want to ask what work is being done to address 
some of the problems faced by commuters with 

disabilities? 
We know that people have to give advance warning, 
if they're travelling with a disability and I don't 
think it is fair that I don't have to do that. 
And just because you have a holistic approach. I 
would like to know what is done in each avenue to 
progress equality for commuters with disabilities. 
  
CLLR LEONARD:  I work, represent the same as Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke so I concur what Sylvester product 
up there.  I'd like to see some money drawn down 
from cycle links as well.  We need investment in 
a Park and Ride facility but we Arklow expanded 
throughout the last 20 years enormously, and 
there's proposal for, we're getting new sewage 
plant and the town will grow more down there but 
public services and transport services aren't 
reflected that at all.  We still have the same rail 
service from Arklow as we had before that 
expansion.  And I think even to look at the shuttle 
services up to connect maybe some of the trains at 
Gray stones to the DART or bring start down to the 
Wicklow will alleviate a lot of the problems 
thanks. 

  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thank you and thank you for coming and 
listening to us today.  Again, I concur with a lot 
of what, everything that's been said particularly 
with Cllr Stephen Matthews and the members of my 
Municipal District, so I won't repeat what has been 
discussed at length.  My question really is on the 
cycle network plan for the debater Dublin area 
published in 2013.  And just looking at the north 
Wicklow sector, there was a lot of routes that I 
get questioned about from constituents, quite a lot 
in the last six months specifically for the route 
between Bray to Delgany and specifically in 
Kilcoole linking the village with the railway 
station, like there could be the improvements in 
the train to the world but physically difficult 
either park the car or walk or cycle safely down 
to the station, but my understanding is that, the 
full implementation of the national cycle policy 
framework is now a part of the climate Action Plan 
so I'm curious is there any clear pathway, funding 
there, or time frame there to delivery of this plan 
in north Wicklow thank you? 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  

Very briefly, it feels like there's, what I wonder 
is, through what, what is on the table in 
terms - there's a vision there for the NTA in terms 
of Wicklow and there seems to be a different vision 
in this room and beyond it I suppose if you're 
knocking on the door and ask them about their 
experience in terms of travelling whether it is 
public transport or in a car, and I wonder, what 
can we do then? 
If we can't again respond to the needs of those 
around the county, then you know, how fast can 
something change if we see that there's congestion 
and we've identified that, if we know the public 
transport is not optimal then what are we doing 
tomorrow about that? 
That's what I find myself wondering, how quick can 
change be implemented within the power of the NTA.  
Thanks. 
  
CLLR FERRIS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  I just have 
a couple of questions I'd like to thank Anne and 
Hugh for coming down to us today. 
First of all, in relation to the 184,185 and bus 
services that Bray people use, the 184, goes to 

Newtown, and Newcastle hospital, the 185 goes to 
Enniskerry and 45A goes to Dunlaoighre rail station 
from Kilmac, so, as a representative of Bray, I 
receive a lot of complaints that in, too often I'd 
say that the buses don't turn on, there's a 
particular problem with the 185 bus and I want to 
know first of all, have you received a large amount 
of complaints about this particular bus? 
And in relation to the 185, have you considered 
perhaps splitting the routes into two, where one 
of the 185 results would go directly to Palermo and 
one to Enniskerry because that might make a more 
efficient bus service.  I heart Cllr Derek 
Mitchell mentioning over there about the Luas 
coming to Bray, which I'm delighted with his 
announcement, but I would, I just want to find out 
more information from you about that, because this 
is something that has been on the cards for 25 years 
maybe. 
So, I'm just wondering what is the story on that?  
And, my colleague Cllr Paul O'Brien here beside me 
wants me to mention, I know he didn't go over his 
three minutes, he mentioned the 133 Wicklow bus, 
he says that a lot of people are reporting that 

drivers are saying they cannot use the disabled 
lift part because of footpaths aren't suitable so 
I just want to know, I want you to give us a report 
back on that. 
So yes, I think that's it thanks. 
CLLR CRONIN:  Thank you very much, I'm sitting here 
and listening to all the issues with east of the 
county, motorways and the N11 and M11 blocked up, 
the trains need to be extended, and more routes 
needed for bus services, and where I come from in 
west Wicklow we don't have a motorway, we don't have 
a rail line, we don't have a Luas line we have one 
bus service which is the 132 with that bus service, 
you have three options to go to Dublin during the 
day, and three options to come home. 
If you miss the bus at 5.30pm you're stuck in Town 
and you have no other way of getting home. 
I think it is great that we're seeing developments 
on the 133 routes, and obviously it is fantastic 
for the people of east Wicklow to see there's a push 
on the M11 
But, for us over in the west of the county we are 
struggling.  We do have the one bus service but 
that needs to be improved, we could do with some 

extra services on the route, a later service for 
example for those of us who do commute to work, I'm 
one of them myself.  I'm theoretically meant to 
stay later than 5.30 but if I do that, I have no 
way of getting home, so I have to leave work early.  
I do think if you could extend that service and 
maybe have a later service, it would be a huge 
benefit to the people in the west of the county but 
we also have another issue this west Wicklow 
regarding a bus stop we've had in Hollywood Cross 
in number years in recent times a bus driver refused 
to stop there because it is not seen as a designated 
stop because there's no pole there. We have been 
working alongside the council and Bus Eireann to 
get this rectified, but I would appreciate any 
support you could give on helping us with that bus 
stop. 
So, that's my contribution, and hopefully you won't 
forget us about us in the west of the county. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and Anne for 
the presentation.  You did say your presentation 
at the plan for south of Greystones service would 
be subject to additional fleet being procured so 
would you be in a position to further on that in 

relation of timescales and you referred to the N11 
and N11, which we will go on later, phase one of 
that, we were inundated the process there, phase 
one of the process and the public consultation 
phase the vast majority of responses in the public 
was that the emphasis should be on improved public 
transport rather than widening roads so I welcome 
the fact you're looking at Park and Ride facilities 
and key locations on that that facility so maybe 
if you elaborate that further with relation to 
timescales that would be welcome. 
  
CLLR GLENNON:  While we empathise with colleagues 
in east Wicklow it is with amusement, we listen to 
people complaining about additional train 
carriages and buses while as Cllr Avril Cronin said 
we can't get the bus that passes by the stop. 
I am I really appreciate the efforts of the Chief 
Executive, Frank and Colm and Pat in efforts to 
resolve this issue for us, but I would ask you to 
go to the TII and encourage them to meet us, and 
to make progress towards getting a bus stop.  I 
understand what recent communications that safety 
issues were raised by them concerning same.  I 

really think this issue needs to be resolved, and 
I know some people see the resolve of route Ireland 
as sharing cars and villages and so on and so forth 
and others then don't seem to understand will is 
already a reasonable adequate bus service in 
Blessington, but the 65 bus service in Blessington, 
it is the rural part of west Wicklow that's 
forgotten about.    And we have no service 
whatsoever, it is outrageous in this day and age 
that those issues still exist. 
And while some of the people here today are you 
might say partaking in interview for higher office, 
I really think you need to listen to the issues that 
are said by west Wicklow because you're not. 
Thank you. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Can I mention the question of 
inability of tens of thousands of parents of 
children in this county to get to work and get home 
at a reasonable hour is a massive issue. 
And it is having a very deep and profound effect 
on family life in this county. 
And, any reasonable person would have to accept 
that the solution to the problem will have to 
involve a combination of improvements whether it's 

additional road infrastructure but also and vital, 
public transport infrastructure and in particular 
Park and Ride facilities as well as the public 
transport provision 
And, you have so much power in your hands actually 
I think in terms of the people of Wicklow and the 
dilemma they're facing at the moment.  And I would 
really like to hear you addressing that particular 
issue for those families 
One question that has bothered me for a long time, 
there was originally a plan to bring the Luas to 
the Old Fassaroe area, they're zoning for 
practically a Newtown on the outskirts of Bray and 
the Luas was to come to that area, and I always felt 
that that would have allowed for the construction, 
there's 400 acres of land on that general domain, 
and it would be ideal opportunity to have a huge 
Park and Ride facility connected with the Luas and 
transport bus transport system in Bray.  I would 
appreciate if you could comment on what you know 
about the Luas situation at this stage.  I missed 
much Cllr Derek Mitchell's announcement of the 
Lucia coming to Bray, maybe I should have listened 
to him before. 

But, on a serious note, I would ask you to address 
for the many people in Wicklow who are desperate 
at this stage. 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks for your presentation and 
thanks for coming down to listen to us 
Can I just ask that when you're looking at the plans 
you're talking about and rolling out plans in the 
immediate future that you consider there is a 
fairly significant population beyond Greystones 
and south of Greystones, there's over 6,000 people 
living in Kilcoole and Newcastle and the service 
needs serious, overview and serious look at.  
Also, because of the way that area has expanded and 
there's plans for further expansion, if you were 
to get into your, you came down on the 133 I beef, 
if you were going back by car and drove down the 
sea where the station is in Kilcoole there's not 
a car spot to be had, it is jammers with cars, it 
needs input there as well and the station itself 
needs looked at.  Sorry I'm asking that question 
in the context of the overall remit in the whole 
transport area.  But I would ask that particular 
section of the plan, is not kind of afterthought 

or through to one's fault, just that's the way it 
happens thank you. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks for the presentation.  Just 
to reiterate what my colleagues have in west 
Wicklow have said and in particular obviously the 
bus stop at Hollywood Cross, I think we're all 
agreed that should be reinstated and the bus should 
stop there.  I believe there was meetings last week 
where this was raised by council officials, and I 
would ask that this issue just be closed once and 
for all it is a no brainer.  When I gave the example 
of the last meeting, an 18-year-old girl dropped 
off four miles further south and had to walk four 
miles back on a dangerous road so I'd like to see 
we put that in place to avoid such circumstance 
happen again.  The other thing I asked and I 
experienced this myself from dropping people of at 
the bus, the bus leaves sometimes early, I went down 
to Analeckey Cross, the bus was I forget the times, 
let's say 9.10 and left six minutes beforehand, it 
was definite six minutes ahead of schedule, so I 
was there six minutes ahead what the bus had left 
and the bus had gone, I rang headquarters, and they 

said it had left in Blessington now, to is left six 
minutes before it was meant to leave.  That he is 
inexcusable. 
  
>>:  So, we're going to share these between myself 
and Hugh, but I may give overview first in terms 
of just realism around the delivery of 
infrastructure, transport infrastructure in 
particular and rail infrastructure heavy rail 
infrastructure in particular, and unfortunate it 
cannot be delivered overnight.  And even the 
delivery of fleet, additional fleet because at the 
moment every single rail car is in use right around 
the country so there is no spare rail fleet 
available at all to deliver any additional services 
across our whole rail network.  So, we with Irish 
Rail have now ordered 41 additional rail cars but 
they're cars that will go on existing fleet, the 
existing ICR fleet.  We're also in the process of 
procuring the electric fleet for the DART expansion 
but the minimum, when the order when the tender 
procurement is completed which is towards the end 
of this year, there's at least a three-year lead 
in before any fleet is delivered into the country. 

So, I just wanted to give you a feel for what is 
the lead-in times for particularly the delivery of 
and that's just fleet.  When you come to consider, 
what might be required for the rail infrastructure, 
there's planning involved and then the delivery of 
actual works on the ground so, it is not one that 
gets turned around very easily.  On the bus side 
we can respond with bus services and additional 
frequency of services easier and quicker than we 
can on the rail side.  There's still cost involved 
in putting on additional fleet and additional 
services, and when we had that funding available, 
we would certainly look at that. 
I'm going to pass over to Hugh to deal with the M11, 
N11 issue and maybe in more general and then we'll 
get on to the specifics, other questions if that's 
OK. 
  
HUGH:  OK, N11, and M11 scheme came up with several 
speakers there.  TII are working on their proposal 
in conjunction with your officials here but, we 
have had discussion with both officials and TI air 
strikes and it is agreed in parallel with the 
long-term road scheme there must be a short-term 

scheme to put in bus priority along that route.  
And we are seeing if we can extend a current design 
team's brief to carry out the work for the 
short-term scheme, there's a lot of benefit in 
that, it would mean the short-term scheme would be 
compatible with the long-term road scheme and would 
also mean the work on it could start much earlier.  
So, it has moved on a bit, that work I'm certain 
that we'll reach agreement with the design team to 
extend the brief to include this.  And that work 
will get under way immediately. 
It will take, as Anne said earlier it is important 
to set a time frame and expectation for this.  
Everything you do in the area of infrastructure now 
is conversation, it will take a period of time 
before the designs are finalised and brought 
through whatever statutory planning approval is 
required and further period of time by which you 
carry out whatever construction is needed so 
there's some road widenings on some level to get 
the hard shoulder width you need.  So, I think we 
would expect, we're talking about a time frame of 
three to four years before you see the bus lanes 
in place.  But if you got those bus lanes in place 

it suddenly things significantly.  The whole idea 
of Park and Ride and making that work now becomes 
truly viable.  Park and Ride means people are 
getting out of a car and getting into a bus that's 
stuck in congestion.  If we get priority for posts 
along the corridor, it suddenly makes it a more 
attractive proposition for people, to use the Park 
and Ride sites we will put in and use the bus service 
then to access the city area.  So, that's where we 
are on that, it is worked on with officials and TII, 
and it is in parallel with the long-term road scheme 
but in our view, it will go ahead of it, 
significantly 
If I just pick up a couple of loose ends, Cllr 
Stephen Matthews you mentioned about smart 
motorways in UK and retreated from it, you're right 
in the UK they used the hard shoulder for running 
traffic lanes on it, and various things they've 
done there that is different what we're planning 
here, we want a means of getting buses along the 
hard shoulder so professional drivers and 
different arrangement where we put in refuge and 
things like that, so we're certain what we can do 
here is will be proper safe and adequate and 

suitable, even though in terms of cars using hard 
shoulders, yes there's a movement away from that. 
That probably picks up most questions on the M and 
N11. 
Anne:  Rail line then, the infrastructure. 
  
HUGH:  On the rail line we've done a feasibility 
study on getting a 20-minute DART service to Bray 
and it was sick late to the grey stone Municipal 
District count letters anyway, and I'm sure they're 
aware of it.  It identified we need further pieces 
of work to verify some things this that.  So, that 
further piece of work as mentioned in the 
presentation is ongoing. 
The project then is going to be incorporated into 
the DART expansion programme so as far as we're 
concerned it is part of the funding, included in 
the funding envelope on that programme and we see 
it as one of the important elements of the DART 
expansion programme overall to get a 20 minute DART 
service into Greystones. 
We equally believe that probably the right solution 
is a shuttle service south of that, and I know 
that's not universally agreed by everybody, I 

understand that, in our view that's the right 
solution because as DART gets more frequent it is 
now ten minute DART service and in the future we 
will abbe going to more frequent, it gets harder 
and harder to get a window for the longer distance 
trains to fit through the you are began DART pat 
Earnings.  So, the more pragmatic approach is put 
shuttle service south of Greystones and let people 
connect to the DART and that's the plan we're 
working on.  Again there's a number of years before 
that gets delivered but we see that piece of work 
on the rail side, and the bus lanes on the M11 on 
the other side is the two big elements of the public 
transport in the future and unfortunately we have 
to wait a few more years before we deliver it. 
  
Anne:  OK. 
I'll pick up on some of obviously we said the rail 
extension, including the 20-minute frequency on 
the DART, from Greystones to Bray is included in 
the DART expansion programme and in the funding, 
that we have has been signed by Government.  But 
anything beyond that would require additional 
funding. 

Longer trains - one of the issues in relation to 
longer trains on that section of line south of 
Greystones is the stations, so the station 
platforms would have to be lengthened if we were 
to put in place additional length of trains but, 
that can always be incorporated in any study in the 
future in terms of looking how we can improve the 
rail services in Wicklow. 
Just trying to see, Leap Card - it was I think about 
tax saver, not being available in Wicklow.  There 
are tax saver products on Bus Eireann services, I 
think councillor you probably mean going from use 
Bus Eireann, there are services, there are tax 
savers where you can campaign Bus Eireann with 
other services, it does make it quite expensive, 
I think what we're proposing to do is look at the 
next generation of Leap Card, we're calling it next 
generation account which is means your account is 
in the back office won't be all contained on your 
Leap Card and providing additional I suppose 
benefits sorted with moving from a Bus Eireann 
service, Bus Eireann operated service regional 
services into city service will be easier to do in 
an account rather than in the system we currently 

have.  But certainly, it is something we'll 
certainly consider as part of the next generation 
of ticketing. 
In terms of bus shelters generally, maybe Hugh.  
HUGH:  Bus shelters is not inexpensive things, and 
therefore, it is not really feasible for us to put 
a shelter in every bus stop, there's 10-15,000, 
shelters it would be significantly expensive to put 
in every one location, but we don't have enough at 
the moment.  We're working our way through a list 
we get in from various people to try and prioritise 
it, it would be an ideal position if the council 
here as executive perhaps could pull together a 
list on behalf of the top 30 shelters and we tackle 
those top 30, what happens is we get requests and 
every shelter is the most important in the world 
from that particular requester, so, if there was 
any way of co-ordinating it, that we get the top 
30 are to Wicklow and we'd knock them of one by one 
in a relatively short period of time. 
There are a few others, Cllr Derek Mitchell asked 
a couple of questions on the rail side I didn't 
answer.  The longer trains we're ordering the new 
DART neat we're ordering, they don't have selective 

door opening to answer the question, the idea is 
we should be run ago shuttle type service out of 
there so selective door opening hasn't been 
included, the order hasn't been placed but hasn't 
been included the level crossings, it is our 
intention to shut the level crossings, along the 
South Eastern line, that's we know the difficulty 
that's going to be to do some of those and they're 
all close to the city centre as you know but again, 
as the DART gets more frequent, the amount of green 
time available for cars to pass the crossing, gets 
diminished in any event so to run a reliable service 
like Merrion Gates and Lansdowne Road and Sydney 
Parade they're to shut and we've built that in the 
DART expansion programme so that's one of the key 
components of it. 
  
Anne:  Just on the BusConnects - I think the 
impression has been given that BusConnects will 
only I suppose improve the bus services for the very 
north of the county but in fact if you consider in 
termination of getting reliable bus services in 
Wicklow all the bus priority that's provided both 
in Dublin, but also through Bray in particular will 

have a very large impact and will improve the 
service on the services that are currently using 
the Bray corridor while BusConnects is only touches 
on the priority, only touch on the north of Wicklow 
it does benefit all of the services. 
  
HUGH:  Cllr Paul O'Brien and about Wicklow train 
station not accessible and can't be used by elderly 
people.  I'm not sure what is required to resolve 
that but we have a programme to address 
accessibility the train stations, again, 
everything can't be done overnight but I'm happy 
to take that away and exam what is required to 
address that particular issue whether it is a set 
of lifts or ramp, I'm not exactly sure until we do 
a piece work.  It is not going to happen overnight 
but happy to take that away and see what needs to 
be done. 
Anne:  Cllr Grace McManus asked disability in 
particular and what we're doing to address 
accessibility issues. 
And it was raised by another councillor as well 
about the access of the lifts on to the footpaths 
so the high floor coaches that are used by Bus 

Eireann to deliver their services, usually most of 
them have a wheelchair lift, but it needs quite a 
significant amount of space on the footpath to be 
able to be used for it to come down safely on the 
footpath it needs at least depth of three metres, 
and as you can imagine that depth of footpath is 
not available in many locations in our towns and 
villages.. 
 
So we've approached I suppose, looking at this in 
two ways, one is that we've looked at the fleet, 
that it being used and for some journey distances 
we don't believe a low floor coach is the 
appropriate type of fleet we prefer low floor where 
you would ramped access at the front and that means 
then you don't need to make changes to the at the 
bus stop.  So, we carried out procurement last 
year, and we ordered 52 low-floor coaches regional 
coaches so that are being, have been delivered to 
Bus Eireann and then we distributed it around the 
country.  They don't require, they have wheelchair 
space and it can roll op like you do on the 
double-deck bus that is are we're trying to have 
one bus stop in each major town that will be able 

to take the high-floor coaches because it will take 
a number of years to actually change the fleet and 
there will always be requirement for the InterCity 
longer distance fleet to be probably high floor 
with a lift. 
Anything else on the accessibility. 
  
HUGH:  A number of councillors in the west of the 
council, Cllr Edward Timmins and one other, I'm not 
sure, raised this of Hollywood Cross, we've just 
become aware of that in the last week ourselves so 
it appears to be eminently solvable, and we will 
take it away and in conjunction with councillors 
and Bus Eireann that the bus stop is operating in 
the way it used to be, or maybe move slightly 
because of road safety but we believe it will be 
rectified and take it away to ensure that it is. 
Arklow Park and Ride was mentioned but it is tied 
into what I said earlier, Park and Ride has a role 
to play but it won't be very successful until we 
get bus priorities on the N11 and N11, some will 
change to get out of cars and go on the bus but most 
will say I'll rather stay in my own car if I can't 
get a faster journey, while we may be able to do 

small steps in the meantime I think the real step 
up in Park and Ride along this corridor has to be 
linked to getting bus priority on the M11 and N11 
first to make it truly successful but we have a Park 
and Ride office we're setting up now and certainly 
they can start the planning work the Park and Ride 
locations sites to be ready to go in conjunction 
wherever we end up on the main corridor itself. 
Anne:  On cycling infrastructure generally, we 
would certainly and would agree with us, that we 
haven't been in a position to fund the level of 
investment in cycling infrastructure that we would 
have wanted the funding just hasn't been there. 
There's now commitment to increase the level of 
funding going into cycling and walking 
infrastructure And we really want to focus on 
building up the number of project and plans and work 
working with the local authorities to get plans 
shovel ready to be able to I suppose avail of any 
funding that becomes available.  So, it is a reason 
as well why we've put in place a dedicated cycle 
design office to supplement the work that's been 
done in the local authorities to really drive the 
delivery of cycling infrastructure, ones that are 

really sorely needed.  So, you want to talk about 
that. 
HUGH:  Luas to Bray, if we inadvertently announced 
that, we're withdrawing that announcement, the 
position with Luas to Bray is it runs on the Green 
Line extension of the Green Line so the Green Line 
as some of probably know as you get to closer to 
Dublin City is near to full capacity, while we're 
putting additional carriages and putting some of 
the additional carriages on it, that capacity is 
going to be taken up with towns like Cherrywood 
growth in Sandyford and Dundrum and so on, so, we 
have said the last time we were down here the 
message is the same, until we get the Green Line 
upgraded to Metro level, then we can't afford to 
extend it any further because all would happen is 
we're putting people into more congestion so the 
sequence is get the Green Line upgraded to Metro 
and then the Luas can be extended further 
southwards, prior to that it doesn't make sense the 
capacity isn't there. 
  
Anne:  To some Cllr Anne Ferris raised issues about 
the 184, 185, 45A the complaints that the bus didn't 

turn up.  We'll check that out.  We have had some 
complaints, that will go ahead and operate those 
services, so while there were certainly issues when 
go ahead commenced operations, our understanding 
and my understanding is that they have greatly 
improved their service in terms of reliable and 
punctuality in particular.  And that the 
complaints level should be reduced associated with 
that.  But certainly, we'll have a look at that 
again. 
  
HUGH:  It was suggested about changing the 185, and 
splitting it in two, from memory that was part of 
the proposal in BusConnects there was a change to 
that, I cannot remember but we proposed a change 
so hopefully, that will roll out at part of 
BusConnects ultimately.  We're trying to pick up 
odds and ends here, I think it was Cllr Tom Fortune 
mentioned additional parking at Kilcoole train 
station so now that we have a Park and Ride site, 
office in place, we will take a long at that and 
with Irish Rail to see if there's anything we can 
do in period pre-additional fleet and certainly 
setting it up that it is good to go when we have 

additional fleet. 
Anne:  For members in west Wicklow they request to 
have a look at the 132 service, and whether we 
request provide additional services throughout the 
day but also particularly the evening, we'll have 
a look at that, and see whether there's any 
possibilities of that as well. 
I think we've covered most things there. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  I'll ask my question, and see if 
that covers it. 
Thank you.  I didn't get an answer on extra 
carriages for the Wicklow line and ties into if you 
expand further, if you're considering a turn back 
shuttle service, Greystones, Wicklow, that doesn't 
rule out the possibility of electrification 
Would I be correct in saying that? 
And also, just to clarify, is the bus priority a 
third lane or are we losing the hard shoulder, could 
you clarify which it is please. 
  
HUGH:  Second one first, I don't know is the short 
answer, we're looking for the quickest selective 
solution to put in priority along there we can get, 

it seems to us it is likely to be widening to create 
width in the hard shoulder for bus running on it 
but until somebody does a piece of work it is not 
possible to definitively say that.  But it is 
likely option, just don't want to say it is 
definitive option.  As regards, electrification, 
sorry, additional fleet, when we get in additional 
DART fleet mentioned earlier there will be 
available a lot of the deiseal fleet cascaded on 
to other routes, so you might think additional DART 
fleet doesn't benefit Greystones southwards, yes 
it does it allows other fleet to be cascaded to 
provide whatever level of service provided at that 
stage, because at that stage we should have 
sufficient fleet.  It doesn't preclude 
electrification in the future, about you it means 
the line is electrified and at the moment the key 
thing is additional services for people. 
 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I didn't get answer for proposal 
for feasibility study from DART to Wicklow, even 
funding sought for it if you don't have the funding 
yourselves, to seek funding from some, EU revenue 
stream or something like that. 

  
HUGH:    DART to Wicklow is challenging. 
That's the truth of it, because, there's a single 
line effectively from the north of Bray Head all 
the way down.  It is very unusual for electrified 
commuter DART service to operate in anything other 
than dual lines.  I think the strategy that we're 
operating to, and the strategy we do have to retest 
as part of renewal of our transport strategy is that 
we get a much more frequent service into 
Greystones, and then we get a much more frequent 
shuttle service south of Greystones that allows 
people to connect in a way they can't connect at 
the moment because the service is so infrequent and 
we think that's the better solution rather than to 
go off in a different direction to look for full 
electrification and twin-tracking which all the 
problems, I shouldn't say the environmental 
challenges on that line is likely to be many, many 
years away. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you.  Just thanks for that.  
I was glad to hear you're working on the 20 minute 
DART service to Greystones, and it seems to feature 
significantly on and other work needs doing, I just 

feel myself that in terms of Kilcoole and Wicklow 
Town, that the shuttle will be a difficult service 
to use at rush hour and take 7.5 minutes to 
transfer, if there's not a cross platform transfer 
in Greystones, I don't know that may not be able 
to arrange and I know in the Meath Parkway service 
you have direct training at rush hour and outside 
the rush hour you have a shuttle and I heard at 
meetings various complaints about the time it took 
to change and the problems.  It is a long journey 
from Wicklow and Arklow, and people aren't going 
to want to change and wait 7.5 minutes to transfer 
from one up over the platforms and things in 
Greystones, so I would be concerned.  I would think 
that the peak hour service anyway should be through 
train. 
And, I just it does concern me that really the TII 
study of the N11 seems I think to be going to be 
done without considering any better use of the 
rail. 
Now the TII study won't be implemented until 2027 
at the earliest by which time there's more 
carriages in the country, so, I just feel that that 
study should take account of a better system, on 

the railway.  And it will be less of a need to do 
things certainly south of Kilmac if that's the case 
thank you. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you.  Just in relation to 
the local link, are you considering implementing 
a much broader local link provision in light of the 
fact it is going to take three to five years to get 
any of the other improvements in place.  The county 
choked with traffic now and we need an immediate 
solution to it, and I think local link and other 
buses are actually the only way we're going to 
address that in the short-term.  And also, has 
there ever been a target set for car journey 
reductions in the county? 
So, you know if we have a certain number of car 
journeys what is our preferred and our target for 
reducing those.  We need to be more results focused 
how we address the issue thank you. 
  
HUGH:  If I can respond to Cllr Derek Mitchell 
first.  Just to say I realise I didn't say earlier 
as part of the Greystones work we are examining the 
potential of third platform at Greystones to 

Wicklow, the changeover to be simpler, we have 
indicative system already, we will see if it is a 
runner later on, so it is more than akin to walking 
in one direction for the sure if you can get it two.  
TII and consideration of the rail services, when 
they right up environmental impact assessment for 
the N11 or M11 in due course one of the things they 
have to assess you will all the viable as part of 
that, they'll take on board probably what we will 
be abstracting from a transfer strategy in regard 
to the rail services, so, short answer to your 
question is they must consider the alternative of 
rail services before as part of the road widening 
scheme and they will consider that as part of the 
environmental impact assessment report. 
  
Anne:  On local link services, there's blatant 
demand for local link services throughout country 
and we're delivering as much as awe funding can 
deliver, we could deliver and deliver more 
services, but what we're doing is carry out a study 
which we're calling connected Ireland which is 
looking at county by county basis on what is the 
level of service particularly in rural areas and 

it is really kind of focusing outside of our cities 
and towns. 
It is what level of service, what level of transport 
service could be provided which would allow people 
living in rural areas to avail of their services 
without a car. 
So it is looking at the possibility of having a 
service in the morning to get you to the next town 
or even to be able to connect into a larger town 
to get on to a more regional service to bring you 
to your work and employment and education. 
So, that study we hope to complete around K2 this 
year we will go on out consultation to get feedback 
and Wicklow would be included in that particularly 
how do we serve outside of the main corridors. 
But, how could we link up your towns here in your 
towns and villages into what are the main transport 
services the future transport services along the 
N11 and N81 corridors. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Has there been a target of car 
reduction, car journey reduction.? 
HUGH:  Smarter travel was a document about ten 
years ago and it set the target that no more than 

4% of journeys, commuting journeys should be by 
car.  So, we've never done the sum and applied it 
to Wicklow, if you want to start where somewhere, 
that's probably somewhere. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  It is ten years old. 
HUGH:  It is still the current policy. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Unfortunately, we're out of time, 
thank you both for coming down today, it is the 
first of many discussions.  Unfortunately, we do 
have a huge issue within the county in terms of 
commuter traffic and congestion, and both the east 
and the Westside of the county. 
And because there's so many disparate bodies and 
separate bodies, I think we're going to all have 
to sit down and talk together to try and come up 
with interim solutions to the long-term plan can 
be put in place.  But I'd like to thank you for your 
time and wish you well in your journey back to 
Dublin. Cllr Stephen Matthews. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Would you put the motion forward 
to next meeting please? 
  
