WICKLOW TOWN COUNCIL MEETING HELD AT WICKLOW COUNTY 
BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN 
ON MONDAY JANUARY 13TH 2020 AT 2:00PM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
 
ELAINE MCCARTHY 
ELAINE MCCARTHY 
 
 
 

NON-VERBATIM TRANSCRIPT OF MEETING HELD ON MONDAY, 
JANUARY 13TH 2020:  
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon.  You're all very 
welcome back to the Wicklow County Council in 2020, 
just remind you all again we still have the 
three-minute rule. It will stay in place and 
hopefully we will have a productive year. 
(sound lost)… 
MS GALLAGHER:  We also have condolences in 
relation to - for Noel Harper, father and friend 
of our colleague, and for Oliver Lawlor former Town 
Councillor and father of our colleague Audrey Bowe 
in Bray County Council. 
  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  Just a vote of sympathy for 
Bernadette Halfpenny and her family, she's from 
Gorey but managed the Ballyview services in 
Rathdrum and had a major impact on the families and 
staff there so I just want to note sympathy for her. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Just want to pass vote of 
sympathy to a family in Arklow to the death of their 
son in Arklow and family of Nadine who is well 
known, who died pre-Christmas. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I would like to include a vote of 

sympathy for Nora Fitzpatrick, Nora was a Town 
Councillor in Municipal District and also matron 
of a hospital in Wicklow and was just a wonderful 
woman. A wonderful, kind, generous, dry-witted 
woman who did so much for her community and her loss 
will be felt by family and friends and community.  
Just before we stand can somebody from IT help out 
over here there's no feed to sound. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thank you.  Cathaoirleach I wish 
to request a list of standing orders which I 
discussed previously.  To discuss the M11, N11 
improvement scheme there's been considerable 
change from what was briefed in phase one to what 
is on offer in phase two, it is one of the most 
strategically important infrastructure for the 
county and there has been changes also the 
extension of the public consultation I have a 
proposal I wish to put before councillors if you'll 
agree to put it to the members and I can summit that 
proposal and take it at a time that sexualities you 
on the agenda. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do you have a seconder, yeah OK, 

so if we take it at 16.45 OK.  Is that agreed? 
OK. 
OK. 
Item one, to confirm and sign minutes of the Budget 
meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday, 
25th of November.  Copy attached; can I have a 
proposer? 
Cllr Vincent Blake, Cllr Rory O'Connor. 
And to confirm and sign the minutes of the ordinary 
meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday 
second of December, can I have a proposer, Cllr Paul 
O'Brien and seconded by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald. 
And OK, item number three, Pat Kennedy. 
>>:  Thank you.  For item number three can I 
abstain from the meeting as just reading from the 
disposal notice, these people are related to me so 
I would like that to be noted in the minutes. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I would like to propose item number 
three. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. 
Do we have a seconder.  Cllr Derek Mitchell.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed.  Pat you can come back. 
OK. 

Item number one, to receive a presentation Mr 
Stephen Kent to discuss how Bus Eireann can deliver 
the best possible transport service and in 
attendance will be Alan Park.  The chief executive 
officer, chief operations manager and if they'd 
like to come up thank you. 
OK, we can have one at that side yeah. 
  
MR KENT:  Good afternoon everyone, and councillors 
and pleasure to be here today and answer some of 
the questions we have so I know that at the moment 
a short presentation and after that we can take 
questions if that needs.  So I'll open up there, 
to go forward, give the background, so at the moment 
from the perspective of everybody in Bus Eireann, 
obviously we're a national company. To a large 
extent we're in financial recovery for the last two 
to three years, particularly 2017 when we had one 
of the longest strikes in the history of the state 
so we've been in a position to rebuild these service 
of the company and to a large extent we turned a 
corner in 2018 and that progressed to 2019, so 
you'll see this year, basically on the back of a 
number includes the Exeter we contribute 58 million 

to the Exchequer, rising to 60 million this year.  
Our customer journeys to 2019, this is how we 
measure ourselves, 2019 is the most successful year 
we've had for a decade, so we've delivered more 
passenger journeys we've had 88 million with the 
school transport services with new vehicles, 
because the business had been on hold for a number 
of years, there wasn't a lot of steady state 
investment put in, but in the last two years I'm 
pleased to say during the course of this year, we'd 
orders placed for a hundred new vehicles, and about 
60 have been received to date and going into next 
year, we'll have another hundred vehicles, so if 
somebody looks at what we deliver across the state 
we probably have 650 road passengers vehicles, so 
over the two years, you'll have 200, almost a third 
of them replayed and new, that's essential for our 
perspective, they're funded by the National 
Transport Authority from our perspective.  And I 
should say from the outset that what we do on behalf 
of the road until transport services is we deliver 
to a contract sped in detail by them right down to 
the timetables that we operate to the services and 
frequency, all of that requires all of those 

services to be funded, we fund them down to a level, 
and it allows as part of the contract to make a very, 
very small reasonable profit, is what it allows to 
do, and that goes into further investment.  From 
our perspective, we had a couple of initiatives 
that went in, particularly, we're striving to 
ensure all the vehicles that are purchased are all 
low-floor and accessible vehicles to an extent 
where you're putting them in, that's not always 
possible to the vehicles that transcend the 
motorways but there's a commitment to be a 
successful and delivering the needs.  The other 
part going in the vehicles is now everybody wants 
cleaner, greener, lower emission vehicles, and to 
a certain extent that's part of what is going on 
the agenda.  So, the investment at the moment 
there, is starting to transition into hybrid 
vehicles, probably later in this particular year 
we'll be going in and trialling electric, so that's 
the way the world is moving. 
Last year, we were at the beginning we opened the 
year with the first 24-hour service down in Cork, 
that was significant initiative because it 
delivered massive passengers growth and catered 

for people doing a lot of shift work and patterns 
of living are completely different from here to 
for, so that was significant from Carrigaline and 
Ballincollig and doubled the usage.  A lot what we 
do is continue to improve the customer experience 
so I know part of the reason I'm here is we will 
dealing with one of routes where we haven't been 
delivering an optimal customer experience, if I was 
to say to you one of the things we're trying do is 
now spend a huge amount of time retiming a lot of 
what we try to deliver in terms of functionality 
and reliability, improving vehicle standards what 
is happening and that investment is coming and then 
over the last year NTA in conjunction who regulate 
the fares moving a lot of the cash fares on to leap 
fares who when will do, will avail of a 30% of 
discount.  It is always good to travel by Leap and 
that's overview where we're recovering a small 
profit being significantly lost, put all the 
services back in and rebuild the team so in the last 
18 months we've taken over 500 new people into the 
company.  And they have been delivering a lot of 
extended services, higher frequency services 
throughout the business.  And then we're in the 

business now of improving the customer experience 
elsewhere.  So, I'll just keep moving on there. so, 
to get to Wicklow. In summary, so, where we are in 
terms of Wicklow, at the moment is we're delivering 
most of our service on the PSO route operated under 
contract to National Transport Authority, 1233.  
And that has a couple of variance, that end up going 
through Gorey, Arklow and serving Wicklow, and that 
particular service is also supplemented by 
services 132 and that's serving Bunclody and then 
on our Expressway, which is a completely different 
service, that is receives no state aid, that leaves 
Wexford every day, and travels to Dublin Airport 
and that operates under the Express completely, in 
certain instances it can be complimentary but 
different and distinguished by that. 
Now if you add up all those services, you're 
delivering 300 trips every week between Wicklow and 
Dublin, so that's what we're delivering at the 
moment.  And most of those are in high capacity 
vehicles, and if we don't have those, given the 
amount of commuting that's done from places like 
this, it ends up causing us problems so it is 
critical we get the proper type of vehicles on the 

bus, in addition to the road passenger, we see, over 
3,600 children availing.  The school transport 
scheme and delivering that using over 130 vehicles 
every day, so that's a critical scheme as well and 
that's something that a scheme we're very proud of, 
it goes into delivering nearly 125,000 children 
across the state and we do on behalf of the 
Department of Education while the other services 
are delivered through the Department of Transport.  
That's what we do in terms of a simple offering to 
Wicklow.  Our customer journeys over the past year 
have been 5% up on last year, and when I started 
in this business, in the beginning of 2014 and our 
current Taoiseach sock used to be the minister of 
transported the country was beginning in 2014 to 
meet monthly to see how you generate growth of 2%. 
So, at the moment, we're getting 5% on 132, which 
has gone in and dramatically improved with new 
buses and services.  We delivered about 15% 
drought on that particular route in the past year.  
So, that has been, good traction from the point of 
view, now, Wicklow as we said here has been a route 
in growth so that 5% seeing on the 1 
3 route compares against a national average to 

12-13% growth.  This we know has been happening 
over the course of the year so more growth to be 
delivered right in that.  Most what we do, hugely 
now depends on, local collaboration, so, meetings 
like this are important to us.  And obviously, 
then, our local team, who sits here, by Adrian  
McLoughlin, and he's available for any meetings we 
continue to have, because we need to be conjunction 
with the NTA with the local authority or Gardai or 
stakeholders and schools so that's a critical 
application critical part of the business, one 
thing we have to continue doing each year, it never 
stays the same and the level of growth and 
particularly now that the country's gone back to, 
low levels of unemployment, or full employment, 
those issues have caused congestion right across 
not just for bus users but car users and that has 
been a critical issue for us.  So, even though we 
originate a timetable at the beginning of the year 
we have to continue monitoring that, and then of 
course, we're hugely reliant on further investment 
that may follow.  So, going forward here ... 
  That traffic congestion I want to highlight to 
you again, has been the biggest bugbear for our 

company certainly in the last three months. 
So, notwithstanding as I said we delivered about 
15% growth nationally and in fact the NTA would say 
we're probably the fastest growing public 
transport operators to under their remit in the 
past year.  Because we've put in all of the 
additional services, but in reality, what we've had 
to try and do is deal with the levels of congestion, 
particularly in the GDA.  So, anything serving 
from here, from the airport back into the city 
centre, or from the city centre out and where there 
isn't prioritisation for public transport, we have 
had difficulties.  No different than a lot of you 
may have experienced if you sat in your own cars 
and you'll experience, so, I myself just before 
Christmas I was back out taking the 133 myself, and 
on average it can run at the moment, we've 
difficulties of between 18-20 minutes upholding 
the punctuality reliability of our current 
timetable and that was something we had to bring 
to bear, continue to moderate that. 
Too, you should know I guess, that the world has 
moved on from observation, and everything now is 
completely data driven so all of the buses are 

fitted with equipment that monitors their specific 
departure and arriving times at every stop now.  
And before you'll make a change to every timetable 
you have to supply a couple of months of data you 
who you performed against each of those bus stops 
each time so you can inform yourself reliably yes 
the stop is hit on average eight to ten minutes or 
as we've seen, our Dublin city to airport has been 
running ten minutes more than the current tame 
table and that's the average, we haven't been able 
to improve it, no matter what you can do, the driver 
can't drive faster or the bus can't move beyond the 
speed limits, that's the issue we have, we've been 
through Donnybrook, and there's issues and 
currently as we knew that as well as we transition 
into Leap, which happened when you're out around 
UCD, and people were boarding, in certain instances 
you could have 40 people boarding at that 
particular stop.  And there's issues there, that 
when this they are ear boarding and not at pace 
you're running late for the next stop, these are 
the observation that is Alan and his team who run 
the operation with all of their vehicle control 
centres are now getting down in the minutiae, this 

is a lot of cash up work we're dealing with, so in 
certain instances the company is dealing with what 
I call legacy timetables, you've had the timetable 
for a couple of years and you got to modify it, we 
are in the process of doing that, so we have that 
informed there, there's are instances no matter 
what we'll do here, as you know Glen of the Downs 
for instance can be issues, where you have it, so, 
you're dealt cards in terms of where you have 
prioritisation and after that, the best what we're 
trying to is to tell the customer exactly when it 
will arrive and perform to that timetable and we 
haven't been able to do that in the last period but 
we're moving forward on that.  All the 133 trips 
are operated on double-deck coaches. 
Where we can, and where we fail it is because there 
has been a vehicle breakdown. 
But, the criticality of that for us, the double deck 
coaches take 84 people, that's 84 people we have 
to transport and we're highly reliant on them.  So, 
in reality, the double-deck coaches has been 
something again, that has been, there's a lag and 
investment from the state but we before Christmas, 
in Christmas week we have news from the NTA there's 

a further number of these vehicles going to be 
invested in, in the future, that's critical for 
routes not just like 13, but we have a number of 
high-dependency commuter routes reliant on a 
vehicle like that as well.  When I talked about the 
Leap transaction time we had issues with technology 
issues in the past that a Leap transaction could 
take longer because cash transaction because of the 
way it is measured, three weeks before Christmas, 
we implemented a change and sped up and delivered 
all of that, so, that was something that helps us 
speed loading so these might seem small immaterial 
things but when you have a number of stops as we 
have on a route like Wicklow, they're critical, 
they are the deciding point whether you're going 
to be ten minutes late or 15 minutes late at a stop, 
so our goal at the moment is to get ourselves more 
accurate and reliable and punctuation wall and 
that's what we've done. 
From the point of view from the reliability, under 
the contract, we delivered on the 133, 98% of 
scheduled trips were delivered in 2019. 
According to the NTA and as we can deliver it, as 
it happens we can't drop 2% of trips, and sometimes 

when you get into the high congestion, 3%, because 
if you're run something late it is inevitable 
sometimes a trip canning delayed and they're just 
the operational difficulties you can occur on the 
vehicle has broken down. 
So, we have met our contractual obligation on the 
133, 132, serving Bunclody we have delivered 99% 
of all of the scheduled trips timetabled operated.  
So, between reliability and punctuality and the 
punctuality is the issue we are trying to address 
in the current work.  And lastly, I guess, we're 
continuing to monitor a lot of people will be aware 
in the last couple of months there's media 
commentary and also, concerned commentary on our 
part about social behaviour and continuing to treat 
drivers, so we'll continue to work and collaborate 
with as many people we can, we need people to 
respect the drivers, and all that's good for the 
passengers, and we run campaigns like that.  So, 
lastly, just if I tee up to where we are, 
recognising in the first instance, there have been 
issued as I've said here, and when I say there's 
instances of punctuality on the route, primarily 
driven by congestion, primarily driven by certain 

areas, where we haven't had adequate 
prioritisation, and that can be coming from 
Townsend street to Loughlinstown, sometimes you 
can't get through the traffic.  So, one of the 
things we've done now, is we've spent a number of 
months, planning with the NTA, and we've got a 
timetable approved through the NTA, that now as of 
this week we will be trying to engage with our own 
staff in order to make the changes, and to bring 
in a timetable change.  And the key features as 
I've tried to highlight in relation to this, if 
there's timetable coming in, we believe it will be 
more reliable and more efficient from the point of 
view from the customers' serving Wicklow.  Because 
the timetables have been informed by the data.  In 
certain instances it won't speed up their time but 
what it will tell them exactly if there's 18 minutes 
to be caught, they know they'll do it, it has other 
features, we will put increased morning and evening 
frequency to deal with the peak so we know there's 
more people coming in on certain times and where 
we've been operating for every 30 minutes we will 
move to 20 minutes so that's additional investment.  
We used to begin at 5,30, we will start at 5am and 

finish add midnight, departing Dublin and that's 
based on feedback through ourselves and NTA, so we 
can arrive that. 
There will be morning and evening direct services 
and some of the instances that we've had is, because 
you're serving a route that has been all the time 
running from Wicklow to Dublin Airport, in certain 
instances we haven't had the numbers that are on 
it for the airport so we know most of the journeys, 
the vast bulk of them are always in the morning and 
evening.  So, a number of those services, in the 
minute there, will begin in the city centre instead 
of waiting for the bus getting caught, coming in 
from Dublin Airport, caught in the city and 
delivering people late all the way down to Wicklow.  
So, what we're trying do is take a pragmatic 
approach to continue service demand but not 
oversupply demand where people are actually not 
using it, and instead deploy it where they really 
need the service on a more reliable and punk wall 
basis, we expected that timetable will be 
implemented on March 22nd. 
Just after Paddy's week, so, we have the dialogue 
to do with our own staff in certain instances we 

have to bring in resource, and then communicate 
those changes, we'll put it in operation and trial 
it and then go live.  So that allows us to typical 
lead time we need from receiving a timetable to 
implementing it then with our own staff and getting 
out and communicating it.  On top of that, I guess, 
for the remainder of this year there's a number of 
other changes, one is that we will as I said, we 
have a lot of vehicle investment going to come in 
on half the NTA and Expressway, so, on the 
Expressway, we have to invest in the vehicles 
ourselves. 
And we will be doing that in 2019, we will be 
introducing new omni channel ticketing, we call it 
but ticketing takes account and certain people to 
pay with debit cards rather than cash and everybody 
would expect that day and age but we haven't had 
it, so that's something that will be in by the end 
of the year, again, people will coded ticket and 
foe when we're coming out the road somebody is 
expecting to board that bus, this is information 
we didn't have but using technology to good effect.  
And in the very last instance, what I would say at 
the moment is there's a continued programme of 

trying to invest in the bus stations and that has 
happened through our bus facilities Dublin Airport 
and in the depots, we're looking to upgrade 
facilities where they're in there they're 
continued to be accessible and safe and modern and 
progressive where we have it with customer 
information and lastly I guess at the moment some 
of you I know will raise the issue of bus stops and 
shelters, so, at the very beginning of it, rather 
than repeating the point, the responsibility for 
bus stops and for shelters are the responsibility 
of the National Transport Authority. 
So, when people ask us to do stops, we obviously 
liaise with the council, but the stops are the 
responsibility and location of those stops, are 
governed by the National Transport Authority.  Our 
job is to make sure we inform them when they're 
broken else and when they need update.  And at the 
moment from everybody's perspective NTA have 
procurement process in place, to procure new bus 
poles, new bus stop information, which are in the 
middle of a procurement process now, so I suspect 
that's going to take six months or so-to-before 
that's in.  What we have, we hold, and if we can, 

if there's anything that is very damaged and needs 
to be urgently replaced we will try to do that, but 
more of a sticking plaster rather than a real 
solution, the real solution will come on the back 
of the procurement.  So, I'll leave that open to 
there in terms of a quick update, I hope that's 
given you a flavour of what we have in the business.  
Strong passenger growth starts of new continued 
investment, a new timetable change coming in to 
serve Wicklow on the back of it, continued to 
dialogue with the NTA and if there's any other 
issues we'll throw it open and answer any questions 
we can.  Thank you Chair. 
 
CHAIRATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
Now if you want to take out a pen and paper because 
there's currently ten councillors waiting to ask 
you questions, so what we'll do is take maybe all 
of the questions and then you can rely to them if 
you can. 
MR KENT:  That's fine. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you for coming down, because 
I think these meetings are valuable and there's ten 
councillors but you've probably answered a lot of 

the questions, can I start apologising to you, 
because I wrote to you a letter in relation to a 
bus stop, but you referred me to as senator, but 
thank you very much, you obviously know something 
that I don't.  I think, as I say these meetings are 
important Mr Kent because there's a lot of 
frustration out there, I will talk from 133 from 
Arklow, Wicklow up because that's my area and I'm 
sure councillors will want to refer other areas, 
not that I don't care about the rest of county.  The 
good news is the first e-mail I got about this was 
to praise you in the sense of the 7am Express train, 
Express bus, sorry, from Wicklow Town, the lady 
couldn't have been any more appreciative.  But 
then the "but" came in and that was back from 
Dublin, the level of frustration out there is 
palpable at the moment you have people standing on 
a day like today on the next bus due in five minutes 
and it doesn't turn up.  The main one at the 
Burlington Hotel, you have sympathy in terms of 
traffic, you can't control the traffic, and 
certainly, can't control the lack of investment 
other the last number of years. 
Can I ask a question, what's the turnover of drivers 

in the area? 
Again, local knowledge is everything, you hear 
passengers telling me they have to give drivers 
direction, it sounds a little bit scare scary to 
be honest with you, that passengers have to give 
drivers directions.  And local knowledge is 
everything and you get used to you are why 
passengers obviously I had one lady on a day like 
today she was in Newtownmountkennedy opposite side 
of the road trying to flag the bus down but the bus 
left without her so you can understand people's 
frustrations at this stage.  I'm going to stick to 
my three minces. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You're getting close. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  But you have reassured a lot of 
people, but meetings are vital like this and we 
should have more of them in the future but that's 
all I have to say on it.  There is a lot to say but 
the main word would be frustration from passengers 
thank you again. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you Chair and thank you for 
your presentation. The 133 is a huge problem, we're 
all aware of it.  I have been in contact with people 

whose teenager daughters have been left at the side 
of the road in the dark as the bus drives by.  Who 
I've been contacted by people who have had to leave 
their jobs because the bus service was so 
unreliable.  People who had to buy a second car 
because they couldn't rely on the bus. 
It is not acceptable the services that's provided 
by the 133 at the moment and I'm pleased to hear 
that you're planning for improvements, but we need 
to look at the current situation as well. 
It is the most complained about service in the 
country, I think 889,000 per thousand passengers 
compared with national average of 40 complaints per 
100,000 passengers, so it is the worse service in 
the country.  Something has to do, because it is 
not fair, we want people on public transport we heed 
them to use it, ifs it is not frequent and reliable 
they will not use it.  I think it is safe to say 
the 133 is a basket case at the moment. 
And there has to be a significant focus on improving 
that. 
And hopefully, what you have planned will actually 
achieve that. 
I'm not sure whether people will have faith in it, 

but I really hope that's the case. 
I think part of the problem is actually, there's 
a problem with part of the problem is it could be 
a cultural problem.  Because I've heard of drivers 
driving by, not stopping refusing to take student 
tickets and essentially putting teenager girls out 
on the side of the road when they wouldn't accept 
the tickets, that's a problem and that's not 
investment problem that's organisational problem 
and that's something you have to address.  On a 
side note I know there have been calls for the 133 
to stop in Aughrim, it is something that's raised 
over the past number of years, and I just wondering 
if you would consider extending the bus service 
because not only do we need to improve the current 
service that's there, it needs to be extended 
because we need more and more people to be using 
this service, and Aughrim could be a focus of that.  
Thank you very much. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks to the representatives from 
Bus Eireann down here today.  It is very pleasing 
to hear the improvements that have been planned.  
But, a couple of months ago there were so many 

complaints coming in by Bus Eireann's 133 service 
that I organised a petition which I forwarded on 
to you with over a thousand names.  I'm hoping you 
got it and read some of the comments that were on 
it.  I won't go through them again, there's one 
comment that sticks in my mind - and it is quite 
simply just that, being late is affecting my 
husband's work and our mental health.  Now when you 
consider that 40 percentage perspective of 
employees leave this county every day to work, it 
shows how important it is to have a good transport 
system.  We have a very poor train system, there's 
only a couple of carriages, they're very short, 
some people are standing all the way from Wicklow 
to Dublin, the bus service is vital.  We don't have 
the Dart in Wicklow and in Luas and no sign of it 
arriving in this lifetime so people are dependent 
on the bus service, they're depending on it for work 
college, hospital appointments which sometimes 
take months to get, people are left with no shows, 
followed by other no shows, people are beyond 
frustrated at this stage.  Now we can go back and 
tell all these wonderful things that have been 
planned and hopefully they will come to fruition.  

But it has to be more than just empty promises.  
Because people are just at the end of their tether.  
One of the - I just happened to go on the website 
to see what your mission statement says and 
basically, it says "To succeed by providing 
excellent service to our customers through a 
commitment team”. Well I don't need to tell you 
you're falling way short of that at the moment and 
hopefully it will improve. 
Just want to finish by saying that, there seems to 
be a big gap between how Bus Eireann think they're 
doing and how the public think they're doing.  And, 
hopefully as I said these improvements will make 
a huge difference because people have nowhere else 
to go, we have to get this right. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, yeah, 
welcome to Bus Eireann here, it is good to hear the 
plans for the change and improve the service. 
But there does seem to be as mentioned huge problems 
with the reliability of the 133.  I represent 
Greystones Kilcoole and Newcastle and some of 
Newtown, and the main Express bus which I'd be 

dealing with would be the 84X run by Dublin Bus and 
I don't get complaints about the reliability of 
that bus, certainly in the mornings, now in the 
evenings there's a problem getting back from town 
to Greystones but basic bus seems to be reliable. 
Whereas I get quite a lot of complaints from willow 
grove and Newtown that the bus hasn't come, the news 
I think doesn't go sometimes to willow grove if it 
is full maybe or maybe could be other reasons and 
people are left there for a very long time not 
knowing what the story is.  This hugely decreased 
confidence in using the 133.  And people bought 
cars lots of them, to use on the N11 because of this, 
whereas they would prefer many of them, to use the 
bus. 
And we badly need to get cars off the N11, and some 
of the things we're told about here if it works to 
have every 20 minute service, maybe we should get 
in the medium term more frequent services at the 
very peak to really encourage people off the N11, 
it would be cheaper than massive expansion of the 
whole thing.  And, I would just the reliability 
would be difficult to get across to people, and I 
think a major campaign is needed to persuade people 

out of the car that this bus will be reliable. 
And the statistics which Cllr Jennifer Whitmore 
mentioned was interesting, certainly I get far more 
complaints, rather than relatively few in my area 
use it, theses the 84X, so I'd like to urge you have 
a campaign to try and get people on to it, and ensure 
it is reliable and increase the frequency for an 
hour in the morning or so, as the 84X is. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you.  I've two questions for 
you:  One is on Express bus services, so you've 
heard that there's discussions at the moment our 
proposal on N11 and Express bus service is 
discussed as one of the options on that.  Can you 
give example of Express bus service that Bus 
Eireann are currently running that's using hard 
shoulders and Park and Ride, how it is managed and 
how it is operated and is it successful? 
Secondly, on PSO subvention, can you tell us is your 
PSO at the level you require to provide the service 
you want to provide, or approximately how short 
percentage wise is PSO at the moment? 
And I believe you want to run a better service, ire 
rod Eireann was in last month they want to run a 

better service, I know the department holds purse 
strings for NTA, you referred to the teak sock when 
he was formerly Minister for Transport and I 
remember a disparaging remark he made about public 
transport in that he said loved trains that he had 
a train set when he was a child and I think that 
highlights the way public transport is held in this 
current Government and I believe you want to run 
a better service and there needs to be higher 
investment in public transport.  If we're to 
overcome climate change and congestion and 
economic loss from that thank you Chair. 
  
CLLR O’NEIL:  Sorry I was the second on here with 
my ight to speak.  I was number two. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You're after this person.  I take 
it in the order.  You will have to wait your time 
like everybody else. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Have you reset my time? My speaking 
rights have gone across, thank you for coming in.  
I'm conscious, that personal stories are very 
important with this, you can get the statistics 
through your monitoring and database and that's 
important too.  But, when there's stories, e-mails 

sent to me of parents of young children going out 
to work to commute out of the county as so many 
people do in Wicklow and they're standing out the 
Park View at 6.00 and the bus passes and they have 
to wait the whole day and the same story for the 
bus in Dublin back home, apart from the sheer 
frustration, and the effect on mental health it is 
affecting people's wellbeing, they're away from 
families as long as it is, so improving the service 
is critical, I welcome the changes you're proposing 
but as Cllr Stephen Matthews dichotomy, to what 
people really want, and public transport is failing 
them at the moment. 
And this has to change.  Which you know, we 
hopefully some of the changes you've presented here 
will help on the route of the 133. 
The second thing that I think desperately needs to 
be addressed as well is that the complaints service 
and phone this is the second point of frustration 
Expressed to me from people is not only is there 
absolute failings with the 133 service but failings 
in trying to communicate with anything in Bus 
Eireann, people e-mailing in and calling in and 
getting no response back and again, there's why I'm 

sure there's lots of us get e-mails from people is 
despair from people that nobody is listening to 
them.  And so, I would ask you to reply 
specifically on this - are you also looking at 
improving the way you record complaints and respond 
to people, is there a way of fast-tracking 
complaints and more real time way for people to get 
response there Twitter or whatever it is, but 
people are hearing silence at the moment and that's 
adding to the frustration. 
  
>>:  Thank you, 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Thank you, I just listened to your 
presentation there, and again, we didn't hear much 
of west Wicklow in it, but there's one issue, that 
I would like to raise again and again, it is going 
on maybe three four years with Bus Eireann with 
regards to the stop at Hollywood Cross, Hollywood 
is a village Blessington, it is serviced up to 1920, 
and up to the last couple of years it is hit and 
miss with regards Bus Eireann want to stop at the 
stop at Hollywood Cross, and it really depends on 
more or less the driver, if the driver wants to stop 
at that stop we will, and if he doesn't he won't 

because it is not a designated stop. 
But what I would ask you today is to put this at 
top of the agenda once whether it is through the 
NTA, or the TIA or whatever, but once and for all 
that we don't have the situation where driving 
threatens… a while ago with a young girl where the 
bus did not stop off at Hollywood Cross but brought 
the girl who was diabetic to another ten kilometre 
south of Hollywood Cross, and now her mother was 
frantic at the time with the equipment she needed 
for the girl, and followed the bus, she had to be 
looked after in the bus before it moved further 
south.  It is a huge issue, that the people of 
Hollywood are very, very annoyed with.  What I hate 
the thoughts of is Chairman of the Baltinglass 
Municipal District is coming into the chamber 
today, raising this issue with my colleagues here, 
including and come back in another year and another 
year, can we get this sorted out? 
Because, you know, if you're elderly or young or 
vulnerable or whatever, and you get a bus from 
Dublin, down west Wicklow now, we always feel a bit 
left out in west Wicklow but this is a simple thing 
I think that can be done, and we don't want to come 

back year after year and month after month and maybe 
something horrible might happen in that neck of the 
woods. 
What I would plead now today is once we get a 
solution to this, that it will be a dissipated stop 
in a couple of weeks and people can, that a bus will 
stop there, instead of this crazy situation where 
the bus goes Annaleckey ten kilometres further. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's time. 
CLLR GLENNON.  Thank you Chair. 
Thank you, Mr Kent. Gerry made a lot of the points 
I intended making, most councillors here are 
concerned about the 133 service, and trains and 
DART, and unfortunately in West Wicklow we have 
nothing only Bus Eireann, and I echo everything the 
councillor has said, it is disgraceful what 
happened, I was reared on the N81, and I'm around 
a long time that the bus traditionally always 
stopped at Hollywood Cross going back when it was 
the New Ross bus and now Bunclody. It services 
Dunlavin, Hollywood and Dunard and for generations 
people have been getting the bus there.  In 
fairness, most of the drivers still will stop 
because they know that's the tradition.  But 

there's one or two particular drivers that refuse 
to stop, put people off despite illness and in 
Blessington, elderly people are told you have to 
get out I'm not stopping so that's an issue you can 
resolve here today by going back and saying, I spoke 
to the Chief Executive at lunch time about getting 
proper facilities there and in fairness they're 
doing their best with TIA to get two bus shelters 
and official stops but in the meantime you can 
resolve it by telling drivers to pick people up at 
Hollywood Cross and drop them off, it always has 
been a bus stop so why someone made it unofficial, 
I don't know. 
  
CLLR O'CONNOR:  Yeah, as a Councillor Scott was 
saying there as everyone knows, this is how I get 
to the meetings, I take the 133 down to Bray, and 
this morning, I had an experience where this couple 
asked me for when the time of the bus was coming, 
so I showed the approximate time and they said we're 
not waiting that long and the bus ended up coming 
90 minutes earlier than the app said, that plays 
into reliability in a sense that you guys need to 
update your app, and I know you say a lot about data 

and gathering it, and using it, but I think that's 
easy to do on app you don't have to change the whole 
timetable you can make it easier to use and what 
not. 
And I just wondered if you have plans to make that 
better, yeah, that's all. 
  
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thanks for coming down, I 
agree with Councillor O'Brien, it is important that 
we have opportunities to share and discuss these 
issues, and I had an experience, actually I was in 
Dublin for a meeting and I had to make a call, I 
was on Baggot Street and the option was to go to 
get the 133 and be here or DART to Bray and get lift 
and I chose the DART. I'm an user on 133, that's 
all I am I want to believe in Bus Eireann and the 
bus service and as public representative to be able 
to encourage others to use, we went to, well I want 
to believe that Bus Eireann is part of the solution 
to all of the challenges we face in traffic 
congestion and the environment. 
But at the moment, I the only thing I would say 
positively is the buses are brilliant.  As someone 
who would work on a bus as well, the plugs, the WiFi 

and comfort, it is great and I commend absolutely 
but it is difficult for me to encourage to use the 
Bus Eireann service in Wicklow, I'm fascinated to 
see the new timetable and hope it rolls out.  My 
question is, what is the ambition for Bus Eireann 
in Wicklow? 
Do you have an ambition within your own 
organisation? 
How quick can change happen within your operational 
systems that we can see now how everything is 
changing fast in terms of again the environment and 
climate and if proposals are landing in Wicklow, 
that we want the bus to be alternative to that, a 
positive alternative how quick can change happen 
in your world thank you. 
  
CLLR CRONIN:  Hi thank you very much for your 
presentation. 
As my colleagues in west Wicklow have mentioned 
there's a huge need for the bus stop at Hollywood 
Cross, I'm a commuter myself and I use the bus, 
which I have done since 2015, I used to get it from 
Hollywood Cross every morning and get dropped back 
there in the evening and about three years ago there 

was a new driver in place and he said he wouldn't 
stop there anymore. 
So, that's a major issue. 
They said it is due to safety, although there's 
actually a lay-by there and there is a streetlight 
at the cross. 
So, I can't see how he thinks it is, there seems 
to be a safety issue there.  He did however decide 
it was OK to stop N81, so you were left on the side 
of the road in the dark having to walk back to where 
the cars were parked which is ridiculous.  There's 
one particular driver, he's normally does the 
morning route at the 7.10, there's never an issue 
with him, he will stop at Hollywood Cross, he will 
never pass anybody and the same in the evening he 
will stop at Hollywood and let people off but 
there's two drivers that refuse to stop there, this 
is ongoing issue, it is raised numerous times in 
here at district level and also with TDs in the 
constitution, but unfortunately we still haven't 
resolved the issue.  Another issue with the 132, 
it is a very reliable service as I said I use it 
myself but the only thing is the last bus home is 
at 5.30pm which really isn't very suitable for 

people if they work any time after 5pm you're 
rushing it out to get it.  Myself I don't finish 
until 5.30 so if I get it, I have to sky off early.  
You might consider extending the service, or 
changing the timetable just to give maybe a later 
service in the evening to allow people who do work 
until 5.30 to give them an opportunity to avail of 
the public transport in west Wicklow.  We 
obviously don't have the luxury of a rail or of the 
Luas we only have in rural areas is the 132.  So, 
there are change that is can be made. 
But, it is a reliable service I've no issue with 
the timings and things like that, I have to say it 
is always reliable with you but it is the fact 
certain drivers are refusing to stop at Hollywood 
Cross and extend the times maybe it would be a big 
help for people in the area. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  Thank you.  First of all, I would 
like to congratulate you on the improvement you 
have made on the service, when I came on the 
council, we had infrequent service on the 133, and 
didn't go to the airport.  And I remember lobbying 
with my other councillors we get that improvement 

which you did bring in thankfully. 
I use the service myself often.  And but I do find 
it frustrating if I have to wait more than five 
minutes for a bus beyond the stated time.  The 
airport return can be tricky for some people coming 
back on late nights I've often been caught myself 
coming back and missing the last bus at 12.00 to 
Arklow. 
Because of the bus timetable and I was wondering 
if you could have flexibility there, if there were 
late flights arriving would your app allow you to 
delay departure from the airport to facilitate late 
arrivals. 
Otherwise you have to wait until 6am in the morning 
for the next bus, so there's a problem there at 
certain times I imagine. 
I was wondering have you ever considered Park and 
Ride it is becoming topical now as possible way of 
encouraging more people to use the bus service and 
we don't have Park and Ride facilities along the 
N11 corridor at the moment, official ones anyway 
so it was something you might touch on but you 
haven't mentioned it.  And the other thing when I 
plan a journey, I see to myself with family, will 

I take my car, or will I take the bus? 
And when I price the family rate for four people 
or five people to go it is dearer on the bus, to 
go than take the car.  And youthened up taking the 
car.  I really think you should be trying to 
encourage people to, especially families, to take, 
you should provide a better value ticket for 
families to encourage them to use your bus service 
more often because more often than not I end up 
taking the car.  So just another point.  And 
lastly, probably a very good reason why you're not 
doing this - I imagine it must be health and safety, 
but in congested areas on the N11 in the mornings, 
where the cars from Newtown by pass block up the 
road from there to Bray, what about the hard 
shoulder for the buses? 
For a segment of the motorway, why can't buses be 
allow today do that to speed up journey times at 
peak times? 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks.  Thanks for the 
presentation and thanks for coming down.  You 
mention there's a new schedule coming out on the 

2nd of March, and there's been over the last 
year-and-a-half, there's been two, maybe three 
looks schedules and I'm mainly my concern is the 
school Newcastle pocket because it is the end, if 
you come into north Wicklow it is the end of the 
bus route, and I feel that there's a population of 
6,000-plus of people in that immediate catchment 
area and they're losing out on the scheduling and 
frequency during the recent local elections, one 
of the things I was hearing from people was the 
frequency of the service. 
Now in the morning time it is very good.  The Xs, 
it is good, but as the day progresses, a number of 
problems came up at the last two schedules that came 
out and to be fair we were able to get them sorted, 
the buses put back on that were taken off.  I'd ask 
you, when you're bringing out the schedule in 
March, could you make sure that the Kilcoole 
Greystones, or Kilcoole Newtown is not an 
afterthought, not intentionally but that's the way 
it comes across, it is frustrating pause people 
depend on it getting to work and college.  The 
journey into UCD is a problem, you need to look at 
that, we've been able to sort out the times with 

children coming back from school but we need to 
ensure the frequency is looked at, so I'd ask you 
to look at that please. 
  
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
Again, like my colleagues here in the chambers, I 
suppose we've all had representations from 
community over the years in regard to problems.  By 
Bus Eireann and I suppose, the idea today is it is 
not to embarrass the officials of Bus Eireann but 
to try and help you in regard to provide a better 
service, because ultimately that's what everyone 
wants. 
I suppose, just to highlight a particular family 
and give you an experience that I had recently, and 
supposed to show you the low ebb that you're 
starting from, because while we've had years of 
people complaining about the service and I know 
that you've increased frequency and so on, but, the 
reality is that your reputation is on the line, 
particularly in east Wicklow and that's why some 
of the suggestions that's made here today and I 
commend the councillors from west Wicklow in 
regards the simple things that could be done, 

because that in turn will help your service and 
increase your level of commitment from the public 
to the service that you're providing, but a recent 
family I met was a couple of generations, there was 
a mother, grandmother and children. 
This particular family and their extended families 
have used services for many years in regard to 
getting children to facilities in Dublin for 
educational purposes and also for employment in 
later years as adults.  Part of the conversation 
was around the 133 which has been discussed here 
at length, and the grandmother said what is the 133? 
And within two seconds a ten-year-old child that 
was in the room said the worst service in Ireland 
grandma. 
And I think that's what you have to contend with, 
because the next generation are already starting 
off with that in their mind and I'd hate to see that 
happen because I know that you're running a 
difficult service. 
With the increase in traffic on the N11 and the M50, 
but, I do hope that you can take on board a lot of 
what my colleagues are saying here in the chambers 
because ultimately, we're all here to try and help 

and increase and improve the level of commitment 
from your company to the public, but, certainly 
you've a lot of work to do, you have to win back 
the trust of a lot of people, but as councillor 
Bourke said there in regards to there's a lot of 
positives today, today you're only hearing the 
negatives but a lot of positives out there and I 
commend you. 
  
CLLR LEONARD:  Hi I'd like to thank you for your 
presentation, and I want to, I'm sure everybody's 
affected somebody in their family's been affected 
by Bus Eireann, in my own case my daughter attends 
college in NCAD and on more than one occasion she's 
left standing in the rain when the bus was full and 
had to wait another half an hour for the next one 
to arrive which means she's sitting in wet clothes 
all day in Dublin.  What worries me more my mother 
attends St Vincent's Hospital and she has procedure 
on her eye and I've not often been able to bring 
her up so she has to go herself and she's been missed 
buses due to the capacity coming back, so after get 
ago day procedure and I'm sure she's not alone 
because there's a lot of older people having to make 

their way up, because everybody has to work 
nowadays and there's not that extra person to drive 
them to hospitals and bring them home, that, maybe 
you could reconsider putting on extra capacity on 
the UCD stop to Arklow because many of the staff 
working in Vincent’s have had the same occurrence. 
In addition to that, I concur with Silvester about 
the Park and Ride facility, Arklow, I represent 
Arklow Municipal District and we have commuters 
down there, and I would love to see a Park and Ride 
facility introduced, I don't know whether that's 
NTA or local county council facility but it is well 
needed and needs to be developed. 
And then the other thing is, there's a stop that 
has been decommissioned in Arklow and there will 
be more development in that area of town, and a lot 
of older residents attending the hospital as well 
that have mobility issues and can't get down to the 
further stop down at where across from the in front 
of the Methodist Church in Arklow, they're not able 
to make that journey down due to mobility issues, 
could it be reintroduced that stop in Arklow, in 
Dublin Road in Arklow. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Yeah, just obviously, Cllr Peir 

Leonard has mentioned it there, when some changes 
were made to the service there some years ago, from 
Arklow the number 5 bus who brought people to 
hospital in Waterford was discontinued and so 
services to St Vincent's Hospital were 
discontinued and St Vincent's Hospital is the main 
hospital for the Arklow area. 
And I have had to go up there one night back some 
time ago to take a person home pause you can't get 
home after it, and when you're there, when go in, 
there's a big time between the time go in and the 
next bus is coming along, and I think at the time, 
I said it, reading what I said, it was absolutely 
ridiculous to reduce the stops at Vincent's 
hospital because a lot of the people who go there 
are in the upper age group, they go up on the 02 
bus, it stops there three times a day down and I 
think it was a wrong decision to make at the time, 
it was made as I am owe told to save money not for 
no other reason so I think there should be, that 
should be looked at and maybe an extra stop at least 
one, just look at it, people go in the morning 
mainly for appointments, they come back in the 
afternoon. 

On the other side of it, I have a good memory back 
some years ago, when it was difficult to get a bus 
in the '80s, and part of the '70s, and the service 
we have at the moment in my opinion is quite good, 
and certainly, I think we have 13 or 14 buses a day 
to Dublin and the airport, you wouldn't get a bus 
to the airport in the '80s, anyway, so I want to 
commend Bus Eireann on the increase in the 
services. 
And the service is excellent so far as you could 
say it, but we need jigging, the last bus out of 
Gorey at night time people work at night time, is 
21.30, and then you have a gap, so, that needs to 
be looked at, I know you're looking at the services 
there, but in general, the service has improved so 
far as there's more buses on the road, but it is 
not the number of buses you have to look at but what 
buses are - Vincent's hospital, if you go there, 
you get off at UCD and some people get taxis, if 
you're not in a position to get down there, issues 
walking and whatever, I think that should be looked 
at.  Because, you're running a public service, and 
in my opinion that should be looked at and the 
number of buses that stop there, and come back from 

St Vincent's Hospital should be increased, the 
decision was wrong at the time and still wrong and 
people contacting me are totally frustrated with, 
getting off at UCD and trying to get down to 
Vincent's hospital.  In saying that, the other 
side of that is your service improved with the 
number of buses, and I have no issue saying that, 
the only issue is some of the bus shelters, we're 
getting two new ones, in Arklow and one Rathdrum, 
some of the, I think we need better facilities at 
the bus stops as well because at the moment, I think 
we've one out of eight. 
With a shelter, now, I know, sorry, and fully 
support Cllr Peir Leonard in asking that for a bus 
stop at Invemore park that was taken away because 
we were told we only had three stops. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank 
you for your presentation. 
My question is in relation to students who rely on 
your services within the county.  So, that data, 
that has been informing the changes coming, is 
there any specific research being done on the 
students that are relying on the service both in 
terms what they need for their timetables? 

And in the cost of commuting from Wicklow and 
relying on your service to get to college? 
Thank you.  
CLLR DUNNE:  Thanks for your presentation. 
Somebody who uses the bus in DIT in Dublin we have 
the 133, the Wexford Bus and I suppose like 
everything there can be problems and there's 
something as bad I suppose as a bus going past you, 
or turning up and nobody knowing what is going on, 
and that's I say the bulk of people in this room 
today giving out about that. 
shoo my question is if the buses are tracked, and 
they do, bypass a bus stop, do you know about it? 
If you do, what do you do about it? 
Because surely, as Cllr Avril Cronin and the people 
from west Wicklow are talking about Hollywood Cross 
there, if a bypasses Hollywood Cross, you should 
know about that, and should do something about it. 
If it is, a driver's personal opinion he doesn't 
want to stop it, the company should know about it 
and act on that.  In my opinion from Wicklow Town 
point of view, the service is good, and you'll only 
hear people giving out when something goes wrong, 
90% of the time the buses run well and should be 

commended on that.  Without that, I know a lot of 
people in Wicklow are going to colleges and that 
in Dublin, they would struggle to further their 
education.  I councillor Fitzgerald, a lot of 
people find it difficult to get to Vincent's 
hospital a lot of people use that hospital and if 
something could be done there, that we could 
accommodate people getting to the hospital as near 
as possible can be, it should be done, because, 
really, the idea of going into Dublin, getting off 
a bus stop and having to get a taxi to the hospital, 
you know, it is really not fair. 
Just a final point, the bus stop in Wicklow Town 
Convent Hill has been damaged for a long number of 
years, and maybe go pack to colleagues in Bus 
Eireann and have a look at it, thank you. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS.  Thank you, Chairman and thanks for 
the presentation guys.  I will be brief a couple 
of quick points; one has already been rehashed a 
few times but obviously pertinent the Hollywood 
Cross issue.  I know of a young girl of 18 years 
of age who wasn't got off at Hollywood, and she had 
to walk back from Analeckey along the N81, which 

we know how dangerous it is, it is hour and half 
walk back, so there's obvious takers in the fact 
she wasn't allowed to get off at home village.  The 
other point and I experienced this myself, just 
dropping people to the bus stop at Analeckey Cross, 
so equi-distance between Baltinglass and 
Blessington, I got there six minutes before the due 
time for the bus to leave and the bus has gone, I 
rang the head office and they said, I got through 
after ten minutes, and he said he's coming in 
Blessington now, so it is inexcusable, even more 
money before the due time so I'd ask that would be 
stamped out please.  Thanks. 
  
CLLR WALSH: Just a quick question in relation to 
the business initiative, the BusConnects, and 
there's been public consultation periods, into 
that, wondering have you an involvement in that, 
have you regard nation approach there, from 
yourselves just, there's a lot of information 
greened from the Dublin Bus on the BusConnects 
project would be of use and benefit when you're 
going forward with your new frequency and new 
timetable. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Finally, I live beside a bus stop, 
I work beside a bus stop and ended up having to give 
up using the 133, because, one day it cost me 31 
euros for a taxi because I couldn't be late for work 
that day and couldn't get the bus.  You said in the 
presentation that 97% of trips are delivered and 
that you've met your target.  It is amazing to me, 
that we can be the most complained about route in 
the country, you said 898 complaints, and that 
you're hitting 98% target.  Obviously, we either 
have prolific letter writers or e-mailers, 
because, very few of the people who actually want 
to complain go to the bother of putting it in 
writing.  So, for everyone you get there's ten that 
haven't written so you're looking at 8,000 people 
upset with the service that you have.  And you're 
still hitting 98% target, I actually find that 
frankly hard to believe.  Thanks. 
  
MR KENT:  So, Alan and I will respond, we may not 
hit them all, but we've taken notes.  In the first 
instance, look, you'll just have to accept bona 
Phidias, we're here, you're not finding us 

defensive at the moment, we know the issues at 13, 
you're right it came out of the high complaint 
routes in the country, just to in terms of where 
the data is, to be specific on the thing, we've 750 
complaints on 400,000 journeys this year. 
That has been a complaint rate of 174 per hundred 
thousand, that's what it is at the moment. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Is that specifically for the 13. 
MR KENT:  Just 133, and in terms of the urgency from 
everybody's perspective.  This is a route we have 
been told is going to go out to public tender in 
2021, so when somebody asked the question, will be 
you fast we have to be.  We have a route we have, 
you know, over a 20-plus drivers, the bulk of whom 
are based here this Wicklow, so we know there's 
areas there, of a route and we've been operating 
for years so we want to hold on to them.  Some 
complaints are based on punctuality and we're 
recognising having done the analysis that we've 
had, segments where we've ten minutes late and 
whole of route, end-to-end 20 minutes, late.  It 
is not we're running it, we're 20 minutes, based 
what the current timetable says, even when we put 
in the change, we won't speed it up by 20 minutes, 

but more accurate in reflecting what we're out to 
deliver.  That's important point.  You're asking 
about the funding available.  For us to bring it 
in the 22nd of March, we obviously will have to 
present, we're presenting it to staff, but get the 
funding for any change and we're depend unanimity 
on the NTA to do that.  Where it is putting in, 
that's subject.  So, in principle once approved a 
timetable we will come back to them in the next week 
to ten days, because we're back from Christmas, 
saying here is the cost of the route.  So, I don't 
envisage problems in relation to that, because 
everybody, are in concert and wanting to make sure 
this is the best service it can be.  Unlike other 
people, the NTA, well the NTA are having some 
funding constraints but at the moment from the 
point of view of the Bus Eireann company at the 
moment, we're reasonably satisfied what we're 
asking for is being paid for.  Would we like more 
frequency and issues been asked there, can you 
extend to Dublin Airport later, they're practical 
questions of cost as a reality at the moment, so, 
it is difficult for me to say.  So, and that's why 
I don't say or commit lightly, if there's 

commitment, NTA need revenue to cover the cost, and 
usually 40% of the difference, where it is higher 
if you unvented 80%, people will request if that's 
value for money.  From our perspective, so far so 
good in terms of our negotiation, because we 
entered in a new contract as of the December 1, the 
NTA will tell us we'll get what we need to deliver 
the service but additional services that add cost 
and is done a dialogue, on a case by case basis.  
We're going to March 22nd to put those in.  The 
question is asked about park and rides, in general, 
because we're a public transport operator, we're 
very supportive of park and rides where we get them 
in.  Anything that gets people out of a car on to 
a bus or train we'll support.  But we're not in 
control of that, there have been conversations 
about a Park and Ride in Arklow and there are 
threads, but apart from consulted on, we will only 
be consultee, we don't control the spend, we're not 
in the council, but if somebody asked us would we 
support it, I think we would, and it would be in 
our interests, if people are able to connect on to 
public transport generally. 
In relation to the Vincent’s, and I'll pop to 

annual, he will address some of the drivers issues 
that have been addressed as well.  The St Vincent’s 
question has been up, to a certain extent it has 
been a question sometimes of compromise.  Because, 
you had the people saying they didn't want to go 
down the road to get Vincents and go up the road 
and delays, so you will balance delivering the 
service and people directly to the door.  So, it 
was one of those issues.  If I had my way and there 
on the outside of the door you would deliver them 
but that's the question.  If somebody wants to pay 
us to go down the road and back out again, it will 
add journey time on every journalistic approach and 
question is for everybody on the bus going from this 
position, whether they're happy.  I would take the 
stand that I wouldn't want to see anyone 
discommoded, we all have people we love and care 
about, and want them to have the best service.  
That particular one the decision was, look it 
involves about a hundred metres in terms where we 
can, for it has been a question of compromise, it 
is never to say it won't be revisited but not in 
the current timetable.  On those locations you 
mentioned, I think we'll take them away if you allow 

us to come back, the key question at the moment 
somebody asked is it a designated stop? 
And the issue we've had with your drivers at the 
moment is most drivers for years, for decades, they 
were taught to get from A to Z and do that, and try 
to minimise it.  The worth has changed, every 
individual stop that you hit is equally important.  
A this has been a mindset change we had to change 
in the business for everybody.  So, the question 
is, if that is a designated stop under the NTA 
contract they have to stop at it.  So, I just need 
to check if it is designated, if it is, absolutely 
they should stop.  If not, then we probably have 
to go and get the designation in and to put it in 
there, otherwise, by stopping to a large extent all 
we're doing is perpetuating this old custom and 
practised way you're trying to get out of the old 
system so operate to a contract.  I noted these 
places you said, Arklow, and Hollywood, and we'll 
take them away and maybe come back to them and I’m 
happy to respond if you want to give me detail 
directly.  I don't want to give anybody a mislead 
on this.  And the last theming I would say to large 
extent here, look there's great ambition to improve 

the service, we've got a massive growth in our 
process at the moment, the public transport is 
growing, this is the one route at the moment, where 
we're delivering on average 37, 36,000 customer 
journeys every month.  So, a lot of people, and of 
the 36,000 we're getting 75-100 complaints.  So, 
we immediate to get those down to 40, maximum and 
in reality, zero.  But zero is not a practical 
reality for anybody.  So, the time sensitivity 
that people have behind their apps and phones, is 
much more different than it was five years ago.  
So, are we improving our app? 
Yes, there's a huge piece of work going on in the 
background.  Is it an easy piece of work? 
It is not, but we're trying to get three data feeds, 
so somebody isn't left working if the bus is coming. 
  
ALAN:  Stephen's answered a lot of the questions 
there, just on the timetable, it is great to hear 
all the feedback.  We do know we have a timetable 
largely due to the increase in congestion hasn't 
been deliverable and we will be adding into the new 
timetable up to 25 minutes on the journey time, that 
will make and appear the journey longer, but what 

it will do is actually represent exactly what is 
happening and the reality and people will plan to 
that create.  I think the challenge for us, we have 
our scheduling built with not enough time.  Buses 
are getting late, turn around are getting late, 
challenges, people highlighted, particularly in 
the evening in Dublin, buses are getting late in 
Dublin, because they are so behind time, capacity 
issues because they're bunching, we see the new 
timetable will address those, and as I say, that 
commitment for ourselves to, we know unless we have 
a reliable timetable it won't be reliable in the 
minds of the public, and they won't use the service.  
I think, we have seen where we got it right, we've 
gone through a process over the last twelve, 18 
months which is continuing to be reviewed to get 
reliable timetables, Waterford city we did, we're 
over 80% punctuality, Galway we reviewed the 
timetables they're up 78% punctuality.  13, we 
have been down around the 40% punctuation wall of 
our services, that's got over to the back end to 
2019, we're up to 56% punctuation wall.  We need 
that to be, our target as business to be 90% must, 
at every service, 90% or better punk wall and that's 

is a measure for the NTA is every single bus stop, 
so no matter which customer or bus stop they're 
standing at, we need the bus to be punctuation wall.  
It is difficult, the operating environment makes 
it challenging, but we know we need to deliver that, 
if not we're not part of the solution.  People 
won't use public transport it is great to hear that, 
you know the desire within the chamber here, the 
public transport part of the solution, so, we 
really do believe that this new timetable will be 
the building block, it is not the sole answer, we 
know we need to do a lot but the timetable needs 
to be there. 
I think, on the driver issues, driver turnover, we 
due to service expansion we took in nationally 
about 500 new drivers so we have 1600 drivers, we 
took in 500 new drivers, a number where in the 
Dublin area, it sounds like some of the feedback, 
we had driver training issues, they should not have 
to be told by a customer which route to take.  
That's something, we will take back, we do have in 
Dublin a six-week training programme for every 
driver who comes in, they do operate not an excuse, 
but operate a lot of routes and we immediate to make 

sure they're trained and fully aware of every bus 
stop on every single route.  A couple of comments 
come up, the use of hard should, we don't use hard 
shoulders anywhere, in Northern Ireland they do use 
them going into Belfast, is it something we've 
raised with NTA, yes, it is and something that needs 
to be explored. 
Again, I suppose, anywhere where we get bus 
priority, to help improve the reliability and 
punctuality of our services we would welcome that.  
But again, nothing available to us. 
Other cases, Stephen's raise the the issues with 
the stops, particularly Hollywood Cross, a lot of 
feedback on that, we will take that away and respond 
to that.  I know there has been, we'll confirm 
whether it is designated stop, I know there's 
discussions about infrastructure and facilities 
needed there, but we will respond back. 
The complaints, we do, we are monitored by the 
National Transport Authority in relation to 
complaints.  We have, we must our target otherwise 
we are fined.  With penalties within fifteen days, 
so, this is what, we're sitting at 90% plus within 
fifteen days response, we're continuously working 

to ensure that's higher, but that's a target and 
we are monitored closely and penalised if we don't 
get back to customers who are communicating with 
us. 
I think Steve might have the comment about the 
ambition, our ambition is to be a significant 
player and operator in public transport services 
in Wicklow and delivering for the public in 
Wicklow, that's what we want to do.  We have, we 
do know the 133 is put out to tender.  We want to 
ensure we retain it and we're the operator of that 
service and deliver a good service to the public 
and we have, Stephen again mentioned we have a 
number, of employees living and working in this 
area and we want to make sure we retain it, so that's 
very much our motivation in the 133, and we the 
piece around working with the representatives, we 
want to did that and continue do that, and we will 
take on board everything we've heard here today. 
The other, and again, we'll take away the NTA are 
responsible for the timetable.  What we can do is 
take away the suggestions we've had today, and 
liaise with them, feed them back and ultimately 
they decide what the timetable is, similarly on the 

fare whether it is the leap fare or cash fare that's 
set by the NTA but always good to get feedback and 
we'll pass that back through to them. 
And the bus, maybe two final ones I picked up, from 
the students we have, I suppose we built a new 
timetable based where we see the demand and overall 
demand and what we've tried do is in the morning 
peak between 6am and 7am going into Dublin, 20 
minute service and better balance returning back 
out of Dublin due to capacity.  Again, the fare for 
the students, that's settle by the NTA, but 
ultimately there's some cracking value there with 
LEAP cards and 3% discount and we're seeing a 
significant move to Leap Card use now due to the 
value that it is providing. 
I think the final one there, the buses, all the 
buses are tracked.  And we use that to feed the RTPI 
system, we need to get the quality of that better, 
as Stephen referenced, so we're giving good quality 
RPI data to the customers.  When, if a driver goes 
past a stop and doesn't stop, we wouldn't see that 
on the data. 
We, we're not notified of that, so, if he went off 
route we would see, but where he passes a stop and 

doesn't pick up that's difficult for us to see on 
individual basis from the data.  Hopefully that 
covers a lot, all the questions, not sure I missed 
one particular. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're an hour-and-a-half. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Will you consider expanding the 
route to Aughrim? 
MR KENT:  We will take that in, and Aughrim is a 
decision, so, the last thing I will say, we're an 
Irish company, and we have given you lots of data 
here, but we know most of it what underpins is it 
personal issues and we've a lot of respect and a 
lot of care and attention to address the issues 
you've highlighted in Wicklow today. 
Successful to be getting the Cathaoirleach to get 
back on the bus outside the bus stop.  So, if I come 
back and say we've done that, so we're twelve to 
fifteen months in our own jobs, we've got so far 
on the thing, we have momentum 5% growth combined 
and 15% now it is about quality of service.  So 
we'll give a commitment to move on the first 
instance on the 22nd of March, look at locations 
where he was we have to see but that's a dialogue 

with the NTA, and if I come back and say at the end 
of next year those complaints, we'll have to give 
it a good shot anyway and hopefully we'll have 
support on that. 
  
CLLR GLENNON:  Will you give a commitment that the 
bus will stop at Hollywood Cross and accept the 
point infrastructure is looked at, surely it is 
wrong that a bus driver can make a decision to leave 
people standing there or not drop them there, can 
you give as senior management, that all 132 
services: 
MR KENT:  If it is designated stop we will.  If it 
is designated stop we will and if not, then we'll 
have a dialogue about that. 
But I can assure you if I check it Adrian is waving 
his stop it is not designated stop so that's the 
status of it.  So, what we'll have to do is go into 
dialogue with NTA on that.  So that's the only 
commitment we can give you on that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much indeed 
  
MR KENT:  I will. It is clear the stop at Hollywood 
is not a designated stop but what we're arguing 

since 1920, it was always used as a stop, and the 
inconvenience that is causing is not fair. 
  
>>:  I hear that. 
MR KENT:  So, I can let you know it is not 
designated stop but since 1920 it has been used and 
what we're asking is that, this can be sorted out 
next week and can be used as a stop. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
  
>>:  Thank you very much. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  Item five on the agenda to 
consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management 
Report. 
And I would like to bring your attention to the fact 
this is the first meeting for our new Director of 
Services, Breege Kilkenny, she's taking over from 
Shaun Quirke as Environment and Municipal District 
in Baltinglass, it is very nice to see a woman as 
director of services in Wicklow, it is the first 
time it happened, I'm sure it won't be the last. 
  
Chief Executive:  I'll mention one or two items and 

take questions then.  We did receive funding last 
week under the large-scale capital infrastructure 
fund sports infrastructure fund so two schemes one 
is refurbishment of the Coral Leisure Centre to 
improving wheelchair access, and changing rooms 
and front area, so that's welcome.  The second one 
was to replace the running track at shoreline 
sports park in Greystones, it is well used facility 
and by local clubs, and your disabled groups and 
everybody so very well.  The second grant we got 
last week was in relation to Claremont, this is for 
don't creation centre, that will have creative 
pods, co-working spaces, screening facilities, 
Podcast studios, Conference centres and private 
offices that will allow people to feed into the 
audio-visual sector, so people involved in 
post-production, he had the sound, and costume 
design and set design, that will come with manager 
and provide a lot of training and support to people 
working in that industry.  And that coincides with 
grant permission for 4,900 square metres extension 
for Ardmore Studios, Ashford has 65,000 square 
metre extension grand so feeding into that sector 
and it is going to position us and Ireland and 

Wicklow as a global hub for this screen content 
creation sector.  We'll have a full presentation 
at that on the February meeting. 
Contract was signed this morning for N11, M11 
parallel service road so that will start very 
shortly. 
And that's funded from our TIA funding which we 
received last week, 7.2 million so that's very 
welcome. 
And one last one, we have project shortlisted now 
for the All Ireland Community and Council Awards 
coming up so those are the Cliff Walk here in 
Wicklow, eco-trail held around Bray Head in the 
Autumn and the gates of hell experience in Wicklow 
gal.  So, I'll take any questions 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and on 
behalf of my party I wish Breege the very best of 
luck and wish a happy new year, going back to the 
Chief Executive comments, it is great to see the 
funding coming through and God bless elections, we 
welcome the Coral Leisure Centre because it is run 
dawn for many years and needs a makeover, I want 
to welcome the efforts in relation to Claremont 

because we can all agree here whether we live in 
the north south-east or west we need jobs.  We've 
heard all the job announcements all over the 
country and Wicklow seems to be left behind. 
I was looking at the figures last week and the IDA 
happened to visit here in once in 2018 and six times 
in 2019, compared to Dublin, 269 in 2018 and 216 
in 2019, Westmeath are ahead of us so I welcome the 
announcement of the creation hub in Claremont but 
the council are doing all they can but need 
assistance and help from the IDA and wondering with 
a the intentions are of the council to collaborate 
with the IDA, or have the IDA any intentions of 
coming to Wicklow? 
Because the one thing Wicklow is lacking at the 
moment is major announcements. 
  
CLLR BOURKE: Thank you that was an excellent 
managers report put together there as usual, very 
detailed, a couple of things you left out on it 
though, you haven't mentioned anything about the 
Pure Mile, I understand up until last week, the Pure 
Mile has not been renewed yet and I was hoping there 
may something in the report about that, I was 

reading it last night and disappointed to see no 
mention of the renewal of the Pure Mile for the 
coming year, maybe you could clarify for us.  And 
disappointed there was no mention of the outdoor 
recreation grants with repair to the seafront for 
the walkway, that's a big issue for the last number 
of years, but it got some traction in the media last 
November, and we were hoping for some kind of 
announcement on that.  Perhaps you may have update 
on that one and manager, thought crossed my mind 
from reading the report last night are you 
concerned at all since you took over as manager here 
that arrears in rents have rocketed by 60% and are 
now at 1.6 million as per the report. 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thanks very much and thanks again for 
the report. 
And, I want to echo the congratulations to Breech 
soon we'll have a full team of women sitting on the 
front bench.  Pointing out a couple of things that 
were omitted even though it is a comprehensive 
report as usual, I note there's no monthly update 
on the progress with the chime adaptation strategy 
on the report this month, if that could be returned 

back on to the report, in February.  There was no 
monthly on the climate adaptation strategy. 
And the other thing is, I did ask last month for 
a breakdown of the length of time the children and 
families are homeless, the reason I asked that last 
month is just given the affect homelessness and 
living in temporary emergency accommodation has on 
children mental health and physical and emotional 
development, I want a breakdown of length of time 
there, related to that, noting that the publication 
of the voting registers is due to happen shortly 
I want to know measures to ensure there's a system 
forever those living in temporary accommodation 
and without fixed addresses they can register to 
vote and not be disenfranchised, and be a position 
in place.  I was wondering update on the Government 
funding to support the rollout of electrical 
vehicle charging points across the local 
authorities, I know it was announced back in 
October and I want an update noting Greystones have 
no EV charging points which need to be addressed.  
Thanks very much. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  Thank thanks Cathaoirleach for a 

detailed report.  Three brief questions, one is, 
stream one funding for the West Wicklow Swimming 
Pool Project, is there an announcement on that, 
because that project is to be making progress, the 
other project is to see it on target is the Arklow 
Shillelagh Greenway, supposed to be going through 
a planning process in the first six months in year, 
I'm presuming that is still the plan, and want 
confirmation on that.  I've had a number of reports 
from villages and we've raised it Municipal 
District level, a couple of times is the poor state 
of public lighting in towns and villages, 
Shillelagh, Carnew and tin a Healey is poor, we've 
raised it Municipal District level I think the 
contract needs to be looked at because there must 
be come back where the contractor is not performing 
the job they're supposed to do, and now the 
Christmas lights have gone down the darkness is 
becoming more acute so I would like a report and 
on where we are with that. 
CLLR O'CONNOR:  Yeah, first like to thank the Chief 
Executive in including the reports on smokeless 
coals and wondering for the climate SPC, because 
the air pollution complaints went from one to a 

wondering we get where the pollution complaints are 
coming from, if they're coming from the same 
location, or if we get lost, maybe a year of 
complaints sent that would be great. 
  
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks. 
Just like to ask the Chief Executive please for an 
update on the house purchase loans. 
In particular the rebuilding Ireland programme, I 
note 134 applications received up to the end of 
November. 36 approvals, 44 declined and 17 
withdrawn or incomplete. 
I suppose, it is an area that I would get quite a 
lot of kips from people and a certain amount of 
frustration in that there's no point applying for 
this particular purchase loan and I would like a 
clarification on I suppose how many applications 
are we in a position to approve or is there 
obviously a limit on funding on that? 
Because it is certainly a lot of questions that need 
to be asked with regards to the house purchase loans 
thank you. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and manager for 

a comprehensive report, good news in funding awards 
and welcome the content creation hub for the County 
Campus.  Like you said Cllr Sylvestor Bourke 
reading the report, one thing that jumped out at 
me is significant increase in the arrears of the 
social housing stock we're up to almost 1.7 
million, a figure that coincidentally is the same 
figure that represented the 10% increase in LPT, 
it is neither here or there but significant 
increase in last year and this year, another 
question is in relation to, might come up with Cllr 
Stephen Matthews's proposer for suspension, page 
32, on the N11, M11 improvement scheme, I know when 
this was raised here last the director roads 
director indicated there would be a number of 
meetings held with stakeholders groups, just 
wondering if there's update available on the 
meetings and how many have been held today.  And 
noted in commercial rates arrears, there's a 
significant number of over 12 million so wondering 
what measures are in place to those arrears.  Thank 
you.   
CLLR LEONARD:  Thank you for the report it is 
always a great read and gives a template for 

everybody to comment on, and congratulation late 
Breech as well, just in relation to the online 
consultation hub, there's seems to be a problem on 
mobile phones, getting through to the links so 
maybe that's something the council can look at, I'd 
love as well to have update on the advertisement 
of the recruitment and ports and harbours, 
advertisement of the harbour's master position, 
that is due to be put to it as well. 
To get a timeline on that? 
And also, I was wondering could it be incorporated 
into the monthly report, whether there's 
remediation works planned for Avoca mines and 
tailings into Avoca, now we're getting sewage 
treatment plant in Arklow it is time to look at the 
whole river as catchment and improve the quality 
and restore some of the life back into it.  Thanks. 
  
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank 
you to the Chief Executive for the report. 
At the risk of being predictable or determined I 
want to talk about the child homelessness figures, 
I circulated a motion that we have put forward this 
will become a stand-alone agenda and I want to say 

thank you to everyone who relied and I know 
sometimes you don't have the time to reply but the 
people who read it.  I don't think we'll get to 
motions today so my question is first of all I'm 
concerned again, 67 children presented in November 
as homeless in the county, there's a huge drop so 
two people in temporary emergency accommodation 
and 14 in B&B, which is down 46 the month previous 
which is good news I guess, and I would appreciate 
if the Chief Executive would tell us what happened, 
for that, we don't normally see a drop of that 
significance between months, so, that would be 
great to see what is working for going forward.  
And secondly, in terms of the work for schedule for 
2019, so is it that happen, Sonas and thank you. 
CLLR CRONIN:  Thank you for the detailed report, 
just a few issues I want to raise, I want to ask 
you in relation to the approved housing bodies, do 
you have a time frame as to when the houses in 
Dunlavin will be ready the 40 units which will be 
turnkey when they're ready to be occupied and if 
they will alleviate most of the people on the 
housing list in the west Wicklow area.  And also, 
as Cllr Sylvestor Bourke mentioned a Pure Mile I 

was speaking to Ian this morning about the Pure 
Mile, and that, he is still awaiting funding and 
this is made a huge difference in our uplands and 
rural areas, so, I think we need to ensure this gets 
approved again for the coming year.  I have made 
representation to the minister so I'm waiting to 
hear back from him.  And finally, there's built 
heritage investment scheme is coming up and I would 
ask to consider Dunlavin market house for this 
grant, as you are aware when you drive into Dunlavin 
it is a unique building in the centre of the town 
and over the past number of years it has, it is 
becoming to look a bit there be dated, we're waiting 
on lights to be fixed spotlights to be fixed, a am 
in of months, I have raise it had with the council 
but still waiting for them to be fixed.  But it 
would be great if you could consider applying for 
the market house for the built heritage investment 
scheme.  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you very much Chair and I 
would like to congratulate Breech and look forward 
to work with climate action, I want to support what 
Cllr Grace McManus has been saying and support her 
motion to have a stand-alone item. 

Because I think if we focus and address the issues 
that affect the most vulnerable of children in 
Wicklow, we will make Wicklow a better place for 
everyone living there.  If we focus with children 
and their needs to spreads to everyone else.  In 
relation to the reporting of it, I'm just wondering 
whether there's some way of reporting on family 
groups, so, that because my understanding is while 
say 67 children are recorded this month that they 
may have entered and exited so it would be good to 
have an idea how long, when family groups are coming 
in to us and how long they're staying and where 
they're being put and then we can track them and 
see whether or not there is delays that we need to 
address because it is important that those people 
are accommodated quickly. 
I have, at the last council meeting I raised an 
issue in relation to unauthorised quarries. 
And the CEO said he'd get a report to me on build 
or not Wicklow County Council had any contracts or 
business arrangements with the operators of any 
unauthorised quarries in the county, I haven't 
received yet, Shaun has left so it maybe one of the 
things that fell off the table but if he could get 

that to that would be good thank you very much. 
  
Chief Executive. 
  Just in relation to Cllr Paul O'Brien, on the IDA 
we have regular contact, the regional manager, he 
is on to us all the time, when there's itineraries 
on Wicklow, we will meet them.  He looked for 
results on commuter survey and skill set that's 
available in the county.  And you know there really 
is positive engagement, he was down here and friend 
to the council, had a workshop in June 2018, and 
look we'll keep that contact up and with a lot of 
the companies in relation to the when they come to 
Ireland, the job of the idea is to get them in, they 
will have locations picked in advance and sometimes 
there isn't a lot they can do.  The one in Arklow 
is one he put a lot of work into, and it came 
through, but we'll pass comments back in relation 
to visits. 
Cllr Sylvestor Bourke Pure Mile, Ian Davidson is 
in contact with me again this morning also, and I 
will contact the department immediately in 
relation to the funding for that next year, if it 
is in if it is in jeopardy we will to all we can 

to restore it. 
The outdoor recreation grant for seafront, it 
wasn't announced yet, we'll expect something 
shortly we will let you know.  Arrears in rent, we 
put never place in terms of build pay, Post Office, 
and in terms of deductions for pay role, we have 
the rent collectors calling out so we make 
everything available for people to pay in as much 
as they can, if people default we have to go down 
a different route but everything that can be done 
is being done in terms of making it easy for people 
to pay their rent. 
Cllr Lourda Scott in relation to the climate 
adaptation strategy, the climate action team is in 
place and reporting next lime action and 
biodiversity on the 30th of January.  The first 
action item is looking at the EU charging points 
throughout the county, so district engineers have 
been consulted in relation to suitable locations 
and that includes the Greystones area.  We did of 
course, try and sign a climate change charter here 
in the December, that's between ourselves and the 
two separate Government departments in relation to 
committing ourselves to those actions 

In relation to the length of time for homeless, as 
in the presentations and exits, yes, we'll have a 
look at that future of Chief Executive’s Report. 
And Cllr John Mullen the west Wicklow swimming pool 
that's a separate grant as opposed to the stream 
two announced last week, that would be stream one, 
we haven't heard anything on that yet but expect 
it shortly.  Arklow to Shillelagh Greenway, that 
will require, as you know, there's contact with the 
various landowners, it will require preliminary 
design and appropriate assessment screening that 
may lead to impact statement and environmental 
impact report to go to An Bord Pleanála, but what 
has been announced is funding source to apply 
funding for those schemes so we'll apply for that.  
In terms of public lighting, again, we've written 
to the service provider, we've been in contact with 
them, I know they've taken on extra staff and we're 
talking to the ESB and will arrange a further 
meeting for this.  We will have the main scheme LED 
lights coming on end of 2020 which will make a huge 
difference, air pollution complaints, Cllr Rory 
O'Connor yeah, we'll take that information and send 
you directly in addition to putting it in the 

report.  The rebuilding home loan, again, it has 
been confirmed now, that that's going to be in 
place, for the next year and Government has put 
aside 220 million so something like that, so no 
issue of grants coming into it, if people are 
eligible there's no issue in paying the grant.  We 
received 134 to 30th of November, 34 approvals, 44 
declined, 17 were incomplete or withdrawn. 
But again, people have to have the means to pay, 
and go through the credit control commit and 
referred to housing agency et cetera, but the grant 
is here and here to stay. 
I mentioned the rents and arrears, we have hit 
targets set for us in terms of rates and you know, 
it is higher than it ever been up around 80% but 
we will keep chasing people.  N11 and M11 
improvement scheme there was consultation process 
up until the end of January, that's a standard form 
so that's finished but the whole, there's a 
continuous consultation process, so, we will be 
accepting and are national road design office will 
be accepting ideas and any form of consultation, 
right through to the end of the process.  There 
were over 200 groups met stakeholders groups, that 

was groups themselves and individual landowners.  
So, we can get more information on that, but it is 
on-going consultation process. 
Cllr Peir Leonard the online consultation hub, yeah 
that's certainly something we will take into 
account.  We have the front desk coming up as item 
on the agenda and certainly something that could 
be looked at from that group. 
In trying advertising the position, again I'll come 
back to you on that, we are looking at exactly what 
time of individual we want and need that will assist 
the harbour master and in the Avoca mines, no plans 
to do work there, we are looking at CPO to tidying 
the whole title we are mapping and surveying it at 
the moment but haven't looked at applying for 
funding to do the full clean-up and maybe turn it 
into a tourism attraction or whatever down the line 
but there's potential there absolutely.  And Cllr 
Grace McManus in terms of the homeless - it is a 
difficult issue there's no question about it and 
all individual circumstances and a lot of ditch 
circumstances.  The focus is on prevention and 
intervention, and we have been very successful in 
a lot of pre-prevention, if you look at HAP homeless 

time they provide solutions in terms of 3D 2% of 
the cases but 88 were prevention where we worked 
with the people and prevented them getting homeless 
in the first place so that's the priority.  The 
people who are in emergency accommodation, again 
it varies, the numbers needless to say month by 
month that people come through because of various 
different reasons, there's notice of the quick 
family breakdown alcohol, drugs, a whole range of 
issues.  The numbers in emergency accommodation, 
are lower than Kildare and Meath and Dublin areas 
because of the prevention and intervention by the 
staff here. 
A lot of the people the numbers have gone down in 
terms of emergency accommodation but people there 
now, there's solutions being put in place for them 
as we speak.  And, similarly, we have people who 
are in houses, it is not their final long-term 
solution, but we are working with people in 
relation to HAP and social housing and it is a 
continuous process of working with them. 
The Sonas facility will be run by Dublin Simon so 
they need to a small amount of work we'll fund in 
relation to bringing it up to standard so that's 

starting right now so just a matter of two or three 
months they will be ready to take people in.  Cllr 
Avril Cronin houses in Dunlavin are close, I would 
say it is about two months away, something like 
that, we were hoping to have it by the end of the 
year but it didn't work out with difficulties they 
had onsite and incumbent weather and different 
issues.  Pure Mile gets on to that straightaway.  
Build heritage for market house, we'll talk to the 
engineer about the spotlights, I know they should 
be up and running at this stage. 
Cllr Jennifer Whitmore, I mentioned the family 
groups, I know what you're saying in terms of 
presentations and exits, a bit more detail on that.  
Quarries, I haven't got the report but follow up 
and as soon as I get it, I'll send it out. 
  
CLLR BEHAN:  Can I have a point of order; can we 
kill the heat for a while. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Clarification, of those without the 
fixed address are registered to vote or is there 
a facility in place, just a comment on that. 
Chief Executive:  If Tom wants to make a comment 
on this, we have the supplementary forms will be 

going out so we have a new register of electors 
published on the first of February, which will come 
into effect on the 15th, so, it depends when the 
election is held.. 
So, we don't know when that is obviously, it could 
be the 7th or 14th, we don't know, so we'll continue 
asks to be entered on the date set by the department 
so usually two weeks before the election, so 
somebody, in whatever type of accommodation 
they're in, they could send that in.  We will 
publicise that and get the message out as well. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK, item six, to receive update on 
the development of the Customer Care Innovation Hub 
and refurbishment of the council chamber and 
private elected members rooms. 
And it is Pamela Kennedy. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  I'm 
going to give introduction and background to the 
whole project.  Pamela Kennedy is the project 
architect, Pamela's retired senior architect with 
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council, she's wide 
experience in enhancement of public buildings, 
Pamela designed and oversaw the development of the 

civic hub and foyer of Dun Laoighaire Rathdown and 
development of the new council chamber there, so 
she's supported by architectural team comprising 
of QS and we have inhouse team which is Chief 
Executive, myself, Eddie Murphy, Chief Executive 
of housing, senior engineer and Ben and Clancy 
architects here.  So, to kick off with the Customer 
Care Innovation Hub, so, its development, in the 
foyer area will lead in the process of major 
organisational change and improvements to promote 
efficiency of operation, customer service and 
support the goals of the Corporate Plan.  So, the 
process will take citizen centre approach and 
provide targeted and effective service delivery 
improvements county wide.  The services that would 
be provided through the improved CRM which 
transform how Wicklow County Council deliver its 
services the public centrally.  So just to give a 
background of our public service 20, and where this 
is all flowing from central Government, the public 
service 20, it is the overarching framework that 
supports the continuous development and innovation 
across the entire public service, so its framework 
is built on three pillars and they're set out there 

on the slides, delivering for our public, 
innovating our future and developing our people and 
organisations. 
So delivering our services for public, it know 
cusses on ensuring the outcomes of the public are 
central to our service delivery and this is 
achieved by the five actions that are set out there 
in delivering for our public which is accelerating, 
digital delivery of services, improving services 
for our customers, making services for accessible 
to all and significantly improving engagement with 
the public, driving efficiency and effectiveness.  
So, three actions most relevant to customer care 
hub, are actions two and actions three. 
And so, improving services for our customers, so 
the development of the new customer service space 
would provide a complete range of customer focused 
services, it will be supported by a highly trained 
customer care team comprising of eight new staff.  
The team will provide high caught citizen focused 
and effective customer services, it will be headed 
by administrative officer and staff officer and 
manage the customer services innovation hub. 
So, both of these officers with their team will be 

responsible for the development of a Wicklow County 
Council customer Action Plan.  The customer 
service charter and customer care policy and 
implementation of the customer care policies and 
Wicklow communication strategy. 
So the delivery of the whole service will be 
supported by a CRM system and we will be hearing 
from Emer later on, she'll present it to you, the 
hub will deal with all telephone queries, that come 
in, central e-mails for County Buildings and five 
municipal districts and councillors and TDs 
representations.  So, the hub will be an initial 
point of contact deal with customer queries for all 
directorate, all cash receipting will take place 
there as well as motor taxation transactions, 
applications for social housing support, 
validation stage, and they will be dealt with there 
as well, generation of HAP applications and loan 
grant applications and customer queries to other 
directorates like public lighting potholes 
flooding and parking issues, public liability 
claims any services that can be dealt with, 
centrally will be dealt with at the hub. 
So, action three and four, making our services 

accessible to all and significantly improving 
communications and engaging with the public, So, 
action three advocates we design service delivery 
taking into account diverse needs of our customer 
and that's key objective of customer care hub as 
they move forward, acknowledging that, technology 
is key and the CRM is crucial as management tool, 
we won't be forgetting the face-to-face 
interaction and telephone communication with the 
members of the public, that cannot be 
underestimated and is key and will form a large part 
of the service delivery of the hub.  Once the team 
is in place, a key focus will be the assessment of 
feedback from our customers, and the customer 
service which means the team will go out to the 
public and stakeholders and ask them for their 
feedback how they're delivering our services which 
will be on going.  Just to mention too the Wicklow 
County Council's communication strategy it sets 
out our objectives in terms how we communicate with 
our customers and communication and customer 
services go hand-in-hand, how we communicate with 
our customers, elected representatives and the 
community in general will be a key priority. 

The on-line public consultation hub was mentioned, 
and it is going to be a key channel for getting 
public consultation and feedback.  So, up to now 
we have been delivering the best customer services 
that we can.  Although fragmented, the customer 
hub will enable us to development and embed deliver 
service and communications culture throughout the 
organisation wrapping it around our communications 
plan. 
So, again, that's the customer care element of the 
project.  Then we'll come to the council chamber 
for the new members that are here as well we've 
twelve new members since the local elections the 
council chamber was built in the 197 0s, then it 
was accommodating 18 members, the structure and 
fabric have been the same it was refurbished in 2002 
and a second time in 2014, so there are serious 
issues with the roof, they require repairs, leaking 
in a number of areas and also requires insulation 
It is proposed and Pamela will go through it in her 
presentation to upgrade the technology, the 
speaking system and presentation screens the 
seating arrangements are not ideal for elected 
members interaction with the outer view blocked and 

refurbishment of the chamber will secure the 
council chamber in the next decade and beyond and 
developing both, the council chamber in tandem with 
the other refurbishments which will propose 
economies of scale.  Another element of the 
project and again Pam will about through it is the 
elected members rooms.  You will all agree they're 
not fit for purpose; they require upgrading and 
refurbishment, they need to be insulated, 
currently the rooms, coldest one known as the 
Fianna Fail room, extremely cold even when the 
heating is on, it requires insulation.   
Entire area is dark, we propose, the propose would 
be to flood it with light and we process configuring 
the Cathaoirleach's office which can double as 
meeting room for elected members when not in use.  
I will pass you over to, we will put be on Pamela. 
Thank you, Emer. 
  
Pamela:    Good afternoon. 
This is very exciting project for your team.  We've 
been working on it since late last spring and 
working here with people in the council itself. 
too so, this is what I did in Dun Laoghaire, and 

if anybody is passing by you might go in and have 
a look, obviously it is a different building with 
different plan, but, it gives you an idea of what 
we ended up with, I think it would be help if you 
actually had seen the building beforehand and seen 
what happened when it was finished, this is new 
council chamber. 
And this is our customer service hub. 
And what has really come out of it is when you walk 
into the foyer which will be the same here, when 
you walk in the foyer you immediately know where 
it go and see people who can deal with you, and 
immediately have a team available to help you with 
your queries and it has worked in Dun Laoghaire and 
very efficient and people are very happy with it, 
and I'm sure it will be the same here.  With a we've 
done, this is our site plan and working on our new 
plan, we will have an expanded area for the council 
chamber and totally elevated area for the foyer, 
and totally renovated area for the meeting room.  
Lorraine mentioned a lot of the items we came up 
with, which was the redesign of the Cathaoirleach's 
room and in co-operation of the new interview room 
which was part of the original brief to create roof 

light in the central area which we are doing, and 
to redecorate entirely all of the rooms and to 
improve the lighting and to improve the insulation.  
Then we move further down the scheme there, if you 
have a look you can see there's a blue area there, 
this is the public toilets that come off the foyer 
which haven't had very much done to them for quite 
some time so they will be upgraded and in particular 
the disabled wheelC access toilet is increased to 
modern standards and upgraded and this will be, 
mean that our entire new development takes care of 
the new disabled access search requirements for a 
building of this type for disabilities, including 
hearing loops for the people with hearing 
impairment, and we'll have rail signage for people 
with visual impairment. 
So, there's a slightly larger version of the 
sanitary area with its new disabled toilet. 
And then we have the new council chamber which is 
going to have a completely new visitor gallery 
located here.  This wall here will be pushed out 
in the foyer area, not very far but enough to give 
us three rows of seating and then there's a new 
entrance through the existing room at the moment 

that training room will go across the foyer to the 
other side where state-of-the-art training room 
will be created and new link straight through to 
the council chamber in this direction.  The 
seating of the members will be two separate levels 
lower and higher level so clear vision for 
everybody towards the central table where the 
Cathaoirleach is and the we will of the arrangement 
will spin around to 30 degrees so as you walk in, 
you walk straight towards the new seating position 
for the Cathaoirleach which will give everybody 
improved sight lines and vision. 
This is also being followed up by providing new 
audio-visual system with backlit till vision-type 
screens which will give increased quality of 
performance when things are put up on the screen 
and we'll be a much more modern and 21st century 
answer to projection. 
So, this actually, sorry you can't see that, you 
could see that on the proper screen with proper 
black lighting, that shows seating and fifteen 
spaces for management, 32 for the members and a 
total of 32 visitor spaces and further 16 spaces 
for staff and further 8 spaces for staff visitors 

and press 
This is the structure showing how the structural 
areas are reorganised with the building, there's 
a very small extension to the building, the 
majority of the work is being done within the 
existing built fabric which means we contained the 
costs within the original budget. 
So the Customer Care Innovation Hub will be similar 
to what you saw on the photographs in Dun Laoghaire, 
glass faced counter across, people will sit, there 
will be letters over each seating area so you will 
take a ticket and then there's a similar too when 
you have your car taken off to be tested, you take 
a ticket and directed to a particular person ABCD 
or E, and two of the areas will be designed to take 
wheelchair accessibility, and one of them is 
designed as a cash office so that all the cash 
points will be taken in one area from now on. 
And then, the new training room across the room is 
shown as a in a classroom formation but also can 
be done as meeting room, so number of formats it 
will be set out at. 
And then we will have new ceiling tiles and lighting 
in awful the areas that are hatched there blue and 

red on the first ceiling areas and all areas 
outlined in red will have new floor finishes and 
redecoration, so, it is 99% of the whole of the 
foyer. 
And joining rooms 
So, the next thing we have to consider carefully 
which we have was health and safety person is that 
we will carry out the work in two phases so that 
the first phase will be the members rooms and the 
council chamber and half of the foyer so directing 
the public in through the back of the building, as 
I call it, everyone else calls the front.  This 
area here the public will come in so continuous 
service and meeting of the public will go on, 
throughout the project.  And the majority of the 
interaction will be through the motor tax office 
at the moment and then in phase two, that section 
will be completed, and the hub will be completed 
and phase two will be the new training room on the 
other side and the remainder of the floor. 
Some of the sections of the floor will have to be 
on out hours but redid that to a minimum to keep 
the cost down because working outside of normal 
hours is more expensive. 

Our procurement we used a framework which had been 
established for a number of local authorities, 
including Dun Laoghaire and Wicklow, and we applied 
to seven tenders and received three valid tenders. 
And the tendered were opened here in Wicklow by the 
people in the offices here, and then, they were 
assessed by the quantity at lowest tender was 
assessed as being the best value and he was, they 
were 100,000 below the cost plan so we were relieved 
and pleased about that, because it is difficult to 
know how tenders are going to come in.  So, we're 
on budget, we intend to stay on budget. 
So, we've divided it into three separate zones 
there, if you read you can see the various costs, 
zone one foyer public counter and zone two 
refurbishment of the rest of the Foy a upgrade of 
the public toilet so three is the cost of the 
council chamber which is 545, 495.56 and zone four 
is members meeting area, meeting rooms and the last 
zone there is building works.  Now, the building 
works, we were hoping we would be able to do less 
but we're actually found that the roof is in 
terrible condition, and it is pretty obvious to 
anyone coming in leer it is leaking very badly over 

there, it is leaking in a number of places in the 
foyer and in between the tiles it is leaking, in 
fact when you think about it, this roof is 50 years 
old and none of this type of flat roof lasts for 
any longer than that, so it has reached its limit, 
it is not anybody's fault it just needs to be 
renewed and the building is 50 years old, none of 
us could think of that, everyone thinks it is a new 
building, I think it looks like a think building 
but I'm getting very old myself. 
I don't know if this can work, I can do it on the 
computer. 
It runs the video. 
This was just a sketch, three dementia drawing, 
showing how the spaces will look where, so it is 
3D exploded 3D of the plan to show you how the new 
spaces will look when the project is completed. 
That's the planning area there with the new desks 
and there will be new monitors in the area where 
you can touch screen and look at planning 
applications.  And then there's part of the glazed 
screen and ladies sitting behind to answer the 
questions.  The office in behind that, where they 
will do telephones, mail and so on, and they can 

look straight from the office outside and see if 
there's somebody waiting to be served or helped, 
so it should give a very good connection.  And then 
that's the actual council chamber which will look 
two very nice circles.  So, euro that. 
  
>>:  Thank you. 
  
EMER: OK we're just looking at the customer 
relationship management software wear that's going 
to support the customer services hub.  I'm going 
to show you a live demo of the CRM system, we've 
kicked it off in Arklow municipal while we were 
waiting for it to be developed here, we said try 
it in Arklow, that kicked off at the start of the 
new year, and Arklow, like County Buildings here, 
it will have its planning queries, housing queries 
so members of the public at the moment coming into 
counter this Arklow, and then their queries are 
dealt with as is the way it will be done when it 
happens in County Buildings here, and I'll show you 
then the customer portal where councillors can 
create a case and if through the process. 
So, in Arklow, a case is recorded, people will 

either ring in or go to the counter or e-mail.  The 
case is then logged in customer care unit in Arklow, 
that case then will go through a process of triage, 
where we will decide is that actually, does it need 
to go to the opening near? 
Or planning or can we deal with right at that 
moment, if it is an application form, we send the 
application form out to the customer and we can 
close our case.  Ideally, we'll try and deal with 
the customer at that moment in time and then if it 
can't be dealt with then it will go on to the next 
line of process.  After that we will close the 
case.  I'm going to show you a demo what is 
happening in Arklow, the system we're using at the 
moment. 
I have put test information this, I have Mr Byrne 
as my customer and put in a test council property 
just for GDPR so nobody can see all the tenants 
here. 
On the screen, well anyone at customer care unit 
in Arklow which will be based here in time, will 
be able to see all cases coming into the system.  
Each case will have a title, it will have a unique 
identifier, you see Mr Byrne as customer and 

council house property, 123 Treetops, if assigned 
that case on to a contractor, we can put the 
contractors details on the first hub here the 
receptionist will see, it is normal, or high 
priority case, here is my customer service name so 
I created this, and somebody else in buildings 
created a case, I can actually have a Skype 
Conference with them and discuss the case and I can 
see now that this case now in progress, the date 
it was created on. 
OK, so we're going to create a new case as happens 
in Arklow at the moment 
I select my customer. 
Mr Byrne. 
If it is a rep, I will put in the council 
representing him, so Cllr Tommy Annesley submitted 
this.  Case is, it is about damage gutter here, and 
then I can assign it to maintenance. 
I note the date it was received and how it came in, 
e-mail or person.  OK, I'm now entering in the 
council property.  Only certain members of staff 
will be able to access that drop down for GDPR 
purposes, if they're in environment or motor tax 
they won't have access to that.  There's a number 

of different security settings on the system 
OK, and now we're just going to create that case.  
Actually, we're going to select gutters, this is 
all for your data analysis purpose, we know exactly 
what type of data came in.  Unique identifier 
number has been created and we can look at Mr Byrne 
and look at any case he submitted to the local 
authority and status to which case, if he also 
mentioned gutters damaged, we could reopen that 
case.  We're driving it through to the next stage 
and after triage we decided this needs to go to 
Arklow Municipal District in which case we will 
assign it to Arklow depot, I know Dennis is based 
in Arklow depot. 
And this case goes straight to his computer.  He 
can access it on his mobile phone. 
Dennis will decide and inspect the house and then 
the site, what need to be done? 
If he decides a contractor needs to go out, Dennis 
will put the name of the contractor in here. 
And then he will use another one of our software 
Microsoft flow, which will actually generate an 
inspection request. 
That is Arklow municipal's involvement finished 

for the moment.  If you think of the contractors, 
if I'm Weatherglaze I'm checking my e-mail and I 
will now receive an e-mail request from Arklow 
municipal and it will tell me the location Eircode 
of the property, tenant, contact details or the 
contact if it happens to to be the neighbour, and 
will provide a link for the contractor to access 
so the contractor will go out to the property, 
conduct the work and then they'll hit the 
inspection report. 
Their case number is there, and they'll summit the 
information Arklow need, did the contract phone the 
tenant first, was there an answer, is the job job 
complete and does another contractor need to go 
out? 
They'll give us the details what work they've done. 
And summit that.  That's the contractor’s job 
finished we go back to customer care unit.  Arklow 
municipal will have an e-mail to say this 
contractor completed their task.  System logged 
it.  If I go in here, I have entire history, I can 
Weatherglaze, James or Dennis will decide we will 
resolve that case or assign it to somebody else if 
the case is not complete.  So now they have 

completed the case.  I'm going to show you what 
happens in triage, we have an example in our 
resolved cases for request for windows and doors 
to be repaired. 
So, what happened here is as a customer reception 
desk they three and decide no it is not actually 
the responsibility of the local authority under the 
tenant handbook the tenant is responsible, so it 
is noted, and the case is closed. 
The council report, this is not in operation at the 
moment but will be in the future.  Each councillor 
will be given a log in and password and be able to 
create a case on the internet 24/7, they will be 
notified, if it is a council rep, the person that 
they are representing will be notified by e-mail 
the councillor hags now how submitted a case opened 
on your half.  The member of the public will be 
given a case number, the councillor will access the 
portal to see how the case is progressing, and they 
will be able to comment on it, live and also they 
can choose case, if the case is closed and they're 
not happy they can reopen the case.  I'm going to 
show you a demo what your software will look like. 
OK, so I will set councillor EOD you will be logging 

into this portal. 
spa the portal will record all past transactions 
you've had with the local authority.  So, all of 
your past cases are all there, so you can choose 
to open your new case, so we're saying bins are 
required.  This is an example of a council rep so 
we're saying we're representing Arklow Tidy Towns 
and provide Arklow Tidy Towns, their e-mail 
address. 
And then we'll give quick description 
If you don't provide the e-mail address, the person 
you are representing will not get e-mail 
notification.  OK, you can choose to summit now, 
there's also a location here where you can attach 
any files or documents that you may need to summit. 
And then councillor will summit. 
OK.  You now have given a case ID number and you 
can click in and have a look at what is happening 
to that case 
You can see it is active, and currently in progress, 
OK, you can add a comment here if there's more to 
say about that, later on, in a few days' time and 
that comment will appear in customer service hub. 
You can choose to update your case, if the case is 

no longer relevant you can go ahead and close it, 
or cancel your case. 
OK, now I'm going to show you the e-mail that Arklow 
Tidy Towns have received, so they've a case number 
and told me that, councillor EOD on my half has 
submitted a request here.  If I go into the 
customer care unit, I will see that automatically 
a case has been created. 
And I can also see all the cases that councillor 
EOD has submitted and that's it. 
OK. 
If Wicklow the customer service hub decides to 
close that case the reason why it was closed and 
e-mail will be sent out to the member of public and 
the councillor and the councillor can decide to 
reopen that case through the portal.  So ideally 
we have dashboards, we have the data going in, 
recorded and now we have dashboard so we can see 
what cases are coming in, like take Arklow for 
example, last week, you can see its heating’s 
problems or leaks problems based on the time of 
year, and see when customers are coming in, the time 
you can decide what works need to be done and plan 
future budgets based on, you know exactly what work 

people are requesting, how the numbers that are 
calling into the deck. 
The environmental wardens are using this system at 
the moment and they're going out onsite, and 
they're inspecting if there have been dumping 
reported they'll go out onsite with their tablets 
and record all the details onsite and they summit 
it, so we have the location of where the dumping 
occurred the type of dumping and categorising 
everything and building up a knowledge bank here 
so that we can actually build and looking at data, 
mining here, we can get more information out of 
this, as long as we start to gather the information.  
You see here, there's 24 incidents reported. 
The warden has signed off on that form. 
499 minutes have been spent so far inspecting. 
And then we also have a dashboard here who will tell 
us where the location municipals dumping the time 
of year and time of year when the stuff was dumped. 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  It is a treat to see this 
coming, I've been to Dun Laoghaire, and brilliant 
to see it coming to our area.  One is relation to 
live streaming of council meetings available to Dun 
Laoghaire now and will that be an option for us here 

to have that.  The second is relation to the 
accessible toilet and if there's an option for the 
public toilet to be mid-positioned as opposed to 
up against either side of the wall, is that 
something considered from accessibility point of 
view, and in relation to the municipal distribute, 
in Bray we send queries locally to Bray MD, what's 
their involvement will be if hub is here, will they 
have a mini-version in Municipal District and will 
that link up. 
CLLR LEONARD:  I want to say congratulations to the 
architect it looks gorgeous and very exciting 
project.  I'd like to lobby on half of the artists 
in Wicklow and I know it is usually the 1% for art 
but I would love to see, I was involved in the 
renovation of St Mell's Cathedral, doing one of the 
mosaic's baptismal arts, first of all I'd like to 
see lots of art in it, but spread across the board, 
across all the artist and crafters in Wicklow and 
open up the 1% is split wean more than one person 
to celebrate the artist a support a the councillor 
part of the hub the digital hub thing, I'd love to 
see that manifesto as soon as possible because it 
is brilliant and well needed and I'd love to know 

the time line how much of a gap will there be between 
the two. 
  
CLLR CREAN:  Could you say more on the piece, where 
the member of the public can input as well on a case, 
did you say that.  So, person you're making the 
case for, was there a part of the system they can 
put in comments. 
>>:  Not yet. 
>>:  Just I thought, and there's two comments one 
was when we have the data and track, and cases that 
were dealt with, time they were dealt with and sore 
forth, can that data be used to make a case for more 
staffing and funding because a lot of the time cases 
won't be resolved on the basis of it being a 
staffing issue and timely manner, so definitely to 
be used for that.  And in relation to the language, 
I know we're using the word customer but I've been 
reading around the idea of customer and the whole 
language and local authorities and I would be 
suggesting we look at the idea and maybe lead on 
this as a local authority, and look at using the 
word "citizen" it is reflective of the democratic 
relationship, it is not a business relationship 

although I see aspects the customer language suits 
to be transferred over, but I think it would be more 
reflective of the actual relationship to use the 
word "citizen" that's just a suggestion and 
something I would put strongly on thank you. 
CLLR CULLEN: I want to welcome what we've heard from 
Pamela and Emer, this came to us over a year ago 
at this point for a vote and I think it is to be 
welcomed.  The refurb of the council foyer, in my 
opinion needs drastic improvement, from what the 
experience of the customer gets when they walk in 
the door.  So that's to my mind a hugely 
significant that it is a place where people feel 
comfortable doing their business, and what is being 
suggested is really very good to see. 
I suppose, just a couple of points I want to 
make - the press area and the public seating, I 
think Pamela suggested it was out in front of me 
here.  You said three rows of seats for the public 
area, has that been in terms of numbers, because 
there's times here it gets very congested, when we 
have quite a lot of people visiting the foyer for 
the chamber for particular issues so I want to make 
sure that we're well covered with regards to public 

seating. 
In terms of the CRM, I think Emer you've done a huge 
amount of work on this, we've all had experiences 
where we've made phone calls or sent e-mails to 
different department and haven't heard any results 
of what they were pursuing to come back to us, so 
I think this CRM policy, or situation will 
certainly open things up to follow a trail when a 
councillor makes reps on half of a customer, I think 
it is hugely significant and I think that will 
transform the business of what we're here to do, 
so I welcome that. 
In terms of timescale, I suppose that's the big 
point, how long will this take? 
Because obviously the sooner we can get this 
completed the better. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  A question about the CRM 
again, it looks amazing, I'm trying to follow it 
in my head - so if citizen Dermot is making a rep 
on my own behalf, I can do that, and can I? 
And can I have arranged success to my data in terms 
of all the other reps I have made so do I see that 
as Dermot O'Brien or is that only available through 
someone control of the system if that makes sense. 

CLLR DUNNE:  This is welcome, the old building was 
built in 1977 and refurbished around 2002 so 
members room especially need to be looked at.  The 
foyer area, you know, it is not fit for purpose, 
whether we like it or not. 
And the council chamber at the end of the day, 
nobody I think likes sitting around here with their 
backs to people and things like that, it has to be 
looked at, in fairness to the members.  I have two 
questions, Councillor Cullen asked one, how long 
do you envisage this work to be carried on? 
And obviously, when this work is carried the 
council meetings won't take place here and do you 
envisage, maybe moving the council meetings around 
the county in that period of time for how many 
months that might be? 
I think it would be a good PR for the council to 
show people in different parts of the county how 
the actual council meetings worked it has 
CLLR MCDONALD:  Before, the last time we couldn't 
hold meetings in the council chamber and it is 
something we should look into, but that will decide 
and dependent on how long the work is going to take 
to be carried out in the council chamber, thank you. 

  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, like 
everybody else I'm delighted to see the new CRM 
system, it certainly means that a lot of us who have 
to follow up on things two and three e-mails should 
be able to see something happening straightaway.  
To be perfectly honest, while some people are 
fantastic getting back to us on issues, other 
people don't even respond so this should hopefully, 
eliminate that.  And then I also was going to ask 
the question of the time frame.  And 
practicalities where we'll have the meetings when 
the changes are going on, is the chamber going to 
be in August when there's no meetings or going to 
be done early on, and as Cllr Gail Dunne said 
meetings held somewhere else? 
 
And I welcome the changes for the rooms for 
customers because it is not really fit for purpose 
at the moment thank you. 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thank you and thank you for the 
presentation and that, I was just wondering in 
relation to the design of the public area in the 

Foyer, what privacy will members of the public have 
when they come to the counter? Thank you. 
 MS GALLAGHER:  Just in terms of I'll deal with the 
timeline first. 
It is proposed that once the stand still time period 
and all passes you will be looking at a couple of 
weeks, so, we would be thinking our last meeting 
would be in March. 
So, it would start pretty much after our first 
meeting, first Monday in March so looking at April, 
May, June and July, being out of the chamber.  
Allowing builder holidays, and you know, you would 
be hoping you would be back in chamber for first 
meeting in September, definitely in October. 
When we refurbish the chamber in times past, we had 
I remember a council meeting in the Grand Hotel for 
example, that option isn't open to us, you're 
effectively trying to recreate what is here, this 
terms of you know Wi-Fi, meeting space, press, 
public discussion and all of that, there is the 
Wicklow County Campus the big area there, but I 
think that's a Martha will have to be talked about 
at protocol and having regard what is said in the 
chamber and CPG. 

So, Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy you mentioned live 
stream, are you talking about cameras?  Actual 
cameras because we have the live streaming of the 
text because you introduced that when you were 
here, you have the cameras, you can see bits of it 
left, we had the cameras in the past before, and 
that cost in the region of 45,000 per annum, we took 
it out when we were short on funds so it is up to 
protocol to look at that, to see if you want that 
introduced but it is not something we have budgeted 
for within and it is the ongoing fee that would - but 
so, seating, there are 32 seats at the minute, 
including staff, so, there would be 56 seat for 
staff press and public so that's additional. 
He I think that's these terms of the 
practicalities. 
Design of the public area, and confidentiality, 
people will come in, take a seat, take a ticket, 
and then they will be invited up to the public 
counter and have business dealt with.  There are 
three spare meeting rooms so if something needs to 
be discussed confidentiality, the staff member 
concerned would be asked to come out and deal with 
that confidentially, there's some POD, some 

proposed seating arrangements enclosed that a 
person can sit in and have a private conversation. 
The others are in relation to CRM, are they. 
  
>>:  I'll mention a couple of them if it is OK.  The 
live streaming, one of the things that the new 
layout will do will allow us to stream from here 
to reception. 
We'll have done that so in terms of say streaming 
into the members rooms, that can be done quite 
easily.  The system we had a couple of years ago 
was expensive to install and maintain.  And we 
weren't getting great bang for the book in terms 
of webcasting. 
It is something if the members want to do in the 
future, yeah, we can do that, we're well capable 
of doing it. 
In relation to the MDs, this should actually 
strengthen the role of the MDs in that we can create 
virtual Municipal District customer care it will 
be across the council.  You can have a virtual MD 
team where you have a virtual team based both in 
the MD in here because each will have access to 
exactly the same systems so they contract the cases 

from here or from the MDs time line for the hub I 
think we've done. 
Tracking in cases staffing, yes, the whole idea 
about this, is to sorrow deuce again you know the 
councillors have been very supportive of all of 
these initiatives in terms of managing in terms of 
tracking, in terms of statistics, from the customer 
care side of it, you look at your support through 
NOAC and service indicators all of this, all this 
should allow better quality decision-making for 
the Chief Executive, so, he can look at allocation 
of resources, whether it is housing maintenance or 
pothole repairs and all of that sort of stuff and 
have very real information.  This is the purpose 
behind the Chief Executive's report.  It is not 
actually improving the transparency of the 
information that is available and how we make it 
available.  Again we have that covered with the say 
the geographic side from the waste enforcement 
team, we know where stuff is happening and know, 
we're getting better quality information and the 
whole idea about this system is to improve the 
information that the councillors get and how we can 
make that information available. 

Phone calls to customer care unit, again customer 
care unit with the telephone system we have now it 
is voice over IP, so, you have created virtual team 
already in between Bray and here.  We transfer 
cases from here to our mobiles to - we can do all 
of that sort of stuff as things are. 
So, with a we need do is as we move forward, as the 
on boarding process for dynamics and for the 
customer care, we can do it as quickly or as to meet 
your requirements. 
And as that happens with the customer care unit the 
staffing and customer care unit will be looking at 
services which are most important to you and for 
the members of the public and to allow better 
quality information for the manager.  Those, that 
will be the on boarding process there. 
The portal is something which is currently 
available and can be made available.  But we need 
to make sure that how it filters into the 
background, how it makes sure that there's no point 
in having a portal system if we're not actually able 
to get the tasks done so we need to ensure the 
customer care unit and how we manage these queries 
that we can actually handle it under a customer care 

system.  So yeah, a lot of it can take place now, 
but we need to make sure that it meets your 
requirements and our requirements and the 
requirements of the various directorates and 
municipal districts in terms of handling the cases 
that you raise.  As soon as we all or as soon as 
we have all the ducks in a row, we can do it, and 
but that's the whole idea of the systems we're 
trying to implement. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that everything? 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  The accessible toilet rather 
than the one in the middle? 
>>:  The reason it is at the wall it allows someone 
using the wall to use a small wash hand basin, so 
do you have right hand or left hand transfer, the 
majority want right hand transfer, you transfer on 
the right, if you put it in the centre, you have 
difficulty accessing the basin and that's the 
thing.  I'll have to discuss it with our DAK person 
and see. 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  And if we look at access for 
all documents. 
>>:  In the documents they suggest there should be 

two in this building and they each should have the 
altern nationality transfer location. 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  I know, if we work what we have 
and try to get the most use of it. 
>>:  I'll look again on it and look at it, consider 
it a CRM question. 
In the meantime, speak up. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  In relation to the time we're not 
in the chambers, is there an opportunity go out 
across the county.  There's a lot of people maybe 
in west Wicklow. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  SG we can look at.  I'm going to 
suspension standing orders now.  So, Cllr Stephen 
Matthews you may stand up, I can't get the mics to 
work. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  The proposal I wish to make has 
been circulated to the members and do it based on 
the fact that when I went to the phase one 
consultation, there was a lot of stuff discussed 
about one, and phase two seemed to have completely 
changed and the first thing on phase two there's 
maps drawn everywhere, so we convene a top level 
meeting between the Department of the NTA and TII, 

you Cathaoirleach, two chairs, are the most 
relevance and director of services for roads and 
look for a number of studies to be done, that can 
feed into this process as we're discussed at phase 
one and seemed to have disappeared from phase two, 
I have all the documentation on it and can't find 
any transport studies that have been done, it is 
not acceptable in this day and age, so I propose 
to the Cathaoirleach and put it to the members if 
in agreement with it the proposal. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I haven't read it, it is 
substantial decision we can't make in two to three 
minutes this evening; I would prefer to go back to 
the SPC, I don't know how members feel about that. 
>>:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Just to say that, the 
second public consultation, if you noticed on the 
boards, particularly board six it referred to 
public transport and consideration that needs to 
be given to public transport that would be offline 
to be delivered separately by the NTA, and then, 
for public transport on the N11, M11 with potential 
for Express bus lane and Park and Ride facility 
Just to say that, next week, we at the SPC, a member 
from Kildare National Roads Office and ARAB 

consultants on the project will come to update on 
the public consultation and in the course of the 
presentation they will give outline of with a has 
taken place and what engagements have taken place 
with public transport providers and the NTA to 
date. 
Secondly, I would point out that the NTA, are coming 
to the council meeting the next council meeting in 
February. 
And obviously they have responsibility for overall 
public transport planning for both bus and rail, 
so, they're coming to that meeting. 
And we have the SPC on the 20th next Monday as well 
where we'll get an update.  Now the public 
consultation as we've spoken about, and the Chief 
Executive mentioned earlier is still on going, 
there, there's been approximately 140 meetings 
that happened to date, another 20-30 with 
interested parties to happen to date.  And a lot 
of what has come out of the public consultation is 
need for public transport solution to ease traffic 
congestion along the N11 as long, unfortunately the 
public consultation what gained most, what gained 
most comment were the route options as you said Cllr 

Stephen Matthews. 
That's that particular slide which outlined the 
route options which are being considered are the 
ones commented on most.  But the public 
consultation did refer to the need for public 
transport solutions and again on slide, on board 
4 of the public consultation documentation it 
concluded multicomponent solution was required to 
the N11, M11 issue. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  All consultations are going on 
with the phase two has been presented and now we 
hear consultations are going on with public 
transport providers in the background, that's not 
acceptable with the people of Wicklow, this road 
as road only solution won't work.  We heard Bus 
Eireann won't operate on bus lanes, they answered 
that question today in the UK which you references 
and done in Northern Ireland they've gone away from 
the motorway issues because of management and 
safety issues so people have been asked to comment 
on a proposal here at phase two, and they don't have 
the information.  So I'm asking for a postponement 
of phase two until we get the agencies around the 

table including Cs of the SPCs in Wicklow, it is 
a policy of welcome become to improve the N1S but 
how we go about that policy should be a matter for 
the Chairs of the SPCs to feed into that as well 
the director and four main agencies concerned with 
transport in Wicklow, we need them around the table 
and that's what I'm asking for here.  If you 
recommend go to SPC, when is that going to happen? 
Will it go on the SPCs agenda top of the agenda and 
when will the recommendation come back, and what 
SPC are you planning, it covers environment 
transport and economic SPC, it covers all ... 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: … 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  I'm saying postpone phase two of 
the N1S the N11 needs work and one of the objectives 
I have here is to continue with the works on water, 
surface water on junctions and safety but what is 
propose asked roads only solution with roads 
through sensitive environmental site through 
people's lands and property and handled in a poor 
manner, councillors around this table we should 
postpone this phase two, this is ten-year plan, 
postpone it by a month, I think this should be 

action we should take. 
  
CLLR MITCHELL:  I'm Chair of the transport SPC, and 
we have arranged that the ARAP and study leaders 
will come to the SPC next Monday in our meeting.  
It was to be somebody else, but we changed it to 
that will hatch.  Now, I have to say, I have 
sympathy with this motion, but very reluctant to 
suggest we postpone this, I think it is, we have 
the final choice I believe at the end as to which 
route is selected, although we need, and we can 
refuse if it is not studied properly.  However, I 
am extremely dissatisfied on early December at the 
consultation, and I think a lot of councillors 
were, that there was no indication that they were 
thinking of public transport or bus system.  Now 
I am told this has changed and they're going to 
consider a bus lane, but this may not actually deal 
with the rail system which essentially is empty. 
Now, I have written a fairly simple idea of how you 
make the system work, out of Greystones, and Irish 
Rail management has refused today discuss it.  
They're looking for 1.5 billion to get 600 new 
carriages and won't say what they'll do with 

carriages to improve our service which is a 
disgrace, so I do think it needs certain serious 
attention this, and I want to see proper 
specification of this study which includes the 
trains for Wicklow. 
I really find it difficult to know how they ask to 
design the N11 without knowing how many people will 
be taken off the road in trains and Express buses. 
 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks very much Chair.  I think, 
over the past number of months we've had multiple 
consultations on different aspects of this, and I 
think one of the problems is there isn't anyone 
taking holistic view, as Cllr Derek Mitchell said 
we had the N11 consultation, when I asked them were 
they talking to people in relation to Irish Rail 
they weren't.  We cannot look at this, 
independently, we need a holistic approach to 
transport within the county.  And I think we do 
need to bring all the main players together and even 
things like job creation within the county that has 
been a consideration.  We need to set ambitious 
target to say we want 30-40% reduction of cars on 
roads, and whilst I agree, we need to get people 

together it needs to be expanded and cover 
transport across the entire county.  I have a 
problem with the consultation in that there was a 
move, it was a movable feast with the deadline, 
initially the 13th of December was the deadline and 
then we heard it expanded, extended and now it is 
now in on going consultation which I don't think 
is actually good.  You have a start and end point 
to end consultations and provide information for 
people to consider during that period.  I believe 
that there's actually addition cathedral 
information being put up on the website, every few 
weeks.  Now if you started off at the very start 
of that consultation and looked at the information 
there, you will not be told there's further 
information on it and you may now be missing you 
needed to know about.  And actually, I would 
request whether that would meet our house 
objectives to environmental planning, I have an 
issue with that, and that should be raised.  I 
written I wrote to minister Ross to have a task 
force and I recommend people should write too. 
 
CLLR BEHAN:  Well there's a lot of validity what 

has been said, let's spare of the tens of thousands 
of people who are currently today struggling to get 
home to their families 
Because, the situation is unsustainable. 
And while I accept everything that has been said 
by previous speakers, there needs to be asking of 
public transport and road improvements, et cetera, 
et cetera, so say as the Green Party leader did a 
couple of weeks ago in the Dail he will stop the 
whole thing if he gets in Government, and now 
another one to stop it, let's go back to the drawing 
board and have more delay on this, that's not good 
enough for the people who suffering at the moment.  
If we could go back and design it public transport 
options and a Luas line all the way down N11, great, 
but the reality is families are being destroyed at 
the moment because parents are leaving home at 6 
in the morning and getting home at 6 or 7 in the 
evening and they’re paying a fortune for childcare 
in the meantime.  We don't have enough jobs in the 
county or enough opportunities for people to stay 
working in the county.  I accept what Cllr Stephen 
Matthews is trying to do here, he's trying to as 
he has been consistently, trying to offer a suite 

of some alternatives, I understand that, but let's 
face it, there's two important fact here, first of 
all, we're going to be completely excluded from 
this decision.  When the route is decided or when 
the project is finalised, it will be An Bord 
Pleanála, not us, so we can talk all we like, but 
someone else in Dublin will be making the decision 
and secondly there is nobody in charge of the entire 
project.  We need to have somebody in Government, 
or somebody in the Civil Service who has 
responsibility for all the transport modes and 
options and bring them all together and that's 
exactly what councillor Matthews is saying, but I 
fear if we try and put a stop to this now what, is 
going to happen all of those people whose lives are 
a misery at the moment so I'm not going to agree 
to stopping the process but I do agree we should 
continue along the lines that councillor Mitchell 
has said.  And we should engage in it. 
CLLR LOURDA SCOTT:  You can listen to another Green 
Party here now, I'm one of the people and I have 
a young people who commute on the N11 and it is 
absolutely misery, but the tens of people you're 
talking about that are commuting in misery and have 

family at home and paying a fortune in childcare, 
I repeat I have been one of those, none of them, 
when I was canvassing last year or at the moment, 
none are begging for the N11 to be widened because 
they know, I'll tell you know what will happen, if 
you widen it, everyone will be sitting except 
they'll be sitting in a extra lane of traffic going 
nowhere, we have to press pause if we want 
sustainable options in this county.  If we want a 
truly sustainable county we have to hit pause and 
have joined up thinking with all of the agencies, 
and it is not good enough to say the NTA are coming 
in next month, we're all under pressure here with 
the going through the agenda, they'll be sitting, 
yawning to us to a certain degree with we need to 
get everybody together.  And the second part to 
this, what Stephen has down on the bottom of the 
motion is critical, application can, looking at the 
carbon footprint, assessing the environmental 
impact, these are what people looking forward in 
ten years are critically concerned as they should 
be.  We've declared a climate emergency which 
everyone agreed on, we're talking about the climate 
action charter which is signed, that requires 

councils to establish procedures for carbon 
proofing major decisions such as transport, so has 
been car boon proofed, has anyone thought of 
looking at that, we have to absolutely press pause 
and get joined up thinking instead of going down 
a route that cannot be solved in ten years' time. 
  
Chief Executive:  One thing it took a lot lobbying 
to get this in the National Development Plan in the 
first place, it is in with a suite of schemes going 
to fully design and shovel ready and Government 
will decide depending on the economy what will go 
ahead, I wouldn't recommend postponing it and 
putting because in the queue.  Part of the scheme 
is we look at the environmental options and 
accessibility, integration and economy and 
employment and et cetera and they do take a public 
transport options into the account, they're 
liaising with the NTA body responsible for that, 
and they're coming to the next meeting, so 
certainly, the national roads design office are 
coming to the next SPC, which is welcomed, the NTA 
are coming to the next council meeting and which 
can lobby in relation to the various different 

transport options, but I would caution against 
postponement, there are schemes which are glad to 
be where we are you now and up in the queue so I 
wouldn't recommend that by any means. 
  
CLLR MITCHELL:  If we write to them and have the 
objectives of the study for the next meeting so we 
know what the objectives are, and that we can start 
with known objectives. 
And not come here and go away and nothing happen.  
I'm very reluctant to postpone this, it has been 
a big issue to get it here. 
no on the other hand we do need to see what they'll 
do. to be honest, I think as any good transport 
solution will have a lesser carbon footprint than 
any road proposal.  So, I don't think we should go 
too much in the detail of that, we need to focus 
on getting better transport, better public 
transport and then see what the road is left with 
and I'd like that to be the concentration 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  It is a significant proposal, I 
accept that, the N11 is a significant piece of 
infrastructure in the county.  I think to try and 

come to agreement, five minutes before the end of 
the council meet is not acceptable.  It is not 
acceptable to members and respectful to this entire 
decision that's going on, the Chief Executive talks 
about meetings with NTA and SFC and various 
meetings, that's very ad hoc, we need to bring all 
the players together.  What my motion calls to is 
not to postpone any N11 job upgrade improvement 
scheme, it calls for improvements to be carried 
out.  What I'm asking for is postponement of phase 
two, until, that word is important “until” you 
convene a meeting with players and Chairs of policy 
makers in this council, that's what is asked for 
here.  I do believe it is within the Chief 
Executive's capability to get the players around 
for one of the most significant road projects in 
the council at the moment.  It is within our 
capability and that's what we're seeking, until we 
get the people around the table.  The imperative 
is on us to get that done in the next couple of 
weeks, they're talking about this taking seven, 
eight, ten years, it was handled badly at the start, 
let's handle this correctly from here on. 
  

>>:  We have 60% of the population is - we're worse 
affected by the delays on the N11, people are 
commuting and the round trip is taking four hours, 
so my view is and the view of everyone I speak to, 
most people on that road, they don't want any 
further delays, that whatever is planned should go 
ahead, and I think Councillor Mitchell said we need 
to improve public transport, but the people I 
represent don't want any deferral on that project 
and that's my view on it quite clearly. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  While I see the need to get the 
relevant stakeholders around the table and discuss 
the options going forward, but something of the 
looking to postpone the project at this point in 
time would send out the wrong message.  We were a 
long time looking at this scheme to be up and 
running and now that 2012 it is important things 
are tracked and it moves along quickly.  There were 
reservations when time frame was given to us, so 
I certainly think postponing it would send out the 
wrong message whilst I think the idea of getting 
stakeholders around the table is advisable at this 
point in time thank you. 

  
CLLR MITCHELL:  I think it is unfair members have 
left, would you agree to put this on the agenda on 
the next meeting for discuss. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Yeah. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  And we fully thrash it out. 
MS GALLAGHER:  The motion hasn't been circulated. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  We copied and circulated it; we 
knew we would be pressed for time.  Is that 
acceptable  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Lock. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Could we ask for objectives for the 
next meeting for the next transport study. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Get every report on the public 
consultation.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK just to... 
MS GALLAGHER:  We are out of time, these items are 
only for noting so if the elected members are happy 
to note them I'll skip to number is 1 first to note 
that the members have been circulated with the 
ethical framework for local government services, 
annual declarations to be submitted back by the 
31st of January and then also the political 
donations, actually the 31st.  January for 

political donations and February for annual 
declarations the local government, the data report 
for the year ended 3 
St of December 2018 was circulated, if the members 
are happy to note it, at this meeting, if not we 
can put it on the agenda for the next meeting.  Are 
members happy to note it. 
>>:  You said 2019.  If you're happy to note it for 
now. 
CLLR BOURKE:  I was looking through it there, when 
the manager talks about bank investments 
increasing by 9.2 million, I assume that's bank 
deposits rather than investments yeah happy to 
note.  Yes. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We will see you in a month’s time, 
we mightn't see you so the very best of luck. 
  
