January 30th, 2019
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Gnåthcrinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras an
Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 4ü lå Feabhra 2019 ag 2:00 pm chun an gno seo a
leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 4th February 2019
in the Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
B nnacht Leat.
LORRAINE GAL HE
SENIOR EXEC
OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 4th February 2019 at 2:00pm
To consider the disposal of land situated in the townland of
Ballinalea, Ashford, Co. Wicklow being site 37 Ballinalea,
Ashford (37 Rosanna Close, Ashford) to Ms. Geraldine Kelly, 37
Rosanna Close, Ashford ( as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 37 Ballinalea, Ashford.pdf
To consider the disposal of freehold interest in the property
known as 49 St. Peter's Place, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Paul
Costello and Ms. Gabriele Shalan, 49 St. Peters Place, Arklow,
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 49 St Peters Place Arklow.pdf
To receive a demonstration/ survey on Customer Relationship
Management System: Ms. Emer O'Donovan, IT
Analyst/AppIications Developer and Mr. Paddy O'Flaherty,
G.I.S. Project Leader.
To consider report in accordance with Section 179 of the
Planning and Development Act, 2000 as amended; Part 8 of the
Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 - 2006 as
amended: Extension and upgrade works to Council Chamber
and refurbishment works to foyer area at County Buildings,
Wicklow Town
Not included
Not included
D
D
D
Foyer Refurbishmen.pdf
Site Map Elevations Section-pdf
Council Chamber Layout.pdf
CE Chamber Report.pdf
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
IO.
11.
12.
1.
2.
3.
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
January 2019 (copy report attached).
D Chief Executive's Monthly Report January 2019 (3).pdf
To receive a presentation: Rates revaluation process: Mr.
John O'Sullivan, Commissioner of Valuation.
To note the Local Government Audit Report 2017 ( deferred
from meeting of 14th January, 2019)(copy attached).
D AFS 2017.pdf
D WCC LG Audit Report 2017.pdf
To consider Draft Protocol for Wicklow County Council and
Municipal District civic functions/official openings/unveilings
etc (copy attached).
D DRAFTPROTOCOLRECEPTIONS.pdf
To receive update on Housing Capital Programme.
To receive a presentation: Creative Ireland Arts - Ms. Jenny
Sherwin, Arts Officer.
Notice of Motions
Correspondence.
Notices of Motion
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Jennifer Whitmore (31st
October, 2018).
"That Wicklow County Council install a network of water fountains and bottle-refill stations across each
Municipal District to help reduce the use of single use packaging,such as plastic water bottles".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018).
"That this Council recognise the landmark decision in the European Parliament when MEP's voted
overwhelmingly in favour of an EU-wide ban on single use plastics in all County Council buildings in County
Wicklow and at any funded functions, within 3 months of passing of motion".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
4,
5.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018).
"That this Council commits to an exploration in QI 2019 of the feasibility of installing drinking water fountains
in areas within the County that have high volumes of footfall. This will ensure improved access to drinking
water and thereby reduce plastic waste from bottled water".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018)
"That this Council commits to a process of recognising its role as a local authority in supporting the
implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The seventeen 'Global Goals' represent the
universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure that all people enjoy peace and
prosperity".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mary Kavanagh (26th
November, 2018)
"That this Council noting the recent Cen.'ical Check scandal, calls upon the Minister for Health and An
Taoiseach to acknowledge, support and respond in detail to the demands of the Standing4Women
campaign. These include: Legislation and policy on mandatory open disclosure independent of the patient
safety bill. Provision ofa start and end date and full disclosure on the 1800 smears yet to be audited, and a
breakdown of the new packages being negotiated with laboratories carrying out smear slide analysis
including mandatory site audits".