1
CombNRLe C0DCAe CbiLL mbADCÄfi)
«1iqcLo«1 COUDCg CoanciL
Fiontar & Seirbhfsi Corpar6ideacha
Enterprise & Corporate Services
Åras An Chontae / County Buildings
Cill Mhantåin / Wicklow
Guthån / Tet: (0404) 20158
Faics / Fax: (0404) 20112
Rphost / Email: corporate@wicklowcoco.i
Suiomh / Website: www.wicklow.ie
31u La Bealtaine 2019
DO GACH BALL
Tion61far crinniü bliantüil de Comhairle Chontae Chill Mhantåin i Seomra an
Comhairle Aras an Chontae, Chill Mhantain Dé hAoine, 7ü Lä Meitheamh, 2019
ag 2.00 p.m. chun on gné seo a leanüs a chur i grich.
larrtar ort bheith i Iåthair.
The Annual Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Friday the 7th
of June 2019 in the Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow
commencing at 2.00 p.m. to consider the agenda detailed hereunder.
Your attendance is requested.
Beannacht at,
LORRAIN GAL GHER
SENIOR EX
IVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE AND CORPORATE SERVICES
CLÅR GNO
.1
2
3
4
Election of Cathaoirleach.
Election of Leas Chathaoirleach.
Appointment of Cathaoirligh designate to the following Strategic Policy
Committees:-
1) Economic Development & Enterprise Support SPC
2) Community, Cultural & Social Development SPC
3) Housing & Corporate Estate SPC
4) Transportation, Water & Emergency Services SPC
5) Planning and Environment SPC
Appointment of Members to the Corporate Policy Group (Cathaoirleach and
Chairpersons of each SPC and where the Municipal District is not already
represented, a member of such Municipal District (as selected by the Municipal
District) or failing selection, the Cathaoirleach of the Municipal District or
Tå an doicjméad seo ar fåil i bhformåid:• eile ar iarratas.
This document is available in aiternative formats on request.
Seoltar gach comhfreagras chuig Stiürthöir Seirbhfsf, Fiontar & Seirbhfsf Corparäideacha.
All correspondence shaufd be addressed to the Director of Services, Enterprise & Corporate Services.
2
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
his/her nominee).
Appointment of 15 Members to the Wicklow County Council Joint Policing
Committee (at least 2 Members from each municipal district).
Appointment of 3 Members to the Eastern and Midlands Regional Assembly.
Appointment of 4 Members to the Regional Health Forum (Dublin-Mid
Leinster).
Appointment of 5 Elected Members to the Kildare Wicklow Education Training
Board
Appointment of 5 Members to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative
Committee (LTACC) (one from each municipal district)
Appointment of 3 members to the Local Community Development Committee
(LCDC)
Appointment of 3 Members to the Bray Area Partnership (2 from the Bray MD
and 1 from the Greystones MD
Appointment of 2 Members to Wicklow Rural Partnership
Appointment of 2 members to the Board of Wicklow Enterprise Park Ltd (at
least one member from the municipal district of Wicklow)
Appointment of 3 Members to the Board of Mermaid County Wicklow Arts
Centre
Appointment of Members to the Protocol/Standing Orders Committee.
(previously 12 in addition to the Cathaoirleach as ex-officio member)
Appointment of 3 Members as Wicklow County Council delegates to the
Association of Irish Local Government (AILG)
Appointment of 1 Member to the Local Authority Members Association (LAMA)
Appointment of 3 Members to the East Coast Regional Drugs Task Force (one
from each of the municipal districts of Arklow, Greystones and Wicklow
Appointment of 1 Member to attend the Annual Meeting of Irish Public Bodies
Mutual Insurance Limited.
Appointment of 5 members to the Wicklow County Tourism Ltd. (one from each
municipal district)
Appointment of 1 Member to Bray Tourism Ltd (from the Bray municipal
district)
Appointment of 1 Member to the Music Generation Committee
Appointment of 3 Members to the Local Committee to oversee the Rural Water
Pro ramme.
Appointment of 6 Members to the Greystones/Bray Cliff Walk Management
Plan Sub-committee (3 from Greystones municipal district and 3 from Bray
munici al district
Appointment of 2 Members to the Bray Harbour Joint Development committee
(2 from Bray municipal district)
Appointment of 3 Members to the Bray Swimming Pool Committee (3 from
Bray municipal district)
Appointment of 2 members to the Ballynagran Community Liaison Committee
Appointment of 2 Members to the Wicklow Local Sports Partnership
To consider the adoption of Wicklow County Council standing orders (copy
attached)
To agree Schedule of Meetings for coming year (copy attached)
To determine the procedure for the opening of tenders
To determine the procedure for affixing of seal on documents
3
33
End.
To set date and time for meeting of Municipal Districts of Blessington, Bray,
Arklow, Greystones, and Wicklow (to be held no later than 17th June, 2019)
(copy schedule attached.)