January 6th, 2021
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionålfar gnath crinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain ar siül at Zoom Dé Luan, liü lå
Eanåir 2021 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnö seo a leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Zoom Monday, 11th January
2021 commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
Beannacht Le t.
LORRAINE AL GHER
DIRECTOR
ERVICES/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 11th January 2021 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 11th December, 2020 (copy
attached).
To consider the disposal of 0.0237 Hectares (0.059 Acres) or
thereabouts of land situated in the townland of Templerainey
Td, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Teresa Enright, Ballymoney,
Arklow, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Teresa Enright.pdf
D Disposal Teresa Enright Map.pdf
To consider the disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of
transfer order in property situated in the townland of Wicklow
Town, Wicklow being 17 Seafield, Wicklow Town, Co. Wicklow
to Mr. John Sexton and Ms. Louise Sexton, 17 Seafield,
Wicklow Town, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal Notice -John Louise Sexton 17 Seafield Wicklow.pdf
To consider the disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of
transfer order in property situated in the townland of
Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow being 34 Centre Road,
Ballybannon, Rathdrum,Co.Wicklow to Mr.James(otherwise
Seamus) Driver and Ms. Helen Driver, 34 Centre Road,
Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal Notice - James & Helen Driver, 34 Centre Road, Ballygannon.pdf
To consider the disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
transfer order in property situated in the townland of
Blessington, Co. Wicklow being 38 Mountainview, Blessington,
Co. Wicklow to Mr. Eugene Tyrrell, 38 Mountainview,
Blessington, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Notice - Eugene Tyrrell 38 Mountainview Blessington.pdf
Not included
To consider the disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of
transfer order in property situated in the townland of
Knockanragan Lower, Arklow, Co. Wicklow being 37 Fernhill,
Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Elizabeth Doyle, 37 Fernhill, Arklow,
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Notice - Elizabeth Doyle 37 Femhill Arklow.pdf
To consider the disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of
transfer order in property situated in the townland of
Corporation Lands, Wicklow Town, Co. Wicklow being 10
Glenside Road otherwise 10 Colley Row, Wicklow Town, Co.
Wicklow to Ms. Margaret Duffy, IO Glenside Road otherwise 10
Colley Row, Wicklow Town, Co. Wicklow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal Notice - Margaret Duffy IO Glenside Road Wicklow.pdf
Not included
Not included
To consider the disposal of Freehold Interest by way of transfer
order in property situated in the townland of Arklow, Co.
Wicklow being 38 Fernhill, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Mary
O'Neill, 38 Fernhill, Arklow, Co. Wicklow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal Notice - Mary O'Neill 38 Fernhill Arklow.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.2017 hectares or thereabouts of
land comprised in Folio WW4484 Co. Wicklow at Property No.
—293, Plan 18 at Millands, Coolafancy, Tinahely, Co. Wicklow-to
Mr. Martin Hennessy and Ms. Eleanor Hennessy, Millands,
Coolafancy, Tinahely, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal Notice -Martin Eleanor Hennessy Millands Coolafancy Tinahely.pdf
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
December, 2020 (copy attached).
Not included
Not included
11.
12.
13.
14.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
To receive a presentation: (a) Introduction to proposed Local
Authority Climate Action Training Programme - Tuesday 29th
January, 2021 (2) Climate Action update for Wicklow County
Council.
To ratify the appointment of Cllr. Erika Doyle, agreed by the
Bray Municipal District Members, to the Mermaid Arts Centre
Board arising from the vacancy created by the election of
former Councillor S. Matthews to Dåil Eireann.
Correspondence.
Notice of motions.
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Lourda Scott (7th October,
2019).
"Wicklow County Council notes a sutvey of Plan Intemational Ireland showing that 50% of Irish teenage girls
find it difficult to afford period products and 61% miss school as a result. Wicklow County Council
acknowledges the work of organisations such as Homeless Period in collecting donated sanitary products
and distributing to those in need. Following the example of Dublin City Council and Wexford City Council,
Wicklow County Council agrees to have free period products available in the toilets of all Council buildings,
including swimming pools and libraries".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr. Paul
O'Brien (4th November, 2019).
"We note the Council's commitment to an accessible website and request that, where possible, all PDF
documents on the Council's website should be original PDF's accessible to blind/vision impaired people and
not just scanned copies".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (20th November, 2019).
"That this Council will have 'Child Homelessness' as an agenda item for each meeting until the Child
Homelessness figure for the county reaches 0".
Notice of motion in the names of the Greystones Municipal
District Councillors (12th December, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council request Irish Water to refrain from imposing commercial connection and water
charges in respect of public drinking water fountains".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th January,
2020).
6.
7.
8.
9.
"That this council acknowledges the phenomenon of protests outside medical centres in Ireland and the need
to ensure that women can access healthcare services safely. In doing so, that this council agrees
to explore the drafting of bye-laws for the regulation and control of public roads and footpaths adjacent to
healthcare facilities in Wicklow. This will ensure that patients, service providers, healthcare staff and
members of the public can enter premises without fear of intimidation or harassment as evidenced by the
nuisance presented in situations where such protests have taken place".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Paul O'Brien and Cllr.
John Mullen (2nd March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Councillors have a responsibility to show leadership in effotts to improve the civility of
public discourse on political matters.
We propose that Wicklow Councillors now regulate their own submissions on social media and must ensure
that any inappropriate comments left by members of the public are removed in a timely manner. In order to
monitor this commitment, we propose that all councillors sign declarations indicating agreement or non-
agreement with the measure and that this will be published and updated annually on the council website".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Tommy Annesley (2nd
March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Council calls on the Irish Govemment Departments of Health, Justice and Equality and
Children and Youth Affairs to recognise that Parental Alienation is "Substantial and sustained dissatisfaction
within a caregiver-child relationship associated with significant disturbance in functioning" as indexed under
QE52.0. Caregiver-child relationship problem in the latest Intemational Classification of Diseases version 11
by the World Health Organisation and to implement recommendation 36 of the Report of Reform of the
Family Law System October 2019".
Notice of motion in the names of the Baltinglass Municipal
District Councillors (24th March, 2020)
"That Wicklow County Council calls on the elected members of the neighbouring Local Authorities of Carlow
County Council, Kildare County Council, Wexford County Council and South Dublin Council to join with them
in lobbying the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport and the respective Minister to provide funding
for the immediate upgrading of the N81 along the preferred route Tallaght to Hollywood. "
It is impottant that the upgrading of the N81 which is vital for the economic growth of Carlow, South Kildare,
South Dublin, Wexford and Wicklow is kept on top of the agenda and considered for urgent capital funding.
At present the N81 is only the national route to Dublin, the Nation's Capital, that hasn't been upgraded. The
upgrading of the N81 will assist this entire area to develop and reach its potential. However, this is not just
an economic issue but the present condition of the N81 raises health and safety concerns, largely due to the
high volume of traffic now using the route coupled with the current condition of the road. The N81 was never
designed or constructed to facilitate the current volumes of traffic now using this road. While some remedial
actions has taken place in recent times, it is now essential that the entire N81 is upgraded, as previously
planned for, to a satisfactory standard that meets the current daily need of its commuters".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (20th April,
2020)
"That Wicklow County Council fund a feasibility study for the implementation of lateral coastal protect
10.
11.
(groynes) and beach nourishment at the North Beach/Porters Rock area in Arklow as part of a combined
measure to restore access to the North Beach Area for the local community as they have had for
generations".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Peir Leonard and Cllr.
Mary Kavanagh. (20th April, 2020)
Part 1 "That Wicklow County Council introduce a "rent payment" system similar to that used in Wexford
County Council. This would enable all Council tenants to pay their rent in their local Post Offices throughout
the county. The benefits of which would be as follows:
-Tenants will benefit from being able to pay rent in the Post Office the same day as they collect social welfare
payments if applicable.
-Post offices will benefit from the extra revenue and therefore more job security for P. O. employees.
-Shops and small businesses adjacent to the Post offices will benefit from increased footfall.
-Wicklow County Council will benefit from less arrears and a decreased workload on municipal staff'.
Part 2 "That Wicklow County Council support an awareness campaign to reverse the transfer of social
welfare payments from Post Offices to banks during the COVID-19 Emergency period. Apan from
supporting the restoration of lost revenue to Post Offices the weekly visit for many constituents to the local
Post Office plays an integral part in their overall wellness and connectivity to the wider community as well as
an economic suppott to local Main Street businesses".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris, Cllr. Paul
O'Brien, Cllr. Lourda Scott, Cllr. Erika Doyle and Cllr. Jodie
Neary (9th July, 2020).
"- Recognising that people with disabilities have the same right to use and enjoy public spaces that we all
share,
-Acknowledging the obstacles which people with disabilities face in their daily lives, including badly parked
vehicles and bicycles, billboards, over-grown hedges and other ill-placed hazards,
-Understanding that most obstacles are caused by thoughtlessness and genuine lack of awareness.
We urge the Members to adopt the following motion:
"That Wicklow County Council:
-supports the establishment of an annual national "Make Way Day" taking place this year on the 25th
September, 2020,
-will write to An Taoiseach, and to each individua/ Minister and Minister of State, calling on them to support,
establish, fund and resource an annual national "Make Way Day" which would be localised in each region,
-will annually support and promote a local #MAkeWayWick/ow campaign as pan of the wider "Make Way
Day".
12.
13.
14.
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Dermot O'Brien and Cllr.
Grace McManus (22nd July, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council endorse the recently launched Youth Manifesto on Climate Justice. As the
first Council to declare a climate and biodiversity crisis and the first Council to include a young person on an
SPC we join such eminent figures as Chair of the Elders and former President Mary Robinson in the
endorsement of this important Manifesto which calls for Climate Justice through:
Unity
Pointing fingers at each other will not solved the climate crisis. Whether we are young or old, rich or poor,
from urban or rural areas, climate change will impact us all. Standing in unity while recognising our different
realities is how we must tackle this challenge.
A Green Check
How society functions in any given democracy is dictated by the priorities of its government. Make climate
change our priority. Deliver radical, people centred policies that would support the transition we need.
A Just Transition
It is normal to fear the unknown. However, we cannot afford to continue, as if our house is not on fire. We
need to transition for the better of all in society and to reach those that are fuhhest behind in our society first.
A Social Justice lens
It is those who are least responsible for climate change that will suffers its gravest consequences. We
cannot solve the climate crisis by ignoring Inequality and Human Rights. So, let's build global empathy and
leave no one behind".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (7th August, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council write to the Minister for Social Protection Heather Humphreys asking: That the
stillbirth register be opened to the public with an opt-out for bereaved parents if they choose to do so.
Bereaved parents whose babies are listed on the stillbirth register should also have the opportunity for their
baby to be listed on the birth and death register instead of the stillbirth register and to receive a birth and
death certificate for their baby".
Notice of Motion in the names. of Cllr. Aoife Flynn Kennedy,
Cllr. Dermot O'Brien, Cllr. Melanie Corrigan, Cllr. Grace
McManus, Cllr.ooe Behan, Cllr. Erika Doyle, Cllr. Anne Ferris
and Cllr. Rory O'Connor (4th September, 2020).
"That this Council calls for a full and independent review of the Bray Fire Service as a matter of urgency.
The rapidly changing landscape of the greater Bray area both in terms of
commercial and residential development requires a Fire Service that is functioning at an appropriate and
sustainable operational capacity.
Wicklow County Council should commission a report to re-examine the requirement for a Full-time Fire
15.
16.
17.
18.
sewice for Bray which gives consideration to both the needs of the community and the wellbeing of the Fire
Service Staff.
On the 1st of December 2014 a repon was issued on the provision ofa Full-time Fire Service for Bray. This
repon was based on a number of data sources, including population data from the 2011 census. Giving
consideration to the population growth in Bray, Enniskerry, Kilmacanogue and surrounding areas, the
increased development both in terms of residential and commercia/ units and the length of time since the last
assessment was carried out, an independent review of the current services and future needs are now
required to ensure adequate service provision can be planned. "
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Miriam Murphy and Cllr.
Aoife Flynn Kennedy (7th September, 2020).
"Local Authority Motion in Support of the Right to Personal Assistance (shortened version).
Considering the unanimous motion passed in Dåi/ Eireann on the 19th November 2019, this Local
Authority recognises: In March 2018 Ireland formally ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of People
with Disabilities (UNCRPD), which under Adicle 19 states that disabled people have the right to live in
the community and have access to a range of in-home and other supports including PAS to support this.
Its obligation to consult closely with disabled people and their representative organisations in policy
development as enshrined in Article 4.3 of the UNCRPD which states that "in the development and
implementation of legislation and policies states parties shall closely consult with and actively involve
persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through their representative organizations",
specifically in relation to services provided by this local authority which impact on disabled people's lives,
such as planning, housing, transport, social inclusion and enterprise. The Motion passed in Dåil Eireann
on the 19th November and as such reaffirms that PAS that supports disabled people to live independent
lives should be legislated for as a right. Independent Living Movement Ireland as a national disabled
persons organisation invite you to join us in the celebrations as they look to an accessible future for
representative in local authorities It is similar to the Motion that was presented to the Dail, which you
can see here: httpdLthomasprjnglezie12—9LIU151"
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Rory O'Connor (1 lth
November, 2020).
"That this Council in advance of the Enniskerry Town plan review makes it a priority to establish the creation
of a greenway from Dublin to Enniskerry within the plan".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Mary Kavanagh and Cllr.
Peir Leonard (24th November, 2020).
That Councillors bi-month/y payslips are sent electronically to cut down on the use of paper thereby helping
the environment".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (25th
November, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council writes to the Ministers for Justice, Finance and Public Expenditure to make
provisions where drug and drug trafficking monies confiscated under the Proceeds of Crime Legislation be
redirected from central coffers back into local addiction services, youth organisations, and community
initiatives to combat the effect of addiction on our communities, and that the necessary legislation is changed
as a matter of urgency to allow this vital funding support to happen".
19.
20.
21.
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr, Edward Timmins (30th
November, 2020).
"We call on Wicklow County Council to request the head of the defence forces President Michael D. Higgins
to advance the awarding of military medals for gallantry and distinguished service to Irish soldiers of A
Company, 35th Infantry Battalion, who so bravely defended the Siege of Jadotville, serving under a UN
mandate in the DRC".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Edward Timmins (2nd
December, 2020).
"That this Council writes to the Minister with responsibility for Tourism with the following proposal. This has
huge potential and will benefit all areas of the counfry and Island.
That the tourist authority in Ireland establish a tourism trail of the birthplaces of the Irish ancestors of
Presidents of the US. This should also be done in conjunction with the Northern Ireland tourist authorities,
which is also the origin of many Presidents".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Melanie Corrigan and Cllr.
Aoife Flynn Kennedy (4th December, 2020),
"That this council takes proactive action in meeting its obligations under the Disability Act, 2005 by ensuring
that in all it's Public Consultation use Plain English, as approved by NALA, and Picture messaging when
appropriate, so that People with Disabilities are not discriminated against in accessing Important
information. In addition, that this council increased the number of staff who are trained with NALA to present
more documents in the Plain English format".