December 4th, 2020
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionålfar gnath crinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Druid's Glen Hotel, Baile an
Chinnéidigh, Co. Chill Mhantain Dé Aoine, llü lå Nollaig 2020 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnö seo a
leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Friday, 11th December
2020 in Druid's Glen Hotel, Newtownmountkennedy, Co. Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to
consider the agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
Beann
LO RAINE LLAG
DIR
OF SERVICES/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Friday, 1 lth December 2020 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 7th September, 2020 (copy
attached).
To confirm and sign minutes of LPT meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 21st September, 2020 (copy
attached).
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 5th October, 2020 via Zoom
(copy attached).
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 2nd November, 2020 via
Zoom (copy attached).
To confirm and sign minutes of special meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Tuesday 3rd November, 2020 (copy
attached).
To confirm and sign minutes of annual budget meeting of
Wicklow County Council held on Monday 23rd November,
2020 (copy attached).
To consider the disposal of property comprised in Folio No.
WW2758L being the property situated at 30 Beechwood
Park, Kilcoole, Co. Wicklow by Transfer Order to Ms. Linn
Trogen and Mr. Aidan Kelly, 30 Beechwood Park, Kilcoole,
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 30 Beechwood Park amended mtg date.pdf
To consider the disposal of property comprised in Folio No.
Not included
WW2842L being the property situated at Bawnogues,
Baltinglass, Co. Wicklow by Transfer Order to Mr. Gerard
Halloran, Bawnogues, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
9.
circulated).
D Disposal Bawnogues amended mtg date.pdf
To consider the disposal of 176 sq meters or thereabouts
known as The Science Laboratory, Clermont House,
Rathnew, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Caoimhe Doyle, 128
Kindlestown Park, Greystones, Co. Wicklow by way of a 2
year and 7 month lease commencing 8th December, 2020
(as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal The Science Lab amended mtg date.pdf
Not included
Not included
10 (a). To establish the Wicklow County Council Access and
Inclusion Committee.
10 (b). To ratify the nominations to the Wicklow County Council
11.
12.
13.
Access and Inclusion Committee:
• Wicklow Municipal District: Councillor Gail Dunne
• Bray Municipal District: Councillor Melanie Corrigan, Councillor Aoife Flynn
Kennedy and Councillor Grace McManus.
• Arklow Municipal District: Councillor Miriam Murphy
• Greystones Municipal District: Councillor Mags Crean
• Baltinglass Municipal District: Councillor John Mullen
To consider the nomination of a representative from the
Wicklow Municipal District to the Local Traveller
Accommodation Committee due to the resignation of Cllr.
Irene Winters.
To consider the nomination of Cllr. Sylvester Bourke to the
Wicklow Naturally CLG.
To consider the Taking In Charge of the following estates:
• Ardglass, Baltinglass
•
•
Deerfield, Detgany
Hillview, Carnew
Oakdale, Arklow
Oakwood Court, Arklow
Pierview, Wicklow
Seahaven, Wicklow
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
• The Willows, Kilcoole
• Upper Ballard, Shillelagh
• Village Gate, Kilcoole
• Westmount Court, Wicklow
D TIC.pdf
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management
Report, November 2020 (copy attached).
D Chief Executive Report -November 2020.pdf
To receive a presentation Consarc Consultants:
Not included
Not included
Glendalough and Wicklow Mountains Masterplan and Visitor
Orientation Plan.
To consider the passing of a resolution to vary the car
parking charges as set out in Schedule A Bray Municipal
District of the Wicklow County Council Parking Bye-Laws
2017: Zones D and H from 30 cent per hour to 50 cent per
hour (from €3.00 per day to €5.00 per day) and to extend the
parking period from: Monday to Friday to Monday to
Saturday (Zone D = Strand Road from Martello Terrace to
Fontenoy Terrace and Quinsboro Road —East of railway to
Strand Road and Zone H North Beach Car Park).
Wicklow County Council Meetings: (a) To consider the
holding of Remote Meetings (amendment of paragraph 6
Wicklow County Council standing orders: Place of
Meeting: Document attached) (b) To consider and adopt
draft Supplementary Standing Orders to regulate
proceedings of remote meetings (copy draft standing orders
attached).
D Standing order letter.pdf
D AmendmentStandingOrders.docx
D STANDINGORDERSREMOTEMEETINGS.docx
Correspondence
Notice of Motions
Not included
Not included
Not included
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Lourda Scott (7th
October, 2019)
"Wicklow County Council notes a survey of Aan International Ireland showing that 50% of Irish teenage
girls find it difficult to afford period products and 61% miss school as a result. Wicklow County Council
acknowledges the work of organisations such as Homeless Period in collecting donated sanitary
products and distributing to those in need. Following the example of Dublin City Council and Wexford
City Council, Wicklow County Council agrees to have free period products available in the toilets of all
Council buildings, including swimming pools and libraries".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr.
Paul O'Brien (4th November, 2019).
"We note the Council's commitment to an accessible website and request that, where possible, all PDF
documents on the Council's website should be original PDF's accessible to blind/vision impaired people
and not just scanned copies".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and
Cllr. Dermot OIBrien (20th November, 2019).
"That this Council will have 'Child Homelessness' as an agenda item for each meeting until the Child
Homelessness figure for the county reaches 0".
Notice of motion in the names of the Greystones Municipal
District Councillors (12th December, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council request Irish Water to refrain from imposing commercial connection and
water charges in respect of public drinking water fountains".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th
January, 2020).
"That this council acknowledges the phenomenon of protests outside medical centres in Ireland and the
need to ensure that women can access healthcare services safely. In doing so, that this council agrees
to explore the drafting of bye-laws for the regulation and control of public roads and footpaths adjacent
to healthcare facilities in Wicklow. This will ensure that patients, service providers, healthcare staff and
members of the public can enter premises without fear of intimidation or harassment as evidenced by
the nuisance presented in situations where such protests have taken place".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Paul O'Brien and Cllr.
John Mullen (2nd March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Councillors have a responsibility to show leadership in efforts to improve the civility of
public discourse on political matters.
We propose that Wicklow Councillors now regulate their own submissions on social media and must
ensure that any inappropriate comments left by members of the public are removed in a timely manner.
8.
9.
10.
In order to monitor this commitment, we propose that all councillors sign declarations indicating
agreement or non-agreement with the measure and that this will be published and updated annually on
the council website"
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Tommy Annesley (2nd
March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Council calls on the Irish Govemment Departments of Health, Justice and Equality and
Children and Youth Affairs to recognise that Parental Alienation is "Substantial and sustained
dissatisfaction within a caregiver-child relationship associated with significant disturbance in functioning"
as indexed under QE52.O. Caregiver-child relationship problem in the latest International Classification
of Diseases version 11 by the World Health Organisation and to implement recommendation 36 of the
Report of Reform of the Family Law System October 2019".
Notice of motion in the names of the Baltinglass Municipal
District Councillors (24th March, 2020)
"That Wicklow County Council calls on the elected members of the neighbouring Local Authorities of
Carlow County Council, Kildare County Council, Wexford County Council and South Dublin Council to
join with them in lobbying the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport and the respective Minister
to provide funding for the immediate upgrading of the N81 along the preferred route Tallaght to
Hollywood. "
It is impottant that the upgrading of the N81 which is vital for the economic growth of Carlow, South
Kildare, South Dublin, Wexford and Wicklow is kept on top of the agenda and considered for urgent
capital funding. At present the N81 is only the national route to Dublin, the Nation's Capital, that hasn't
been upgraded. The upgrading of the N81 will assist this entire area to develop and reach its potential.
However, this is not just an economic issue but the present condition of the N81 raises health and
safety concerns, largely due to the high volume of traffic now using the route coupled with the current
condition of the road. The N81 was never designed or constructed to facilitate the current volumes of
traffic now using this road. While some remedial actions has taken place in recent times, it is now
essential that the entire N81 is upgraded, as previously planned for, to a satisfactory standard that
meets the current daily need of its commuters".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (20th
April, 2020)
"That Wicklow County Council fund a feasibility study for the implementation of lateral coastal protect
(groynes) and beach nourishment at the North Beach/Porters Rock area in Arklow as part of a
combined measure to restore access to the North Beach Area for the local community as they have had
for generations".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Peir Leonard and Cllr.
Mary Kavanagh. (20th April, 2020)
Part 1 "That Wicklow County Council introduce a "rent payment" system similar to that used in Wexford
County Council. This would enable all Council tenants to pay their rent in their local Post Offices
throughout the county. The benefits of which would be as follows:
-Tenants will benefit from being able to pay rent in the Post Office the same day as they collect social
11.
12.
welfare payments if applicable.
-Post offices will benefit from the extra revenue and therefore more job security for P. O. employees.
-Shops and small businesses adjacent to the Post offices will benefit from increased footfall.
-Wicklow County Council will benefit from less arrears and a decreased workload on municipal staff'.
Pan 2 "That Wicklow County Council support an awareness campaign to reverse the transfer of social
welfare payments from Post Offices to banks during the COVID-19 Emergency period. Apart from
supporting the restoration of lost revenue to Post Offices the weekly visit for many constituents to the
local Post Office plays an integra/ pad in their overall wellness and connectivity to the wider community
as well as an economic support to local Main Street businesses".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris, Cllr. Paul
O'Brien, Cllr. Lourda Scott, Cllr. Erika Doyle and Cllr. Jodie
Neary (9th July, 2020).
"- Recognising that people with disabilities have the same right to use and enjoy public spaces that we
all share,
-Acknowledging the obstacles which people with disabilities face in their daily lives, including badly
parked vehicles and bicycles, billboards, over-grown hedges and other ill-placed hazards,
-Understanding that most obstacles are caused by thoughtlessness and genuine lack of awareness.
We urge the Members to adopt the following motion:
'That Wicklow County Council:
-supports the establishment of an annual national "Make Way Day" taking place this year on the 25th
September, 2020,
-will write to An Taoiseach, and to each individual Minister and Minister of State, calling on them to
support, establish, fund and resource an annual national "Make Way Day" which would be localised in
each region,
-will annually support and promote a local #MAkeWayWicklow campaign as part of the wider "Make
Way Day".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Dermot O'Brien and
Cllr. Grace McManus (22nd July, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council endorse the recently launched Youth Manifesto on Climate Justice. As
the first Council to declare a climate and biodiversity crisis and the first Council to include a young
person on an SPC we join such eminent figures as Chair of the Elders and former President Mary
Robinson in the endorsement of this important Manifesto which calls for Climate Justice through:
Unity
Pointing fingers at each other will not solved the climate crisis. Whether we are young or old, rich or
poor, from urban or rural areas, climate change will impact us all. Standing in unity while recognising
13.
our different realities is how we must tackle this challenge.
A Green Check
How society functions in any given democracy is dictated by the priorities of its government, Make
climate change our priority. Deliver radical, people centred policies that would support the transition we
A Just Transition
It is normal to fear the unknown. However, we cannot afford to continue, as if our house is not on fire.
We need to transition for the better of all in society and to reach those that are furthest behind in our
society first.
A Social Justice lens
It is those who are least responsible for climate change that will suffers its gravest consequences. We
cannot solve the climate crisis by ignoring Inequality and Human Rights. So, let's build global empathy
and leave no one behind".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and
Cllr. Dermot O'Brien (7th August, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council write to the Minister for Social Protection Heather Humphreys asking:
That the stillbitth register be opened to the public with an opt-out for bereaved parents if they choose to
do so. Bereaved parents whose babies are listed on the stillbirth register should also have the
opportunity for their baby to be listed on the birth and death register instead of the stillbirth register and
to receive a bidh and death certificate for their baby".
Notice of Motion in the names. of Cllr. Aoife Flynn Kennedy,
Cllr. Dermot O'Brien, Cllr. Melanie Corrigan, Cllr. Grace
McManus, Cllr. Joe Behan, Cllr. Erika Doyle, Cllr. Anne
Ferris and Cllr. Rory O'Connor (4th September, 2020).
"That this Council calls for a full and independent review of the Bray Fire Service as a matter of urgency.
The rapidly changing landscape of the greater Bray area both in terms of
commercial and residential development requires a Fire Service that is functioning at an appropriate
and sustainable operational capacity.
Wicklow County Council should commission a report to re-examine the requirement for a Full-time Fire
service for Bray which gives consideration to both the needs of the community and the wellbeing of the
Fire Service Staff.
On the 1st of December 2014 a report was issued on the provision of a Full-time Fire Service for Bray.
This report was based on a number of data sources, including population data from the 2011 census.
Giving consideration to the population growth in Bray, Enniskerry, Kilmacanogue and surrounding
areas, the increased development both in terms of residential and commercial units and the length of
time since the last assessment was carried out, an independent review of the current sen.'ices and
future needs are now required to ensure adequate service provision can be planned. "
15.
16.
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Miriam Murphy and
Cllr. Aoife Flynn Kennedy (7th September, 2020).
"Local Authority Motion in Support of the Right to Persona/ Assistance (shortened version).
Considering the unanimous motion passed in Dåil Eireann on the 19th November 2019, this Local
Authority recognises: In March 2018 Ireland formally ratified the IJN Convention on the Rights of People
with Disabilities (UNCRPD), which under Article 19 states that disabled people have the right to live in
the community and have access to a range of in-home and other supports including PAS to support this.
Its obligation to consult closely with disabled people and their representative organisations in policy
development as enshrined in Article 4.3 of the UNCRPD which states that "in the development and
implementation of legislation and policies states patties Shal/ closely consult with and actively involve
persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through their representative organizations",
specifically in relation to services provided by this local authority which impact on disabled people 's
lives,
such as planning, housing, transport, social inclusion and enterprise. The Motion passed in Däil Eireann
on the 19th November and as such reaffirms that PAS that supports disabled people to live independent
lives should be legislated for as a right. Independent Living Movement Ireland as a national disabled
persons organisation invite you to join us in the celebrations as they look to an accessible future for
representative in local authorities It is similar to the Motion that was presented to the Dail, which you
can see here: http;llthQmasp-1&je120.8L11L151"
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Rory O'Connor (1 lth
November, 2020).
MThat this Council in advance of the Enniskerry Town plan review makes it a priority to establish the
creation of a greenway from Dublin to Enniskerty within the plan".