March 27th, 2019
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Gnåthcrinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras an
Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, lü lå Aibrean 2019 ag 2:00 pm Chun an gn6 seo a
leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 1st April 2019 in the
Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
Beannacht Leat.
LORRAINE GALLA ER
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICE-RIME-ETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 1st April 2019 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 4th March, 2019 (copy
attached).
D 2019MINMTG4THMARCH.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.0379 hectares (0.0937 acres) or
thereabouts of land in the townland of Ballinaclogh, Rathnew,
Co. Wicklow to Mr. Aubrey Armstrong, Ballinaclogh, Rathnew,
Co. Wicklow ( as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Aubrey Armstrong.pdf
To consider the disposal of part of the freehold interest in the
property comprised in Folio WW5279F being 25 Hawthorn
Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr. James Mulrooney (junior) and
Ms. Elizabeth Carroll, the legal representatives of Mr. James
Mulrooney (deceased) 25 Hawthorn Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow
(as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 25 Hawthorn Road.pdf
To consider the disposal of part of the freehold interest in the
property comprised in Folio WW5279F being 25a Hawthorn
Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Rossa Murray and Ms. Deirdre
Murray, 25a Hawthorn Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal 25a Hawthorn Road.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.00208ha (0.0314 acres) or
thereabouts of land in the townland of Merrymeeting, Rathnew,
Co. Wicklow being 50 Seaview Heights, Rathnew, Co. Wicklow
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
to Mr. Thomas Butler and Ms. Elaine Butler, 50 Seaview
Heights, Rathnew, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal 50 Seaview Heights.pdf
D Valuation 50 Seaview Heights.pdf
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
Not included
Not included
6.
7.
8.
9.
IO.
11.
12.
1.
2.
March 2019 (copy attached).
D Chief Executive's Monthly Report March 2019.pdf
To note the Wicklow County Council Joint Policing Committee
Report for year ended 31st December, 2018 (copy attached).
D JPCANNUALREPORT2018.pdf
To consider the LCDC Annual Report, 2018 - Presentation by
Mr. M. Nicholson, Director of Services/ Cllr. G. McLoughlin,
Chair.
To receive: progress on the Draft Regional Spatial and
Economic Strategy 2019-2031 (copy attached).
To receive update: The Water Framework Directive.
Correspondence.
Notice of Motions.
Notices of Motion
Not included
Not included
Not included
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Jennifer Whitmore (31st
October, 2018)
"That Wicklow County Council install a network of water fountains and bottle refill stations across each
Municipal District to help reduce the use of single use packaging, such as plastic water bottles".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald ( 5th November, 2018)
"That this Council recognise the landmark decision in the European Parliament when MEP's voted
overwhelmingly in favour of an EU-wide ban on single use plastics in all County Council buildings in County
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Wicklow and at any funded functions, within 3 months of passing of motion".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018)
"That this Council commits to an exploration in QI 2019 of the feasibility of installing drinking water fountains
in areas within the County that have high volumes of footfall. This will ensure improved access to drinking
water and thereby reduce plastic waste from bottled water".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018)
"That this Council commits to a process of recognising its role as a local authority in supporting the
implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The seventeen 'Global Goals' representing the
universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure that all people enjoy peace and
prosperity".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mary Kavanagh (26th
November, 2018)
"That this Council noting the recent Cervical Check scandal, calls upon the Minister for Health and An
Taoiseach to acknowledge, support and respond in detail to the demands of the Standing4Women
campaign. These include: Legislation and policy on mandatory open disclosure independent of the patient
safety bill. Provision ofa statt and end date and full disclosure on the 1,800 smears yet to be audited, and a
breakdown of the new packages being negotiated with laboratories carrying out smear slide analysis
including mandatory site audits".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Brendan Thornhill (14th
January, 2019).
"That elected members of Wicklow County Council call on the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local
Government, Eoghan Murphy, to introduce legislation so that the maximum term that any elected councillor
serve without break would be 15 years (3 terms)".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Miriam Murphy and Cllr.
Mary Kavanagh (8th February, 2019)
"On behalf of Aitheantas I am calling on Wicklow County Council to write to Minister Zappones Department
requesting/demanding that her Department acknowledges Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows
Adoptees access to their own information on health, history and heritage in line with the equality and
personal autonomy rights of other citizens and as voted for in two referenda".