August 28th, 2019
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Gnåthcrinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras an
Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 2ü lä Méan F6mhair 2019 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnÖ seo
a leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 2nd September
2019 in the Councit Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to
consider the agenda attached.
Your attendan is equested.
Be nnacht eat
LORRAIN GALLA HER
SENIOR EX UT E OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 2nd September 2019 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting held on 1st
July, 2019 (copy attached).
D 2019MINSJULYIST.docx
To consider the disposal of portion of property measuring
0.0057ha known as 25 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow
comprised within part of Folio WW40424F and part of Folio
WW704F, by deed of transfer and rectification to Mr. Paul
Quinn, 25 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Revised Disposal 25 Connolly Square Bray.pdf
To consider the disposal of portion of property measuring
0.0023ha known as 36 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow
comprised in Folio WW40424F, by deed of transfer and
rectification to Tanager DAC in their capacity as charge holder
over the property (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 36 Connolly Square Bray.pdf
To consider report in accordance with Section 179 of the
Planning and Development Act, 2000 as amended; Part 8 of the
Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 as amended:
Proposed Solar Carports at County Buildings Car Park, Station
Road, Wicklow Town. Planning Register Reference : 191717
(report attached).
D Solar Panel.pdf
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
August 2019 (report attached).
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
To consider the adoption of the 2019-2024 Strategic Policy
Scheme (documentation attached).
D SPC Reportpdf
D SPC Submissions.pdf
D SPCSCHEME2019.doc
To consider the 1st draft of the Wicklow County Council
Corporate Plan 2019-2024 (initial draft attached and
Departmental guidlelines).
To consider the adoption of the Wicklow County Council
Climate Change Adaption Strategy (previously circulated and
copy attached).
D CE Report on Submissions final report only signed for publishing.pdf
D CE Report on Submissionsfinal appendix I for publishing.pdf
D IOO_500_CIimate Adaptation Strategy_Rev 3_O.pdf
D SEA
AA Screening
To consider the adoption of the Wicklow County Council
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2019-2024 (report
circulated).
To receive a presentation on Wicklow County Council Housing
Supply Programme.
To consider protocol on the opening of tenders (copy report
attached).
To set date for a Council meeting, before the end of September,
2019 to consider: The Setting of the Local Adjustment Factor.
To note the 1st draft of the Wicklow County Council Annual
Report, 2018 (copy attached).
D Draft AR 2018.pdf
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
14.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Notice of Motions
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Councillor Sylvester Bourke
(3rd June, 2019)
"That Wicklow County Council commences a land management program to plant suitable pollinating plants
to help bees. The Council has a considerable land bank throughout the county which is mostly
underutilized".
Notice of motion in the names of Councillor Sylvester Bourke
and Councillor Pat Fitzgerald (3rd June, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council devises a cycle way plan for the county and apply for a fair share of funding
from the NTA to implement it. For example the old NII might have a cycle path similar to the Old Nl 1
Gorey".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr, Tom Fortune and Cllr.
Mary Kavanagh. (1 lth June, 2019).
"Wicklow County Council has a social responsibility to serve, inform and protect the public and the
environment from exposure to harm, and therefore it opposes the roll-out of unregulated 5G in the County of
Wicklow based on the 'precautionaty principle' pending the enactment by Dail Éireann of protective
legislation. In the meantime, it is proposed that a cross-patty '5G Advisory Council Committee' or working
group be established (including Independent representatives) who would be mandated to report back to
Council on the potential harmful health effects of wireless EMF on our environment and in particular on our
Carbon Footprint".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Rory O'Connor (1 lth June,
2019).
"The members of Wicklow County Council hereby resolve to introduce a county wide ban on the sale,
distribution and burning of smoky coal in the absence of action from the Government on the matter. The
members of Wicklow County Council note that seriously damaging effects on health and the environment
from the continued burning of smoky fuels and express disappointment that the announcement in October,
2018 by then Minister, Alan Kelly, of the Govemment's intention to proceed with a nationwide ban has not yet
been implemented. The council fudher notes the subsequent commitment from the the Minister Denis
Naughton to have the ban introduced by 2019. A total of 10,344 people over the age of 18 suffer with
asthma within Wicklow.
Calls on the Executive of the Council to:
• introduce and enforce a County wide ban on the sale and use of smoky fuels to
take effects on November, 2019;
• provide an information campaign to consumers in Wicklow on the dangers of
smoky coal;
• publicly notify all retailers and wholesalers about the decision of the county wide
5.
6.
7.
8.
ban on the sale and use of smoky fuels;
• update the members of Wicklow County Council monthly on the number of
inspections carried out pursuant to the decision;
• formally write to the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment
and to An Taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, informing him of the decision and urging them
to introduce the nationwide ban without delay, as committed to by this Government
and previous Ministers;
• formally write to each member of the Oireachtas in Wicklow urging them to pursue
the matter with the Minister and with the Govemment and to update the members
of the Council on progress in this matter;
• seek a formal meeting with Wicklow TD and Minister for Health, Simon Harris, to
allow members discuss the need for his support for this measure and to ensure
that the health implications are understood. "
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Sylvester Bourke (18th
June, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council writes to the Minister of the Environment asking for a plastic bottle and can
deposit refund scheme to be introduced, the aim of which is to incentivize the public not to litter the
countryside".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th July,
2019).
"That Wicklow County Council notes the current housing crisis as the biggest challenge facing our citizens. It
is also an obstacle to the socio-economic development of this county.
That this council recognises that the crisis can only be addressed with a building programme of social and
affordable housing. Mixed income public housing is the most progressive option to over-reliance on the
private sector.
That this council offers practical support for social and affordable housing options by;
• Exploring cost rental housing and advocating for a cost rental model in Wicklow
• Using council land zoned for residential for social and affordable housing only
• Advocating for social and affordable housing programmes on land owned by
private developers".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th July,
2019).
"That this council agrees to work towards increasing the Wicklow County Council ranking on the
Transparency International (T') National Integrity Index. The index ranks Ireland's 31 local authorities based
on three criteria: Transparency, Accountability and Ethics. Wicklow County Council has been ranked joint
19th with an overall score of 12 out of 20 (just 40%)"
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (27th July,
2019).
9.
10.
11.
"That this Council receives an update on the proposed business case for the retrofit of public lighting with
LED's and that this council adopt a sustainable energy public lighting policy informed by the business case
so the Wicklow County Council start to reduce the Council's carbon footprint".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Joe Behan (1st August,
2019).
"That in the context of the current housing emergency, this Council eases the restrictions on one off housing
in rural areas with immediate effect".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (1st August,
2019).
"That this council receives a presentation on the Arklow Flood Relief Scheme for input from elected members
before final approval of the scheme".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (1st August,
2019).
"That this council provides safe access to the North Beach, Arklow for the local people as we have had for
generations".