June 26th, 2019
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Gnåthcrinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras an
Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, lü Iå lüil 2019 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnÖ seo a leanas a
chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 1st July 2019 in the
Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
Beannacht Leat.
LORRAINE GAL G
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 1st July 2019 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 29th April, 2019 (copy
attached).
D 2019MINSAPR28th.pdf
To confirm and sign minutes of Annual Meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Friday 7th June, 2019 (copy
attached).
D 2019MINSANNUALMTGJUNE7th.pdf
To consider the disposal of the freehold interest in property
comprised in Folio No. WW332L being 11 Mellows Avenue,
Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Paddy Finn, 11 Mellows Avenue,
Arklow, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 11 Mellows Ave Arklow.pdf
To consider the disposal of the freehold interest in property
comprised in Folio No. WW2753L being 1 0'Connell Terrace,
Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Michael Russell and Ms. Kay
Redmond, personal representatives of Ms. Kathleen Russell,
deceased (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 1 0 Connell Tce.pdf
To consider the disposal of the freehold interest in property
comprised in Folio No. WW3305L — being "Hawthorn",
Tomacork, Carnew, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Aidan Kinsella,
"Hawthorn", Tomacork, Carnew, Co. Wickow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal Hawthorn, Tomacork, Carnew.pdf
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
To consider report in accordance with Section 179 of the
Planning and Development Act, 2000 as amended; Part 8 of
the Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 - 2006 as
amended: Glendalough - Laragh Visitor Access (report to be
circulated).
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management
Report, June 2019 (copy attached).
To consider the Wicklow County Council Draft Strategic Policy
Committee (SPC) Scheme 2019 - 2024 (copy attached).
D SPCSCHEME2019.pdf
D SPC Letter.pdf
To establish the Audit Committee of Wicklow County Council.
To receive a presentation on the Local Community
Development Committee (LCDC) and to consider increasing
the number of elected members on the LCDC from 3 elected
members to 4 elected members (agreed at Annual Meeting
held on Friday 7th June, 2019).
To ratify the appointment of Councillor Gerry O'Neill
(Baltinglass Municipal District) and Councillor Steven
Matthews (Bray Municipal District) being the Municipal
District's not represented on the CPG.
To ratify the appointment of the following 14 elected members
to the Wicklow County Council Joint Policing Committee:
1. Councillor Joe Behan (Bray Municipal District)
2. Councillor Dermot O'Brien (Bray Municipal District)
3r Councillor Steven Matthews (Bray Municipal District)
4. Councillor Tom Fortune (Greystones Municipal District)
5. Councillor Margaret Crean (Greystones Municipal District)
6. Councillor Gerry Walsh (Greystones Municipal District)
7. Councillor Irene Winters (Wicklow Municipal District)
8. Councillor Paul O'Brien (Wicklow Municipal District)
Not included
Not included
13.
14.
15.
16.
9. Councillor Shay Cullen (Wicklow Municipal District)
10. Councillor Vincent Blake (Baltinglass Municipal District)
11. Councillor Avril Cronin (Baltinglass Municipal District)
12. Councillor Sylvestor Bourke (Arklow Municipal District)
13. Councillor Tommy Annesley (Arklow Municipal District)
14. Councillor Peir Leonard (Arklow Municipal District)
15. Vacant (Baltinglass Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 5 elected members
to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative
Committee (LTACC):
1. Councillor Joe Behan (Bray Municipal District)
2. Councillor Lourda Scott (Greystones Municipal District)
3. Councillor Irene Winters (Wicklow Municipal District)
4. Councillor Gerry O'Neill (Baltinglass Municipal District)
5. Councillor Peir Leonard (Arklow Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 3 elected members
to the Bray Area Partnership:
1. Councillor Grace McManus (Bray Municipal District)
2. Councillor Aoife Flynn Kennedy (Bray Municipal District)
3. Councillor Lourda Scott (Greystones Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 3 elected members
to the East Coast Regional Drugs Task Force:
1. Councillor Margaret Crean (Greystones Municipal District)
2. Councillor John Snell (Wicklow Municipal District)
2. Councillor Tommy Annesley (Arklow Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 5 elected members
to the Wicklow County Tourism Ltd.:
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
1. Councillor Melanie Corrigan (Bray Municipal District)
2. Councillor Gerry Walsh (Greystones Municipal District)
3. Councillor Paul O'Brien (Wicklow Municipal District)
4. Councillor Patsy Glennon (Baltinglass Municipal District)
5. Councillor Miriam Murphy (Arklow Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 1 elected member to
Bray Tourism Ltd.:
1. Councillor Aoife Flynn Kennedy (Bray Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 6 elected members
to the Greystones/Bray Cliff Walk Management sub-
committee:
1. Councillor Melanie Corrigan (Bray Municipal District)
2. Councillor Steven Matthews (Bray Municipal District)
3. Councillor Rory O'Connor (Bray Municipal District)
4. Councillor Tom Fortune (Greystones Municipal District)
5. Councillor Derek Mitchell (Greystones Municipal District)
6. Councillor Gerry Walsh (Greystones Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 2 elected members
to the Bray Harbour Joint Development Committee:
1. Councillor Steven Matthews (Bray Municipal District)
2. Councillor Anne Ferris (Bray Municipal District)
To ratify the appointment of the following 2 elected members
to the Bray Swimming Pool Committee:
1. Councillor Anne Ferris (Bray Municipal District)
2. Councillor Aoife Flynn Kennedy (Bray Municipal District)
3. Another to be appointed
To ratify the appointment of the following 2 elected members
to the Ballynagran Community Liaison Committee:
22.
23.
24.
25,
26.0
1. Councillor Gail Dunne (Wicklow Municipal District)
2. Councillor John Snell (Wicklow Municipal District)
To consider the appointment of 2 elected members to An
Comhairle Na Nog.
To consider the appointment of 4 elected members to the
Maritime Business Development Group (1 from each of the
Bray, Greystones, Wicklow and Arklow Municipal Districts).
To consider the nomination of an additional elected member
(now 4) to the County Wicklow Partnership committee.
To consider the appointment of 5 elected members to the
County Wicklow Heritage Forum (one from each Municipal
District).
Notices of Motion