June 10th, 2020
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionölfar gnath crinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Shoreline Leisure Centre, Na
Cloch Liatha, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 15ü lå Meitheamh 2020 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnö
seo a leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 15th June 2020 in
the Shoreline Leisure Centre, Greystones, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attend e requested.
Beannac Leat.
LORRAI
LAGHER
A/ DIRECTOR OF SERVICES/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 15th June 2020 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of special meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 25th February, 2020 (copy
attached).
D 2020MINSFEB25TH.pdf
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 2nd March, 2020 (copy
attached).
D 2020MINSMAR2ND.pdf
Not included
Not included
To confirm and sign minutes of special meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Friday 29th May, 2020 (copy attached).
D 2020MINSSPECMAY29.pdf
Not included
To consider the disposal of all of Folio. WW3817L- Co. Wicklow
being the property known as 36D Ledwidge Crescent, Bray, Co.
Wicklow to Ms. Shirley Vij, 36D Ledwidge Crescent, Bray, Co.
Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
Disposal 36D Ledwidge Crescent.pdf
To consider the disposal of all of Folio No. WW344L being the
property known as 46 St. Peter's Place, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to
Mr. David Doherty and Ms. Bernadette Doherty, 46 St. Peter's
Place, Arklow, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal 46 St Peters Place Arklow.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.0049 hectares or thereabouts of
land in the townland adjacent to 32 Connolly Square, Bray, Co.
Not included
Not included
7.
8.
9.
IO.
11.
Wicklow to Ms. Audrey Collins, 32 Connolly Square, Bray, Co.
Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 32 Connolly Square.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.0017 hectares or thereabouts of
land comprised in Folio No. WW2882L - Co. Wicklow being a
strip of land adjacent to 5 Upper Grattan Park, Greystones, Co.
Wicklow to Mr. Fergus Ryan, Legal Representative of Ms.
Carmel Ryan (deceased) of 5 Upper Grattan Park, Greystones,
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Notice re 5 Upper Grattan Park Greystones.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.0094 hectares or thereabouts of
land being a plot of land to the rear of 4 Connolly Square, Bray,
Co. Wicklow to Mr. John Butler and Ms. Maureen Doran,
Personal Representatives of Ms. Teresa Butler (deceased) of 4
Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal Notice 4 Connolly Square.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.192 acres or thereabouts of land
situated at Villa Mena, Dunbar Park, Wicklow Town by way of
Fee Simple to Mr. Ciaran Kelly and Mr. Aidan Kelly, Legal
Representatives of Mr. Patrice Kelly (deceased) of Villa Mena,
Dunbar Park, Wicklow Town ( as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal Vila Mena Dunbar Road.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.0104 hectares or thereabouts of
land comprised in Folio No. WW4484 Co. Wicklow situated at 6
Lourdes Cresecent, Aughrim, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Kevin Byrne
and Ms. Melissa Byrne, 6 Lourdes Crescent, Aughrim, Co.
Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Notice re 6 Lourdes Crescent Aughrim.pdf
To consider the disposal of all of Folio No. WW2211L being the
property known as Cnoc Rua, Hollywood, Co. Wicklow to Mr.
Finbar Mulligan and Ms. Joanne Fox, Cnoc Rua, Hollywood, Co.
Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
D Disposal Notice re Cnoc Rua, Hollywood - Finbar Mulligan & Joanne Fox.pdf
Not included
12. To consider the disposal of the Freehold Interest of the piece of
plot or ground with dwellinghouse known as 37 Wolfe Tone
Square East, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Michael Barry and Ms.
Ashling Beirne, 37 Wolfe Tone Square East, Bray, Co. Wicklow
(as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Notice re 37 Wolfe Tone Square East, Bray - Michael Barry & Ashling
Byrne.pdf
13. To consider filling the vacancy of the Chair of the Climate and
Biodiversity SPC created by the election of Former Councillors
J. Whitmore and S. Matthews, to Dåil Eireann.
14. To consider the filling of the vacancy on the Eastern and
Midland Regional Assembly (EMRA) created by the election of
Cllr. S. Matthews to Dåil Eireann.
15. To consider the filling of the vacancy on the AILG arising from
the resignation of Cllr. Rory O'Connor.
16. To consider the filling of the vacancy on the Wicklow County
Council Protocol Committee arising from the vacancy created
by the election of former Councillor S. Matthews to Dåil
Eireann.
17. To ratify the appointment of Cllr. Erika Doyle, agreed by the
Bray Municipal District Members, to the Bray Harbour Joint
Development Committee arising from the vacancy created by
the election of former Councillor S. Matthews to Dåil Eireann.
18. To ratify the appointment of Cllr. Erika Doyle, agreed by the
Bray Municipal District Members, to the Greystones/Bray Cliff
Walk Management Plan Sub committee arising from the
vacancy created by the election of former Councillor S.
Matthews to Dåil Eireann.
19. To ratify the appointment of Cllr. Erika Doyle, agreed by the
Bray Municipal District Members, to the Special Amenity Area
Order for Bray Head Committee arising from the vacancy
created by the election of former Councillor S. Matthews to Dåil
Eireann.
Not included
20. To ratify the appointment of Cllr. Erika Doyle to the Planning
and Enviroment SPC arising from the vacancy created by the
election of former Councillor S. Matthews to Dåil Eireann.
21. To ratify the appointment of Cllr. Jodie Neary to the Climate and
Biodiversity Action SPC arising from the vacancy created by
the election of former Councillor J. Whitmore to Dåil Eireann.
22. To consider the adoption of the Wicklow County Council
(Wicklow Port) Explosive Bye-laws 2020 (copy documentation
attached).
D Wicklow County Council (Wicklow Port) Explosives Bye-Laws 2020 - Draft V.._.pdf
D Schedule 4 Map Wicklow County Council (Wicklow Port) Explosives Bye
Laws.._.pdf
23. To receive an update on Wicklow County Council Covid 19
Business Continuity:
1. Chief Executive, Mr. Frank Curran
2. Ms. Vibeke Delahunt, Head of Enterprise
3. Mr. Brian Gleeson, Head of Finance
24. To note the circulation of the Chief Executive's report for March
and April, 2020 and to consider the Chief Executive's Report,
Not included
Not included
May 2020 (copy circulated).
D Chief Executive Report - May 2020.pdf
25. To note the Annual Financial Statement 2019 and approve by
resolution additional net expenditure in excess of budget in
accordance with section 104(7) of the Local Government Act
2001.
26. To adopt the Wicklow County Council Annual Report, 2019
(Section 221 of the Local Government Act, 2001)(copy
attached).
27. To adopt the Wicklow County Council Annual Service Delivery
Plan, 2020 (Section 134A of the Local Government Government
Act, 2014) (copy attached).
D ASDPLAN2020 25.03.2020.pdf
Not included
Not included
28. To note the review of the Wicklow County Council Corporate
Plan, 2015-2019 (copy letter attached).
D Corporate Plan 2015-2019 Review Circular.docx
29. To note the Wicklow County Council Joint Policing Committee
Annual Report, 2019 and to submit same to the Policing
Authority (copy attached).
D JPCANNUALREPORT2019.pdf
30. To note reports to to the Elected Council (Section 141 of the
Local Government Act, 2001).
31. To agree the date and the location of the next meeting of
Wicklow County Council.
32. Correspondence
33. Notice of motions.
Not included
Not included
1.
2.
3
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Lourda Scott (7th October,
2019)
"Wicklow County Council notes a sutvey of Plan Intemational Ireland showing that 50% of Irish teenage girls
find it difficult to afford period products and 61% miss school as a result. Wicklow County Council
acknowledges the work of organisations such as Homeless Period in collecting donated sanitary products
and distributing to those in need. Following the example of Dublin City Council and Wexford City Council,
Wicklow County Council agrees to have free period products available in the toilets of all Council buildings,
including swimming pools and libraries".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr. Paul
O'Brien (29th October, 2019)
"We note the Council's commitment to an accessible website and request that, where possible, all PDF
documents on the Council's website should be original PDF's accessible to blind/vision impaired people and
not just scanned copies".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr, Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (4th November, 2019).
"This Council notes that:
4.
5.
6.
• according to the Central Statistics Office 137,200 workers reported earning the
national minimum wage or less in Q4 2018;
• female workers are currently more likely than male workers to earn the national
minimum wage or less;
• half of all those eaming the national minimum wage or less in Q4 2018 were aged
under 24;
• according to Social Justice Ireland 110,000 workers are living at rick of poverty
across the state;
• the current Living Wage stands at €12.30 per hour, as calculated by the Living
Wage Technical Group;
• there are legal protections currently in place, for those companies who can show
they cannot afford to pay the national minimum wage;
• there is no legal obligation on businesses who can afford to pay their workers a
Living Wage, to do so:
agrees that:
• work must pay now and not just some undetermined time in the future;
• proper wages and the eradication of precarious practices should be the essential
foundations of economic growth and productivity;
• the implementation ofa Living Wage would play a critical role in ending in-work
poverty and reducing the financial pressure on many households;
calls on the government to:
• recognise the huge contribution low paid workers make to the Irish economy;
• immediately reverse their decision not to increase the national minimum wage;
• introduce a Living Wage of €12.30 per hour in 2020, with appropriate legal
protections for those SME's who can show they cannot afford to pay the Living
Wage".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (20th November, 2019).
"That this Council will have 'Child Homelessness' as an agenda item for each meeting until the Child
Homelessness figure for the county reaches O".
Notice of motion in the names of Greystones Municipal District
Councillors (12th December, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council request Irish Water to refrain from imposing commercial connection and water
charges in respect of public drinking water fountains".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th January,
2020).
"That this council acknowledges the phenomenon of protests outside medical centres in Ireland and the need
to ensure that women can access healthcare services safely. In doing so, that this council agrees
to explore the drafting of bye-laws for the regulation and control of public roads and footpaths adjacent to
7.
8.
9.
10.
healthcare facilities in Wicklow. This will ensure that patients, service providers, healthcare staff and
members of the public can enter premises without fear of intimidation or harassment as evidenced by the
nuisance presented in situations where such protests have taken place"
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Paul O'Brien and Cllr.
Anne Ferris (14th February, 2020).
"After witnessing the unnecessary amount of posters used in the genera/ election, the Labour party wish to
restrict the amount of posters permitted in each Municipal District to 50.
We proposed this motion in order to cut down on the amount of single use plastics used during elections.
We are also mindful of respecting the democratic right of candidates, especially new ones to promote
themselves hence us not calling fora total ban on posters. We also wish to acknowledge that many of our
Towns and villages have already banned posters and we as politicians should respect their wishes".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Paul O'Brien and Cllr.
John Mullen (2nd March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Councillors have a responsibility to show leadership in efforts to improve the civility of
public discourse on political matters.
We propose that Wicklow Councillors now regulate their own submissions on social media and must ensure
that any inappropriate comments left by members of the public are removed in a timely manner. In order to
monitor this commitment, we propose that all councillors sign declarations indicating agreement or non-
agreement with the measure and that this will be published and updated annually on the council website".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Tommy Annesley (2nd
March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Council calls on the Irish Govemment Departments of Health, Justice and Equality and
Children and Youth Affairs to recognise that Parental Alienation is "Substantial and sustained dissatisfaction
within a caregiver-child relationship associated with significant disturbance in functioning" as indexed under
QE52.O. Caregiver-child relationship problem in the latest Intemational Classification of Diseases version 11
by the World Health Organisation and to implement recommendation 36 of the Report of Reform of the
Family Law System October 2019".
Notice of motion in the names of the Baltinglass Municipal
District Councillors (24th March, 2020)
"That Wicklow County Council calls on the elected members of the neighbouring Local Authorities
of Carlow County Council, Kildare County Council, Wexford County Council and South Dublin
Council to join with them in lobbying the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport and the
respective Minister to provide funding for the immediate upgrading of the N81 along the preferred
route Tallaght to Hollywood."
It is impottant that the upgrading of the N81 which is vital for the economic growth of Carlow, South
Kildare, South Dublin, Wexford and Wicklow is kept on top of the agenda and considered for
11.
12.
urgent capital funding. At present the N81 is only the national route to Dublin, the Nation's Capital,
that hasn't been upgraded. The upgrading of the N81 will assist this entire area to develop and
reach its potential. However, this is not just an economic issue but the present condition of the
N81 raises health and safety concems, largely due to the high volume of traffic now using the route
coupled with the current condition of the road. The N81 was never designed or constructed to
facilitate the current volumes of traffic now using this road. While some remedial actions has taken
place in recent times, it is now essential that the entire N81 is upgraded, as previously planned for,
to a satisfactory standard that meets the current daily need of its commuters".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (20th April,
2020).
"That Wicklow County Council fund a feasibility study for the implementation of lateral coastal protect
(groynes) and beach nourishment at the North Beach/Porters Rock area in Arklow as part of a combined
measure to restore access to the North Beach Area for the local community as they have had for
generations".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (20th April,
2020)
Part 1 "That Wicklow County Council introduce a "rent payment" system similar to that used in Wexford
County Council. This would enable all Council tenants to pay their rent in their local Post Offices throughout
the county. The benefits of which would be as follows:
-Tenants will benefit from being able to pay rent in the Post Office the same day as they collect social welfare
payments if applicable.
-Post offices will benefit from the extra revenue and therefore more job security for P. O. employees.
-Shops and small businesses adjacent to the Post offices will benefit from increased footfall.
-Wicklow County Council will benefit from less arrears and a decreased workload on municipal staff".
Part 2 "That Wicklow County Council support an awareness campaign to reverse the transfer of social
welfare payments from Post Offices to banks during the COVID-19 Emergency period. Apart from
supporting the restoration of lost revenue to Post Offices the weekly visit for many constituents to the local
Post Office plays an integral pad in their overall wellness and connectivity to the wider community as well as
an economic support to local Main Street businesses".