October 2nd, 2019
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Gnathcruinnü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras an
Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 7ü lå Deireadh Fömhair 2019 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnÖ
seo a leanas a chur i gcrich,
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 7th October 2019 in
the Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
B a ac t Leat.
LOR INEG
SENI REXE
ENTER
GHER
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
& CORPORATE SERVICES
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 7th October 2019 at 2:00pm
'13 To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 2nd September, 2019 (copy
attached).
D 2 September 2019 Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council.pdf
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
To consider the disposal of 2.7496 hectares (6.7945 acres) of
land as shown on the attached map, situated at Lotts Lane,
Knockroe, Kilcoole, Co. Wicklow to St. Anthony's Kilcoole
United F.C., for a period of 30 years by way of sporting lease.
D Disposal St Anthonys Kilcoole United FC.pdf
D Disposal St Anthonys Kilcoole Map.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.034623 hectares (0.085555 acres)
of land as shown on the attached map, situated at Sea View
Avenue, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to South East Road Cycling Club,
for a period of 30 years by way of sporting lease.
D Disposal South East Cycling Club Arklow.pdf
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
September 2019 (copy attached).
D Chief Executive Report - September 2019.pdf
To receive a general update on the work of the Town Teams
with short presentation by the Chairs of Blessington Town
Team and Wicklow Town Team.
To receive a presentation on the Draft County Wicklow Digital
Strategy 2019-2024.
Not included
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
1.
2.
3.
To receive a presentation on Social Housing.
To consider the adoption of the Wicklow County Council Litter
Management Plan 2019 - 2024 (copy circulated).
To consider passing a resolution that: Wicklow County Council
sanction the borrowing of the sum of €20.18m in respect of the
Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan Scheme.
D RIHL WCC 2018-2019 Allocation.pdf
To adopt the Wicklow County Council Annual Report, 2018
(copy attached).
D Final AR 2018.pdf
Not included
Not included
To set a date for the Annual Budget Meeting of Wicklow County
Council.
To consider the ratification of 2 additional Elected Members to
the Protocol Committee of Wicklow County Council : Councillor
John Snell and Councillor Steven Matthews.
Correspondence.
Notice of Motions.
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Councillor Sylvester Bourke
(3rd June, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council commences a land management program to plant suitable pollinating plants
to help bees. The Council has a considerable land bank throughout the county which is mostly
underutilized".
Notice of motion in the names of Councillor Sylvester Bourke
and Councillor Pat Fitzgerald (3rd June, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council devises a cycle way plan for the county and apply for a fair share of funding
from the NTA to implement it. For example the old NII might have a cycle path similar to the Old NII
Gorey"
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Tom Fortune and Cllr.
Mary Kavanagh. (11th June, 2019).
4.
5.
"Wicklow County Council has a social responsibility to setve, inform and protect the public and the
environment from exposure to harm, and therefore it opposes the roll-out of unregulated 5G in the County of
Wicklow based on the 'precautionary principle' pending the enactment by Dail Éireann of protective
legislation. In the meantime, it is proposed that a cross-party '5G Advisory Council Committee' or working
group be established (including Independent representatives) who would be mandated to report back to
Council on the potential harmful health effects of wireless EMF on our environment and in particular on our
Carbon Footprint".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Rory O'Connor (1 lth June,
2019),
"The members of Wicklow County Council hereby resolve to introduce a county wide ban on the sale,
distribution and buming of smoky coal in the absence of action from the Government on the matter. The
members of Wicklow County Council note that seriously damaging effects on health and the environment
from the continued burning of smoky fuels and express disappointment that the announcement in October,
2018 by then Minister, Alan Kelly, of the Government's intention to proceed with a nationwide ban has not yet
been implemented. The council further notes the subsequent commitment from the the Minister Denis
Naughton to have the ban introduced by 2019. A total of 10,344 people overthe age of 18 suffer with
asthma within Wicklow.
Calls on the Executive of the Council to:
• introduce and enforce a County wide ban on the sale and use of smoky fuels to take effects on
November, 2019;
• provide an information campaign to consumers in Wicklow on the dangers of smoky coal;
• publicly notify all retailers and wholesalers about the decision of the county wide ban on the sale
and use of smoky fuels;
• update the members of Wicklow County Council monthly on the number of inspections carried out
pursuant to the decision;
• formally write to the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment and to An
Taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, informing him of the decision and urging them to introduce the nationwide
ban without delay, as committed to by this Government and previous Ministers;
• formally write to each member of the Oireachtas in Wicklow urging them to pursue the matter with
the Minister and with the Govemment and to update the members of the Council on progress in this
matter;
• seek a formal meeting with Wicklow TD and Minister for Health, Simon Harris, to allow members
discuss the need for his suppott for this measure and to ensure that the health implications are
understood. "
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Sylvester Bourke (18th
June, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council writes to the Minister of the Environment asking for a plastic bottle and can
deposit refund scheme to be introduced, the aim of which is to incentivize the public not to litter the
countryside".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th July,
6.
2019).
"That Wicklow County Council notes the current housing crisis as the biggest challenge facing our citizens. It
is also an obstacle to the socio-economic development of this county.
That this council recognises that the crisis can only be addressed with a building programme of social and
affordable housing. Mixed income public housing is the most progressive option to over-reliance on the
private sector.
That this council offers practical suppod for social and affordable housing options by;
• Exploring cost rental housing and advocating for a cost rental model in Wicklow
• Using council land zoned for residential for social and affordable housing only
• Advocating for social and affordable housing programmes on land owned by private developers".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th July,
7.
2019).
- "That this council agrees to work towards increasing the Wicklow County Council ranking on the
Transparency International (TO National Integrity Index. The index ranks Ireland's 31 local authorities based
on three criteria: Transparency, Accountability and Ethics. Wicklow County Council has been ranked joint
19th with an overall score of 12 out of 20 Cust 40%)"
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (27th July,
8.
2019).
"That this Council receives an update on the proposed business case for the retrofit of public lighting with
LED's and that this council adopt a sustainable energy public lighting policy informed by the business case
so the Wicklow County Council start to reduce the Council's carbon footprint".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Joe Behan (1st August,
9.
2019).
"That in the context of the current housing emergency, this Council eases the restrictions on one off housing
in rural areas with immediate effect".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (1st August,
10.
2019).
"That this council receives a presentation on the Arklow Flood Relief Scheme for input from elected members
11.
12.
before final approval of the scheme".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (1st August,
2019).
"That this council provides safe access to the Notth Beach, Arklow for the local people as we have had for
generations".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr, Paul
O'Brien (2nd September, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Councils notes the historic decision ofthéinembers of Wicklow County Council on
29th April, 2019 to declare a climate and biodiversity emergency. Wicklow County Council further notes that
the decision at its AGM to establish a Strategic Policy Committee of the Council on Climate Change and
Biodiversity.
Wicklow County Council notes that climate change is an intemational crisis and that many local authorities in
Ireland and intemationally are taking action in that regard. Wicklow County Council also notes that in order
to further action on climate change that the following councils have signed the Global Convenant on climate
action and energy: Dublin City, Cork County, Fingal County, South Dublin County, Dun Laoghaire Rathdown
County, Limerick County, Tipperary County, Keny County, Kilkenny County, Waterford County, Roscommon
County, Cork City, Carlow County and all Kerry Municipal Districts.
We are calling on Wicklow County Council and all of the Municipal Districts to sign the Global Covenant on
Climate Action and Energy, if this has not already been carried out by the Council meeting in October 2019".