February 26th, 2020
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Ghnathtacrinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras
an Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 2ü lå Mårta 2020 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnÖ seo a
leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 2nd March 2020 in the
Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attendance requested.
B nnachtL t.
LORRAINE AL GHER
A] DIRECTOR 6F SERVICES/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 2nd March 2020 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 3rd, February, 2020 (copy
attached).
D 2020MINSFEB3RD.pdf
To consider the disposal of 1.223 acres of land situated in the
townland of Tinakilly Townland, Aughrim, Co. Wicklow to
Woodfab Timber Ltd., by way of a 3 year lease (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal Woodfab Timber.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.13 acres (559.70m2) or
thereabouts of land situated in the townland of Drummin
Townland, Annamoe, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Jason Roche,
Drummin, Annamoe, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal Jason Roche Drummin.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.2 acres (814m2) or thereabouts of
land in the townland of Drummin Townland, Annamoe, Co.
Wicklow to Mr. Patrick Roche and Ms. Breda Roche, Drummin
Annamoe, Co. Wicklow ( as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Patrick and Breda Roche Drummin.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.12 acres (510.50m2) or
thereabouts of land situated in the townland of Drummin
Townland, Annamoe, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Yvonne Roche,
Drummin, Annamoe, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously
circulated).
D Disposal Yvonne Roche Drummin.pdf
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
6.
7.
8.
9.
11.
12.
To consider the disposal of 0.485623 hectares (1.2 acres) or
thereabouts of land situated at Dr. Ryan Park, Kindlestown
Lower, Greystones, Co. Wicklow to Sporting Greystones for a
period of 30 years (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Dr Ryan Park.pdf
To consider the disposal of the freehold interest in the property
known as Seapoint House, Seapoint, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr.
John Wilson and Ms. Hazel Wilson, Seapoint House, Seapoint,
Bray, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated.)
D Disposal Seapoint House.pdf
Not included
Not included
To consider the disposal of the freehold interest in the property
known as 34 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Sharon
Fannin, 34 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal 34 Connolly Square.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.0044ha or thereabouts of land in
the townland of Enniskerry, Co. Wicklow known as 20 Millfield,
Enniskerry, Co. Wicklow to Mr. David Messitt and Ms. Helen
Messitt, 20 Millfield, Enniskerry, Co. Wicklow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal 20 Millfield.pdf
To consider the disposal of the Council's interest and equity in
0.4026 hectares or thereabouts of land at Clonpadden, Arklow,
Co. Wicklow to Mr. Derek Byrne, 25 Woodlands Rise, Arklow,
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D 51 Derek Byrne Clonpaddin-pdf
To consider the disposal of the Council's interest and equity in
0.0307 hectares or thereabouts of land at Kilboy, Kilbride, Co.
Wicklow to Mr. David Johnson, Penrose House, Redcross, Co.
Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal David Johnson Redcross.pdf
To consider the disposal of of the Council's interest and equity
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
in 0.5123 hectares or thereabouts of land at Ballinacor East,
Kilbride, Co. Wicklow to Mr. David Johnson, Penrose House,
Redcross, Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 50 David Johnson Redcross.pdf
Not included
13. To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
February, 2020 (copy attached).
D Chief Executive Report - February 2020 (2).pdf
14. To receive a presentation: SSE Airtricity.
15. To receive a presentation: National Broadband Ireland.
16. To consider the Wicklow County Council 3 year capital
programme 2020-2022 (copy attached).
17. To consider entering into a Section 85 agreement with Kilkenny
County Council for the carrying out of the Local Authority
Public Lighting Energy Efficiency Project - "The LED Project"
(copy attached).
D WICKLOW- S85 AGREEMENT REPORT.pdf
Not included
Not included
18. To consider passing a resolution: that Wicklow County Council,
subject to the approval of the Department of Housing, Planning
and Local Government, sanction the borrowing of €7,795,000 in
respect of the Public Lighting Energy Efficiency Project (copy
attached)
19. To receive a presentation: County Wicklow Arts Strategy
(deferred from previous meetings)
20. To receive a presentation: Update on County Wicklow Age
Friendly Strategy 2017-2022 (deferred from previous meetings).
21. To discuss proposal circulated by former Cllr. S. Matthews at
Council meeting held on 13th January, 2020 and deferred (copy
attached).
D Proposal Cllr S Matthews.pdf
22. Correspondence.
Not included
23.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Notice of Motions.
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Lourda Scott (7th October,
2019)
"Wicklow County Council notes a sutvey of Plan International Ireland showing that 50% of Irish teenage girls
find it difficult to afford period products and 61% miss school as a result. Wicklow County Council
acknowledges the work of organisations such as Homeless Period in collecting donated sanitary products
and distributing to those in need. Following the example of Dublin City Council and Wexford City Council,
Wicklow County Council agrees to have free period products available in the toilets of all Council buildings,
including swimming pools and libraries".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Paul O'Brien (9th October,
2019).
"In view of the damage that spiralling insurance costs are causing to community groups, voluntary
organisations, charities and small business, Wicklow County Council calls on the Government to accelerate
its insurance reform programme and in patticular, calls on the Govemment to urgently establish the Judicial
Council, immediately establish a fully-resourced Insurance Fraud Unit within an Garda Siochåna and
quantify the benefits to policyholders of the reforms currently being implemented".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr. Paul
O'Brien (29th October, 2019)
"We note the Council's commitment to an accessible website and request that, where possible, all PDF
documents on the Council's website should be original PDF's accessible to blind/vision impaired people and
not just scanned copies".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr. Paul
O'Brien (29th October, 2019).
"We note a clear desire among the members of Wicklow County Council for transparency and
accountability. We further note that the agendas and minutes of WCC Stratgic Policy Committees are not all
on the WCC website and the ones that are on the website have been sporadically placed. We call for the
agendas and minutes of all SPC's to be published on the WCC website in one easily findable place".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (4th November, 2019).
"This Council notes that:
• according to the Central Statistics Office 137,200 workers reported earning the
national minimum wage or less in Q4 2018;
• female workers are currently more likely than male workers to earn the national
minimum wage or less;
• half of all those earning the national minimum wage or less in Q4 2018 were aged
under 24;
6.
7.
8.
• according to Social Justice Ireland 110,000 workers are living at rick of poverty
across the state;
• the current Living Wage stands at €12.30 per hour, as calculated by the Living
Wage Technical Group;
• there are legal protections currently in place, for those companies who can show
they cannot afford to pay the national minimum wage;
• there is no legal obligation on businesses who can afford to pay their workers a
Living Wage, to do so:
agrees that:
• work must pay now and not just some undetermined time in the future;
• proper wages and the eradication of precarious practices should be the essential
foundations of economic growth and productivity;
• the implementation ofa Living Wage would play a critical role in ending in-work
poverty and reducing the financial pressure on many households;
calls on the government to:
• recognise the huge contribution low paid workers make to the Irish economy;
• immediately reverse their decision not to increase the national minimum wage;
• introduce a Living Wage of €12.30 per hour in 2020, with appropriate legal
protections for those SME's who can show they cannot afford to pay the Living
Wage".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (20th November, 2019).
"That this Council will have 'Child Homelessness' as an agenda item for each meeting until the Child
Homelessness figure for the county reaches O".
Notice of motion in the names of Greystones Municipal District
Councillors (12th December, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council request Irish Water to refrain from imposing commercial connection and water
charges in respect of public drinking water fountains".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th January,
2020)
"That this council acknowledges the phenomenon of protests outside medical centres in Ireland and the need
to ensure that women can access healthcare services safely. In doing so, that this council agrees to explore
the drafting of bye-laws for the regulation and control of public roads and footpaths adjacent to healthcare
facilities in Wicklow. This will ensure that patients, service providers, healthcare staff and members of the
public can enter premises without fear of intimidation or harassment as evidenced by the nuisance presented
in situations where such protests have taken place".