September 2nd, 2020
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionélfar gnath crinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Shoreline Leisure Centre, Na
Cloch Liatha, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 7ü lå Meån F6mhair 2020 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnö
seo a leanas a chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 7th September 2020
in the Shoreline Leisure Centre, Greystones, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider
the agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
Be nach ea
LOR ALLAGHER
A/ DIRECTOR OF SERVICES/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 7th September 2020 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 15th June, 2020 (copy
attached).
D 2020MINSORDMTGJUNE15TH.pdf
To confirm and sign minutes of annual meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 15th June, 2020 (copy
attached).
D 2020MINSANNUALJUNE15.pdf
To confirm and sign minutes of special meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Thursday 20th August, 2020 (copy
attached).
D 2020MINSSPECAUG.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.43 acres or thereabouts of land
situated in the townland of Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow, by way of a
3 year lease and the right to pass and repass thereto, to Mr.
Noel Jacob and Ms. Helen Jacob, Jacob's Well, Rathdrum, Co.
Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Jacobs Well Rathdrum.pdf
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
To consider the disposal of 0.0060 hectares or thereabouts of
land in the townland adjacent to 27 Connolly Square, Bray, Co.
Wicklow to Mr. Ciaran Connaughton, 27 Connolly Square, Bray,
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 27 Connolly Square Bray.pdf
To consider the disposal of all of the property in the townland
Not included
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
of Arklow, Co. Wicklow, the piece or plot of ground with
dwellinghouse and premises thereon known as 114 Fernhill,
Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Barry O'Neill, 114 Fernhill, Arklow,
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal 114 Fernhill Arklow.pdf
To consider the disposal of approximately 239.50m2 of office
space situated in the townland of Arklow, Co. Wicklow - Arklow
Courthouse, 1st storey area, by way of a lease for a period of 4
years and 9 months, to Arklow Business Enterprise Centre
(ABEC CLG) (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal ABEC Arklow.pdf
Not included
Not included
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
August 2020 (copy attached).
D Chief Executive Report -August 2020.pdf
To receive a presentation: Local Property Tax Funding
Brian Gleeson, Head of Finance.
To set a date for a Council meeting before the end of
September 2020 to consider: The setting of the Local
Adjustment Factor.
To consider the First Chief Executive's Report (previously
issued) prepared under Section 11 (4) of the Planning and
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) regarding the review of
the County Development Plan and to consider any directions
regarding the preparation of the Draft County Development
Plan 2021-2027 proposed by the members under Section
of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as
amended).
CDP Complete set of proposals 07 Sept 2020.docx
Not included
Not included
To receive a presentation: NTA projects mobility measures.
To ratify the filling of the vacancy on the Wicklow County
Council Joint Policing committee, by Cllr. Erika Doyle, Bray
Municipal District, arising from the election of former Councillor
Steven Matthews to Dail Eireann.
14.
15.
16.
17.
1.
2.
3.
4.
To consider the nomination of a representative from each of the
Municipal Districts to the Wicklow County Council Access and
Inclusion Committee (report attached).
D WCC Disability Officer Presentation August 2020.pptx
Not included
To amend paragraph 6 of standing orders: Place of meeting and
address of principal offices: to allow for the Cathaoirleach in
consultation with the Meetings Administrator to determine the
place of meeting as a result of Covid 19 crisis and physical
distancing requirements for a 6 period of months from the 7th
September, 2020.
Correspondence.
Notice of Motions.
Notices of Motion
Notion of motion in the name of Cllr. Lourda Scott (7th October,
2019).
"Wicklow County Council notes a sutvey of Plan Intemationa/ Ireland showing that 50% of Irish teenage girls
find it difficult to afford period products and 61% miss school as a result. Wicklow County Council
acknowledges the work of organisations such as Homeless Period in collecting donated sanitary products
and distributing to those in need. Following the example of Dublin City Council and Wexford City Council,
Wicklow County Council agrees to have free period products available in the toilets of all Council buildings,
including swimming pools and libraries".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr. Paul
O'Brien (4th November, 2019).
"We note the Council's commitment to an accessible website and request that, where possible, all PDF
documents on the Council's website should be original PDF's accessible to blind/vision impaired people and
not just scanned copies".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (20th November, 2019).
"That this Council will have 'Child Homelessness' as an agenda item for each meeting until the Child
Homelessness figure for the county reaches O".
Notice of motion in the names of Greystones Municipal District
Councillors (12th December, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council request Irish Water to refrain from imposing commercial connection and water
charges in respect of public drinking water fountains".
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mags Crean (7th January,
2020).
"That this council acknowledges the phenomenon of protests outside medical centres in Ireland and the need
to ensure that women can access healthcare services safely. In doing so, that this council agrees
to explore the drafting of bye-laws for the regulation and control of public roads and footpaths adjacent to
healthcare facilities in Wicklow. This will ensure that patients, service providers, healthcare staff and
members of the public can enter premises without fear of intimidation or harassment as evidenced by the
nuisance presented in situations where such protests have taken place".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Paul O'Brien and Cllr.
John Mullen (2nd March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Councillors have a responsibility to show leadership in efforts to improve the civility of
public discourse on political matters.
We propose that Wicklow Councillors now regulate their own submissions on social media and must ensure
that any inappropriate comments left by members of the public are removed in a timely manner. In order to
monitor this commitment, we propose that all councillors sign declarations indicating agreement or non-
agreement with the measure and that this will be published and updated annually on the council website".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Tommy Annesley (2nd
March, 2020).
"Wicklow County Council calls on the Irish Govemment Departments of Health, Justice and Equality and
Children and Youth Affairs to recognise that Parental Alienation is "Substantial and sustained dissatisfaction
within a caregiver-child relationship associated with significant disturbance in functioning" as indexed under
QE52.0. Caregiver-child relationship problem in the latest International Classification of Diseases version 11
by the World Health Organisation and to implement recommendation 36 of the Report of Reform of the
Family Law System October 2019".
Notice of motion in the names of the Baltinglass Municipal
District Councillors (24th March, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council calls on the elected members of the neighbouring Local Authorities of Carlow
County Council, Kildare County Council, Wexford County Council and South Dublin Council to join with them
in lobbying the DepaHment of Transport, Tourism and Sport and the respective Minister to provide funding
for the immediate upgrading of the N81 along the preferred route Tallaght to Hollywood. "
It is important that the upgrading of the N81 which is vital for the economic growth of Carlow, South Kildare,
South Dublin, Wexford and Wicklow is kept on top of the agenda and considered for urgent capital funding.
At present the N81 is only the national route to Dublin, the Nation's Capital, that hasn't been upgraded. The
upgrading of the N81 will assist this entire area to develop and reach its potential. However, this is not just
an economic issue but the present condition of the N81 raises health and safety concerns, largely due to the
high volume of traffic now using the route coupled with the current condition of the road. The N81 was never
designed or constructed to facilitate the current volumes of traffic now using this road. While some remedial
actions has taken place in recent times, it is now essential that the entire N81 is upgraded, as previously
planned for, to a satisfactory standard that meets the current daily need of its commuters".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (20th April,
IO.
11.
2020)
"That Wicklow County Council fund a feasibility study for the implementation of lateral coastal protect
(groynes) and beach nourishment at the North Beach/Porters Rock area in Arklow as part of a combined
measure to restore access to the North Beach Area for the local community as they have had for
generations".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Peir Leonard (20th April,
2020).
Patt 1 "That Wicklow County Council introduce a "rent payment" system similar to that used in Wexford
County Council. This would enable all Council tenants to pay their rent in their local Post Offices throughout
the county. The benefits of which would be as follows:
-Tenants will benefit from being able to pay rent in the Post Office the same day as they collect social welfare
payments if applicable.
-Post offices will benefit from the extra revenue and therefore more job security for P. O. employees.
-Shops and small businesses adjacent to the Post offices will benefit from increased footfall.
-Wicklow County Council will benefit from less arrears and a decreased workload on municipal staff".
Part 2 "That Wicklow County Council support an awareness campaign to reverse the transfer of social
welfare payments from Post Offices to banks during the COVID-19 Emergency period. Apart from
supporting the restoration of lost revenue to Post Offices the weekly visit for many constituents to the local
Post Office plays an integra/ patt in their overall wellness and connectivity to the wider community as well as
an economic support to local Main Street businesses".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris, Cllr. Paul
O'Brien, Cllr. Lourda Scott, Cllr. Erika Doyle and Cllr. Jodie
Neary (9th July, 2020).
Recognising that people with disabilities have the same right to use and enjoy public spaces that we all
share,
-Acknowledging the obstacles which people with disabilities face in their daily lives, including badly parked
vehicles and bicycles, billboards, over-grown hedges and other ill-placed hazards,
-Understanding that most obstacles are caused by thoughtlessness and genuine lack of awareness.
We urge the Members to adopt the following motion:
"That Wicklow County Council:
-supports the establishment of an annual national "Make Way Day" taking place this year on the 25th
September, 2020,
-will write to An Taoiseach, and to each individual Minister and Minister of State, calling on them to support,
establish, fund and resource an annual national "Make Way Day" which would be localised in each region,
-will annually support and promote a local #MAkeWayWick/ow campaign as part of the wider "Make Way
12.
13.
Day".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Dermot O'Brien and Cllr.
Grace McManus (22nd July, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council endorse the recently launched Youth Manifesto on Climate Justice. As the
first Council to declare a climate and biodiversity crisis and the first Council to include a young person on an
SPC we join such eminent figures as Chair of the Elders and former President Mary Robinson in the
endorsement of this imponant Manifesto which calls for Climate Justice through:
Unity
Pointing fingers at each other will not solved the climate crisis. Whether we are young or old, rich or poor,
from urban or rural areas, climate change will impact us all. Standing in unity while recognising our different
realities is how we must tackle this challenge.
A Green Check
How society functions in any given democracy is dictated by the priorities of its government. Make climate
change our priority. Deliver radical, people centred policies that would support the transition we need.
A Just Transition
It is normal to fear the unknown. However, we cannot afford to continue, as if our house is not on fire. We
need to transition for the better of all in society and to reach those that are fudhest behind in our society first.
A Social Justice lens
It is those who are least responsible for climate change that will suffers its gravest consequences. We
cannot solve the climate crisis by ignoring Inequality and Human Rights. So, let's build global empathy and
leave no one behind".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (7th August, 2020).
"That Wicklow County Council write to the Minister for Social Protection Heather Humphreys asking: That the
stillbirth register be opened to the public with an opt-out for bereaved parents if they choose to do so.
Bereaved parents whose babies are listed on the stillbirth register should also have the opportunity for their
baby to be listed on the birth and death register instead of the stillbiåh register and to receive a birth and
death certificate for their baby".