January 9th, 2019
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Gnäthcrinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras an
Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 14ü lä Eanäir 2019 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnö seo a
leanas a chur i gcrfch.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 14th January 2019
in the Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
B annacht L
LORRAI
LA ER
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 14th January 2019 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 5th November, 2018 (copy
attached).
D 2018MINSNOV5TH.pdf
To confirm and sign minutes of Budget meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 26th November, 2018 (copy
attached).
D 2018BUDGETMTG.pdf
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 3rd December, 2018 (copy
attached).
D 2018MINS3RDDECember (2).pdf
To consider the disposal of the freehold interest in the property
known as 45 Dunbur Park, Wicklow, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Maria
O'Reilly and Mr. John Raphael Keaveny, the Personal
Representatives in the estate of Bridget (Bridie) Corcoran,
deceased (as per notice previously circulated).
D 45 Dunbar Park.pdf
To consider the disposal of the Council's interest and equity in
the property known as 6 Wolfe Tone Square West, Bray, Co.
Wicklow to Mr. William Dodd, 6 Wolfe Tone Square West, Bray,
Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D 6 Wolfe Tone SqWest.pdf
To consider the disposal of property in the townland of Bray,
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Co. Wicklow being 19 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow
comprised in Folio WW40424F by Deed of Transfer and
Rectification to Mr. Brian Shortt, the Personal Representative in
the estate of Ms. Elizabeth Shortt, deceased (as per notice
previously circulated).
D 19 Connolly Sq.pdf
To consider the disposal of 0.0327Ha (0.081 acres) or
thereabouts of land in the townland of Corporation Lands
adjacent to Ballyguile, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Noel Howes and Mrs.
Helen Howes, 84 Mountainview, Ballyguile, Co. Wicklow (as per
notice previously circulated).
D 84 MountajnView Ballyguilw.pdf
To consider the disposal of freehold interest in property known
as 33 Rory O'Connor Place, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Ms.
Catherine Going, Legal Representative of Ms. Bridget Going,
deceased, 33 Rory O'Connor Place, Arklow, Co. Wicklow (as
per notice previously circulated).
D 33 Rory O Connor Place-pdf
To consider the disposal of 1 square meter or thereabouts of
land situated at Beechdale, Naas Road, Blessington, Co.
Wicklow to Gas Networks Ireland, Headquarters, Gasworks
Road, Cork, T 12 RX96 (as per notice previously circulated).
D Disposal Beechdale Naas rd.pdf
To consider the disposal of Cl,860 sq ft of land in the townland
adjacent to Arklow Masonic Hall, portion of Folio 4954F, to the
Masonic Hall Committee, Arklow Masonic Lodge, Arklow, Co.
Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).
D Arklow Masonic Hall Map.pdf
D Arklow Masonic Hall.pdf
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
Not included
To consider the disposal of approximately 164.92 acres of land
in the townland adjacent to Tomnafinnogue Wood, Ballyraheen
and Ballykelly, Shillelagh, Co. Wicklow to the Minister for
Culture, Hertiage and Gaeltacht, Leinster House, Kildare Street,
Dublin 2 (as per notice previously circulated).
D Tomnafinnogue Wood.pdf
D Tomnafinnogue Wood Map-pdf
12, To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
Not included
Not included
December 2018 (copy attached).
D Chief Executive's Monthly Report December 2018.pdf
13. To receive a presentation: Results of the County Wicklow
Commuter Survey; Gamma Consultants
14. To discuss the Draft Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy.
15. To receive an update on General Data Protection Regulations
(GDPR): Liam Fitzpatrick, Head of IS (deferred from meeting of
3rd December, 2018)
16. To receive update on NII/MII Junction 4 to Junction 14
Improvement Scheme.
17. To discuss proposal for proposed Nuclear Power Plant,
Anglesey, North Wales (discussed at meeting of 3rd December,
2018)
18. To note Local Government Act, 2001 Ethical Framework for
Local Government Services Annual Declarations: (a) To note
the reporting of Political Donations by Elected Members and (b)
to note requirement for the submission of Elected Members
Not included
Annual Declarations.
19. To note the Local Government Audit Report 2017 (copy
attached).
D WCC LG Audit Report 2017.pdf
20. To consider the taking in charge of the following estate: Carrig
Mill, Greystones (deferred from meeting 3rd December, 2018)
21. Notice of Motions.
22. Correspondence
Not included
1.
2.
3,
4.
5.
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr.Jennifer Whitmore (31st
October, 2018)
"That Wicklow County Council instal/ a network of water fountains and bottle-refill stations across each
Municipal District to help reduce the use of single use packaging, such as plaster water bottles".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018)
"That this Council reognise the landmark decision in the European Parliment when MEP's voted
ovenvhelmingly in favour of an EU-wide ban on single use plastics in all County Council buildings in County
Wicklow and at any council funded functions, within 3 months of passing of motion? ".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018)
"That this Council commits to an exploration in QI 2019 of the feasibility of installing drinking water fountains
in areas within the County that have high volumes of footfall. This will ensure improved access to drinking
water and thereby reduce plastic waste from bottled water".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Nicola Lawless, Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien and Cllr. Mary McDonald (5th November, 2018)
"That this Council commits to a process of recognising its role as a local authority in supporting the
implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The seventeen 'Global Goals' represent the
universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure that all people enjoy peace and
prosperity".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Mary Kavanagh (26th
November, 2018)
"That this Council noting the recent Cervical Check scandal, calls upon the Minister for Health and An
Taoiseach to acknowledge, support and respond in detail to the demands of the Standing4Women
campaign. These include: Legislation and policy on mandatory open disclosure independent of the patient
safety bill. Provision ofa start and end date and full disclosure on the 1800 smears yet to be audited, and a
breakdown of the new packages being negotiated with laboratories carwing out smear slide analysis
including mandatory site audits".