January 8th, 2020
DON CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS DO GACH BALL
Tionolfar Gnåthcrinniü de Chomhairle Chontae Chill Mhantain sa Seomra Comhdhåla, Aras an
Chontae, Co. Chill Mhantain, Dé Luan, 13ü lå Eanåir 2020 ag 2:00 pm chun an gnÖ seo a
leanas a Chur i gcrich.
larrtar ort bheith i lathair.
The Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council will be held on Monday, 13th January 2020
in the Council Chamber, County Buildings, Wicklow commencing at 2:00 pm to consider the
agenda attached.
Your attendance is requested.
B nnacht Leat.
LORRAINE GAL
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
ENTERPRISE & CORPORATE SERVICES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
8.
Agenda
Wicklow County Council - Monday, 13th January 2020 at 2:00pm
To confirm and sign minutes of budget meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 25th November, 2019 (copy
attached).
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow
County Council held on Monday 2nd December, 2019 (copy
attached).
To consider the disposal of 0.011 hectares or thereabouts of
land situated adjacent to No. 17 Bullfield Crescent, Kilcoole, Co.
Wicklow to Mr. Daniel Eager and Ms. Samantha Eager, 17
Bullford Crescent, Kilcoole, Co. Wicklow (as per notice
previously circulated).
D Disposal of 0 011 ha of land adjacent to 17 Bulford Crescent Kilcoole.pdf
To receive a presentation: Mr. Stephen Kent, CEO, Bus Eireann
(to discuss how Bus Eireann can deliver the best possible
transport service to the commuters and people living in the
towns and villages around the county).
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
Not included
December 2019 (copy attached).
D Chief Executive Report -December 2019.pdf
To receive an update: (1) Development of Customer Care
Innovation Hub and refurbishment of Council Chamber and
Elected Members rooms, (2) Development of CRM system to
support the Customer Care Innovation Hub.
To receive a presentation: Update on County Wicklow Age
Friendly Strategy 2017-2022 (deferred from meeting of 2nd
Not included
December, 2019).
9. To receive a presentation: To consider the adoption of the
Wicklow County Council Arts Strategy 2020 - 2025.
10. To note the Wicklow County Council Local Government Audit
Report for year ended 31st December, 2019 (copy attached).
D Wicklow Co Co 2018 Audit Report.pdf
Not included
11. To note Local Government Act, 2001 Ethical Framework for
Local Government Services Annual Declarations: (a) To note
the reporting of Political Donations by Elected Members and (b)
to note requirement for the submission of Elected Members
Annual Declarations.
12. Correspondence.
13. Notice of Motions.
1.
2.
3.
Notices of Motion
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Lourda Scott (7th October,
2019).
"Wicklow County Council notes a survey by Plan International Ireland showing that 50% of Irish teenage girls
find it difficult to afford period products and 61% miss school as a result. Wicklow County Council
acknowledges the work of organisations such as Homeless Period Ireland in collecting donated sanitary
products and distributing to those in need. Following the example of Dublin City Council and Wexford City
Council, Wicklow County Council agrees to have free period products available in the toilets of all Council
buildings, including swimming pools and libraries".
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. Paul O'Brien (9th October,
2019).
"In view of the damage that spiralling insurance costs are causing to community groups, voluntary
organisation, charities and small business, Wicklow County Council calls on the Government to accelerate its
insurance reform programme and in particular, calls on the Govemment to urgently establish the Judicial
Council, immediately establish a fully-resourced Insurance Fraud Unit within an Garda Siochäna and
quantify the benefits to policyholders of the reforms currently being implemented".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr. Paul
O'Brien (29th October, 2019).
"We note the Council's commitment to an accessible website and request that, where possible, all PDF
documents on the Council's website should be original PDF's accessible to blind/vision impaired people and
not just scanned copies".
4.
5.
6.
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Anne Ferris and Cllr. Paul
O'Brien (29th October, 2019)
"We note a clear desire among the members of Wicklow County Council for transparency and
accountability. We further note that the agendas and minutes of WCC Strategic Policy Committees are not
all on the WCC website and the ones that are on the website have been sporadically placed. We call for the
agendas and minutes of all SPC's to be published on the WCC website in one easily findable place".
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (4th November, 2019).
This Council notes that;
• according to the Central Statistics Office 137,200 workers reported earning the
national minimum wage or less in Q4 2018;
• female workers are currently more likely than male workers to earn the national
minimum wage or less;
• half of all those earning the national minimum wage or less in Q4 2018 were aged
under 24;
• according to Social Justice Ireland 110,000 workers are living at risk of poverty
across the state;
• the current Living Wage stands at €12.30 per hour, as calculated by the Living
Wage Technical Group;
• there are legal protections currently in place, for those companies who can show
they cannot afford to pay the national minimum wage;
• there is no legal obligation on businesses who can afford to pay their workers a
Living Wage, to do so;
agrees that:
• work must pay now and not just at some undetermined time in the future;
• proper wages and the eradication of precarious working practices should be the
essential foundations of economic growth and productivity;
• the implementation ofa Living Wage would play a critical role in ending in-work
poverty and reducing the financial pressure on many households;
calls on the government to:
• recognise the huge contribution low paid workers make to the Irish economy;
• Immediately reverse their decision not to increase the national minimum wage;
• Introduce a Living Wage of €12.30 per hour in 2020, with appropriate legal
protections for those SMEs who can show they cannot afford to pay the Living
Wage.
Notice of motion in the names of Cllr. Grace McManus and Cllr.
Dermot O'Brien (20th November, 2019).
"That this Council will have 'Child Homelessness' as an agenda item for each meeting until the Child
Homelessness figure for the county reaches 0".
7.
Notice of motion in the names of the Greystones Municipal
District Councillors (12th December, 2019).
"That Wicklow County Council request Irish Water to refrain from imposing commercial connection and water
charges in respect of public drinking water fountains".