  
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY 
COUNCIL HELD AT SHORELINE LEISURE CENTRE, GREYSTONES, 
CO WICKLOW  
 ON  
MONDAY 15TH JUNE 2020 AT 4:30 P.M.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.   
 
 
 
Elaine McCarthy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(Bell rings) 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If members would take their seat 
please. Good afternoon and thank you for all your 
attention and I'd like to welcome here this 
afternoon the Kennedy family Helena, John, Ciaran 
and Pat, I have a timer on.  People have said over 
the last couple of weeks as sort of my year's come 
to a close, people have said there's been a very 
difficult year to be Cathaoirleach but I would use 
the word "different" because though the normal 
focus had to change and adopt with the Covid-19, 
the council as a vital part of the community has 
to be able to adapt to the challenges in our 
community and I think that we did this 
exceptionally well. 
Every staff member had to change aspects of their 
work practice between homeworking or changed 
extended working hours to allow for safety and for 
social distancing, each Director of Services 
implemented those changes and put in place 
solution toss ensure the continuity of our 
services within the county and I want to thank on 
behalf of you the members, each member of staff 
who co-operated and willingness to adapt. 
Many projects were started, and progressed or 

continued, or planned and I took a look back over 
some of the work that was achieved in the last 
year.  And I know sometimes a lot of people say oh 
what does the council do, so this is just a 
flavour of what the council actually does.  So, in 
housing, we have a programme where we're hoping to 
have 13050 houses by 2021, house houses in 
Whitehall and Baltinglass, PP houses are due to 
open in Wicklow Town, I had the privilege and 
pleasure of residents moving into new houses in 
Rathnew and Arklow and I also got to meet Ronnie 
Delaney which was a personal highlight.  And 
housing is a top priority within the council, and 
you can see that with Joe and all of his team and 
now we have proper homeless accommodation planned 
in Bray which I welcome.  And a community level we 
have playgrounds, we have walkways and the 
Blessington Greenway, we're developing the east 
coast Greenway, and the cliff walk in Wicklow Town 
was opened. 
We also have the mobile library unit, great 
development of the libraries I was in Arklow two 
separate occasions for developments within there, 
and we have the Sports Awards, Active Age and Age 
Friendly and huge work done in all of those areas, 
prior to Covid-19 and during Covid-19 as well. 

Onto in the roads we had the public consultation 
on N11 and M11 safety scheme in Kilmac, work done 
in N81, bus lane for the N11 and small schemes 
throughout the entire county. 
In water we have the waste Wicklow treatment plan 
in Arklow has finally started, and we also have an 
upgrade scheme in Vartry and have a complete water 
conservation project so we can have sustainable 
water over the coming years. 
And I suppose one of the big things we've done is 
in environment is climate action and biodiversity 
and have SPC on that, and I suppose, it hasn't got 
up and running quite the way it would like and 
some things have been delayed but it is a top 
priority now we have a tree planting programme, 
we're putting in extra electric car charges and 
pollinator plan and energy upgrades and putting be 
in solar panels in specific office and carparks 
and energy retrofitting of social housing and 
planning department, they have started the county 
development plan, and in fairness to the staff in 
very challenging times, because of extended public 
consultation have had to adapt and work around the 
legislation that is in place and still try to 
deliver within planning and I would like to thank 
all planning staff for their efforts in that. 

We don't work as a unit; we work in collaboration 
with central Government.  With all of the state 
agencies to deliver for the county and successful 
applications for funding will see the developments 
of the new library in Wicklow down and Rathdrum, 
and the bridge in Bray which will link to the old 
golf club lands and money for Arklow.  Other 
projects nearing completion is the new centre and 
new customer care hub in the County Buildings and 
we got a small taste of the customer care software 
management system, when during the Covid-19 crisis 
when we saw each query was logged and tracked, and 
noted for completion or left flagged if it wasn't 
completed.  And I think that's going to give great 
confidence to all of our customers as they know 
their voice has been heard and responded to.  
There are a few things I would have liked to have 
done better throughout the year as I said earlier, 
I would have loved to actually get to finish an 
agenda.  And to have got to those notices of 
motion motions, and I would have loved for 
presentations to have been kept to ten minutes, 
and I did keep asking, but just the message never 
seemed to filter through to the presenters. 
However, my last act as Cathaoirleach is to thank 
the very many people who have helped me throughout 

the year and I'd like to thanks Frank Curran, 
Chief Executive all the directors of services and 
many staff particularly in housing who I seemed to 
have hounded for the year and I'd like to thank 
them for their knowledge, support and the 
frankness and it was greatly appreciated 
throughout the year, everybody was just a phone 
call away, I don't think, anybody didn't get back 
to me, it might have taken half a day or day or 
whatever but everybody came back to me and I feel 
that I have shown great respect and the office of 
Cathaoirleach was shown respect by all the council 
staff throughout the year and I'm very thankful 
for that.  And in particular, I want to thank 
Lorraine Gallagher who is as always approachable, 
friendly and the font of all knowledge and that 
she made every aspect of my year smoothly and took 
out of hours calls with good humour and wise word 
so I do appreciate it thank you very much.  I 
would also like to thank my mother. 
Maybe I'll just thank her at home.  The other 
people I would like to thank, I have to thank my 
boss, minister Simon Harris, as my employer, he 
actually made this job possible and his support 
has been unwavering, he's had an unbelievably 
challenging year himself and yet his commitment to 

this county meant that he allowed me the time to 
attend the council meetings and all of the 
engagements that I've had to do as part of this 
job. And I really do appreciate that. 
but I also want to thank you all the members for 
your support, courtesy and friendship that was 
shown to me throughout the year. 
I shouldn't have mentioned my family I'm sorry I 
got so upset. But I do really want to thank each 
and every one of you for everything you done for 
me and say it is an honour and privilege to be 
Cathaoirleach and I have really enjoyed it. 
(APPLAUSE) 
  
MR CURRAN:  On behalf of the staff I'd like to 
thank Irene for the help and support you gave us.  
She fully supported all the projects she is a 
member of in the areas of housing and community 
and climate action, biodiversity, economic 
development and town centres the infrastructure, 
the customer care, and you know she's been a great 
support all the way through.  She said herself it 
is great to work in projects but there's people 
working in the council deal every day with 
preventing homelessness and this can take up a lot 
of time, there's people in the council working on 

the likes of assisting a small business, and I 
think Irene was very supportive to those people as 
well to everybody in the organisation and I'd like 
to thank her for that.  Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We move on the election of the 
Cathaoirleach, do I have a proposer, Cllr Vincent 
Blake. 
CLLR BLAKE:  To take the opportunity to 
acknowledge how you carried out your role for the 
last year as Cathaoirleach in exemplary ways, you 
conducted your meetings with and treated fellow 
members with respect and very accommodating and 
approachable as you outline in your speech a lot 
has happened in the year and a lot of progress and 
positives so well done. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
CLLR BLAKE:  On behalf of Fina Gael can I just 
thank you as well, and I'll thank your mother for 
you then all right. 
But look, we've only had three female Chairs, in 
Wicklow County Council and it is wonderful we have 
two of them here in the room today as well.  And 
you are and you were the second, and we had Mary 
Walsh in the 60s, or 70s, so you're one of a very 

select few in this county that has served us, you 
said it was a good year for you, we were looking 
at the first half it went smoothly the last few 
months has been difficult for yourself, and your 
staff around you as well but certainly as Cllr 
Gerry Walsh said you conducted meeting in a 
fair-minded manner over the last year, we thank 
you for that.  And wish you well in the future as 
well.  So, your predecessor as a female has done 
well as she had a position of Cathaoirleach in 
Wicklow County Council so maybe there's good days 
for you ahead in that regard.  Thank you to 
yourself and to your mum and family as well. 
And wish you well for your future.  Thank you very 
much. 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and I've 
always taken great pleasure in addressing you as 
Cathaoirleach as part of the Labour Party I want 
to thank you, personally speaking as a new 
councillor you yourself has been a font of 
information to us, I remember your address last 
year when you said your door would be always open 
you would always answer your phone and you were 
true to your word, you have been an exceptional 
Cathaoirleach, you have set the standard as far as 

I'm concerned, and I hope that your successors to 
the same as you in being so fair, open, and 
approachable.  Cllr Vincent Blake said you're the 
third Cathaoirleach female Cathaoirleach, but I'm 
sure you won't be the last thank you very much. 
  
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thanks Cathaoirleach, and I 
remember you said that I'm good at being short 
when I make my contribution so I'll try to keep, I 
know that's been a challenge for you, but I want 
to say sincere thank you as well as new by I found 
you always very approachable and you bring a lot 
of humanity to the role and a good bit of heart as 
well and that definitely makes it easier 
especially when we have to have you have to 
conversations so I appreciate all the effort you 
went to wish you all the best. 
>>:  I want to congratulate you on the year and 
wish you the pest for the future, I had a couple 
of times to call on the support when we were 
trying to sort out the places for the students in 
the Kilcoole and surrounding area, and I must say 
you dealt with it very well and interacted with 
the minister for us, you had a very good year to 
be fair.  You're fair, approachable and you kind 
of display most of the time no nonsense and get on 

with it.  And I think even listening to your few 
words you've had a very good year and a lot of 
things have happened since you're chair, so 
congratulations and well done and it was nice to 
references your family as well. 
 
CLLR ERIKA DOYLE:  Cathaoirleach I'd like to to 
congratulate you on your year, I haven't been here 
long but in my previous job you haves courteous 
and accessible and on half of the Green Party and 
on behalf of Cllr Stephen Matthews who dealt with 
you for years, I'd like to congratulate you and 
thank you for the help you've shown the Green 
Party members over our term.  I think you've 
probably got five word of that, but I'm sure you 
know the sentiment, thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  Again, just 
want to add to the congratulations you've done an 
incredible job over the past year, I know one of 
the regrets was you haven't got through an agenda 
but I've been awe struck how you managed everybody 
here and agenda and get through everything with 
humour and kindness and with efficiency as well.  
I just want to say that as a new politician, it's 
been a particular honour and particularly 
inspiring to serve my first year in the council 

that was chaired by a woman.  And I'm kind of 
continually astounded there's only been three 
female chairs of Wicklow up to now.  I sincerely 
hope it won't be another ten or eleven years 
before we see another female Chair and I would 
like to point out the people of Wicklow have 
elected many, very strong and capable women that 
are all sitting here in the council chamber.  And 
I sincerely hope that we'll see at least one or 
two more female Chairs following the trail's been 
blazed by you today, Councillor Winters thank you 
again. 
 
CLLR SNELL.  Thanks, I want to personally thank 
you for everything that you've done for myself and 
all the other members down through the years.  
I've had the privilege of serving on the old area 
council the Municipal District and county council 
with you and I whether or not he was that there's 
never been a better Cathaoirleach of Wicklow 
County Council.  You wear your heart on your 
sleeve which is admirable but the one thing that 
stood you out from everyone else, is that your 
fairness to everybody, your representation for 
everybody, irrespective of their political 
background, you gave them a fair crack of the 

whip.  I commend you for that and respect you 
deeply for that.  Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK thank you very much for all 
your kind comments. 
  
CLLR NEARY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and I also 
want to on behalf of the Social Democrats 
congratulate you on a successful year.  It has 
been very - for people like me, women in politics 
to see a woman in roles such as what you have 
taken up in the past year, we certainly need more 
women in those positions and I agree with Cllr 
Lourda Scott as well, I hope it is not the last. 
And I want to thank you for being so welcoming to 
me in my new role I’m still getting the hang of it 
and while I won't have you there in the chair for 
the next while I look forward to working with you 
in the future.  Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks very much.  So, the 
election of Cathaoirleach, can I have a proposer? 
Cllr Pat Fitzgerald. 
  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  It gives me great pleasure to 
propose Cllr Pat Kennedy for the position of 

Cathaoirleach of Wicklow County Council. Since 
being elected to the council in 2014, Cllr Pat 
Kennedy has proved to be a very effective 
councillor, very well respected in our community 
and trojan worker for all the county so I propose 
Cllr Pat Kennedy to be the Cathaoirleach of 
Wicklow County Council. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  Thank you.  Cathaoirleach, 1798 
through up two powerful Irish leaders Michael 
Dwyer and Mr McAllister, in Glenmalure, into 2020 
it is throwing up a powerful local leader, Cllr 
Pat Kennedy.  In the last six years since he has 
been elected as a councillor, he's done trojan 
work proved himself to be worthy of the title 
councillor, and worthy of being Cathaoirleach of 
Wicklow County Council. 
I believe he will do an excellent job, and I'm 
delighted to formally second him here today. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Are there any other proposals?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  There have been no other 
proposals, I deem Cllr Pat Kennedy elected. 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  Chief Executive, members of this 
council, I am honoured to be given the opportunity 

to be Cathaoirleach of Wicklow County Council for 
the coming year.  Thank you to the councillor. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Thanks, you for proposing me and 
Cllr Sylvestor Bourke for seconding me and for the 
kind word.  I want to thank Cllr Irene Winters; 
she has been an outstanding Cathaoirleach and will 
be a tough act to follow. Cllr Irene Winters I 
want to thank you for all you have done for this 
county both as councillor and Cathaoirleach. 
I want to thank my fellow councillors both inside 
and outside of my party for all the work they do 
on behalf of the people that elected them to be 
their voice in this chamber. 
This council from the members to the staff and 
management do fantastic work.  However, we are not 
good at promoting all that is achieved.  This is 
something that I wish to improve upon.  I want to 
bring the council back to the people, into the 
towns and villages, into our communities.  As I 
look around this chamber today, I see a wealth of 
experience.  We have 32 dedicated hard-working 
councillors, nine of whom are former 
Cathaoirleach. All of that experience, and 
dedication will be invaluable over the coming year 
as we work through this difficult time and work to 
bring our county the other side of this terrible 

pandemic.  County Wicklow is a fantastic place in 
both to work and live.  In our infrastructure, our 
amenities and most important of all our people we 
have the necessities to nurture economic 
development and incentivise job creation. 
Our location, and our amenities are a commodity 
that many other counties would love to possess.  
Over the last week, SSE renewables announced 18 
new jobs in Arklow, a move to make the most of our 
natural amenities, built-in infrastructure and 
skilled workforce while working to help us to 
become environmentally stable county.  We need to 
see more of this inward investment county-wide 
this Wicklow, in investment that facilitates 
joined up thinking. 
We need multifaceted investment that allows us 
meet multi-indicators to measure targets through 
the use of our built and natural environment 
providing jobs for skilled workforce while also 
being economic stable and environmental diverse 
While it is great to see investment in our large 
towns and urban centres we cannot forget about 
rural Wicklow and small towns and villages 
They need to see continued investment and greater 
focus placed on their needs and requirement to 
allow rural communities to once again grow and 

flourish. 
Many of our rural towns and villages have 
stagnated due to the lack of investment, waste 
water treatment plants we must work as a council 
to put pressure on Irish Water to correct this and 
allow us to work towards the rejuvenation of our 
rural communities 
Over the coming year I hope to work with all of 
you to develop our ideas and the ideas of the 
people the business community and the 
organisations in doing it, that can make a real 
difference for the people we are elected to 
represent. 
Great things are rarely achieved by one person.  
They are achieved by a team. 
Ever since I was first elected to this chamber, I 
have always maintained this seat I hold is not my 
seat, it is the people's seat and I reiterate that 
here today. 
I may sit in the position of Cathaoirleach, but 
that position is the position of the people. 
And that is what I wanted it to be, now 
Cathaoirleach for and with the people of County 
Wicklow. 
I want to thank the management and staff of 
Wicklow County Council who have gone to great 

lengths to organise this meeting today in a safe 
manner. 
I also want to thank them for all the other great 
work they do, for all in the county. 
I want to thank my wife Helena, she has always 
been at my side, and will always continue to be. 
I hope ... 
This is immensely proud day for me personally and 
I want to thank all of you for placing your trust 
in me.  I want to acknowledge the presence of 
Senator Pat Casey here today, go raibh maith agat. 
Thank you. 
  
(APPLAUSE) 
  
Item number two is the election of the 
Leas-Cathaoirleach, I call on Cllr Vincent Blake. 
 
CLLR BLAKE:  First of all, congratulations to 
yourself Pat on being Chair for the coming year, 
I've known for you many of years and to yourself 
and your family congratulations and the best of 
luck to you for the coming year.  So for 
Leas-Cathaoirleach I would produce Cllr Shay 
Cullen he has been a member of the council for 
years and served and chair of the Wicklow District 

so his experience coming in here would be 
beneficial to yourself as a Cathaoirleach for the 
coming year so I would formally propose Cllr Shay 
Cullen for Leas-Cathaoirleach 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is there a seconder? 
>>:  I want to propose Shay, I have known when he 
was first elected in 2014, and known him outside 
of the chamber he is an effective councillor and I 
have, it gives me great pleasure to propose Cllr 
Shay Cullen for the position of Leas-Cathaoirleach 
of Wicklow County Council. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  A proposer and seconder for Cllr 
Shay Cullen are there any proposer? 
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  First and 
foremost, I want to congratulate you and the 
Kennedy family for your success here today you're 
the first citizen of County Wicklow.  I've known 
you and your family a lifetime.  It is a huge 
honour, personal honour for you, and I know that 
you'll wear them chains with the utmost respect 
for everybody and I'm sure everybody in council 
chambers will appreciate that. 
Pat you're a worker first and foremost so I know 
there's no obstacle you won't overcome for the 

people of County Wicklow in regard of getting 
things sorted and at this vital time I think it is 
important to have a Chair like yourself so I wish 
you very, very well for the few.    In regards of 
nominating someone for Leas-Cathaoirleach could I 
propose Cllr Tom Fortune, Tom's been a member of 
the Wicklow County Council since 2004, he is a 
very experienced member and valued member of the 
council. Over all those years he understands local 
politics more than most.  We as a technical group 
and this is why I put the nomination here today 
because I have the utmost respect for Cllr Shay 
Cullen, somebody who I've known like yourself 
many, many years, outside of politics, sport and 
school, but today it is about contesting the 
Leas-Cathaoirleach and the technical group were 
admirable about stepping aside and not contesting 
the chair today.  But we as members, whether we be 
independent, Social Democrats, Greens, Labour or 
Sinn Fein, have a mandate by the people of County 
Wicklow. 50% of County Wicklow voted for this 
particular group, 50%, there's 32 councillors in 
Wicklow County Council, and I know there's 
legislation out there that would refer the 
positions would be shared out equally to 
demonstrate what the people voted for, and on that 

basis I think it is vitally important we in 
Wicklow send out a message that we are open, not 
just in regards we hear the soundbites we're 
opening for business and otherwise but don't 
exclude the 50% of population of Wicklow County 
Council saying unless you are a member of Fianna 
Fail or Fina Gael you can only dine at the top 
table, let's been open and transparent here today 
and let's throw it out to the membership the whole 
32, we've all heard about, we all need to work 
together as a team and we commend that, of course 
we do, we'll all work together as a team going 
forward irrespective who wins the vote by motorist 
is for Cllr Tom Fortune. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thanks Cllr John Snell.  Do I have 
a seconder for Cllr Tom Fortune?  Cllr Mary 
Kavanagh has seconded it. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, and can I 
just first of all congratulate you on your own 
appointment I'm sure you'll do really well and 
look forward to working with you.  I would like to 
second Cllr Tom Fortune.  Tom is a very 
hard-working and committed public representative 
for the Greystones Municipal District and Bray 
County Council, he is an excellent Chair of 

technical group and fair and thorough with all the 
members and it is quite a disparate membership 
because we come from all kinds of groups across 
the divide but he treated everybody very fairly in 
that.  He was the one who officially presented me 
to the council, following my co-option to Wicklow 
County Council after the untimely death of my late 
sister Pat, so I'll grateful to him for that.  
He's always been available to me whenever I was 
stuck on something, as independent you don't have 
party support and Tom was always there as were 
other members of the independent groups 
I know that he would be available to all 
councillors equally if he was elected. 
And finely I just want to concur with Cllr John 
Snell, there were, there was a vote taken a year 
ago an election, and 32 councillors were split 
evenly between Fianna Fail and Fina Gael on one 
side and everybody else on the other side. 
Greens, Social Democrats, Sinn Fein, independents, 
and I just feel that, in the interest of fairness, 
and in the interest of representation, there are 
five years of a term and I don't think it would be 
unreasonable or unfair for the non-Fianna Fail, 
Fina Gael group to get two seats as chair I think 
that would be fully representational of the way 

the community voted.  So, that's why I'm proposing 
Cllr Tom Fortune here today or seconding Cllr Tom 
Fortune today. 
(No sound). 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thanks, are there any, Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Cathaoirleach I'd like to make a 
point in relation to the suggestion that Fina Gael 
and Fianna Fail are being greedy as such.  Which 
Cllr John Snell eluded to.  I just like to remind 
members that five years ago, there was a similar 
situation when it came, after the 2014 local 
elections, and as far as I recall, it was Pat 
Vance who was the main speaker on behalf of most 
of the parties but they didn't have to give out a 
seat, SPC seat it was before the technical groups 
were established, as we've had in last year's 
election, but, it was handed out to Sinn Fein and 
Cllr John Snell benefited from that, so it is 
unfair to portray the system of alliance that 
occurs after elections as being and suggesting 
that Fianna Fail and Gina feel are greedy and 
never give out at all there's a resident there and 
Cllr John Snell benefited from that himself and he 
might have forgot when he suggested all was not 

well in the house. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  If there's proposals, for anybody 
else for Leas-Cathaoirleach, I'm taking no 
contributions from the floor other than proposal 
from Leas-Cathaoirleach, and that's the right 
thing to do on this day.  Will are any other 
proposals for Leas-Cathaoirleach?  There are no 
other proposals we have two people proposed, Cllr 
Shay Cullen and Cllr Tom Fortune.  We have to go 
for a vote. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  OK.  Cathaoirleach I'm going to 
call out the name of the elected member and then 
if you could indicate your preference, either Cllr 
Shay Cullen or Cllr Tom Fortune.  So ... 
  So that's 21 votes for Cllr Shay Cullen and nine 
for Cllr Tom Fortune and two not present. 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  I claim Cllr Shay Cullen elected 
for the Leas-Cathaoirleach for the coming year. 
  
(APPLAUSE) 
 
So, I also want to thank Cllr Tom Fortune for 
putting down his name going forward for the coming 
here.  Tom you would like to come in. 

  
CLLR FORTUNE:  For quite legitimate reasons they 
put forward, can I congratulate Shay, I know Shay 
for a long number of years in many facets, and 
he's very capable individual and will contribute 
tremendously to yourself, chair over the coming 
year so I want to wish Shay well and well done.  
And before I say something else can I chair, 
congratulate you on your election to Cathaoirleach 
and it is a great honour for your family.  I've no 
doubt that you will be excellent and do a great I 
know you also for a long number of years and 
you've a great way about you and you will make 
people work together so I wish you all the really 
very best with that. 
Can I just say, reflecting on what's happening 
here with the Leas-Cathaoirleach, I think the 
point that Cllr Snell, Cllr Mary Kavanagh and Cllr 
Joe Behan made very well, the technical group 
should have 50% of the seats, it is amazing that, 
anyway, I'll save that comment for another 
time - but it reminds me of the film Braveheart, 
you know, metaphorically, you're kind of facing 
certain annihilation with the same time you feel 
it is only right you should, someone should do it, 
but today it was me put my name forward perhaps in 

the coming years it is someone else that will face 
the annihilation, the makeup way of the current 
council should have a Chair from the technical 
group for two of the year. I think, if things were 
fair there's a great lot of thought about new 
normality and fairness and we need to change the 
way we do things the way we do that kind of stuff 
it is that kind of stuff because we should really 
have OK three from Fianna Fail and Fina Gael and 
then technical group, and that's the way it should 
be and it is not, but congratulations for Cllr 
Shay Cullen and chair very well done to you, you 
have my full support for the next twelve months. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thank you Cllr Tom Fortune. 
As I said earlier on, there are nine former 
Cathaoirleach in this room and that experience is 
needed as we go forward in probably one of the 
most difficult years this council has ever faced 
and I look forward with working with all of 
members here and especially nine Cathaoirleach, 
Chief Executive would you like to come in. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  My own behalf I look like to 
congratulate and Lena, John and Peter and Ciaran.  
Irene mentioned a lot of the projects going on at 
the moment and I've no doubt that Cllr Pat Kennedy 
will support those and many more, it is going to 

be a very difficult year, we don't know what the 
financial implications of Covid-19 will be or what 
recession we will have, so we'll have to deal with 
that and I know Pat will be well 
For that.  And I can guarantee you that you'll get 
100% support from staff and myself and our door 
will always be open and we'll work very well 
together but I think you're fair, capable and 
great representative of the people of County 
Wicklow, thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  The other item on the agenda we 
have to agree schedule for the meetings for the 
coming year and they have opinion circulated, can 
we take those as agreed?  Yeah.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Proposer and seconder.  
CLLR KENNEDY:  Cllr Vincent Blake and Cllr Gail 
Dunne. That concludes the business of today. 
Thank you very much to everybody. 
And just to say again I'm very honoured to be 
Chair and I look forward to working with each and 
every member of the council so thank you very 
much. 
 
