MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING (HYBRID) OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON
MONDAY 3RD NOVEMBER 2025, COMMENCING 2.00 PM IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER AND
VIA MICROSOFT TEAMS
PRESENT:
COUNCILLORS M. CORRIGAN CATHAOIRLEACH, D, ALVEY, M. BARRY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE,
A. CRONIN, M. DUDDY, G. DUNNE, L. FENELON GASKIN, O. FINN, P. FITZGERALD, T.
FORTUNE, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. LEONARD, P. MAHON, J. MULHALL,
M. MURPHY, l. NEARY, D. O'BRIEN, P. O'BRIEN, G. O'NEILL, W. O'TOOLE, G. RICHMOND, L.
SCOTT, J. SNELL, P. STAPLETON, S. STOKES, N. WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY (31)
APOLOGIES
CLLR. E. DOYLE (1)
IN ATTENDANCE:
MS. E. O'GORMAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
MS. J. CARROLL, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. H. DENNEHY, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. L. EARLS, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MR. B. GLEESON, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MR. J. LANE, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MR. M. NICHOLSON, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. T. O'BRIEN, T/DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. H. PURCELL, SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
MS. T. BYRNE, ASSISTANT STAFF OFFICER
MR. J. CALLERY, ENVIRONMENTAL AWARENESS OFFICER
MR. M. CARROLL, CIVIL DEFENCE OFFICER
MS. E. MULLEN, ASSISTANT CIVIL DEFENCE OFFICER
At the commencement of the meeting a roll call was taken. The Meetings Administrator
advised all present they are bound by the Code of Conduct for Councillors and Employees.
Also, of meetings etiquette for online meetings and that the press and some members of
the public were also present.
Votes of Sympathy
Elected Members passed a vote of sympathy to the families of the late Ms. Bridie Delaney,
Sean Browne, Ms. Irene Carey, Mr. Andrew Tarrant, Mr. Michael Lambert, Ms. Bridget
1
Kenny, Mr. Liam Vickers, Mr. Denis Luby, Mr. John Norton, Mr. Anthony Doyle and Mr. Jim
Moore. A minutes silence was observed for the deceased.
Request for Suspension of Standing Orders:- The Meetings Administrator advised that one
request for suspension of standing orders had been submitted in advance of the meeting.
In accordance with the protocol adopted the request was read to the meeting as proposed
and seconded:-
Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. T. Fortune, and Cllr. J. Behan requested a suspension of
standing orders to discuss the following motion:
'That Wicklow County Council write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment,
the IDA, Enterprise Ireland, and other relevant State agencies to convey the deep concern of
this Council regarding the announced closure of the Merck facility in Arklow in 2028, and to
seek assurances that a comprehensive local transition and support framework will be
established at the earliest opportunity.
Further, that Wicklow County Council actively participate in any taskforce established, and
that the Chief Executive coordinate with the Local Enterprise Office and local stakeholders to
ensure timely communication of supports, promote retraining and upskilling, assist affected
small businesses, and protect local employment and economic stability'.
It was agreed by all to have a discussion on the topic at 4.30 p.m.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. O'Brien and agreed by all to move
to Item 9 following Item 7.
The Cathaoirleach reminded the Elected Members that the conduct of members at
meetings is as set out by the Code of Conduct for Councillors, which was circulated on the
25th of September of this year, and is part of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended,
by the Local Government and Reform Act 2014. The Cathaoirleach requested the Elected
Members to abide by this Code of Conduct. Some of the items referred to are:
• Treat their colleagues and local authority employees with courtesy, respect and
dignity. '
And.
• "Courtesy and respect should also be observed when using social media channels,
messaging applications and written communications. "
The Cathaoirleach also reminded the Elected Members of a motion which was passed in
2021. She requested the Meetings Administrator to circulate the motion to the Elected
Members following the meeting. In order to monitor the commitment, The Cathaoirleach
proposed that all Elected Members sign the declaration indicating agreement or non-
agreement with the motion.
2
The wording is:
"That Wicklow County Councillors have a responsibility to show leadership, to improve
civility of public discourse on political matters. We, the Elected Members of Wicklow County
Council, agree to regulate our own submissions on social media and will ensure that any
inappropriate comments left by members of the public are removed in a timely manner. In
order to monitor this commitment we propose that all Councillors sign declarations
indicating agreement or non-agreement with the measure and that this will be published
and updated annually on the Council website. "
ITEM NO. 1
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council held on
Monday 6th October 2025.
It was proposed by Cllr. O. Finn, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin and agreed by all to confirm and
sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday 6th October
2025.
ITEM NO. 2
To consider the disposal of 3.0261 hectares or thereabouts in the townland of Fassaroe,
Bray, Co. Wicklow being the property originally acquired from Borg Developments
Unlimited Company by way of lease to The National Transport Authority for a period of 30
years.
It was proposed by Cllr. N. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. M. Corrigan and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 3.0261 hectares or thereabouts in the townland of Fassaroe, Bray,
Co. Wicklow being the property originally acquired from Borg Developments Unlimited
Company by way of lease to The National Transport Authority for a period of 30 years, as set
out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 3
To consider the disposal of 0.0127Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Knockanrahan
Lower Td. being the property known as 8 Pearse Terrace, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Ms.
Gemma Kennedy.
It was proposed by Cllr. W. O'Toole, seconded by Cllr. P. Fitzgerald and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 0.0127Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Knockanrahan Lower
Td. being the property known as 8 Pearse Terrace, Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Gemma
Kennedy, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
3
ITEM NO. 4
To consider the disposal of 0.0057Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Dunlavin Upper
Td. being the property known as 2 The Green, Dunlavin, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Fiona
Kinsella, 2 The Green, Dunlavin, Co. Wicklow.
It was proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of 0.0057Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Dunlavin Upper Td. being the
property known as 2 The Green, Dunlavin, Co. Wicklow to Ms. Fiona Kinsella, 2 The Green,
Dunlavin, Co. Wicklow, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 5
To consider the disposal of 0.0182Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Oldcourt Td. being
the property known as 9 Wolfe Tone Square North, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Patrick Breen
in the estate of Elizabeth Breen deceased.
It was proposed by Cllr. l. Neary, seconded by Cllr. N. Whelan and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of 0.0182Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Oldcourt Td. being the property
known as 9 Wolfe Tone Square North, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Patrick Breen in the estate
of Elizabeth Breen deceased, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 6
To consider and adopt Wicklow County Council Litter Management Plan in accordance
with Section 13 of the Litter Pollution Act, 1997.
Mr. J.
Callery, Environmental Awareness Officer gave a presentation outlining the following:
Litter Management Plan.
Responsibilities in litter management.
Litter composition.
Priority issues.
Strategic focus.
Plan development.
Amendments following consultation.
A lengthy discussion followed in which the Elected Members raised queries which were
responded to by Mr. Callery. Some of the issues raised were as follows:
Recycling centres not taking certain items.
Dog fouling.
Request for more dog wardens.
DNA dog testing.
Fly tipping and illegal dumping.
Coffee cup initiative.
4
•
•
•
•
Town teams Jink — litter control.
The plastic bottle return scheme.
Education and awareness.
Abandonment of vehicles.
Enforcement prevention.
Utilise recycling centres more — circular economy.
Sea bins.
Funding.
Cigarette butt and vape wastage.
Dumping and associated clean-up costs.
Success of Tidy Towns.
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Behan, seconded by Cllr. L. Scott and agreed by all to consider and
adopt Wicklow County Council Litter Management Plan in accordance with Section 13 of the
Litter Pollution Act, 1997.
Time Extension: It was proposed by Cllr. J. Behan, seconded by Cllr. P. O'Brien and agreed
by all to extend the meeting to 5.30 p.m.
ITEM NO. 7
To note NOAC Local Authority Performance Indicator Report 2024
Elected Members were circulated with the NOAC Local Authority Performance Indicator
Report 2024. It was agreed by all to note NOAC Local Authority Performance Indicators
Report 2024.
ITEM NO. 9
To receive a presentation: Wicklow Civil Defence.
Ms. E.
•
•
•
Mullen, Assistant Civil Defence Officer gave a presentation highlighting the following:
Who are the Civil Defence?
Civil Defence — Towards 2030.
50 Active volunteers.
Civil Defence Training Centre, Greystones.
Who calls the Civil Defence?
What we do — First Aid; Search and rescue; Emergency response; Community.
Radon testing — Environmental Protection Agency.
Critical incident Stress Management.
Tasking/Operations.
Training ongoing and coming up.
Recruitment 2025 — 7 new volunteers.
5
The Elected Members thanked Ms. Mullen for her comprehensive presentation and thanked
her and her colleagues for all the good work that they do.
ITEM NO. 8
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report, October 2025.
Elected Members were circulated with the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
October 2025.
Some of the issues raised included the following:
•
•
Pedestrian crossing, Ballynerrin, Wicklow Town.
Grants for older people.
Update on congestion on NII.
Sporting infrastructure.
Funding suspended for NII.
Bray/Greystones Cliff Walk.
Time line for repairs — Bray/Greystones Cliff walk.
Colbanstown Bridge
RRDF Baltinglass.
Report and costing of works in Farrankelly.
Feasibility study, Kilcoole.
Housing.
Road markings between Shillelagh and Tullow.
Hollywood Cross re-development.
N81 — not fit for purpose.
Hearns Crossroads.
Progress on Mill Road property, Greystones.
Part 8 — 75 houses, Church View, Arklow.
Secondary school — Newtown mountkennedy.
199 local link — Glendalough to Bray.
Out of Hours service.
Drop-in information session on disability.
Package treatment plants on sites.
Greenway — Greystones to Arklow.
Court proceedings —65 houses in Kilbride.
Hollywood traffic calming.
Meeting with Taoiseach re housing and zoning.
Requirement for park and ride.
Local link service.
IDA progress updates.
N81 upgrades and traffic calming works.
6
Elected Members raised questions which were responded to by the Chief Executive and the
relevant Director of Services.
Suspension of Standing Orders
Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. T. Fortune and Cllr. J. Behan requested a suspension of
standing orders to discuss the following motion:
'That Wicklow County Council write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment,
the IDA, Enterprise Ireland, and other relevant State agencies to convey the deep concern of
this Council regarding the announced closure of the Merck facility in Arklow in 2028, and to
seek assurances that a comprehensive local transition and support framework will be
established at the earliest opportunity.
Further, that Wicklow County Council actively participate in any taskforce established, and
that the Chief Executive coordinate with the Local Enterprise Office and local stakeholders to
ensure timely communication of supports, promote retraining and upskilling, assist affected
small businesses, and protect local employment and economic stability'.
Following a short discussion it was agreed by all to write to the Minister for Enterprise,
Trade & Employment, The IDA, Enterprise Ireland and other relevant bodies.
Notice of Motion number 1
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. L. Scott (proposer), seconded by Cllr. C. Winstanley
(30th August 2025).
"This Council resolves that the Chief Executive write to the Department of Housing to request
increased and multi-annual funding for the local authority Energy Efficiency Retrofitting
Programme, in order to more effectively reach national climate targets and deliver much
needed regeneration to social housing in Co. Wicklow".
It was agreed by all to write to the Minister for Housing.
Notice of motion number 3
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. C. Winstanley (proposer), seconded by Cllr. J. Behan
(23rd September 2025)
'That Wicklow County Council write, through the Chief Executive on behalf of the elected
members, to the Minister for Education and Youth, and to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade
and Employment, to:
7
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Express support for the inclusion of socio-economic status as a protected ground in
Ireland's equality legislation, specifically within the Employment Equality Acts and
the Equal Status Acts.
This motion aligns with the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission's
recommendations and the national "Add the 10th" campaign, both of which call for
socio-economic status to be formally recognised as a prohibited ground for
discrimination.
Note that the Government has approved the General Scheme of the Equality
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2024, published in early 2025, which proposes
significant reforms to equality law and is expected to advance in the coming Dåil
term.
Call on Government to ensure that socio-economic status is included in the
forthcoming legislation, thereby strengthening protections for individuals and
communities affected by poverty and social exclusion.
Affirm that Wicklow County Council is committed to promoting social inclusion,
advancing equality, and protecting the rights of those experiencing poverty and
disadvantage, and urges other local authorities across Ireland to adopt similar
motions.
Rationale:
This motion recognises that adding socio-economic status as a protected ground is an
essential step toward building an inclusive society where poverty or economic background
does not determine a person's opportunities or rights. It will provide a legal basis to
challenge discrimination, strengthen social justice, and support national efforts to reduce
poverty and inequality'.
It was agreed by all to write to the Minister for Education & Youth and to the Minister for
Enterprise, Trade & Employment.
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING
CLLR. MELANIE CORRIG
CATHAOIRLEACH
WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL
4-4.eÅe—, ( .
MS. HELEN PURCELL
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
Confirmed at meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday the ISt December 2025.
8