 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING (HYBRID) OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
MONDAY 13TH MAY 2024, COMMENCING 2.00 PM IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER AND VIA 
MICROSOFT TEAMS 
 
 
PRESENT:   
 
 
COUNCILLORS A. FLYNN KENNEDY CATHAOIRLEACH, T. ANNESLEY, M. BARRY, J. BEHAN, V. 
BLAKE, S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, S. CULLEN, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, A. FERRIS, 
P. FITZGERALD, T. FORTUNE, P. GLENNON, M. KAVANAGH, P. KENNEDY, P. LEONARD, D. 
MITCHELL, J. MULLEN, M. MURPHY, D. O’BRIEN, P. O’BRIEN, R. O’CONNOR, G. O’NEILL, M. 
RYAN, L. SCOTT, J. SNELL, S. STOKES, E. TIMMINS, G. WALSH AND I. WINTERS (32) 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE: 
 
 
MS. E. O’GORMAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
MS. L. GALLAGHER, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MS. B. KILKENNY, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MS. L. EARLS, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MR. J. LANE, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MR. M. NICHOLSON, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MR. B. GLEESON, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MS. D. KENNEDY, LAW AGENT 
MS. H. PURCELL, SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
MS. T. O’BRIEN, SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
MS. L. HEALY, A/SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
MS. S. NICHOLS, A/SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
MS. E. O’DONOVAN, HEAD OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
MR. J. BOWES, SENIOR ENGINEER 
MR. F. KEOGH, SENIOR ENGINEER 
MR. M. FLYNN, SENIOR ENGINEER 
MS.H. FALLON, SENIOR ENGINEER 
MS. S. WALSH, SENIOR PLANNER 
MR. A. DEMPSEY, CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
MS. E. BERMINGHAM, SENIOR EXECUTIVE PLANNER 
MS. M. CAMPBELL, COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER 
MS. C. WRIGHT, ARCHIVIST 
MR. M. COSTELLO, CLIMATE ACTION CO-ORDINATOR 
MR. B. WILDES, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 
MS. K. BOYLE, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 
MR. D. PORTER, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 

MR. J. POWDERLEY, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 
MS. R. WOODS, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 
MS. E. BRESLIN, SENIOR STAFF OFFICER 
MR. G. MURPHY, IS TECHNICAL SUPPORT OFFICER 
MS. T. BYRNE, ASSISTANT STAFF OFFICER 
 
 
At the commencement of the meeting a roll call was taken.  The Meetings Administrator 
advised of meetings etiquette for online meetings and that the press and some members of 
the public were also present. 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
Elected Members passed a vote of sympathy to the families of the late Mr. Graham Larkin, 
Mr. Pa Curley, Mr. Paddy Manley, Mr. John (Jackie) Sillery, Mr. Josip Strok, Ms. Mollie 
Dempsey, Mr. Cathal Friel, Ms. Pamela McCormack, Mr. Pat Malone, Mr. Danny Dowling 
and Mr. Des Cullen.  A minutes silence was observed for the deceased. 
 
Ms. C. Wright, Archivist advised the Elected Members that we are celebrating 125 years of 
Wicklow County Council, first meeting taking place on 22nd April 1899.   
 
 
ITEM NO. 1 
 
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council held on 
Monday 8th April 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. S. Cullen, seconded by Cllr. R. O’Connor and agreed to confirm and 
sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday 8th April 2024. 
 
 
ITEM NO. 2 
 
To consider the disposal of 18 square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath, 
Rathnew, Co. Wicklow to Teagasc, Oak Park, Carlow, R93 XE 12 by way of a one-year lease 
commencing 26th June 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Snell, seconded by Cllr. P. O’Brien and agreed to consider the 
disposal of 18 square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath, Rathnew, Co. 
Wicklow to Teagasc, Oak Park, Carlow, R93 XE 12 by way of a one-year lease commencing 
26th June 2024, as set out in statutory notice circulated. 
 
 
 
 
 

ITEM NO. 3 
 
To consider the disposal of 115 square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath, 
Rathnew, Co. Wicklow to Art McCormack and Tomas O’Leary of MosArt Ltd. by way of a 
one-year lease commencing 23rd May 2024. 
It was proposed by Cllr. S. Cullen, seconded by Cllr. G. Dunne and agreed to consider the 
disposal of 115 square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath, Rathnew, Co. 
Wicklow to Art McCormack and Tomas O’Leary of MosArt Ltd. by way of a one-year lease 
commencing 23rd May 2024, as set out in statutory notice circulated. 
 
 
 
ITEM NO. 4 
 
To consider the disposal of 176 sq. metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath, 
Rathnew, Co. Wicklow known as The Science Laboratory, Clermont House, Rathnew, Co. 
Wicklow to Ms. Caoimhe Doyle, 128 Kindlestown Park, Greystones, Co. Wicklow by way of 
a one-year lease commencing 9th June 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Snell, seconded by Cllr. S. Stokes and agreed to consider the 
disposal of 176 sq. metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath, Rathnew, Co. 
Wicklow known as The Science Laboratory, Clermont House, Rathnew, Co. Wicklow to Ms. 
Caoimhe Doyle, 128 Kindlestown Park, Greystones, Co. Wicklow by way of a one-year lease 
commencing 9th June 2024, as set out in statutory notice circulated. 
 
 
ITEM NO. 5 
 
To consider the disposal of 0.0254HA or thereabouts in the townland of Abbeylands Td, 
Co. Wicklow comprised in Folio no. WW2384L Co. Wicklow being the property known as 
16 Griffith Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow by Transfer Order to Mr. Brendan McDonald (as 
LPR of Mary Maura McDonald) of 16 Griffith Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow, the person 
entitled to the freehold interest in the property. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Fitzgerald, seconded by Cllr. T. Annesley and agreed to consider 
the disposal of 0.0254HA or thereabouts in the townland of Abbeylands Td, Co. Wicklow 
comprised in Folio no. WW2384L Co. Wicklow being the property known as 16 Griffith 
Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow by Transfer Order to Mr. Brendan McDonald (as LPR of Mary 
Maura McDonald) of 16 Griffith Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow, the person entitled to the 
freehold interest in the property, as set out in statutory notice circulated. 
 
 
ITEM NO. 6 
 
To consider the disposal of 0.0254HA or thereabouts in the townland of Abbeylands Td, 
Co. Wicklow comprised in Folio no. WW2384L Co. Wicklow being the property known as 
16 Griffith Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow by Transfer Order to Mr. Brendan McDonald (as 

LPR of Mary Maura McDonald) of 16 Griffith Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow, the person 
entitled to the freehold interest in the property. 
 
Prior to discussing the disposal, Cllr. A. Flynn Kennedy excused herself from the meeting. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Behan, seconded by Cllr. A. Ferris and agreed to consider the 
disposal of 0.0254HA or thereabouts in the townland of Abbeylands Td, Co. Wicklow 
comprised in Folio no. WW2384L Co. Wicklow being the property known as 16 Griffith 
Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow by Transfer Order to Mr. Brendan McDonald (as LPR of Mary 
Maura McDonald) of 16 Griffith Street, Arklow, Co. Wicklow, the person entitled to the 
freehold interest in the property, as set out in statutory notice circulated. 
 
Cllr. Flynn Kennedy was invited to rejoin the meeting which she duly did. 
 
 
ITEM NO. 7 
 
To note Annual Financial Statement 2023 and to approve by resolution (i) additional net 
expenditure in excess of budget in accordance with Section 104(7) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 and (ii) additional transfers to and from capital in excess of budget. 
 
Mr. B. Gleeson, Director of Services, gave an overview of the Annual Financial Statement 
2023 as follows: 
 
 The Council faced a number of economic challenges and uncertainties during 2023, 
including high inflation and energy costs and increased interest rates.  However, I am 
pleased to report that despite these challenges the Council's overall financial 
position remained quite strong at the end of 2023. 
 
 The total expenditure incurred in the revenue account after transfers was 150 
million; an increase of 16 million on 2022.  A revenue surplus of 341,000 was 
generated which reduced our overall revenue deficit to 598,000 at year end.   
 
 Capital account expenditure including transfers was 131 million last year.  The vast 
majority of this expenditure was under our housing programme and a full 
breakdown by programme group is outlined in Appendix 6 on page 42 of the report. 
 
 Commercial rates collection increased from 88% to 91% last year, which is the 
highest collection rate Wicklow has ever achieved.  Housing loans collection rate also 
increased significantly from 84% up to 90%.  The housing rent collection dropped 
from 85 to 84%.   
 
 
 A significant amount of expenditure occurred, a lot was achieved in 2023 and some 
of the key actions and deliverables are outlined on pages 7 and 8 of the financial 
review. 
 

 While the AFS itself is just for noting by the members, under section 104(7) of the 
Local Government Act, approval of the members is sought for the net expenditure in 
excess of budget in the revenue account and for transfers to and from the capital 
account. 
 
 Net expenditure in excess of budget, these amounts are outlined by division on page 
4 of the AFS as well as in note 16 on page 26, and they are as follows:  Housing and 
building, 
1,602,782; 
roads 
transportation 
safety, 
190,871; 
development 
management, 222,024; environmental services 1,478,204; recreation and amenity, 
598,559; and finally, agricultural, education, health and welfare, 120,997.   
 
 Approval by the members for transfers to and from capital is also requested.   
 
 The most significant transfers from capital are rates revaluation provision, a funds 
rate income reductions following tribunal decisions and that was 2.2 million.  Also, 
another amount is internal capital receipts to fund pre letting expenditure of 
approximately 278,000 under the housing division. 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. V. Blake, seconded by Cllr. G. Walsh and agreed by all to approve: 
 
(i) 
additional net expenditure in excess of budget in accordance with Section 
104(7) of the Local Government Act 2001 and;  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. A. Ferris, seconded by Cllr. E. Timmins and agreed by all to approve: 
 
(ii) 
additional transfers to and from capital in excess of budget. 
 
 
ITEM NO. 8 
 
To adopt the Wicklow County Council Annual Report 2023 in accordance with Section 221 
of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
Ms. H. Purcell advised that the Draft Annual Report was considered by the Elected Members 
at the April meeting.  NOAC performance indicators for 2023 and the Annual Financial 
Statement along with a statement of internal financial control were now included. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. E. Timmins, seconded by Cllr. P. O’Brien and agreed by all to adopt 
the Wicklow County Council Annual Report 2023 in accordance with Section 221 of the Local 
Government Act 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ITEM NO. 9 
 
To consider the Chief Executive’s Monthly Management Report, April 2023 
 
Prior to discussing the Monthly Management Report, the Chief Executive paid tribute to Ms. 
B. Kilkenny, Director of Service, on her forthcoming retirement and thanked her for her 
dedicated service to Wicklow County Council. 
 
The Elected Members joined in wishing Ms. Kilkenny well in her retirement. 
 
The Elected Members were circulated with the Chief Executive Monthly Management 
Report, April 2024.  Some of the issues raised included the following: 
 
 Adaptation funding – flooding to road and footpaths caused by climate change. 
 Arklow/Shillelagh Greenway. 
 Lack of recreation facilities – Wicklow Town. 
 Housing, Ballinalea, Ashford – lack of infrastructure. 
 Extension of Arboretum, Kilquade – parking issues. 
 Bray/Greystones cliff walk. 
 Lack of a recycling centre, Greystones. 
 Chapel Road pedestrian cycle infrastructure improvement. 
 Bundle scheme – Rehills land, Bray. 
 Dell site, Boghall Road. 
 Community recognition fund. 
 Community gardens. 
 E-bolt scheme. 
 Lack of road markings across the county. 
 Boiler maintenance. 
 Greystones Enterprise Hub. 
 Coastal erosion. 
 Bridge, Seapoint Court. 
 Need for a second bridge over river Dargle. 
 Signage, Seafront, Bray. 
 Active travel. 
 Proposed relief road. 
 Public transport, West Wicklow. 
 Park and Ride, West Wicklow. 
 Support for new businesses. 
 Public lighting, West Wicklow. 
 ‘65’ Bus Service. 
 Recreational land, Blessington. 
 Immigration policy. 
 Disability policies. 
 Small businesses, Arklow Main Street. 
 Electricity outages, Aughrim. 
 Poor state of rural roads. 

 Town and village renewal funding. 
 Rural planning. 
 Kippure Lodge. 
 Sewerage issues, Blessington. 
 The Murrough, Wicklow Town. 
 Fire Stations, Dunlavin and Baltinglass. 
 Water Safety Information Boards. 
 Brides Head masterplan. 
 Street enhancement fund. 
 Recreation audit. 
 Coastal protection, Clogga. 
 Assembly Hall, Wicklow 
 
Elected Members raised questions which were responded o by the Chief Executive and the 
relevant Director of Services. 
It was agreed a letter should issue to the Minister of Environment, Climate Action, 
Communications & Transport and the NTA expressing concern at the withdrawal of the 184 
bus service and at the lack of capacity on the 65 bus service in Blessington. 
Time Extension: It was proposed by Cllr. A. Flynn Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. O’Brien and 
agreed by all to extend the meeting to finish of business.  
 
ITEM NO. 10 
 
Correspondence 
 
There were no items of correspondence. 
 
 
ITEM NO. 11  
 
Notice of Motions 
 
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. P. O’Brien (proposer), seconded by Cllr. J. Mullen    
(23rd February 2024) 
 
"To ask the Chief Executive the number of apprentices taken on in each of the years 2023, 
2022, 2021, 2020 and 2019; and if she will provide a disaggregated breakdown of their 
function in the local authority." 
 
Response 
 

Two apprentices were employed in the Information Systems department in 2019 and one 
accounting technician apprentice was employed in finance n 2020. No apprentices were 
employed in 2021, 2022 or 2023. 
 
Wicklow County Council have committed to employing five apprentices as part of the 
Outdoor Workforce Plan agreed between management and unions. The H.R. department is 
currently in discussions with the KWETB in this regard. 
 
Wicklow County Council is also at the final stages of the regional graduate recruitment 
programme and we anticipate up to 9 graduates will be employed over 10 skill set areas. 
This project is run in conjunction with Grad Ireland and the LGMA. 
 
 
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. S. Stokes (proposer), seconded by Cllr. R. O’Connor 
(1st March 2024) 
 
‘That Wicklow County Council erect Lyme disease information and warning signage in public 
parks and playgrounds to advise of the dangers Lyme disease. Such signage should also 
outline the steps to take to minimise the risk of contracting this chronic condition’. 
Response 
 
Lyme disease is an infection carried by infected ticks.  Lyme disease can affect anyone but is 
commonest among hill-walkers, hikers, campers and others whose leisure activities or work 
takes place in heathland, light woodland and other grassy areas or brings them in contact 
with certain animals e.g. deer and sheep. Summer and autumn is the period when most 
cases occur.   
 
Ticks are most likely to be found in the following areas: 
 
Shady and humid woodland clearings with grass 
 
Open grassland, parkland, fields and bushes 
 
Walking paths, especially those bordered by long grasses 
 
Wooded and forested areas 
 
Vegetation close to lakes and seaside beaches 
 
According to the Health Protection Surveillance Centre (HPSC), Ireland's specialist service for 
the surveillance of communicable diseases, it is estimated that around 200 people have a 
positive blood test for Lyme disease each year. 
 
Wicklow County Council raises awareness of Lyme’s Disease through its website, which has 
been updated to include links to the HPSC website, and will run an awareness campaign 
during May 2024.   
The HPSC has produced a Lyme and tick leaflet on Protecting Yourself Against Tick Bites and 
Lyme Disease to help raise awareness of Lyme disease and promote prevention methods.   
 
Given the locations of the Council owned parks and playgrounds, it is felt that there is a very 
low risk of users contracting Lyme’s disease in such locations and, as such, no signage is 

required.  Should the HSE decide to run a Public Health Campaign, the Council will, of 
course, liaise further with them on this matter.   
Further information is available here: 
https://www.hpsc.ie/az/vectorborne/lymedisease/informationforthepublic/factsheetsforth
egeneralpublic//  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. S. Stokes, seconded by Cllr. R. O’Connor and agreed by all to bring 
the motion back to the SPC. 
 
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. A. Flynn Kennedy (proposer), seconded by Cllr. M. 
Corrigan (4th March 2024) 
 
'That Wicklow County Council, in conjunction with Bray Municipal District examine fully the 
traffic congestion issues within Bray, both town centre as well as the entry and exit points of 
the District, and develop a plan to deal with the long term traffic congestion, taking into 
consideration new developments with current planning approved and / or submitted and the 
future development of the Fassaroe lands.'  
Response 
 
The Bray Transport Study 2019 was developed to address current and future transport 
needs in Bray and its environs. The study considered future developments and set out 
infrastructure necessary to cater for the increased traffic arising. Key objectives included 
modal shift to bus and DART services. DART services will double in frequency under the 
DART + coastal proposed improvements. Dedicated bus and cycle lanes are proposed from 
Bray to the city centre under the Bus connects project, currently under consideration at An 
Bord Pleanala. 
 
Many of the proposals to address traffic movements to and from Bray were contingent on 
progressing the M11/N11 improvement scheme. Regrettably funding for this scheme has 
not been available to progress improvements as anticipated in the Bray Transport Study. 
Efforts continue to seek funding for improvements on the M11/N11. It is proposed to 
undertake a new Local Area Plan for Bray commencing in 2024; it may be appropriate to 
review elements of the Bray Transport Study in conjunction with this work. 
 
While the Bus Connects and the DART improvement works may have limited impact on the 
Town centre area, a traffic modelling report has been issued and the bus priority and 
decongestion scheme are available for consultation by members. 
 
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. M. Murphy (proposer), seconded by Cllr. S. Stokes 
(4th March 2024) 
 
‘That Wicklow County Council will undertake an accessibility audit in all formats of all Polling 
Stations in each Municipal District before June’s proposed Local Election.  
The Irish Wheelchair Association (IWA) has called on the Department of Housing to ensure 
that "appropriate measures" are taken to ensure that polling stations are fully accessible to 

people with disabilities seeking to participate in upcoming elections and referendums, after a 
National Disability Authority found that 29 buildings, servicing 43 polling stations, were not 
accessible to wheelchair users at the last general election, while other issues included the 
availability of easy-to-read information on candidates and difficulties with the tactile voting 
template for the visually impaired. "The onus should not be on the person with the 
disability to try and find where they have to go to that is accessible, which maybe not in 
the same premises as where other family members vote’ 
 
Response 
 
The European Returning Officer Ms. Mary Delehanty has responsibility for the polling 
stations in the forthcoming elections.  
 
She has confirmed that a full accessibility audit has been carried out in respect of all of the 
polling stations on our polling scheme in County Wicklow.  
 
Ramps are available where required and secondary access doors and extra polling booths 
and rooms have been identified as necessary in two stations and these will be catered for in 
the forthcoming elections.    
 
Works are carried out on schools and community halls all the time.  Ms. Delehanty requests 
a safety report to be completed and notified to her in respect of each station before polling.   
 
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. E. Timmins (proposer), seconded by Cllr. V. Blake 
(28th March 2024) 
 
''We are calling on The Minister for Tourism Catherine Martin and The Minister for Housing 
Darragh O’Brien to urgently engage with the providers of Short Term Lets’ and Air B&B’s 
throughout Ireland that are providing much needed support and accommodation to enhance 
The Tourism Industry that is so vital to our economy. What is required is a suspension of The 
Mandatory Registration Process for Short Term Lets’ until adequate Consultation and 
Clarification is put in place in order to allay the fears, anxiety and misinformation that is 
bringing huge uncertainty to the providers of accommodation in this sector.'' 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. E. Timmins, Seconded by Cllr. V. Blake and agreed by all to write to 
the Minister for Tourism and to the Minister for Housing. 
 
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. M. Kavanagh (proposer), seconded by Cllr. P. 
Leonard and supported by Cllr. J. Behan and Cllr. T. Fortune (2nd April 2024) 
 
‘Due to the very worrying increase in road fatalities throughout the country, this Council 
demands that the Government provides funding for the employment of a full time Road 
Safety Officer in every Local Authority in the country’. 
 
If passed, that this motion be sent to every local authority’. 
Response 

 
The role of Road Safety Officer with Wicklow County Council has always been a part time 
administrative role.  This differs throughout the Country as some RSOs are a technical grade.  
To the best of my knowledge all RSOs are part time with the exception of a few counties 
Donegal, Mayo, Kildare and the Dublin Authorities.  Some counties share a RSO.  
 
The Department recently launched a pilot scheme with 4 counties for the appointment of a 
permanent RSO at an Executive Engineer grade.  An announcement is expected that the 
scheme will be rolled out to all local authorities shortly.  
 
Other Information in relation to the RSO role: 
 
The duties of the post of the Road Safety Officer include, but are not limited to:  
 
• 
Promoting and assisting in the implementation of the Government’s Strategy on 
Road Safety Vision Zero.  
• 
Initiating and promoting road safety campaigns and projects in collaboration with 
relevant stakeholders to develop a culture of proactive safe road use for all users.  
• 
Promoting and assisting the implementation of a road safety plan for County 
Wicklow.  
• 
Managing the Road Safety Working Together Committee for Wicklow and 
maintaining good working relations with An Garda Siochana and other stakeholders.  
• 
Chairing quarterly meetings 
• 
The RSWTC members include representatives from Wicklow County Council, the 
Road Safety Authority, the Gardaí, and Transport Infrastructure Ireland. 
• 
The main objectives of the Road Safety Working Together Committee are:  
• 
To oversee the preparation of a Road Safety Plan for County Wicklow in line with the 
Government’s Strategy on Road Safety Vision Zero.  
• 
Implementation of the Plan. 
• 
Set, measure and realise targets for road safety, in accordance with the Road Safety 
Plan 
• 
Report annually to the SPC on the outcomes achieved from the plan. 
• 
To discuss road safety priorities and communicate good practice. 
• 
To enhance the knowledge of all those on the Working Committee.  
 
• 
Budget holder for the Annual Road Safety Budget of €1000 
• 
Point of contact for public/Schools in relation to RS and liaising with MD in replying 
to the queries. 
• 
Weighbridge – Recently reached agreement with a private company to allow use of 
their Weighbridge by AGS (WCC is obliged to provide this facility under legislation). 
• 
School Warden Service     – Assisting the MDs in the operation of a School Warden 
Service for County Wicklow (training, uniforms, substitute cover) 
• 
Participating on Interview Boards for STWs 
• 
Presentation of road safety data, plans, information to various meetings, when 
required.  
• 
Deliver road safety messages via media and radio when required. 
• 
Manage and maintain social media on Wicklow County Council’s SM channels.  

• 
Update of Website for Road Safety. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. M. Kavanagh, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard and agreed by all to write 
to the Minister for Transport and to the NTA and the motion to be circulated to every local 
authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________                                        ________________________ 
CLLR. PAUL O’BRIEN  
 
 
 
MS. HELEN PURCELL 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
 
 
 
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/ 
WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 
 
 
Confirmed at meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday the 1st July 2024    
 
