MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING (HYBRID) OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON
MONDAY 2ND MARCH 2026, COMMENCING 2.00 PM IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER AND
VIA MICROSOFT TEAMS
PRESENT:
COUNCILLORS M. CORRIGAN CATHAOIRLEACH, D, ALVEY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE, A. CRONIN,
E.' DOYLE, M. DUDDY, G. DUNNE, L. FENELON GASKIN, O. FINN, P. FITZGERALD, T. FORTUNE,
P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. LEONARD,'P. MAHON, J. MULHALL, M. MURPHY,
l. NEARY, P. O'BRIEN, G. O'NEILL, W. O'TOOLE, G. RICHMOND, L. SCOTT, J. SNELL, P.
STAPLETON, S. STOKES, N. WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY (30)
APOLOGIES
CLLR. M. BARRY (1)
IN ATTENDANCE:
MS. E. O'GORMAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
MS. J. CARROLL, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. H. DENNEHY, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. L. EARLS, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MR. J. LANE, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MR. M. NICHOLSON, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
T. O'BRIEN, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. D. KENNEDY, LAW AGENT
H. PURCELL, SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
MS.
MR. S. DOYLE, IS PROJECT LEADER
T. BYRNE, ASSISTANT STAFF OFFICER
P. DUNNE, WICKLOW CHEVIOT SHEEP OWNERS ASSOCIATION
P. BEHAN, WICKLOW CHEVIOT SHEEP OWNERS ASSOCIATION
At the commencement of the meeting a roll call was taken. The Meetings Administrator
advised all present they are bound by the Code of Conduct for Councillors and Employees.
Also, of meetings etiquette for online meetings and that the press and some members of the
public were also present.
Votes of Sympathy
Elected Members passed a vote of sympathy to the families of the late Ms. Kathleen
Harmon, Mr. Edmund O'Brien, Mr. Gerry Scully, Mr. John Tucker, Mr. Stephen Doyle, Mr.
Patrick Dunne, Mr. Kevin Lee, Mr. Ray Cranley, Mr. Gerry Toomey, Ms. Bernie Fitzgerald and
Ms. Margaret Doyle. A minute's silence was observed for the deceased.
1
At the commencement of the meeting it was agreed by all to move to Item 10 following
item 8.
Request for Suspension of Standing Orders: - The Meetings Administrator advised that a
request for suspension of standing orders had been submitted in advance of the meeting. In
accordance with the protocol adopted the requests were read to the meeting as proposed
and seconded: -
Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. G, O'Neill and supported by Cllrs. P. Glennon, P. Mahon, J.
Mulhall and P. Stapleton, requested a suspension of standing orders to disc-uss the following
motion:
'To seek additional roads funding for emergency repairs as a result of storm Chandra. The
estimated cost of road repairs for the Baltinglass MD is €5 million'.
It was agreed by all to have a discussion on the topics at 4.30 p.m.
ITEM NO. 1
To consider the disposal of 0.0187 ha or thereabouts in the townland of Kilbride Td. being
the property known as St. Helen's Lodge, Killarney Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Karen
Fraher.
It was proposed by Cllr. N. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. C. Winstanley and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 0.0187 ha or thereabouts in the townland of Kilbride Td. being the
property known as St. Helen's Lodge, Killarney Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Karen Fraher, as
set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 2
To consider the disposal of 0.43 acres of land or thereabouts in the townland of Rathdrum.
Co. Wicklow by way of 18-month lease for the period 9th January 2026 to 8th July 2027 and
the right to pass and repass thereto, to Mr. Noel Jacob and Ms. Helen Jacob, Jacob's Well,
Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. Fitzgerald and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 0.43 acres of land or thereabouts in the townland of Rathdrum. Co.
Wicklow by way of 18-month lease for the period 9th January 2026 to 8th July 2027 and the
right to pass and repass thereto, to Mr. Noel Jacob and Ms. Helen Jacob, Jacob's Well,
Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 3
To consider the disposal of 0.1892Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Killacloran,
Aughrim, Co. Wicklow, Y14 AE80 comprised in Folio WW4484 being the property known
2
as Killacloran, Aughrim, Co. Wicklow, Y14 AE80 by Transfer Order to Julie Doyle,
Kllqueeney, Avoca, Co. Wicklow.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. P. P. Kennedy and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 0.1892Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Killacloran, Aughrim,
Co. Wicklow, Y 14 AE80 comprised in Folio WW4484 being the property known as Killacloran,
Aughrim, Co. Wicklow, Y 14 AE80 by Transfer Order to Julie Doyle, Kllqueeney, Avoca, Co.
Wicklow, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 4
To consider the filling of casual vacancy arising from the resignation of Cllr. Dermot
O'Brien in accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until the April meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
ITEM NO. 5
To consider the vacancy on the Climate, Action, Biodiversity, Environment, Energy,
Marine, Recreation & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee arising from the resignation of
Cllr. D. O'Brien.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until the April meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
ITEM NO. 6
To consider the vacancy on the Special Amenity Area Order for Bray Head arising from the
resignation of Cllr. D. O'Brien.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until.the April meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
ITEM NO. 7
To consider the vacancy on the Bray Local Drugs Task Force arising from the resignation of
Cllr. D. O'Brien.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until the April meeting as no
nomination has been. received from Sinn Féin.
3
ITEM NO. 8
To consider in accordance with Section 11 of the Roads Act, 1993 and Section 180 of the
Planning and Development Act, 2000, as amended, the Taking in Charge of the following
estates:
Annabasky Glen, Enniskerry
Avondale Meadows, Rathdrum
Holywell, Kilcoole
Oak Springs, Rathdrum
Sillan, Greystones
Thorndale, Delgany
Wood Park, Rathdrum
Ternlee, Kilcoole
It was proposed by Cllr. M. Corrigan, seconded by Cllr. C. Winstanley and agreed by all to the
taking in charge of the following estate: Annabasky Glen, Enniskerry.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. W. O'Toole and agreed by all to the
taking in charge of the following estate: Avondale Meadows, Rathdrum.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. Fortune, seconded by Cllr. L. Fenelon Gaskin and agreed by all to
the taking in charge of the following estate: Holywell, Kilcoole.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. Fitzgerald and agreed by all to the
taking in charge of the following estate: Oak Springs, Rathdrum.
It was proposed by Cllr. S. Stokes, seconded by Cllr. L. Fenelon Gaskin and agreed by all to the
taking in charge of the following estate: Sillan, Greystones.
It was proposed by Cllr. S. Stokes, seconded by Cllr. O. Finn and agreed by all to the taking in
charge of the following estate: Thorndale, Delgany.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. Fitzgerald and agreed by all to the
taking in charge of the following estate: Wood Park, Rathdrum.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. Fortune, seconded by Cllr. O. Finn and agreed by all to the taking
in charge of the following estate: Ternlee, Kilcoole.
ITEM NO. 10
To receive a presentation: Wicklow Cheviot Sheep Owners Association.
Mr. P. Behan and Mr. P. Dunne, Wicklow Cheviot Sheep Owners Association gave a
presentation outlining the following:
• 155,000 breeding ewes in Wicklow, fifth highest sheep numbers by county in Ireland.
4
225,000 lambs born in Wicklow every Spring.
736 flock owners in Wicklow.
Worth €31m to the Wicklow economy.
Sheep farming is the backbone of rural life in Wicklow, especially in upland areas.
Due to the upland nature of the Wicklow landscape, sheep are crucial for
maintaining and improving biodiversity.
Sheep farming indirectly sustains employment in several areas of the rural economy.
A lot of sheep worrying attacks go unreported.
Controlling of dogs by owners.
Should be a ban of non-working dogs on upland areas where livestock are present.
Dog owners need t respect signage of 'no dogs allowed'.
A broad discussion followed in which the Elected Members raised queries to which Mr.
Dunne responded. There were two proposals put forward by the Elected Members.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. S. Langrell and agreed by all to write
to the Department of Agriculture, Food & the Marine with the following motion:
'For an amendment to the National Sheep and Goat Census by the Department of Agriculture, Food
& The Marine, to add a question to the end of the form that states:
Has your flock experienced a dog attack in the past 12 months?'
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Behan, seconded by Cllr. J. Snell and agreed by all to write to the
Department of Agriculture, Food and Marine with the following motion: -
"Wicklow County Council call on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and Marine to run a national A/
and social media campaign about sheep worrying and dog control.
Also to change the wording in legislation 'effective control' to 'complete control'. "
ITEM NO. 9
To consider the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report, February 2026.
Elected Members were circulated with the Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report,
February 2026.
Some of the issues raised included the following:
Whitestown Remediation Plan.
Bus Priority scheme - Bray.
Boxing club, Enniskerry.
Flooding — Ballinaclash.
Update on Rathlawn Estate, Dunlavin.
Update on Colbinstown bridge.
Parking — Blessington.
5
•
•
•
•
N81 — update on discussions with neighbouring county councils.
Wastewater treatment plant.
Rent arrears.
Allocation of money — bus shelters.
Protocol for nitrous oxide canisters/hazardous waste.
Housing — area of choice - Greystones.
Emergency accommodation - domestic violence cases.
Update — HAP.
Lott Lane junction, Kilcoole.
R761 development.
Local Community Safety Partnership.
Derelict site register.
NTA — budget allocation.
Capital funding projects — match fund €13m.
E.S.B. connections — Arklow.
Flooding register.
Text alert facility — severe weather alerts.
Housing — Arklow area.
Notices to quit — Arklow.
Tenants in-situ scheme.
Accommodation — National Disability Strategy.
Update on part 8 plan available to the public — Killincarrig.
Workshop — County Development Plan.
Derelict building — Market Squaré, Wicklow Town.
Walkway dangerous — Magheramore.
Local link — no designated bus stops.
Increase frequehcy — DART.
Additional staff resources required, housing grants.
Erosion - The Murrough, Wicklow Town.
Damp/mould — council owned houses.
Flood Relief Scheme and impacts.
Damaged road — South Beach, Arklow.
Log job completions by municipal district in the Chief Executive's report.
Kippure Lodge.
Day care centre, Blessington.
Bridge — Knockierin, Blessington.
PPP — Burgage, Mountain View - Blessington.
Planning — private developments.
Public lighting.
Stronger enforcement — collection of rental arrears.
L6202 — Kilpipe, Aughrim.
RRDF — Blessington.
Delegation to meet TII — N81 and NII.
Greystones health centre and primary care centre.
6
Elected Members raised questions which were responded to by the Chief Executive and the
relevant Director of Services.
Notices of motion
Notice of motion number 1
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. L. Scott (proposer), seconded by Cllr. L. Fenelon
Gaskin and supported by Cllr. S. Stokes, Cllr. M. Barry, Cllr. O. Finn and Cllr. T. Fortune.
In light of the amount of active open space, playgrounds, general community park and
outdoor facilities in Co. Wicklow, we propose that the Chief Executive establishes a Parks
Division as a priority. In addition the CE applies to the relevant Department for necessary
funding and includes updates to this request as a standing item on the monthly CE report. "
Response
Parks and Landscape Services Departments (P&LSD) oversee the development,
management, and maintenance of the county's Parks & Open Spaces, including, Tree
management, Biodiversity & Sustainability, Recreation & Play, Strategies & Policy, and
delivery of Capital Project i.e. public open space.
A P&LSD within Wicklow County Council would be fundamental in ensuring a cohesive and
multi-disciplinary approach to the development and management of quality Public Open
Space, •including active & passive recreation, sporting opportunities, play facilities,
community facilities, and stakeholder engagement. P&LSDs would -be instrumental in
planning decisions, development control, and policy development, ensuring that public and
communal open spaces are designed, delivered, and managed to meet the needs of the
communities. P&LSD staff would provide a technical understanding of the required
provision and maintenance of existing amenities within the County and promote and lead in
the protection and enhancement of biodiversity and sustainability, networking through the
various organisational departments to provide input in private and county led
developments, including forward planning and development management.
The establishment of a Parks Department in WCC would enable the CERA Directorate
provide support across the organisation in the development of policy, setting out the needs
for the county that can be delivered in a plan led, information based, solutions driven
manner. The technical knowledge provided by a Parks Department will ensure that the
correct facilities are planned strategically, in consultation with the communities, elected
members and stakeholders.
CERA have included the provision of a Parks and Landscape Service Department in the work
force place but is wholly dependent on funding being made available: There is no central
government funding for such posts.
Following a short discussion it was proposed by Cllr. L. Scott, seconded by Cllr. S. Stokes and
agreed by all to write to the Department of Finance to request funding.
7
It was further proposed by Cllr, L. Scott, seconded by Cllr: T. Fortune and agreed by all to
also write to Wicklow TDs and Senators highlighting the urgent need for funding.
Notice of motion number 2
Notice of motion in the name of Cllr. S. Bourke (proposer), seconded by Cllr. P. Stapleton.
'That Wicklow County Council explore an application for RRDF funding for Town First
projects similar to Carrick-in-Suir, that prioritises undergrounding of ESB and other utility
cabling, to enhance the visual urban landscape of Wicklow towns, and provide funding to
eliminate exterior metal shuttering from retail premises on Main streets, as recommended
on page 190 of the Architectural Heritage Protection document issued by the Department of
Arts Heritage and the Gaeltacht. Arklow should be used as the initial candidate to pilot this
proposal as it has been singled outfor criticism by An Taisce'.
'That Wicklow County Council unify the public lighting infrastructure in public Realm areas,
initially by removing redundant attachments, matching lighting fixtures, and paint all stands
in a single uniform colour, (grey, black or a suitable alternative), to unify the street
landscape. Arklow's Main Street, Ferrybank and Wexford Road, should be the initial focus, as
Arklow has been singled outfor criticism by An Taisce. Other towns and villages in county
Wicklow could be incorporated in this scheme to re-organise lighting to match up older
lighting fixtures. Climate sensitive lighting should be prioritised'.
Response
This Notice of Motion has been referred to both Planning and Economic SPCs as
correspondence in January, for consideration for inclusion in their multi annual work
programmes for 2026.
(ii) Arklow Town Team to explore options and funding streams available. Where a viable
project emerges, it will be through the Town Centre First process and application for funding
will be progressed through next various calls for application under the various schemes.
An assessment of public lighting across Wicklow is ongoing including a review of public
realm lighting. This includes the heritage/decorative style lighting (approximately 700 units)
commonly found in town centres. The proposal to bring a consistent approach to lighting in
public realm areas has merit and will be included in the ongoing assessment work.
The priority for staff and contractors working on public lighting in Wicklow remains the
repair of faulty lighting in a timely manner. This ensures areas are provided with operational
lighting in the first instance which then allows the area to be reviewed regarding upgrades
or retrofitting. Arklow Main Street for example required the existing lighting faults to be
repaired in order to assess the extent of follow up required to restore the
heritage/decorative light vista.
By way of background;
8
Heritage lamps in public realm areas were due to be addressed under the PLEEP contract —
this work like so much other work got 'de-scoped' when it became problematic. This is an
issue we will need to work out with our PL maintenance contractor in due course.
Suspensions of Standing Orders
Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. G. O'Neill and supported by Cllrs. P. Glennon, P. Mahon, J.
Mulhall and P. Stapleton, requested a suspension of standing orders to discuss the following
motion:
'To seek additional roads funding for emergency repairs as a result of storm Chandra. The
estimated cost of road repairs for the Baltinglass MD is €5 million'.
A lengthy discussion took place in which the Elected Members voiced their concerns in
relation to the condition of road throughout the county following storm Chandra.
Cllr. J. Behan, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon proposed an amendment to the motion by the
addition of 'the cost of road repairs for the entire County Wicklow is estimated at €15.6
million. The Council demand the government respond immediately and provide the funding
required for County Wicklow'.
The motion proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. G. O'Neill supported by Cllrs. P.
Glennon, P. Mahon, J. Mulhall, and P. Stapleton, amended by Cllr. J. Behan, seconded by Cllr.
P. Glennon and agreed by all called on the Council;
'To write to the Department of Transport, Office of the Taoiseach, Wicklow TD's and Senators
to seek additional roads funding for emergency repairs as a result of storm Chandra. The
estimated cost of road repairs for the Baltinglass MD is €5 million, the cost of road repairs for
the entire County Wicklow is estimated at €15.6 million. The Council demand the government
respond immediately and provide the funding required for County Wicklow. '
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING
CLLR. MELANIE COR GAN
CATHAOIRLEACH
WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL
MS. HELEN PURCELL
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
Confirmed at meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday the 13th April 2026.
9