MINUTES OF ORDINARY MEETING (HYBRID) OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON
MONDAY 13TH APRIL 2026, COMMENCING 2.00 PM IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER AND VIA
MICROSOFT TEAMS
PRESENT:
COUNCILLORS M. CORRIGAN CATHAOIRLEACH, D, ALVEY, M. BARRY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE,
A. CRONIN, E. DOYLE, M. DUDDY, G. DUNNE, L. FENELON GASKIN, O. FINN, P. FITZGERALD,
T. FORTUNE, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. LEONARD, P. MAHON, J. MULHALL,
M. MURPHY, l. NEARY, P. O'BRIEN, G. O'NEILL, W. O'TOOLE, G. RICHMOND, L. SCOTT, J.
SNELL, P. STAPLETON, S. STOKES, N. WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY (31)
APOLOGIES
IN ATTENDANCE:
MS. E. O'GORMAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
MS. J. CARROLL, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. H. DENNEHY, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. L. EARLS, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MR. B. GLEESON, DIRECrOR OF SERVICES
MR. M. NICHOLSON, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
T. O'BRIEN, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES
MS. D. KENNEDY, LAW AGENT
H. FALLON, SENIOR ENGINEER
MS. S. WALSH, SENIOR PLANNER
MS. E. BERMINGHAM, SENIOR PLANNER
. PURCELL, SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
MS H.
MR. S. DOYLE, IS PROJECT LEADER
T. BYRNE, ASSISTANT STAFF OFFICER
At the commencement of the meeting a roll call was taken. The Meetings Administrator
advised all present they are bound by the Code of Conduct for Councillors and Employees.
Also, of meetings etiquette for online meetings and that the press and some members of the
public were also present.
Votes of Sympathy
Elected Members passed a vote of sympathy to the families of the late Ms. Nora Fox, Mr.
Bobby Doran, Ms. Margaret Williams, Mr. Kenneth Flood, Ms. Eileen Hudson, Mr. Sean
Brophy, Mr. Willie Wall, Mr. Mick Farrell, Mr. Jim Crofton and Ms. Sinead O'Connor. A
minute's silence was observed for the deceased.
1
At the commencement of the meeting, it was proposed by Cllr. P. O'Brien, seconded by Cllr.
P. Kennedy and agreed by all to move to Item 21 following item 18.
ITEM No. 1
To confirm and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council held on
Monday 2nd March 2026.
It was proposed by Cllr. S. Langrell, seconded by Cllr. N. Whelan and agreed by all to confirm
and sign minutes of ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday 2nd March
2026.
ITEM NO. 2
To consider the disposal of property in the townland of Fryanstown, Dunlavin, Co. Wicklow
being the land comprised in Folio WW 2946L being the property known as Fryanstown,
Dunlavin, Co. Wicklow to Andrew Cullen & Kathleen Cullen.
It was proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of property in the townland of Fryanstown, Dunlavin, Co. Wicklow being the land
comprised in Folio WW 2946L being the property known as Fryanstown, Dunlavin, Co.
Wicklow to Andrew Cullen & Kathleen Cullen, as set out in statutory notice previously
circulated.
ITEM NO. 3
To consider the disposal of property in the townland of 1 Wolfe Tone Villas, Bray, Co.
Wicklow being the property comprised in Folio WW1380L being the property known as 1
Wolfe Tone Villas, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Brendan Murphy.
It was proposed by Cllr. N. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. l. Neary and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of property in the townland of 1 Wolfe Tone Villas, Bray, Co. Wicklow being the
property comprised in Folio WW1380L being the property known as 1 Wolfe Tone Villas,
Bray, Co. Wicklow to Brendan Murphy, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 4
To consider the disposal of property in the townland of Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co.
Wicklow being the property comprised in Folio WW3008L being the property known as 24
Centre Road, Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow to Adrian Manley, Leo Manley and
Mairead O'Reilly.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. Fitzgerald and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of property in the townland of Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow
2
being the property comprised in Folio WW3008L being the property known as 24 Centre
Road, Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow to Adrian Manley, Leo Manley and Mairead
O'Reilly, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 5
To consider the disposal of 0.0396Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Ballynerrin Lower
Td. being the property known as 31 Glenview Road, Wicklow Town, Co. Wicklow to Jean
Webster as legal Personal Representative in the estate of Ethel (otherwise Mary) Kelly.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. O'Brien, seconded by Cllr. G. Richmond and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 0.0396Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Ballynerrin Lower Td.
being the propertyknown as 31 Glenview Road, Wicklow Town, Co. Wicklow to Jean
Webster as legal Personal Representative in the estate of Ethel (otherwise Mary) Kelly, as
set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 6
To consider the disposal of 0.0253Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Oldcourt Td. being
the property known as 13 0'Byrne Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mary Grant as legal
personal Representative in the estate of John Grant deceased.
It was proposed by Cllr. N. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. l. Neary and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of 0.0253Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Oldcourt Td. being the property
known as 13 0'Byrne Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mary Grant as legat personal
Representative in the estate of John Grant deceased, as set out in statutory notice
previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 7
To consider the disposal of property in the townland of Oldcourt Td. being the property
known as 65 Wolfe Tone Square North, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Michael O'Toole in the estate
of Eamonn O'Toole.
It was proposed by Cllr. l. Neary, seconded by Cllr. N. Whelan and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of property in the townland of Oldcourt Td. being the property known as 65
Wolfe Tone Square North, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Michael O'Toole in the estate of Eamonn
O'Toole, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 8
To consider the disposal of 0.0198Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Oldcourt Td, Bray
being the property known as 40 Wolfe Tone Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Stuart Geraghty
as LPR.
3
It was proposed by Cllr. l. Neary, seconded by Cllr. N. Whelan and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of 0.0198Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Oldcourt Td, Bray being the
property known as 40 Wolfe Tone Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Stuart Geraghty as LPR, as
set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 9
To consider the disposal of 0.1881Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Ballymoat Td.
being the property known as 28/11 Ballymoate, Glenealy, Co. Wicklow to Bernadette
Glynn in the estate of John Glynn deceased.
It was proposed by Cllr. J. Snell, seconded by Cllr. S. Langrell and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of 0.1881Ha or thereabouts in the townland of Ballymoat Td. being the
property known as 28/11 Ballymoate, Glenealy, Co. Wicklow to Bernadette Glynn in the
estate of John Glynn deceased, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 10
To consider the disposal of 1 acre (0.4046Ha) or thereabouts in the townland of Corballis
Upper, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow being the property known as Site No. 11 in the Avondale
Business Park„Corballis, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow to Irish Decal Products Ltd., T/A Brady's
Coffee, company registered office Unit SMI Wicklow Enterprise Park, The Murrough,
Wicklow Town by way of a 999 year lease.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. Fitzgerald and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 1 acre (0.4046Ha) or thereabouts in the townland of Corballis
Upper, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow being the property known as Site No. 11 in the Avondale
Business Park, Corballis, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow to Irish Decal Products Ltd., T/A Brady's
Coffee, company registered office Unit SMI Wicklow Enterprise Park, The Murrough,
Wicklow Town by way of a 999 year lease, as set out in statutory notice previously
circulated.
ITEM NO. 11
To consider the disposal of 0.5 acre (0.2023ha) or thereabouts in the townland of Corballis
Upper, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow being the property known as Site No. 12 in the Avondale
Business Park, Corballis, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow to David Doyle, T/A Regenerative Foods
Ltd., 4 Bracken Demesne, Roundwood, Co. Wicklow by way of 999 year lease.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke and agreed by all to
consider the disposal of 0.5 acre (0.2023ha) or thereabouts in the townland of Corballis
Upper, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow being the property known as Site No. 12 in the Avondale
Business Park, Corballis, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow to David Doyle, T/A Regenerative Foods
4
Ltd., 4 Bracken Demesne, Roundwood, Co. Wicklow by way of 999 year lease, as set out in
statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 12
To consider the disposal of 70 square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath,
Rathnew, Co. Wicklow being the property known as Clermont College, Wicklow County
Campus to Tom McInerney of Puffjockey Studios Limited by way of two-year lease
commencing 1st June 2026.
It was proposed by Cllr P. O'Brien, seconded by Cllr. S. Langrell and agreed by all to consider
the disposal of 70 square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Newrath, Rathnew, Co.
Wicklow being the property known as Clermont College, Wicklow County Campus to Tom
McInerney of Puffjockey Studios Limited by way of two-year lease commencing 1st June
2026, as set out in statutory notice previously circulated.
ITEM NO. 13
To consider the disposal of 183 square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Bray
Harbour, Bray to the Trustees of Bray Rowing Club, Strand Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow by
way of a 35-year sporting lease.
A short discussion followed. A number of issues were raised relating to the process, and the
commitment of the Council to source suitable accommodation for the boxing clubs.
Cllr. C. Winstanley proposed, seconded by Cllr. N. Whelan 'to consider the disposal of 183
square metres or thereabouts in the townland of Bray Harbour, Bray to the Trustees of Bray
Rowing Club, Strand Road, Bray, Co. Wicklow by way ofa 35-year sporting lease' was put to
a vote and following a roll call was passed by a margin of 25 for, 2 against, 1 not present and
3 abstained viz: -
FOR (25)
AGAINST (2)
NOT PRESENT (1)
ABSTAINED (3)
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, E.
DOYLE, M. DUDDY, G. DUNNE, L. FENELON GASKIN, O. FINN, P.
FITZGERALD, T. FORTUNE, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. LEONARD, P.
MAHON, J. MULHALL, M. MURPHY, P. O'BRIEN, G. RICHMOND, L.
SCOTT, P. STAPLETON, S. STOKES, N. WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY
CLLRS. l. NEARY AND G. O'NEILL
CLLR. M. BARRY
CLLRS. P. GLENNON, W. O'TOOLE AND J. SNELL
5
ITEM NO. 14
To consider the filling of casual vacancy arising from the resignation of Cllr. Dermot
O'Brien in accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until the May meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
ITEM NO. 15
To consider the vacancy on the Climate, Action, Biodiversity, Environment, Energy,
Marine, Recreation & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee arising from the resignation of
Cllr. D. O'Brien.
It was agreed by thesElected Members to defer this item until the May meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
ITEM NO. 16
To consider the vacancy on the Special Amenity Area Order for Bray Head arising from the
resignation of Cllr. D. O'Brien.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until the May meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
ITEM NO. 17
To consider the vacancy on the Bray Local Drugs Task Force arising from the resignation of
Cllr. D. O'Brien.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until the May meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
ITEM NO. 18
To consider the vacancy on the Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) arising
from the resignation of Cllr. D. O'Brien.
It was agreed by the Elected Members to defer this item until the May meeting as no
nomination has been received from Sinn Féin.
6
ITEM NO. 21
To consider the Chief Executive's Report pursuant to Section 37 E (4) of the Planning and
Development Act 2000 (as amended) for an application to An Coimisiün Pleanåla
Reference — 324033-26 for a Strategic Infrastructure Development consisting of Proposed
Development of a Soil Recovery Facility in the townland of Kilmartin, Coyne's Cross, Co.
Wicklow.
Ms. H. Dennehy, Director of Services advised the Elected Members of the following:
The proposal is a proposed development of a soil recovery facility which was
submitted to An Coimisiün Pleanåla (ACP).
The requirement of section 37E of the Planning and Development Act indicates a
Chief Executive Report to be prepared and forwarded to An Coimisiün Pleanåla
before the 30th of March.
An extended timeframe was sought from An Coimisiün Pleanåla (ACP) and the report
is due by the 17th April.
Following discussion today, the Chief Executive report, together with a record of the
Elected Members' discussion, will be forwarded to An Coimisiün Pleanåla by the 17th
April.
A discussion followed in which the Elected Members raised issues which were responded to
by Ms. Dennehy, Director of Services and Ms. E. Bermingham, Senior Planners.
Some of the issues raised were:
•
•
Number of loads in and out.
Impact on traffic.
Impact on community.
Supervision of material going into the site.
Community gain.
Good location.
First phase — 2008. 2m tons of inert soil over 10-year period.
Number of residential houses in the Kilmartin area.
Monitoring of streams to Five Mile Point, Clonmannon — Broadlough Lake.
Role and remit of Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to monitor the site.
Does Wicklow County Council gain from a development levy?
Definition of soil recovery facility.
Importance of engagement with the community.
ITEM NO. 19
To consider the Chief Executive's Report on submissions made to Proposed Variation No. 5
to the Wicklow County Development Plan 2022-2028, relating to the Arklow Local
Planning Framework (previously circulated) and to consider making the Proposed
7
Variation/Local Planning Framework, or making material alterations to the Proposed
Variation/Local Planning Framework, or not making the Proposed Variation/local Planning
Framework.
The Meetings Administrator reminded the Elected Members of their requirements under
the Ethics Legislation as follows:
• When a matter comes before the meeting for consideration if they or a connected
person has a beneficial interest they must disclose to the meeting the nature of the
beneficial interest before discussion or consideration of the matter commences; they
must fully withdraw from the meeting until the matter is concluded; they must also
inform the Council's Ethics Registrar in writing. The disclosure and absence of the
meeting will be recorded in the minutes and when the item is completed the
member will be advised by phone and can rejoin the meeting.
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
EMI
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Cllr. P. Leonard
Cllr. W. O'Toole
NOT PASSED
13, 14, 36, 44, 46, 47, 55
n/a
Various
Various
Chapter/Section
PROPOSAL
Omit all and any reference to an Active Travel Bridge east of the 19 Arches
Bridge.
In particular (but there may be other references also):
A:3.2 Sustainable Transportation
OMIT BULLET POINT
A:4 Overall Strategy
OMIT BULLET POINT
8
10. To support the following priority transport / accessibility schemes in Arklow:
(b) Provision of an Active Travel Bridge over the River Avoca west of the Nineteen
Arches Bridge linking the Town Centre and River Walk to Ferrybank and
Kilbride,
(c) The improvement of the public realm and overall pedestrian environment for
all users in the Town Centre in particular along Main Street/Main Street
Lower,
(d) The continued provision of new / improved footpaths and cycleways on all
regional roads leading into the town,
(e) The construction of the SPAR (Southern Port Access Road) which to reduce the
volume of HGVs from the town centre enhancing this environment for
pedestrians, and
(f) To carry out a feasibility study, including environmental studies, regarding the
provision of a second vehicular bridge crossing over the River Avoca between
the Nineteen Arches Bridge and the MI 1.
B: 1.2 Public Realm & Movement in Arklow Town
AMEND POINT 4
While transport matters are more generally dealt with in Section B.8 to follow
certain projects and objectives have the potential to have a transformative effect
on Arklow Town Centre. In this regard:
1.
2.
3.
The development of the SPAR (Southern Port Access Road) would
significantly alter traffic movement patterns in the town centre and allow for
a substantial reduction in traffic passing through the town centre and across
the 19 Arches Bridge, in particular, HGVs.
The reduction of through traffic resulting from the SPAR would allow for the
reallocation of road space from private vehicular traffic to pedestrians,
cyclists, and public transport and allow for the overall enhancement of the
public realm of the Main Street improving its vibrancy and vitality by making
it a more pleasant place to be.
A number of laneways leading off Arklow Main Street provide linkages to the
waterfront/South Quay and Avoca River Walk, namely Doyle's Lane and
Condron's Lane Lower. Castle Park to the south/west is connected via
Bradshaw's Lane, Abbey Lane and Laffin's Lane. Currently many of these
laneways are designed to prioritise car movements or they are not attractive
or obvious links, especially to visitors/tourists. With a reduction in traffic
levels, improvements to the public realm of the waterfront as part of the
Flood Relief Scheme, improvements to the pedestrian environment of Main
Street and the implementation of wayfinding signage, these laneways could
9
4.
5.
6.
be enhanced, similar to Abbey Lane, to expand the public realm and increase
the use of pedestrian and cycle friendly linkages between the Castle Park
area, the Main Street and onto South Quay.
The draft Arklow Transport Plan supports the development oft-we-an active
travel bridges across the River Avoca;
to the west of the Nineteen
Arches Bridge linking the river walk across to Arklow Town Marsh, Kilbride
and Ferrybank. This route will utilise the debris trap structure proposed as
part of the flood relief scheme and any route taken via the marsh shall be
designed so that it is elevated above the marsh and has minimal impact on
this proposed National Heritage Area.
The reinstatement of former archways which facilitated carriage/vehicular
access to the back lands of properties along the Main Street providing further
pedestrian/cycle connection opportunities as part of the
redevelopment/refurbishment of sites with such features.
Traffic congestion on the single bridge in Arklow previously led to the
development of an objective for the construction of a possible new vehicular
bridge over the Avoca River between the Nineteen Arches Bridge and the
MI 1. However, such a crossing would require detailed feasibility and
environmental studies and significant investment, given the distance it would
have to span across the marsh and river, and is therefore identified as a
longer term objective in the diaft L TP.
OMIT BULLET POINT
Objective ARK 2
To support and facilitate improvements to the public realm in Arklow Town Centre
to provide an attractive, comfortable environment for pedestrians of all mobility
levels, cyclists and users of public transport. Such improvements may include the
following:
•
Improvements in the 'walkability' and 'legibility' of the town centre via improved
wayfinding signage, enhancement of pedestrian facilities along public roads and
local laneways and improving connections from the town centre to the
waterfront, Arklow Train Station and edge of centre residential areas;
Reduction in the dominance of private vehicles and space dedicated to private
vehicles in the public realm, thereby facilitating the enhancement of space for
social interaction and potential use for community and business uses;
By improving the appearance of junctions and gateway areas into the Main
Street, particularly the Main Street — Bridge Street junction and on approach
from Back Street and Tinahask/Harbour Road.
To seek as part of the redevelopment/refurbishment of properties along Main
Street and Lower Main Street the reinstatement of former
archways/vehicular/carriage entrances to provide pedestrian and cyclist routes
between the Main Street/Lower Main Street, South Quay and Castle Park and
open up backland and infill sites for redevelopment with vehicular traffic
accessing plots from alternative locations if practical;
Of_the
town. eyvateeßhop in Centre;
10
•
In conjunction with the National Transport Authority to carry out a feasibility
study and support the development ofa second active travel bridge to the west
of the 79 Arches Bridge connecting Arklow Main town centre, the river walk with
Ferrybank and SL05 Kilbride.
Improvement of quality and consistency of the public realm including more
consistency in road surface treatments, paving materials, signage and street
furniture;
The implementation ofa comprehensive public realm scheme along the south
and north bank of the River Avoca and adjacent areas of Arklow Town Centre as
part of the Arklow Town Flood Relief Scheme works.
Improvement to overall enjoyment of the experience of being in Arklow town
centre through reductions in traffic, street clutter, overhead cabling and
incongruous public realm elements
B:8.7.7 Active Travel
AMEND AS FOLLOWS
The full suite of permeability proposals outlined in the draft LTP is illustrated on
Figure B: 8.7 to follow (Figure 13-4 of the draft LTP). Vhese This proposals can be
summarized as follows:
• In order overcome the overreliance on the Nineteen Arches Bridge, and enhance
connectivity between Arklow Town Centre, the BridgeFGterCæntreao&Ajorth
anä—Søut-h-Qucws, the follow projects«e. is recommended:
- The development of an Active Travel Bridge linking Main Street and the River
Walk with Kilbride and Ferrybank while also maximising accessibility by
providing east-west pedestrian links connecting the proposed Kilbride Pedestrian
and Cycling Bridge with Ferrybank / Dublin Road.
T-hese This active travel bridges-GQ- is identified as AT 7 and-AZ on Figure 8.7
below and will build upon the planned enhancements to the public realm as part of
the flood relief works.
B:8.7.4 Roads
AMEND AS FOLLOWS
Road objectives included in this LPF aim to provide alternative routes for through
traffic, in particular HGVs wishing to access the Roadstone Quarry and Arklow Port.
The development of a Southern Port Access Route and associated upgrades to the
existing suppofting road network either end of the proposed SPAR route would serve
to remove HGVs from the Town Centre and reduce overall traffic volume. This roads
project, in conjunction with the objective for new active travel bridges
crossing the Avoca River, would further enhance the pedestrian / cycle environment
of the Town Centre and enhance connectivity between the north and south of the
11
town.
Main-Streetondthe-BridgevvoterS60pping- Cen tre
Objective ARK 72
OMIT BULLET POINT
To overcome overreliance on the Nineteen Arches Bridge and improve pedestrian
and cycle connectivity between the north and south of the river, by promoting
and supporting the development of;
• The Kilbride Pedestrian and Cycling Bridge between the Avoca River Walk
and Arklow Town Marsh/Ferrybank, including associated east-west
pedestrian links connecting this crossing with Ferrybank / Dublin Road
(short/medium term), the River Avoca Industrial Park (long term) and Arklow
to Laragh Greenway (long term) (AT 1, AT 15, AT 19, CY2)
Such development shall be suitably informed by ecological surveying, ecological
impact assessment, AA Screening/AA and ElA Screening/ElA, as the case may be,
with a view toward avoiding and preventing significant adverse effects on
receiving environmental sensitivities. Such development shall be appropriately
shaped and guided by environmental and ecological constraints in the receiving
environments.
SLOT Northern Waterfront Zone
OMIT TEXT
The Northern Waterfront Zone SLO measures c. 9ha (including all existing buildings
thereon) and occupies an excellent strategic location with access to the waterfront to
the south, Kynoch Park and Coral Leisure to the north and Bridgewater Shopping
Centre to the north west. The comprehensive re-development of these lands would
create opportunities to improve walking linkages between South Quay, Kynock Park
and the Bridgewater centre, while further contributing to the regeneration and
enhancement of this key central, serviced location.
br_idge_ e o e
pea. G _ _ e
There is potential on these lands for further marine based commercial and/or leisure
activities on the sites with access to the waterfront, while high intensity mixed use
(predominantly residential) development will be promoted on the northern sites,
providing passive surveillance over the AOS lands to the north.
12
REASON
Amend Figure B:1.3 'Proposed Public Realm and Pedestrian Connectivity
Improvements for Arklow Town' to omit AT 2, as follows:
Change from:
Change to:
Note - Changes consequent will be required to be made to the Local Transport
Plan.
1. Justification
1.1 Lack of demonstrated benefit
The proposed eastern bridge location does not clearly demonstrate a benefit to
the vibrancy of the town centre or to the effective flow of active travel. It is not
13
evident how this proposal would encourage movement into the commercial core
or support existing businesses.
1.2 Land use and connectivity
The eastern landing point at South Quay is primarily residential in nature and does
not represent a strong destination. In contrast, a western crossing would connect
more directly with established commercial areas, including cafés, pubs and other
town centre uses, and-would better align with existing movement patterns.
1.3 Impact on heritage
There are concerns regarding the impact on the setting of the Nineteen Arches
Bridge, a structure of significant historic importance and a defining feature of
Arklow. The introduction of a new bridge in close proximity would risk detracting
from its visual setting and the character of the river corridor.
1.4 Navigation constraints
The Avoca River is an active navigation channel, including use by yachts and
leisure craft. The siting of a bridge in this location would present constraints in
terms of clearance, span and navigation, which require careful consideration.
1.5 Flood relief considerations
It is noted that the Arklow Flood Relief Scheme is currently being advanced. In this
context, the inclusion of a bridge objective at this stage is considered premature,
as it may interact with or onstrain the delivery of flood relief infrastructure. A
coordinated and integrated approach is necessary.
1.6 Alternative approach
Consideration should be given to the potential to enhance the existing bridge,
including widening and the provision of dedicated pedestrian and cycle facilities.
This approach could deliver active travel improvements without the need for a
new structure in close proximity.
2. Conclusion
The eastern bridge objective is not sufficiently justified, is premature, and raises
concerns in relation to heritage, navigation and infrastructure coordination.
I therefore recommend that the AT 2 objective be removed from the easterly
location and reconsidered as part of a more integrated approqch to future bridge
provision in Arklow.
Chief Executive's Prelimina Res onse
The CE does not su ort the ro osed alteration.
Alteration No. EMI proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. W O'Toole was put to a
vote and following a roll call was defeated by a margin of 10 for, 13 against, 2 not present
and 6 abstained viz:-
FOR (10)
AGAINST (13)
NOT PRESENT (2)
ABSTAINED (6)
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
CLLRS. J. BEHAN, M. DUDDY, O. FINN, T. FORTUNE, P. LEONARD, M.
MURPHY, l. NEARY, W. O'TOOLE, J. SNELL AND S. STOKES
CLLRS. S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, G. DUNNE, L.
FENELON GASKIN, P. FITZGERALD, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S.
LANGRELL, P. MAHON, G. RICHMOND, P. STAPLETON AND N.
WHELAN
CLLRS. E. DOYLE AND G. O'NEILL
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, M. BARRY, J. MULHALL, P. O'BRIEN, L. SCOTT AND
C. WINSTANLEY
EM2
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Chapter/Section
Cllr. S. Bourke
Cllr. P. Kennedy
PASSED AS PROPOSED
61, 65
n/a
PART B SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
B.4 Economic Development &
Employment
PROPOSAL
Amend MAP NO. 1 LAND USE ZONING and add new objective to
EMPLOYMENT OBJECTIVES for lands at Ballynattin.
Amend land use zoning at Ballynattin (measuring c. 17ha) from T 'Tourism' to E
'Employment', as follows:
Change from:
15
REASON
Change to:
Add new objective to EMPLOYMENT OBJECTIVES as follows:
ARK X
Any future development of 'Employment' (El) at Ballynattin located to the
west of the MI shall be accompanied by the deliver/ of active travel connectivity
(pedestrian and cycle infrastructure) to Knockmore / public transport services on
the east side of the MI 1
Rezoning the land from tourism to employment would support the sustainable
growth of a proven, successful local business that has outgrown its current site.
This change would enable the business to expand in a suitable location,
safeguarding existtng jobs while creating new employment opportunities. It would
also ensure the land is used in a way that reflects current economic needs and
delivers long-term benefits to the local community through increased economic
activity, resilience, and investment.
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
16
The Chief Executive is not opposed to this alteration.
Alteration No. EM2 was proposed by Cllr. S. Bourke, seconded by Cllr. P. Kennedy and
agreed by all present.
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
EM3
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Chapter/Section
Cllr. P. Leonard
Cllr. M. Murphy
NOT PASSED
36, 44, 46, 47, 55
PART A STRATEGY &
PART B SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES &
MAPS
A.3 Factors Influencing Future
Development Options
B. 7 Heritage, Biodiversity And Green
Infrastructure
Map No. 6 Active Travel Strategy
PROPOSAL
Omit all and any reference to the Arklow to Laragh Greenway
In particular (but there may be other references also):
Amend A:3.2 Sustainable Transportation subsection as follows:
The high level transport objectives identified in the Draft LTP are:
Objective 3: Enhance and maximise the use of existing and future natural
environmental assets such as Avoca River Walk, Arklow to Shillelagh Greenway anci
Æy_-t9.
Amend Heritage, Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure Objectives as follows:
17
ARK 72: To overcome overreliance on the Nineteen Arches Bridge and improve
pedestrian and cycle connectivity between the north and south of the river, by
promoting and supporting the development of;
•
•
The Kilbride Pedestrian and Cycling Bridge between the Avoca River Walk
and Arklow Town Marsh/Ferrybank, including associated east-west
pedestrian links connecting this crossing with Ferrybank / Dublin Road
(short/medium term), the River Avoca Industrial Park (long
Improved active travel infrastructure linking the Bridgewater Shopping Centre
to Main St. which could be in the form of additional capacity added to the
existing Nineteen Arches Bridge or the provision ofa new active travel bridge
to the east of same (AT 2)
Such development shall be suitably informed by ecological surveying, ecological
impact assessment, AA Screening/AA and ElA Screening/ElA, as the case may be,
with a view toward avoiding and preventing significant adverse effects on receiving
environmental sensitivities. Such development shall be appropriately shaped and
guided by environmental and ecological constraints in the receiving environments
Amend Map No. 6 Active Travel Strategy to omit AT 19 as follows:
Change from: (green dotted line north of Avoca river omitted)
stos
Change to:
18
SL05
REASON
•A'
Note - Changes consequent will be required to the Local Transport Plan
1. Justification
1.1 Environmental sensitivity — Arklow Marsh
The proposed greenway would traverse or run adjacent to Arklow Marsh, a
'propdsed Natural Heritage Area (pNHA)' of significant ecological value. This site
supports sensitive wetland habitats and a range of bird and plant species.
Under 'EU Habitats Directive (92/43/EEC)' and related national planning policy,
any development likely to affect the integrity of designated or proposed natural
habitats requires 'Appropriate Assessment' ahd mitigation. No such assessment
has yet been undertaken for the Laragh Greenway route.
Potential impacts include:
* Disruption of habitats and species
* Increased human pressure on a sensitive ecosystem
* Permanent alteration of wetland functions
1.2 Interaction with the Arklow Flood Relief Scheme
The greenway must also be considered alongside the ongoing 'Arklow Flood
Relief Scheme', which involves major works within and alongside the river
corridor.
Including a greenway at this stage could
* Conflict with flood relief infrastructure
* Require redesign or relocation later
19
* Increase cumulative environmental impacts on sensitive habitats
Until flood relief works are completed, the greenway objective is 'premature'.
1.3 Existing and future greenway strategy
Wicklow is already progressing the 'Arklow—Shillelagh Greenway', which will
provide a high-value inland route linking Arklow with County Carlow.
Given this, a 'preferred second greenway' should focus on a 'coastal route',
linking South Wicklow to Wexford. A coastal greenway:
* Offers scenic and recreational benefits
* Avoids environmentally sensitive inland areas such as Arklow Marsh
* Provides strategic connectivity along the coast without conflicting with flood
relief or protected habitats
1.4 Prematurity and policy alignment
The inclusion of the Laragh Greenway as a fixed objective is 'premature', given:
* The environmental sensitivity of Arklow Marsh
* Its status as a pNHA
* The ongoing Arklow Flood Relief Scheme
* The existence of the Arklow—Shillelagh Greenway project
A more considered approach would involve completing flood relief works,
undertaking detailed environmental assessments, and identifying routes that
avoid sensitive habitats while aligning with EU Habitats Directive obligations.
2. Conclusion
While the development of walking and cycling infrastructure is supported, the
Laragh Greenway, as curreritly proposed, raises significant environmental risks
and is inconsistent with EU and national habitat protection policy.
therefore propose that this objective be removed from the plan at this stage,
with future greenway development focused on a 'coastal route linking South
Wicklow to Wexford' as a more sustainable and environmentally appropriate
alternative.
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
The CE does not support the proposed alteration.
20
Alteration No. EM3 proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. M. Murphy was put to a
vote and following a roll call was defeated by a margin of 9 for, 20 against and 2 not present
viz:-
FOR (9)
AGAINST (20)
NOT PRESENT (2)
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
CLLRS. J. BEHAN, M. DUDDY, O. FINN, T. FORTUNE, P. LEONARD, J.
MULHALL, M. MURPHY, l. NEARY AND S, STOKES
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, M. BARRY, S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN,
G. DUNNE, L. FENELON GASKIN, P. FITZGERALD, P. GLENNON, P.
KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. MAHON, P. O'BRIEN, W. O'TOOLE, G.
RICHMOND, L. SCOTT, J. SNELL, P. STAPLETON, N. WHELAN AND C.
WINSTANLEY
CLLRS. E. DOYLE AND G. O'NEILL
EM4
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Chapter/Section
Cllr. W. O'Toole
Cllr J. Behan
PASSED AS PROPOSED
56
MAPS
Section B:7 Heritage, biodiversity &
green infrastructure
Map No. 6 Active Travel Strategy
PROPOSAL
1. Alter the LPF text as follows:
Section B:7 Heritage, biodiversity & green infrastructure
ARK64
To promote and support the development of enhanced or new greenways and
amenity walks at the following locations and require development in the vicinity of
same to enhance existing routes and / or provide new links:
•
•
•
The Avoca River Walk and Shillelagh to Arklow Greenway Route;
Glenart Woods Forest;
Arklow Seafront and Waterfront Zones;
Arklow Rock Cliff Walk;
21
Arklow North and South Quays;
• A biodiversity and ecological wooclland-type corridor, with a minimum width
of not less than 20 metres, linking OS2 lands and open spaces frotn Arklow
South Beach, along the former town boundary, connecting to the Maples and
Kish, extending to the reår of Knocknnore and onwards to Glenart, and linking
into the Arklow—Shiilelagh Greenway (as shown as AT-X on Map No. 6). This
corriclör shall be integrated into the design of adjoining and future
develppment lands, including SL04, ensuring continuity, accessibility and
ecological function throughout.
2. Amend Map No. 6 Active Travel Strategy to include.new active travel route
(AT)(), as follows (shown in bright green):
Change from:
Change to:
Where this route runs along the proposed SPAR, it shall comprise a segregated green spine separated
from the SPAR by mature hedgerows and planting.
22
REASON
Plus any changes consequent to LTP
This proposed route would complement and enhance the active travel network
while delivering wider long-term environmental and social benefits. Importantly,
the corridor would incorporate multiple connection points into surrounding
estates (including The Maples, Chestnut Grove, Knockmore, Meadowvale,
Ballyraine Court, Mill Meadows, Woodlands and Emyvale), ensuring it works
•alongside, rather than instead of, the Active Travel network.
This proposal also complements existing policy directions by:
Enhancing climate resilience and green infrastructure;
Supporting biodiversity and alignment with national strategies such as the All-
Ireland Pollinator Plan;
Providing accessible recreational space for existing and future cömmunities;
Creating a high-quality amenity that supports tourism, health and education
I believe this represents a once-in-a-generation opportunity to deliver a defining
piece of infrastructure for the town, complementing the transport network while
creating a lasting environmental and community asset.
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
The CE has no objection to the concept 'of this proposed alteration, however there are a number of
concerns as to how it could be implemented and / or delivered given that the route travels along
many areas close to existing development where there will be no / limited opportunity presented by
new development to require the route to be delivered; in addition there are multiple landowners
along its route and this may lead to a fragmented route of limited value.
Cllr. S. Bourke proposed and subsequently withdrew proposed amendment to the
alteration.
Alteration No. EM4 was proposed by Cllr. W. O'Toole, seconded by Cllr. J. Behan and agreed
by all present.
COUNCILLOR
EM5 PROPOSED
ALTERATION No.
SECONDED
Pro osed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Cha ter/Section
Cllr. S. Bourke
Cllr. W. O'Toole
36, 44, 53, 63
PART B SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
B. IOS ecific Local Ob'ectives
PROPOSAL Add a new Specific Local Objective (SLO) for Ballyraine.
Amend MAP NO. 1 LAND USE ZONING to include SLOG - Ball aine, as follows:
23
Change from:
Change to:
Add néw SL06 Objectives as follows:
SLO 6 - BALLYRAINE
These lancls measuring c. ha are locatecl in the tovvniand of BalFyraine to the west
of Arklow town centre and are zoned for new residential I'.RN — c. Jha) ancl open
space use (OS2 c. 3ha). This area may be cleweloped for a mix of uses inclucling
resiclential. community and open space uses, in accordance "Vith the following
re uirements:
24
•
Approximately 2 ha of this site, along the boundary wifh the MI 1 (zoned OS2),
shall be reserved free of development and dedicated to nature restoration in a
manner to be agreed with the Planning Authority;
Any 'development shall safeguard and retain existing watercourses, wetlands,
and ponds; incorporating them into, the site desigh with the apprppriate
setbacks (ih accordance with objective ARK63 and County Development Plan
Objective CPO 17.26);
Any development-shall. ensure the retention and protection of all existing
mature trees on site in accordance with- County Dévelopment Plan Objectives
CPO'17.20, 17.21, 17.22 and 1723), in particular those identified on the
drawing below,- which shall be identified and evaluated by a qualified •arborist
in any application for development and justification provided where' any
remoVal is propose<;
Any development shall maintain a building line setback of 35m from
Lambelton Lane (as shown on the drawing below);
A permeable surface car park adjoining Lamberton Lane of 20 No. spaces shall
be delivered as part of any development. Said car park shall be accessed only
from the-south With pedestrian and cycling links to Lamberton Lane only (no
vehicular access from Lamberton Lane wilt be considered).
25
Mature trees and
hedgerows to be retained
Zha Nature
Restoration
Area
35m Buffer from
Lamberton Lane
25J1t Buffe
Watercours
REASON
This land was zoned residential in the last Arklow LAP . The site is serviced land,
located within walking distance of the town centre, local schools and amenities.
The zoning of the Ballyraine lands under SLO 6 is justified, building on their
previous residential designation in the Arklow Local Area Plan and their sustainable
location within walking distance of the town centre, schools, and local amenities.
The proposal provides a balanced approach, with approximately 2 hectares for
residential development and 4 hectares for open space, supporting both housing
delivery and community amenity. A strong emphasis is placed on environmental
protection, with approximately 2 hectares reserved for biodiversity enhancement,
including lands along the MI 1, and an additional 35m buffer of native woodland
along Lamberton Avenue.
Existing natural features such as watercourses, wetlands, and mature trees will be
retained, while a reen corridor will su ort biodiversi and active travel. Overall,
26
the zoning ensures a well-integrated, sustainable development that aligns with
both housin needs and environmental ob'ectives.
Chief Executive's Prelimina Res onse
The CE does not support the proposed alteration
Alterations to the amendment were proposed as follows:
Change from:
93
Change to:
27
Add new SLOG Objectives as follows:
SLO 6 - BALLYRAINE
These. lands measuring c. 6 ha are located in the townland Qf Bållyraine .to the west
of Arklow'town centre and are zoned for new residential (RN — c. 2.5ha)' and open
space use (OS2 — c.' g.5ha). This area may be developed for a mix of uses
including residential, community and open space uses, in accordance with the
following requirements:•
a) Approximately 2 ha of this site, along the,boundary with thé MI 1' (zoned OS2)I
shall bé reserved free of development (other than the lands required for the
cär parking required by part (e) to follow) and shall be dedicated to nature
restoration in a manner to be agreed With the Planning Authority;
b) Approximately 0.7 ha Of this site along the boundary of Lamberton Lane
(zoned OS2) and corresponding to a 35m set back from the lane shall be
reserved free of development and shall be dedicated to nature restoration in a
manner to-be agreed With the Planning.Authority;
c) Any development shall safeguard and retain existing wqtercoursesr wetlands,
and ponds, incorporating them -into the site design with the appropriate
setbacks (in accordance with objective ARK63 and County Development Plan
Objective cpo 17.26);
d) Any development shall ensure the retention end protection of all existing
mature trees on. site in accordance with County, DevelopmentPlan Objectives
CPO 17.20, 17.21, 17.22.and 17.23), in particular those identified on the
drawihg below, which shall be identified and evaluated by aequalified arborist
in any application for develbpment and justification provided where any
removal is étoposed;
e) A permeable surface car park adjoining Lamberton Lane of 20 No. spaces shall
be delivered as part of any devélopmeöt on the OS2 zone' along the MI 1
described in part (a) above. Said car park shall-be accessed only from the south
with pedestrian and cycling links to Lamberton Lane only (no vehicular åccuss
from Lamberton Lane will be considered).
28
LEGEND
indicative Car
park Location
Mature &
Hedgerows to be
REASON
Mll
This land was zoned residential in the last Arklow LAP . The site is serviced land,
located within walking distance of the town centre, local schools and amenities.
The zoning of the Ballyraine lands under SLO 6 is justified, building on their
previous residential designation in the Arklow Local Area Plan and their sustainable
location within walking distance of the town centre, schools, and local amenities.
The proposal provides a balanced approach, with approximately 2 hectares for
residential development and 4 hectares for open space, supporting both housing
delivery and community amenity. A strong emphasis is placed on environmental
protection, with approximately 2 hectares reserved for biodiversity enhancement,
including lands along the MI 1, and an additional 35m buffer of native woodland
along Lamberton Avenue.
Existing natural features such as watercourses, wetlands, and mature trees will be
retained, while a green corridor will support biodiversity and active travel. Overall,
the zoning ensures a well-integrated, sustainable deVelopment that aligns with
both housing needs and environmental objectives.
29
Alteration No. EM5 proposed by Cllr. S. Bourke, seconded by Cllr. W. O'Toole was put to a
vote and following a rotl call was passed by a margin of 27 for, 1 against and 3 not present
viz:-
FOR (27)
AGAINST (1)
NOT PRESENT (3)
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, J. BARRY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A.
CRONIN, M. DUDDY, G. DUNNE, L. FENELON GASKIN, O. FINN, P.
FITZGERALD, T. FORTUNE, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL,
P. LEONARD, P. MAHON, J. MULHALL, M. MURPHY, l. NEARY, P.
O'BRIEN, W. O'TOOLE, G. RICHMOND, J. SNELL, S. STOKES, N.
WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY
CLLR. L. SCOTT
CLLRS. E. DOYLE, G. O'NEILL AND P. STAPLETON
Time Extension: It was proposed by Cllr. O. Finn, seconded by Cllr.. P. Leonard and agreed by
all to extend the meeting to completion of Item 19.
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION
No.
EM6
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Pro osed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Cha ter/Section
Cllr. P. Leonard
Cllr. W. O'Toole
55
PART B SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
B.I Town Centre Re eneration
PROPOSAL Alter Opportunity Site 'Opportunity Site 2 — Main Street', as follows:
Alter 'OP2' boundary as follows:
Chan e from:
30
CP2
Change to:
Alter 'OP2 Concept Plan' as follows:
Change from:
31
o
o
to 20
10 20
Legend
vv,dicalö.v inks
Irdicauve to stre
u-,Ooor counyard
Site Plan
East Elevation
Opporwntw Site 02
Concept Plan
Mein
Main street Elevation
Change to:
.32
Legend
M•rys
Opportunity Site 02
- Concept Plan
Nain Street
PEDESTRIAN ROUTE
31
PUBLIC REA-M
suN ANALYSIS
Amend written objectives as follows: (CE's recommended changes as per the CE's
Report are in red, the additional changes now proposed in green)
Objectives OP2
•
•
•
Where possible this site should be the subject of a comprehensive integrated
scheme of development encompassing the entire lands. Individual site
redevelopment proposals may be considered if they can demonstrate how they
comply with the objectives of this opportunity site.
Any new scheme should seek to protect the character and appearance of the
traditional shop fronts including the Morgan Doyle facade and canopy and any
architectural details on buildings of high architectural value wherever possible.
Development shall take account of the site's location within an Area of
Archaeological Significance or Potential (Arklow Town) ancl appropriately
protect any heritage assets.
Proposal shall provide for a mix of uses capable of accommodating retail,
commercial, residential, tourism, community and cultural development, all
contained within a high quality architectural, landscaped, streetscape and high
quality public realm environment.
Any recipveiopmer,t proposal Shai! include the provision of a •functionai
com'äil.lllity space of not less which, shall be devoted tc the use
the b#ic.
A high density development will be required to be achieved across the site that
js sensitive and appropriate to its immediate built and natural context and
accords with the Sustainable Residential Development and Compact
Settlements Guidelines for Planning Authorities.
A maximum height of 3 storeys fronting onto Main Street shall be permitted.
Primary facades with a continuous streetscape, active frontage and passive
surveillance shall address the river, Kinsella's Lane, St, Mary's Park and Main
Street. In particular buildings along the River Walkway to the north shall be a
minimum height of 3 storeys with active uses/windows/balconies directly
overlooking this walking route.
To ensure, where possible, there are active ground floor uses in the buildings
ublic s aces, walkwa s and streets and that all new structures resent an
alon
33
•
appropriate facade to the river, walkways and roadside with strorig passive
surveillance, a continuous streetscape and building frontage where appropriate.
Additional links from the Main Street to the river should be incorporated
through the site where feasible with active ground floor uses fronting public
spaces, walkways and streets. In this regard proposals shall retain and reopen
the existing archway addressing the Main Street. Where feasible this archway
shall serve as the entrance to a new pedestrianised link between the Main Street
and the river
To facilitate the enhancement and extension of the adjacent public car park into
a public amenity civic open space area to the northern riverside aspect of the
site.
To facilitate the enhancement of the landscaped linear open space-park along
the river bank, including an accessible pedestrian link to Coomie Lane.
Any redeveloprnent proposals for properties on the east side of St. Marys Park
shall make provision for the western facades / gables to be orientated towards
the new civic .t0\J'd1 square establishing an active vibiznt connection between
the Main Street and the riverwalk.
The Local manning Framework supports the integration of open space and
potential civic functions in Arklow town centre revitalising the historic street
frontage, creating a focal entiY point and bus stop, providing new green space,
using the Site's topography for a public amphitheatre/stepped seating/viewing
area, and connecting visually and physically to the Avoca River.
REASON
Justification for Incorporating Open Space and Civic Functions in OP2
The incorporation of open space and civic functions into the Local Area Plan is
essential due to the absence of a dedicated civic area in Arklow town centre.
Studio Idir's report, prepared in collaboration with the Arklow Tidy Towns
Committee under the RIAI Town Challenge Award, identifies the middle section
of Main Street as a key opportunity to create a vibrant public realm. The proposals
include revitalising the historic street frontage, providing new green space, creating
a public amphitheatre, establishing a focal entry point and bus stop, and
enhancing visual and physical connections to the Avoca River.
These interventions would:
- Deliver a central space for community, cultural, and civic activities
- Strengthen the town's identity and sense of place
- Improve accessibility and public amenity
- Support a community-led vision that aligns with best practice in urban design
and placemaking
Incorporating these directions ensures that future development of the town centre
addresses both functional and social needs while enhancing Arklow's public realm.
Chief Executive's Prelimina Res onse
The CE is generally not opposed to increasing the open space along the river and some of the
additional public realm and design objectives, however the following aspect of the revised
proposals are not supported:
The addition of a second route / roadway / pathway between the development site and the
existing riverside walkway. This considered unnecessary duplication, but there are also concerns
re ardin the develo abilit of such a routewa iven the to o ra h of the lands (stee bank);
34
The inclusion of an objective for a 'public amphitheatre/stepped seating/viewing area'. Given the
constraints of the site, including its topography, seeking for a "public amphitheatre/stepped
seating/viewing area" to be delivered may not be achievable and would potentially require
removal of existing much needed public parking at St. Mary's car park.
The members are reminded that as set out in the Development Plan Guidelines for Planning
Authorities (June 2022), it is important that all objectives are capable of being implemented.
Should the proposed alteration be approved, it is recommended that the following wording be
omitted.
• The Local Planning Framework supports the integration of open space and potential civic
functions in Arklow town centre revitalising the historic street frontage, creating a focal entry
point and bus stop, providing new green space using-thesitets-topography fora
public
amphithea-tre/stepped-seating/viewing-area, and connecting visually and physically to the
Avoca River.
Alterations to the amendment were proposed as follows:
PROPOSA Alter Opportunity Site 'Opportunity Site 2 — Main Street', as follows:
Alter 'OP2' boundary as follows:
Change from:
OP2
o
Change to:
35
10
170
20
40
Alter 'OP2 Concept Plan' as follows:i
Change from:
36
Legend
pruk/civi'
river
hdicaliw links
hdlc,mnve access to Site
fidkaüvc indocr cour:yarC
Site Plan
East Elevation
Main Street Elevation
Change to:
Site 02
Concept Plan
37
Main
Legend
•t. wrys ;pxe
Opportunity Site 02
- Concept Plan
Street
PEDESTRIAN ROUTE
*UBUCREALU
suN ANALYSIS
Amend written objectives as follows: (CE's recommended changes as per the CE's
Report are in red, the additional changes now proposed in green)
Objectives OP2
•
•
•
•
•
•
Where possible this site should be the subject of a comprehensive integrated
scheme of development encompassing the entire lands. Individual site
redevelopment proposals may be considered if they can demonstrate how they
comply with the objectives of this opportunity site.
Any new scheme should seek to protect the character and appearance of the
traditional shop fronts including the Morgan Doyle facade and canopy and any
architectural details on buildings of high architectural value wherever possible.
Development shall take account of the site's location within an Area of
Archaeological Significance or Potential (Arklow Town) and appropriately protect
any heritage assets.
Proposal shall provide for a mix of uses capable of accommodating retail,
commercial,' residential, tourism, community and cultural development, all
contained within a high quality architectural, landscaped, streetscape and high
quality public realm environment.
Shafi Include the provisFün an
functional soace of nor less than which shaft be to
A high density development will required to be achieved across the site that is
sensitive and appropriate to its immediate built and natural context and accords
with the Sustainable Residential Development and Compact Settlements
Guidelines for Planning Authorities.
A maximum height of 3 storeys fronting onto Main Street shall be permitted.
Primary facades with a continuous streetscape, active frontage and passive
surveillance shall address the river, Kinsella's Lane, St, Mary's Park and Main
Street. In particular buildings along the River Walkway to the north shall be a
minimum height of 3 storeys with active uses/windows/balconies directly
overlooking this walking route.
To ensure, where possible, there are active ground floor uses in the buildings
ublics aces, walkwa s and streets and that all new structures resent an
alon
38
•
appropriate facade to the river, walkways and roadside with strong passive
surveillance, a continuous streetscape ahd building frontage where appropriate.
Additional links from the Main Street to the river should be incorporated through
the site where feasible with active ground floor uses fronting public spaces,
walkways and streets. In this regard proposals shall retain and reopen the existing
archway addressing the Main Street. Where feasible this archway shall serve as
the entrance to a new pedestrianised link between the Main Street and the river
To facilitate the enhancennent and extension of the adjacent public car park into
a, public amenity civic open space area to the northern riverside aspect of the site.
To facilitate the enhancement of the landscaped linear open space-paek along the
river bank, including an accessible pedestrian link to Coomie Lane.
Any redevelopment proposals for propenies on the east side of St. Marys Park
Shail make prövision for the western facades / gables to be orientated towards
the new civic town square establishing an active vibrant connection between• the
Main Street and the riverwalk.
The Local Planning Framework supports the integration df open space and
potential civic functions (n Arklow town centre revitalising the historic street
frontage, creating a focal entry point and bus stop, providing new green space,
using the site's topography for a public amphitheatre/stepped seating/viewing
area, and connecting visually and physically to the Avoca River.
REASON
Justification for Incorporating Open Space and Civic Functions in OP2
The incorporation of open space and civic functions into the Local Area Plan is
essential due to the absence of a dedicated civic area in Arklow town centre. Studio
Idir's report, prepared in collaboration with the Arklow Tidy Towns Committee
under the RIAI Town Challenge Award, identifies the middle section of Main Street
as a key opportunity to create a vibrant public realm. The proposals include
revitalising the historic street frontage, providing new green space, creating a public
amphitheatre, establishing a focal entry point and bus stop, and enhancing visual
and physical connections to the Avoca River.
These interventions would:
- Deliver a central space for community, cultural, and civic activities
- Strengthen the town's identity and sense of place
- Improve accessibility and public amenity
- Support a community-led vision that aligns with best practice in urban design and
placemaking
Incorporating these directions ensures that future development of the town centre
addresses both functional and social needs while enhancing Arklow's public realm.
Alteration No. EM6 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. W. O'Toole and
agreed by atl present.
39
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
EM7
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Chapter/Section
Cllr. P. Leonard
Cllr. W. O'Toole
PASSED AS PROPOSED
55
PART B SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
B.I Town Centre Regeneration
PROPOSAL
REASON
Add new objective to Arklow Town Centre Objectives as follows:
ARK2(B)
To support and promote the ilnprøvement of the key central area of Arklow tovur,
centre from the Parade Grounds to St. tv!ary's Park, including (bi-lt not limited to')
the following improvements:
The extension of the existing public reainn ffnprovemen ts aiong the Main
Stieet frorn the Parade Grounds as far as River Lane; this shall entaii a hjqh
r_3Liaiity urban realm design Viiit!n particular reference to enhanced pedestrian
connectivity and accessibility, and improved linkages to the river corridor.
The irnprovement of St. Man/s park and car park, inclucling the access anci
egress roads. Any recleveioprnent / enhancement proposais for these areas
shall be,so designed to integrate the riverl.vaik, car park and park as a unified
space 'oiJlÄich supports mufti-functional uses including community, cultural and
outdoor perfornaance / market uses, protecting the character and
heritage (particularly archaeologvl of the area:
To facilitate the. enhancemlent of the landscapeå linear open space park along
the riverbank linking Coornie Lane to St. Mary's Park.
The objective ARK2(B) is strongly aligned with national regeneration, compact
growth and town centre first principles, as set out in the Department of Housing,
Local Government and Heritage policy frameworks and funding programmes,
including the Town Centre First Policy, Urban Regeneration and Development
Fund and Rural Regeneration and Development Fund. The objective directly
supports the delivery of targeted public realm-led regeneration, which is a key
criterion for securing such funding.
By prioritising the extension of high-quality public realm improvements along
Main Street and enhancing connectivity to the River Avoca, the objective
promotes compact growth, modal shift, and increased town centre footfall,
consistent with national investment priorities that seek to revitalise
underperforming urban cores. The emphasis on pedestrian permeability, universal
40
accessibility, and strong linkages between commercial streets and waterfront
amenities reflects best practice in placemaking and urban design, thereby
strengthening the case for capital investment.
The proposed integrated enhancement of St. Mary's Park, car park, and riverwalk
as a unified, multifunctional civic space delivers a transformative regeneration
project of sufficient scale and impact to meet the objectives of national funding
streams. In particular, the provision of flexible spaces for community, cultural, and
market uses aligns with the activation and vibrancy goals of the Town Centre First
approach, while also supporting local economic development, tourism, and
evening economy opportunities.
Furthermore, the objective embeds key national priorities relating to climate
action, green infrastructure, and heritage-led regeneration. The enhancement of
the riverbank linear park and its linkage to the wider town centre contributes to
nature-based solutions, active travel networks, and climate resilience, all of which
are central to funding assessment criteria. The sensitive integration of
archaeological and built heritage ensures that regeneration is both sustainable
and place-specific, reinforcing Arklow's unique identity.
Overall, ARK2(B) represents a coherent, investment-ready regeneration framework
that aligns with national policy and funding mechanisms, positioning Arklow to
effectively compete for and leverage public funding to deliver long-term,
sustainable town centre renewal.
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
The CE has no objection to the proposed alteration.
Alteration No. EM 7 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. W. O'Toole and
agreed by all present.
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
EM8
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Cllr. P. Leonard
Cllr. S. Bourke
PASSED AS PROPOSED
55
PART B SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
41
Chapter/Section
PROPOSAL
B.5 Tourism Development &
B.7 Heritage, Biodiversity and Green
Infrastructure
Include provisions for access to Arklow South Beach from the Southern Port
Access Road
Amend Tourism & Recreation Objectives as follows:
ARK36
To protect and enhance existing, and support the development of new walking,
cycling routes / trails, including facilities ancillary to trails (such as sign posting and
car parks) and the development of linkages between existing trails in the area. In
particular, to encourage and facilitate the maintenance and improvement of:
•
•
•
The Avoca River Walk and linkages to Vale Road and Arklow Main Street;
Lamberton Avenue/Woodlands Park leading to Glenart Woods;
Walking infrastructure along North Quay linking to the coastal walk and
Kynoch Park;
Walking infrastructure along South Quay linking to Arklow South Beach via
Arklow Port and the former Arklow Pottery site,
Walking infrastructure along the Port Access Road linking ro South
Beach, The Coye Beach and onto Clogga Beach.
Amend Heritage, Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure Objectives as follows:
ARK64
To promote and support the development of enhanced or new greenways and
amenity walks at the following locations and require development in the vicinity of
same to enhance existing routes and / or provide new links:
•
•
•
The Avoca River Walk and Shillelagh to Arklow Greenway Route;
Glenart Woods Forest;
Arklow Seafront and Waterfront Zones;
Arklow Rock Cliff Walk;
Arklow North and South Quays;
Arklow South Beach, The Cove, Nun's Beach anci onto Clogga Beach.
Amend ARKLOW PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE OBJECTIVES - Road Objectives
as follows:
ARK82
Support and promote the development of the following new regional/distributor
roads and road improvements:
e The Southern Port Access Road (SPAR) to (a) facilitate development in SL04
(Tinahask-Mone Bi ) and (b) rovide a more suitable road network for lar er
42
•
vehicles and reduce reliance on the South Quays and Nineteen Arches Bridge for
HGV movement and (c) ensuring safer conditions are provided for active travel
improvements in Arklow Town Centre, the Nineteen Arches Bridge and along
South Quay and (d) crnprove amenity/pedestrian access to Arklow South Beach,
The Cove, Nun's Beach and onto Clogga Beach. The-design of the road including
its final alignment and boundary treatments shall be take into account its
proximity to the coastline whilst ensuring minimal impact on Arklow Golf Club
and the Roadstone Quarry (RN 3, 6)
To require as part of the development of SL04 (Tinahask-Money Big) the
development of distributor road access to SL03 (Abbeylands-Tinahask) to the
north and to the employment zoned lands to the south
To require a; part of a possible Western Distributor Road from Kilbride to the
Vale Road, the development of a distributor road through SL05 from the L-6779
to the northern boundary of Arklow Town Marsh at a location to be agreed with
Wicklow County Council (RN 4)
To improve, as funding allows, the principal access routes into the town centre
from surrounding tourism locations, particular the Coast Road north of the
town, the Clogga Road, the Vale Road, and access to potential northern
waterfront zone develo ments.
REASON
The inclusion of enhanced pedestrian pathways and formalised access to Arklow
South Beach, The Cove and Nun's Beach from the Southern Port Access Road is
consistent with the strategic objectives of the Arklow Local Area Plan and aligns
with national policy promoting sustainable mobility, tourism development and
high-quality placemakiog.
This amendment supports the principles of the Town Centre First Policy by
strengthening physical and visual connections between the town centre,
waterfront and coastal amenities, thereby improving the overall attractiveness and
usability of Arklow as a place to live, work and visit. Improved access to these
natural assets will encourage increased footfall, longer visitor dwell time, and
greater economic activity within the town, reinforcing Arklow's role as a key
coastal destination.
The provision of safe, high-quality pedestrian infrastructure linking the Southern
Port Access Road to the coastline also aligns with national investment priorities
under the Urban Regeneration and Development Fund and the National Transport
Authority active travel programmes, which prioritise permeability, accessibility, and
modal shift away from car dependency. By integrating walking and cycling
infrastructure into strategic road projects, the proposal ensures that the Southern
Port Access Road delivers multi-functional benefits beyond traffic management,
including recreation, health„ and climate action outcomes.
Furthermore, enhancing access to Arklow South Beach, The Cove and Nuns Beach
supports the development of a coherent coastal green infrastructure network, in
line with objectives relating to biodiversity, recreation, and landscape protection.
Improved connectivity between the Port Access Road, coastal walks and adjoining
amenitiesr—including links towards Clogga Beach—will facilitate the creation of an
integrated recreational corridor, supporting both local use and tourism.
Importantly, the provision of defined pathways and managed access points will
also help to protect sensitive coastal environments by directing footfall away from
vulnerable areas, thereby balancing increased usage with environmental
stewardshi
43
Overall, this amendment represents a logical and sustainable extension of existing
infrastructure objectives, ensuring that significant public investment in the
Southern Port Access Road also delivers enhanced amenity, accessibility, and
tourism benefits, in accordance with local and national policy frameworks
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
The CE is not opposed to the proposed alteration.
Alteration No. EM8 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke and agreed
by all present.
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
EM9
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Chapter/Section
Cllr. W. O'Toole
Cllr. P. Leonard
NOT PASSED
16, 43, 56
MAPS
Map No. 1 Land Use Map
Amend MAP NO. 1 LAND USE ZONING for lands at Money Little.
PROPOSAL
Amend land use zoning at Money Little (measuring c. 4.2 ha) from CE 'Community
and Education' to AOS 'Active Open Space', as follows:
Change from:
44
REASON
Change to:
This proposed alteration arises from a number of submissions received on Sports
facilities as part of the process, including:
• 56 -Submission Ref. 155026, which identifies the need to zone suitable lands for
sports and club use, ensuring accessible and shared outdoor recreational
infrastructure
• 43 - Submission Ref. 103009 , which highlights the inadequacy of existing
athletics facilities and the need for a purpose-built track and associated
infrastructure
• 16 - Submission Ref. 063341, which supports the provision of lands for sports
use, including the potential development of a sports hub in the Wexford Road /
Arklow bypass area.
Collectively, these submissions demonstrate a clear and ongoing demand for
accessible, multi-use outdoor sports infrastructure within Arklow.
In this context, the proposed amendment represents a reasonable and evidence-
based response to identified needs, while also aligning with the Active Open
Space requirements set out in the Social Infrastructure Audit.
45
Also the approach suggested seeks to retain flexibility for long-term educational
use, while allowing for Active Open Space or dual-use in the interim, ensuring that
the lands can deliver tangible community benefit within the lifetime of the plan.
I would also say that part of the reason this is even being looked at is down to the
current situation with the existing running track. While there have been works
done, it's still not really fit for purpose and that's been raised a number of times.
Ideally, improving what's already there would always be the better option. But
where that hasn't been delivered, it's only natural that people start looking at
other opportunities, including greenfield sites, to actually meet the demand that's
there.
This proposal is focused on addressing a clear gap in Arklow the lack of accessible,
multi-use outdoor sports infrastructure.
The lands are well positioned to support:
- A dedicated athletics track
- Multi-use sports pitches
- Hard courts for basketball, tennis and similar uses
- Shared use for schools, clubs and the wider community
Rezoning these lands would:
- Deliver much-needed sports infrastructure
- Support health, wellbeing and youth engagement
- Provide inclusive and accessible facilities for a growing population
- Protect the lands for long-term recreational use
This is about ensuring that as Arklow continues to grow, the infrastructure to
support active lifestyles grows with it.
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
The CE does not support the proposed alteration.
Alteration No. EM9 proposed by Cllr. W. O'Toole, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard was put to a
vote and following a roll call was defeated by a margin of 9 for, 13 against, 7 not present
and 2 abstained viz:-
FOR (9)
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, M. DUDDY, O. FINN, P. LEONARD, M. MURPHY, l.
NEARY, G. O'NEILL, W. O'TOOLE AND J. SNELL
46
AGAINST (13)
NOT PRESENT (7)
ABSTAINED (2)
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
CLLRS. J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, L. FENELON
GASKIN, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. MAHON, G.
RICHMOND, L. SCOTT, P. STAPLETON AND N. WHELAN
CLLRS. M. BARRY, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, P. FITZGERALD, J. MULHALL,
P. O'BRIEN AND S. STOKES
CLLRS. T. FORTUNE AND C. WINSTANLEY
EMIO
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Chapter/Section
Cllr. W. O'Toole
Cllr. P. Leonard
NOT PASSED
37, 55, 56, 57
BIO: Specific Local Objectives
Map No. 1 Land Use Map
Amend MAP NO. 1 LAND USE ZONING for lands at SL03 Abbeylands &
PROPOSAL
Tinahask
Expand area of AOS by 20%.
Amend land use zoning at SL03 of 0.7ha from 'RN2 — New Residential to 'AOS
Active Open Space', as follows:
Change from:
47
Change to:
REASON
:ifii;
I propose that the Draft Arklow LPF be amended to increase the extent of lands
zoned Active Open Space (AOS) within SL03.
Notwithstanding compliance with the quantitative standards set out in Wicklow
County Council's Active Open Space policy, it is important that provision is also
considered in terms of distribution, accessibility, and functionality. SL03 is a
strategic residential growth 'areas, and there is currently insufficient allocation of
appropriately scaled and located lands to accommodate formal and informal
recreational uses.
Recent submissions within the plan process highlight ongoing deficiencies in
sports facilities and the need to-support expanding clubs and youth participation.
Increasing AOS zoning in this area would provide for. pitches, multi-use
recreational spaces and community facilities in accessible locations, consistent
with national policy objectives relating to compact growth, active travel and
healthy placemaking.
Furthermore, additional AOS lands could be aligned with green infrastructure and
surface water management measures, contributing to biodiversity enhancement
and climate resilience.
48
It is proposed that the zoning maps be amended to increase AOS lands within
SL03 to ensure additional, accessible and future-proofed recreational provision for
the growing population of Arklow.
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
The CE does not support the proposed alteration.
Alteration No. EM 10 proposed by Cllr. W. O'Toole, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard was put to a
vote and following a roll call was defeated by a margin of 7 for, 12 against, 7 not present
and 5 abstained viz:-
FOR (7)
AGAINST (12)
NOT PRESENT (7)
ABSTAINED (5)
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
OUTCOME
CLLRS. J. BEHAN, M. DUDDY, P. LEONARD, l. NEARY, G O'NEILL, W.
O'TOOLE AND J. SNELL
CLLRS. S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, L. FENELON GASKIN,
P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. MAHON, M. MURPHY, G.
RICHMOND, P. STAPLETON AND N. WHELAN
CLLRS. M. BARRY, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, P. FITZGERALD, J. MULHALL,
P. O'BRIEN AND S. STOKES
D. ALVEY, O. FINN, T. FORTUNE, L. SCOTT AND C. WINSTANLEY
EMI 1
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Proposed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Chapter/Section
Cllr. W. O'Toole
Cllr. P. Leonard
PASSED AS PROPOSED
37, 55, 56, 57
BIO: Specific Local Objectives
Map No. 1 Land Use Map
49
PROPOSAL
REASON
Amend MAP NO. 1 LAND USE ZONING for lands at SL05 Kilbride
Increase AOS by 20%.
Amend land use zoning at SL05 of 1.24ha from 'RN2 — New Residential to 'AOS
Active Open Space', as follows:
Change from:
Change to:
I propose that the Draft Arklow LPF be amended to increase the extent of lands
zoned Active Open Space (AOS) within SL05.
Notwithstanding cömpliance with the quantitative standards set out in Wicklow
County Council's Active Open Space policy, it is important that provision is also
considered in terms of distribution, accessibility, and functionality. SL05 is a
strategic residential growth areas, and there is currently insufficient allocation of
appropriately scaled and located lands to accommodate formal and informal
recreational uses.
Recent submissions within the plan process highlight ongoing deficiencies in
sports facilities and the need to support expanding clubs and youth participation.
Increasing AOS zoning in this area would provide for pitches, multi-use
recreational spaces and community facilities in accessible locations, consistent
50
with national policy objectives relating to compact growth, active travel and
healthy placemaking.
Furthermore, additional AOS lands could be aligned with green infrastructure and
surface water management measures, contributing to biodiversity enhancement
and climate resilience.
It is proposed that the zoning maps be amended to increase AOS lands within
SL05 to ensure additional, accessible and future-proofed recreational provision for
the growing population of Arklow.
Chief Executive's Preliminary Response
The CE does not support the proposed alteration.
Alteration No. EMI 1 proposed by Cllr. W. O'Toole, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard was put to a
vote and following a roll call was passed by a margin of 10 for, 8 against, 8 not present and 5
abstained viz:-
FOR (10)
AGAINST (8)
NOT PRESENT (8)
ABSTAINED (5)
COUNCILLOR
ALTERATION No.
CLLRS. J. BEHAN, M. DUDDY, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, P.
LEONARD, M. MURPHY, l. NEARY, G O'NEILL, W. O'TOOLE AND J.
SNELL
CLLRS. S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, L. FENELON GASKIN,
S. LANGRELL, G. RICHMOND, P. STAPLETON AND N. WHELAN
CLLRS. M. BARRY, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, P. FITZGERALD, P. MAHON,
J. MULHALL, P. O'BRIEN AND S. STOKES
D. ALVEY, O. FINN, T. FORTUNE, L. SCOTT AND C. WINSTANLEY
EM12
PROPOSED
SECONDED
Pro osed Alteration Relates to:
Submission Number
Chief Executive Modification Number
Arklow LPF Section
Cha ter/Section
Cllr. W. O'Toole
Cllr. P. Leonard
55, 56, 57
BIO: S ecific Local Ob•ectives
SLO 2 Southern Waterfront Zone
Amend Objectives for SLO 2 Southern Waterfront Zone as follows:
PROPOSAL
51
REASON
Enhancement of existing and development of new maritime related based
commercial and/or leisure activities on the sites directly fronting Arklow
Port/Harbour shall be supported
Any redevelopment proposals west of the harbour shall retain and
incorporate the existing buildings on the north western corner as identified
on the concept drawing.
Any re-development proposals for the former Arklow Pottery Site shall
provide for the following:
A mixed used high density development incorporating residential
development and tourism accommodation, with active uses at ground
floor level including cafes/restaurants, small shops and marine based
leisure activities, in particular along the facade addressing site Arklow
South Beach.
The redevelopment of this site shall' retain the vehicular access to Arklow
Beach and facilitate pedestrian access though the site via a series of new
streets and public spaces.
Proposals for this site shall be of a high architectural and landscape
quality incorporating some reference to the former use of the site by
Arklow Pottery and contribute positively to the streetscape and public
realm environment of this area. The design shall carefully consider the
visually prominent location of this site which will form primary facades
onto Arklow Beach to the east, the Avoca River and Arklow Port to its
north and west and Arklow Golf Club to the south.
An amenity green / recreational space of not less than 0.8ha that
provides for passive play integrating universal design / sensory
featu res.
The height of any development on site shall demonstrate how it
appropriately responds to its waterfront location at the entrance to
Arklow Port whilst not appearing out of character of context.
The Seafarers Memorial Garden shall be retained as a focal point for this area
Maintaining ease of access to the waterfront for existing and future marine
users (such as the Sea Scouts and Arklow Rowing Club) shall be a key
considered in the regeneration of this area.
The design of any new development, in particular on sites along the water
edge (both along the river or the harbour) shall incorporate any future
identified / required surface water or flood management measures, in
particular any future identified / required flood defences and / or surface
water management infrastructure.
All development proposals shall consider this locations exposed and visually
prominent coastal location. Proposal shall be of a high architectural quality.
High quality finishes are to be used in the public realm, including external
elevational treatment to buildings, structures and public open space. Soft
landscaping shall also consider this coastal location. Finishes shall be
attractive and durable, and appropriate to the scale, form and appearance of
the buildings and their surroundings.
I welcome the inclusion of green infrastructure, biodiversity and amenity policies
within the Draft LPF.
However, I believe there is a gap in how these are spatially applied, particularly in
relation to lands identified as SL02. This presents a significant opportunity to
formally recognise and partially zone some of these lands for a more appropriate
and strate ic form of O en S ace.
52
It is submitted that some SL02 lands should be identified and strengthened as a
blue-green infrastructure corridor, incorporating:
- accessible coastal and riverside walkways
- Low-impact recreational use ( playground/ active play )
- Biodiversity and habitat protection and enhancement
- Sensory and inclusive design elements
While the LPF identifies substantial areas of open space , this does not address the
type, function, or distribution of open space. The SL02 lands represent a unique
natural asset which is currently underutilised in this regard.
Strengthening the designation or policy support for Open Space within SL02
would:
Deliver on green infrastructure and biodiversity objectives already set out in
the LPF;
Provide accessible recreational space for all users, including those with
additional needs;
Support sustainable tourism by enhancing coastal and riverside amenities and
connectivity;
Ensure these lands are protected from piecemeal or inappropriate
development.
This approach aligns with national guidance on climate adaptation, sustainable
urban drainage (SuDS) and multifunctional green infrastructure.
I therefore propose that the LPF be amended to more clearly identify and support
the use of SL02 lands as strategic Open Space and blue-green infrastructure.
Chief Executive's Prelimina Res onse
The CE does not support the proposed alteration
Alterations to the amendment were proposed as follows:
Amend Objectives for SLO 2 Southern Waterfront Zone as follows:
PROPOSAL
•
Enhancement of existing and development of new maritime .related based
commercial and/or leisure activities on the sites directly fronting Arklow
Port/Harbour shall be supported
Any redevelopment proposals west of the harbour shall retain and
incorporate the existing buildings on the north western corner as identified
on the concept drawing.
Any re-development proposals for the former Arklow Pottery Site shall
provide for the following:
A mixed used high density development incorporating residential
development and tourism accommodation, with active uses at ground
floor level including cafes/restaurants, small shops and marine based
leisure activities, in particular along the facade addressing site Arklow
South Beach.
The redevelopment of this site shall retain the vehicular access to Arklow
Beach and facilitate pedestrian access though the site via a series of new
streets and ublic s aces.
53
•
Proposals for this site shall be of a high architectural and landscape
quality incorporating some reference to the former use of the site by
Arklow Pottery and contribute positively to the streetscape and public
realm environment of this area. The design shall carefully consider the
visually prominent location of this site which will form primary facades
onto Arklow Beach to the east, the Avoca River and Arklow Port to its
north and west and Arklow Golf Club to the south.
An amenity green / recreational space of not less than 0.8ha that
provides for passive play integrating universal design / sensory
features.
The height of any development on site shall demonstrate how it
appropriately responds to its waterfront location at the entrance to
Arklow Port whilst not appearing out of character of context.
The Seafarers Memorial Garden shall be retained as a focal point for this area
Maintaining ease of access to the waterfront for existing and future marine
users (such as the Sea Scouts and Arklow Rowing Club) shall be a key
considered in the regeneration of this area.
The design of any new development, in particular on sites along the water
edge (both along the river or the harbour) shall incorporate any future
identified / required surface water or flood management measures, in
particular any future identified / required flood defences and / or surface
water management infrastructure.
All development proposals shall consider this locations exposed and visually
prominent coastal location. Proposal shall be of a high architectural quality.
High quality finishes are to be used in the public realm, including external
elevational treatment to buildings, structures and public open space. Soft
landscaping shall also consider this coastal location. Finishes shall be
attractive and durable, and appropriate to the scale, form and appearance of
the buildings and their surroundings.
REASON
I welcome the inclusion of green infrastructure, biodiversity and amenity policies
within the Draft LPF.
However, I believe there is a gap in how these are spatially applied, particularly in
relation to lands identified as SL02. This presents a significant opportunity to
formally recognise and partially zone some of these lands for a more appropriate
and strategic form of Open Space.
It is submitted that some SL02 lands should be identified and strengthened as a
blue-green infr.astructure corridor, incorporating:
- accessible coastal and riverside walkways
- Low-impact recreational use ( playground/ active play )
- Biodiversity and habitat protection and enhancement
- Sensory and inclusive design elements
54
While the LPF identifies substantial areas of open space , this does not address the
type, function, or distribution of open space. The SL02 lands represent a unique
natural asset which is currently underutilised in this regard.
Strengthening the designation or policy support for Open Space within SL02
would:
Deliver on green infrastructure and biodiversity objectives already set out in
the LPF;
Provide accessible recreational space for all users, including those with
additional needs;
Support sustainable tourism by enhancing coastal and riverside amenities and
connectivity;
Ensure these lands are protected from piecemeal or inappropriate
development.
This approach aligns with national guidance on climate adaptation, sustainable
urban drainage (SuDS) and multifunctional green infrastructure.
I therefore propose that the LPF be amended to more clearly identify and support
the use of SL02 lands as strategic Open Space and blue-green infrastructure.
Alteration No. EMI 2 proposed by Cllr. W. O'Toole, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard was put to a
vote and following a roll call was tied by a margin of 10 for, 10 against, 9 not pæsent and 2
abstained viz:-
FOR (10)
AGAINST (10)
NOT PRESENT (9)
ABSTAINED (2)
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, J. BEHAN, M. DUDDY, T. FORTUNE, P. LEONARD, M.
MURPHY, l. NEARY, W. O'TOOLE, J. SNELL AND C. WINSTANLEY
CLLRS. S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, L. FENELON GASKIN,
P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. MAHON, G. RICHMOND
AND N. WHELAN
CLLRS. M. BARRY, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, P. FITZGERALD, J. MULHALL,
P. O'BRIEN, G. O'NEILL, P. STAPLETON AND S. STOKES
CLLRS. O. FINN AND L. SCOTT
As the vote ended in a tie, the Cathaoirleach had the casting vote in which she voted
against.
55
Part 2 Chief Executives Recommended Alterations to Proposed Variation / draft LPF
Town Centre Regeneration
Section B.I
No.
1
Section
B. 1.4
Opportunity
Site V- The
Alps
Recommended Alterations
Alter the text as follows
Objectives OPI
• The topographical challenges of this site area recognised. Proposals
shall carefully balance the challenges of this site with its highly
accessible town centre location whilst been sensitive to its immediate
built and natural context, including Protected Structure (A39 - Former
Ormonde Cinema) and the Ormonde Castle National Monument
(W1040-029002-Castle - Anglo-Norman masonry castle), and its
location within an area of Archaeological Significance or Potential
(Arklow Town). Proposals shall demonstrate how they accord with the
Sustainable Residential Development and Compact Settlements
Guidelines for Planning Authorities.
CE Recommendation No. 1 was proposed by Cllr. S. Bourke, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard and
agreed by all present.
2
B.I.4
Opportunity
Site 2 - Main
Street
Alter the text as follows
Objectives OP2
• Any new scheme should seek to protect the character and appearance
of the traditional shop fronts including the Morgan Doyle facade and
canopy and any architectural details on buildings of high architectural
value wherever possible. Development shall take account of the site's
location within an Area of Archaeological Significance or Potential
(Arklow Town) and appropriately protect any heritage assets.
CE Recommendation No. 2 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke and
agreed by all present.
Economic Development and Employment
No.
3
Section
Arklow
Recommended Alterations
Include new Objective ARK X:
Employment
0b •ectives
56
ARK XX
To continue to facilitate the development of large-scale
employment development (including ICT development and
associated energy infrastructure) on E zoned lands at Avoca River
Park and Bogland / Money Big
CE Recommendation No. 3 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke and
agreed by all present.
Tourism Development
Section B.5
No.
4
Section
B.5
Tourism &
Recreation.
Objectives
Recommended Alterations
Alter Objective ARK 35 as follows:
'To support and facilitate the improvement of existing and the development of
additional recreational infrastructure at beaches, harbours and coastlines in the
LPF area, including (but not limited to):
• improvements to coastal access, including for those with disabilities, in
particular Improvements to the visual and physical connectivity between the
town centre and Arklow South Beach;
• improvement of existing or development of new toilets, changing facilities,
waste disposal facilities etc; improvement of existing or development of new
appropriately scaled and located car parking;
• infrastructure supporting swimming, sailing, marina/quayside berthing,
rowing and other water sports, and shore fishing subject to ensuring no
adverse environmental or visual im acts.'
CE Recommendation No. 4 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke
and agreed by all present.
57
Social & Community Development
Section B.6
No.
5
Section
Social &
Community
Development
Objectives
Recommended Alterations
Alter Objective ARK43 as follows:
'Having regard to the potential longer 'term education needs in the Arklow
area which have not been determined at this time but may arise; the physical
and environmental constraints present in the area; and the space required
particularly for new secondary schools, the development of new schools shall
be permissible in principle in all land use zones in this LPF, other than OSI
and OS2, subject to the following criteria (in addition to all normal planning
considerations) being fulfilled:
•
•
CE Recommendation No.
agreed by all present.
In order to ensure an appropriate spatial distribution of schools
throughout the LPF area and to ensure maximum accessibility of all
residential areas to schools, no new primary school shall be located within
a 10-minute walking time of any existing primary schools or no new
secondary school shall be located within a 20-minute walking time of any
existing secondary schools;
The site has excellent public transport and active travel infrastructure in
situ, or planned and committed to coincide with a new school opening at
the site;
No such development will be considered on lands in existing community
use where the loss in the use / facility is not being made up for elsewhere
within the settlement.
In relation to flood risk, the sequential approach shall be applied in site
planning, to ensure no encroachment onto, or loss of flood plain. Only
water compatible development such as Open Space will be permitted for
lands which are identified as bein at risk of floodin
5 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke and
Heritage, Biodiversity & Green Infrastructure
Section B. 7
No.
6
Section
8.7
Heritage,
Biodiversity
Green
Infrastructure
Ob•ectives
Recommended Alterations
Include new Objective ARK )O(:
ARK XX Development, where relevant, should have regard to the
structure and setting of Arklow/Ormonde Castle
CE Recommendation No. 6 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke and
agreed by all present.
58
7
8.7
Heritage,
Biodiversity
Green
Infrastructure
Objectives
Alter Objective ARK 57 as follows:
'To ensure development is planned in a manner that has appropriate regard
to specific ecological sensitivities associated with the Arklow area, including
those associated with pNHAs within and around the Arklow LPF area the
AFklew—pNHA, the Avoca River, coastal habitats and species, and sites
suitable for wintering birds. In particular, to ensure the protection and where
possible the restoration of the biodiversity associated with Avoca River and
its riparian (bankside) habitats. Proposals for development at or in the vicinity
of the Avoca River should be informed by ecological surveying and
ecological impact assessment.'
CE Recommendation No. 7 was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard
and agreed by all present.
Physical Infrastructure
Section B.8
No.
8
Section
Recommended Alterations
Infrastructure Alter Objective ARK 77 as follows:
Objectives
To promote and support the delivery of connections which would
significantly reduce walking times to Arklow Train Station including but not
limited to the following:
• The provision of a new link/bridge over the railway line between
Arklow Train Station and Tesco;
• A new pedestrian/cycle link between Yellow Lane and Arklow Train
Station;
• Improvements to existing pedestrian links between the Main Street
and the Train Station in particular Ditch Lane and Tom's Lane.
These links shall be designed to high-quality standards, fully accessible, and
integrated into the broader town centre regeneration and public-realm
improvement programmes.
(PT4
CE Recommendation No. 8 was proposed by Cllr. J. Snell, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard and
agreed by all present.
9
Infrastructure
Objectives
Add new objective as follows
ARK-XX To support and promote the implementation of the
recommended measures set out in the Local Transport Plan
CE Recommendation No. 9 was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke
and agreed by all present.
59
IO
Infrastructure
Objectives
Add new objective as follows
ARK-XX To support the development and optimisation of off-street car-
parking facilities in or adjacent to the town centre so that on-
street, all-day parking can be relocated. On-street spaces shall
be managed and repurposed where feasible to favour set-
down/drop-off areas, short-stay visitor parking and active
loading rather than long-stay parking.
CE Recommendation No. 10 was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. M. Murphy
and agreed by all present.
11
Infrastructure
Objectives
Add the following objective to the LPF:
ARK XX
Public-realm works in Arklow town centre (including lighting,
accessible street furniture, paving and signage) shall wherever
feasible be carried out in a coordinated, locally distinctive
manner which advances high-quality design, reduces visual
clutter, reinforces the towns heritage, and improves the
overall visitor and community experience, in particular:
New lighting, wiring and communications infrastructure
shall be placed underground wherever feasible, to
reduce over-head cabling, poles and visual intrusion.
Lighting design shall wherever feasible be site-specific,
using decorative standards in plazas and along quays,
emphasising heritage frontages, town-centre gateways
and riverside links
The public-realm works shall wherever feasible reflect
Arklow's heritage (boat-building, pottery, seaside
and integrate craft/design elements,
identity)
coordinated across streets, junctions and the waterfront
to create a cohesive sense of place.
Infrastructure renewal shall wherever feasible, be
planned and delivered as part of a comprehensive
public-realm master-scheme rather than piecemeal,
ensuring continuity of design, materials, branding and
quality across the town-centre regeneration area.
CE Recommendation No. 11 with modification, addition of word 'accessible' was proposed
by Cllr. M. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke and agreed by all present.
60
12
Infrastructure Add new objective as follows
Objectives
To protect the strategic function of the N/MII in accordance
ARK-XX
with Spatial Planning and National Roads Guidelines for
Planning Authorities (DoECLG, 2012) and ip compliance with
TII Publications.
CE Recommendation No. 12 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke
and agreed by all present.
13
Flood
and
Coastal
Management
Objectives
Alter the wOrding of Objective ARK 85 as follows:
'Applications for new developments or significant alterations/extension to
existing developments in an area identified as at risk of flooding (Flood
Zones A and B) as set out in the SFRA and flood maps appended to this LPF
OR in Flood Zone C but within an area:
that is deemed by the Local Authority at any time to be at possible risk
of flooding having regard to new information with respect to flood risk
in the area that has come to light; or
that is deemed by the Local Authority at any time to be at possible risk
of flooding having regprd to nearby watercourses that lack
corresponding indicative flood zones;
that is identified as at possible future risk of flooding having regard to
climate change scenarios either on Map 4C attached to this LPF or on
any future maps prepared by the OPW during the lifetime of the LPF;
shall comply with the 'Justification Test for Development Management', as
set out in Box 5.1 of 'The Planning System and Flood Risk Management'
Guidelines 2009 (as may be amended, supplemented or replaced during the
lifetime of this LPF) and shall be accompanied by a site specific Flood Risk
Assessment. Site Specific Flood Risk Assessments shall be in accordance with
the requirements set out in the Flood Risk Management Guidelines and the
LPF SFRA.'
CE Recommendation No. 13 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke
and agreed by all present.
14
Infrastructure
Objectives
Alter the wording of Objective ARK 88 as follows:
ARK 88
To require that the development of Public Utility lands on the
easteFR western side of the Dublin Road to facilitate the
61
expansion of the existing electricity substation comprise of
high-quality design and boundary treatments, include
planting and landscaping proposals to mitigate their visual
impact having regard to their prominent location along the
northern gateway entrance to Arklow Town.
CE Recommendation No. 14 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. P. Kennedy
and agreed by all present.
8.10
No.
15
Specific Local Objectives
Section
SLO 2
Southern
Waterfront
Zone
Recommended Alterations
Alter SLO 2 objective -
Maintaining ease of access to the waterfront for existing and future
marine users (such as the Sea Scouts and Arklow Rowing Club) as well
as emergency services shall be a key consideration in the regeneration
of this area.
CE Recommendation No. 15 was proposed by Cllr. J. Snell, seconded by Cllr. P. Kennedy and
agreed by all present.
16
5
SLO
Kilbride
Alter SLO 5 objective —
An area of 5ha zoned CE: Community & Education shall be reserved to
facilitate the planned development of a new school campus (primary and
post primary).
CE Recommendation No. 16 was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. T. Fortune
and agreed by all present.
17
5
SLO
Kilbride
Alter SLO 5 objective —
To achieve a sense of place and allow for visual diversity any residential
application should provide for a number of identifiable and distinct residential
areas (not exceeding 4-50 200 units) each containing materially different house
designs and typologies within an overall unified theme.
62
CE Recommendation No. 17 was proposed by Cllr. S. Bourke, seconded by Cllr. T. Fortune
and agreed by all present.
18
5
SLO
Kilbride
Add additional objective -
Development of this SLO shall ensure that views of the Howard
Mausoleum from Ferrybank, and local road L-6179 Ticknock — Kilbride
are maintained where feasible.
CE Recommendation No. 18 was proposed by Cllr. S. Bourke, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard
and agreed by all present.
Recommended Alterations to Maps
Land use Map
Map No. 1
No. Section
19 Kynoch
Lodge
Recommended Alterations
Change c. 0.96ha of 'RE — Existing Residential' to c. 0.83ha 'T
0.13ha 'OSI — Open Space'
Change from:
Change to:
63
— Tourism' and c.
CE Recommendation No. 19 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. S. Bourke
and agreed by all present.
20
Avoca
River
Park
A: Change c. 1.32ha from iOS2 Natural Areas' to 'E — Employment'
B: Change c. 1.4ha from 'unzoned' to 'E — Employment'
Change from:
Change to:
64
CE Recommendation No. 20 was proposed by Cllr. P. Kennedy, seconded by Cllr. W. O'Toole
and agreed by all present.
Prior to voting on CE Recommendation No. 21, Cllr. S. Bourke disclosed to the meeting the
nature of a beneficial interest and withdrew fully from the meeting for consideration of the
item.
21 Lamberton A: Change c. 0.3ha from 'OS2 Natural Areas' to 'RN2 — New Residential'
B: Change c. 0.04ha from 'RN2 - New Residential to 'OS2 Natural Areas'
Change from:
Change to:
65
CE Recommendation No. 21 was opposed by Cllr. W. O'Toole, seconded by Cllr. P. Leonard
was put to a vote and following a roll call was defeated by a margin of 3 for, 11 against, 15
not present and 2 abstained viz:- as such the alteration was passed as proposed by the Chief
Executive.
FOR (3)
AGAINST (11)
NOT PRESENT 15)
ABSTAINED (2)
CLLRS. P. LEONARD, W. O'TOOLE AND J. SNELL
CLLRS. J. BEHAN, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, M. DUDDY, L. FENELON
GASKIN, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, P. MAHON, G. RICHMOND, N.
WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, M. BARRY, S. BOURKE, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, P.
FITZGERALD, S. LANGRELL, J. MULHALL, M. MURPHY, l. NEARY, P.
O'BRIEN, G. O'NEILL, L. SCOTT, P. STAPLETON AND S. STOKES
CLLRS. O. FINN AND T. FORTUNE
Cllr. S. Bourke was invited to rejoin the meeting which he duly did.
22
Money
Big
A: Change c. 2.5ha from 'OS2 — Natural Areas' to 'E — Employment'
B: Exclude c. 6.1 ha of 'E' zoned land from SL04
Chan e from:
66
Change to (including altered SL04 boundary):
CE Recommendation No. 22 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon
and agreed by all present.
Appendix
No.
23
Section
SFRA
a endix
Recommended Alterations
Update flood mapping as detailed in Addendum I to the Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment
CE Recommendation No. 23 was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon
and agreed by all present.
67
Prior to voting , Cllr. S. Bourke disclosed to the meeting the nature of a beneficial interest
and withdrew fully from the meeting for consideration of the item.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Leonard, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon that:
'The Elected Members resolve to amend the Proposed Variation to the Wicklow County
Development Plan 2022 2028 Draft Arklow Local Planning Framework in accordance with
the Chief Executive's recommended proposed alterations and the Elected Members proposed
alterations approved at this meeting and given that said proposed alterations constitute
material alterations to the Proposed Variation Draft Local Planning Framework resolve to
publish notice of the proposed material alterations and any changes consequent to said
material alterations for public consultation'
was put to a vote and following a roll call was passed by a margin of 15 for and 16 not
present: -
FOR (15)
AGAINST (0)
NOT PRESENT 16)
ABSTAINED (0)
CLLRS. J. BEHAN, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, M. DUDDY, L. r-ENELON
GASKIN, O. FINN, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, P. LEONARD, P.
MAHON, W. O'TOOLE, G. RICHMOND, J. SNELL, N. WHELAN AND C.
WINSTANLEY
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, M. BARRY, S. BOURKE, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, P.
FITZGERALD, T. FORTUNE, S. LANGRELL, J. MULHALL, M. MURPHY, l.
NEARY, P. O'BRIEN, G. O'NEILL, L. SCOTT, P. STAPLETON AND S.,
STOKES
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING
CLLR. MELANIE CORR AN
CATHAOIRLEACH
WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL
MS. HELEN PURCELL
SENIOR EXECUTIVE OFFICER/
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR
Confirmed at meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday the 11th May 2026.
68