1 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING (HYBRID) OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
MONDAY 16TH JUNE 2025, COMMENCING 11.30 A.M. IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER AND VIA 
MICROSOFT TEAMS 
 
 
PRESENT:   
 
COUNCILLORS P. O’BRIEN CATHAOIRLEACH, D, ALVEY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE, M. 
CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, E. DOYLE, M. DUDDY, L. FENELON GASKIN, P. FITZGERALD, T. 
FORTUNE, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, S. LANGRELL, P. LEONARD, P. MAHON, J. MULHALL, 
I. NEARY, D. O’BRIEN, G. O’NEILL, G. RICHMOND, L. SCOTT, J. SNELL, P. STAPLETON, S. 
STOKES, N. WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY (27) 
 
 
APOLOGIES 
 
CLLRS. M. BARRY, G. DUNNE, O. FINN, M. MURPHY AND W. O’TOOLE (5) 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE: 
 
MR. M. NICHOLSON, DEPUTY CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
MS. H. PURCELL, A/DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MR. F KEOGH, A/DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MR. B. GLEESON, DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MR. M. DEVEREUX, T/DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MS. T. O’BRIEN, T/DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MS. L. HEALY, A/DIRECTOR OF SERVICES 
MS. T. BYRNE, ASSISTANT STAFF OFFICER 
 
 
At the commencement of the meeting a roll call was taken.  The Meetings Administrator 
advised of meetings etiquette for online meetings and that the press and some members of 
the public were also present. 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
Elected Members passed a vote of sympathy to the families of the late Rt. Reverend 
Monsignor Kieron J. Kennedy and John Bermingham. A minutes silence was observed for the 
deceased. 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
ITEM NO. 1 
 
To consider the Proposed Material Amendments to the draft Blessington Local Area Plan 
2025, to consider the Chief Executive’s Report on submissions to the Proposed Material 
Amendments to the draft plan and to consider making, not making or modifying the 
Blessington Local Area Plan 2025 – 2031, all in accordance with Section 20 of the Planning 
and Development Act 2000 (as amended). 
 
 
Disclosures 
 
The Meetings Administrator reminded the elected members of their requirements under 
the ethics legislation that;  
 
1. When a matter comes before the meeting for consideration, if they or a connected 
person has a beneficial interest, they must disclose to the meeting the nature of the 
beneficial interest before discussion or consideration of the matter commences.   
2. They must withdraw fully from the meeting until the matter is concluded.  
3. They must also inform the Council’s Ethics Registrar in writing.   
4. The disclosure and absence from the meeting will be recorded in the minutes.   
5. When the item is completed the member will be advised by phone and can rejoin 
the meeting. 
 
 
PART A 
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
1 
A.4 
 
Overall Strategy 
Amend text as follows:  
In light of Sections A2 and A3.1 and A3.2 above, the development strategy adopted 
in this plan has a number of elements: 
 The key parameters for the future physical development of Blessington are 
based around protection of the environment, sustainability, compact growth 
and developing the settlement in a manner that will generate the minimal 
number of private car journeys and maximise walking, cycling and use of 
public transport. 
 Consolidate the existing built pattern in Blessington by maximising the 
development potential of large sites close to the core and any infill sites and 
backland sites along the main roads within the town core of Blessington; 
 To provide a framework for the future development of Blessington town 
centre to facilitate the development of this core area as the centre/focus of the 
settlement. To enhance the public realm in this centre and enhance 
connections and linkages to the residential areas surrounding the centre, as 
well as providing connections between this area and important recreational 
assets such as the Poulaphouca Reservoir. 
 To promote and encourage the appropriate regeneration of quarry lands with 

3 
 
 
 
a mix of uses including residential and other such uses that provide local job 
opportunities, and uses that support the existing town centre; 
 To facilitate the appropriate development of greenfield residential lands that 
are serviced and serviceable within the settlement, particular to the west of the 
town on the grounds of the former Blessington Demesne, in a managed / 
phased manner so as to align with the housing / population growth targets 
set out in the County Development Plan and the delivery of commensurate 
community services; 
 To provide for new employment opportunities on serviced / serviceable 
greenfield lands at appropriate locations that are connected to local 
residential areas with walking, cycling and public transport facilities. There are 
a number of sites that has the potential for employment growth, e.g. former 
quarry lands, lands in the vicinity of Blessington WWTP, and on infill sites 
within existing industrial estates; 
 To provide for new community, educational and recreational opportunities on 
serviced/ serviceable greenfield lands at appropriate locations that are 
connected to local residential areas with walking, cycling and public transport 
facilities. There are a number of sites that have the potential for new schools, 
community infrastructure and recreation / sports facilities, primarily along a 
part-constructed link roads to the west of the town centre, south from the 
GAA grounds and towards Naas Road.  
 To ensure that the lands surrounding the European Site of the Poulaphouca 
Reservoir SPA are protected from adverse impacts arising from new 
development and to carefully manage and control the extension of existing 
development in proximity to these areas. Generally, zoning for new 
development will only be provided for above the 194m contour adjoining the 
lakeshore.  
 To rationalise and consolidate the settlement boundary of Blessington to omit 
extensive areas of lands previously zoned AG ‘Agricultural Lands’ in the Blessington 
Local Area Plan 2013, where possible, as the objectives of the Wicklow County 
Development Plan in relation to the rural area already applies to these areas. AG 
‘Agriculture’, shall be retained within the plan boundary only where necessary to 
create a zoned bridge to OS2 ‘Natural Areas’ zoned lands e.g. lands in the vicinity of 
the lakeshore or the intervening lands between the town and Glen Ding. 
 
Amendment No. 1 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Stapleton and agreed by 
all present. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------  
 
B.1 TOWN CENTRE REGENERATION AND OPPORTUNITY SITES 
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
2 
Public Realm 
Amend plan text as follows: 
Section B.1 Town Centre Regeneration  
Public Realm 

4 
 
 
 
Footpath widths are not consistent throughout Blessington Town Centre, and in 
some cases can be constrained or are lacking on both sides of a road. 
Furthermore, historical issues in relation to maintenance and the private 
ownership of Newtown Square have resulted in areas of paving and signage 
being in poor condition, as identified in a 2019 Street Route Accessibility Audit. 
Many (though not all) of the issues raised in that 2019 audit could be addressed 
as part of a comprehensive public realm project on Market Square and its 
immediate vicinity on Blessington Main Street. Furthermore, Market Square and 
Newtown Square currently present as two distinct areas that are visually and 
spatially poorly connected to one another. Improvements could involve the 
provision of a linear green space visually linking the two developments, and the 
spatial integration of the two areas by infill development on surface car parking 
that currently divides the squares. 
Such a public realm improvement project is proposed in the Blessington Town 
Centre First Plan and the Local Area Plan will facilitate and support its 
implementation. Public realm and other road improvement schemes within 
Blessington could also provide an opportunity to underground cabling along 
Blessington Main Street. 
While the improvement of the Market Square is a key element of the town centre 
regeneration strategy for Blessington, any alterations to the layout and public 
usage of the Square shall be determined by Wicklow County Council and the 
Elected Members of Baltinglass MD, taking into account the views and needs of 
residents and business owners in area, who will be consulted through any future 
consent processes. 
 
Amendment No. 2 proposed by Cllr. G. O’Neill, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed by all 
present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------   
 
 
3 
Blessington 
Opportunity Sites (OP) 
Amend text as follows: 
 ‘Opportunity sites’ (OP) are identified in this Local Area Plan, which would, if 
developed, contribute to the enhancement of the public realm, streetscape, 
vibrancy, vitality, and the retail/services offer in the town centre. There are 
numerous underutilised and unoccupied properties within Blessington Town 
Centre that could be redeveloped to contribute to the enhancement of the area 
and any development proposal for these sites should have regard to the objectives 
of the County Development Plan, this Local Area Plan, and the Blessington Town 
Centre First Plan as relevant. Development proposals on individual land parcels 
within OP sites may be considered subject to the delivery of relevant development 

5 
 
 
 
objectives and the safeguarding of the delivery of objectives/access on adjacent 
lands. Note that this Local Area Plan has included all opportunity sites identified in 
the Blessington Town Centre First Plan, but has also identified further opportunity 
sites as relevant. 
 
In terms of phasing or priority, while the Local Authority will support where 
possible the development of all OP sites during the lifetime of the plan, the 
focus for the Local Authority’s own efforts, including developing projects and 
seeking funding will be OP1, 2 and 3 located in the very core of the town 
centre, around Market Square. 
 
 
Amendment No. 3 proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon, seconded by Cllr. G. O’Neill and agreed by 
all present. 
 
----------------------------------------------------  
 
 
4 
OP7 Horseshoe Arch 
& Backlands 
Amend text as follows: 
This site is comprised of a series of back land plots behind Blessington Main 
Street and south of Kilbride Road. The plots are currently accessible through a 
horseshoe-shaped arch from the Main Street. This arch is constrained in width 
and height and would present difficulties in accessing back lands for larger 
vehicles and emergency services. Rather, the horseshoe arch would present an 
attractive pedestrian and cyclist access way to these backlands, with vehicular 
traffic requiring an alternative access point to this block of back lands. Some 
alternative access points could be created through Lakeside Downs (c. 13m at 
the narrowest point) or directly from Kilbride Road (c. 7m at the narrowest 
point). 
 To support the development of these lands for provide for mixed use town 
centre infill development (which could include residential use). Indicative 
block formats are provided in the below concept plan. Development should 
provide an appropriate architectural response to the Blessington 
Architectural Conservation Area. 
 To provide for a pedestrian and cyclist only passageway through the 
horseshoe arch onto Blessington Main Street, and ancillary pedestrian/cyclist 
access ways from Lakeside Downs and to the rear of the AIB. 
 Vehicular access (and ancillary pedestrian/cyclist access) into these backlands 
shall be either via the north-eastern corner of the opportunity site through 
incidental green space in Lakeside Downs, or directly via Kilbride Road. This 
vehicular access should also service the rears of existing premises on 
Blessington Main Street adjoining this opportunity site and allow for 
potential future access to backlands to the south, while site layouts should 
allow the development of both vehicular entrances. 
 The development of any individual landholding, or plot therein, should not 
‘land lock’ or prejudice the development of adjacent/intervening plots. No 
individual development proposal for any part of the Opportunity Site will be 
approved unless accompanied by an overall proposal for the accessing of 
the entire Opportunity Site. 

6 
 
 
 
 
Omit Figure B1.9 Concept Plan for OP7 
 
Amendment No. 4 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
5 
OP8 North 
Blessington Main 
Street 
Omit OP8 ‘Concept Plan’ Figure B1.11 
Amend OP8 boundary 
Change from: 
 
Change to: 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment No. 5 proposed by Cllr. P. Mahon, seconded by Cllr. G. O’Neill and agreed by all 
present.  
------------------------------------------  
 
 
6 
Blessington 
Opportunity Sites 
(OP) 
Add new OP – Opportunity Site 
Add new text to Section B.1 Town Centre Regeneration, ‘Blessington 
Opportunity Sites (OP)’, as follows: 
BLESS OP9 
Naas Road – N81 junction 
 
This site is comprised of a large field at the junction of the N81/Blessington 
Main Street and the Naas Road. The site slopes steeply to the west, with 
hedgerows and significant mature trees along the northern/north-western, 
eastern and southern boundaries. The western boundary has a modern 
ornamental hedge boundary. The site is located to the immediate south of 
Dempsey’s Lane and to the west of the green space at Rockypool Villas. The 
redevelopment of this site provides an opportunity to link these two green 
spaces through the creation of a public open space on this site that is well 
located to the south of Blessington Main Street. 

8 
 
 
 
 
Figure B.1.X: Opportunity Site OP9 
Objectives BLESS OP9 
 
To provide for mixed use town centre infill development. Development 
should provide an appropriate architectural response to the Blessington 
Architectural Conservation Area, which is located a short distance to the 
north of the opportunity site. 
 
A public park/civic space measuring c. 0.3ha (including the existing wide 
verges along the northern boundary) should be integrated in to the design of 
any development along the northern and eastern boundary of the site in a 
manner capable of providing linkages to the green space opposite Rockypool 
Villas and the green walkway at Dempsey’s Lane. This public park/civic 
space should be provided as one contiguous area that is not bisected by 
access roads. There should not be excessive areas of car parking between 
north/northeast-facing frontages and this space. 
 
Hedgerows and mature trees should be retained on the site to the 
north/north-western, eastern, and southern boundaries. Vehicular access to 
the site should be via the western boundary, unless otherwise agreed with 
the Planning Authority. 
 
The potential of the site should be maximised through use of the sloping 
topography of the lands. Strong urban and active frontages should be 
provided on the northern and eastern frontages subject to maximum 
retention of mature trees;   
 
Development should have regard to the planned Blessington Pedestrian and 
Cycle Improvement Scheme. Sufficient space shall be left free from 
development to allow for potential upgrades to the existing N81/Naas Road 
junction. 
 
Any lighting proposed should have regard to best practice guidance on bats 
and artificial lighting. 
 

9 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure B.1.X: Concept Plan for Opportunity Site 9 
 
Amendment No. 6 proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon as published, with the minor modification 
recommended by the Chief Executive, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin and agreed by all present. 
 
-----------------------------------------------------  
 
B.2 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT 
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
7 
Housing Targets & 
Extant Planning 
Permissions 
Amend text as follows: 
Having regard to the Core Strategy and population / housing targets 
provided therein for Blessington, there is capacity within the lands zoned TC, 
RE (all located in the serviced, built up envelope) and lands zoned RN1 
(greenfield residential lands either within the built envelope or with extant 
planning permission) to meet current targets. 
In order to ensure a long term supply of zoned land, in particular to ensure 
flexibility in the event of an increase in housing targets during the lifetime of 
this plan, this plan also provides for additional zoned serviced / serviceable 
residential lands, over and above that needed to meet current targets, zoned 
‘RN2 – New Residential Priority 2’. Permission will not be considered during 
the lifetime of this plan for RN2 lands unless the following two conditions are 
satisfied: 
- 75% of Priority 1 new residential lands (RN1) lands have been activated 
(i.e. consent obtained and development initiated) or after 3 years 
following adoption of the LAP, less than 50% of the RN1 lands have been 

10 
 
 
 
activated;; 
- It can be shown that the housing / population generated by the 
proposed development would not result in the prevailing Core Strategy 
targets at the time of the decision to grant permission being significantly 
breached. 
 
 
Amendment No. 7 proposed as published, by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin 
and agreed by all present. 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
8 
Objective BLESS7  
Notwithstanding the zoning / designation of land for new ‘greenfield’ 
residential development (RN), permission will not be considered for RN2 
Priority 2 lands unless the following two conditions are satisfied: 
- 75% of Priority 1 new residential lands (RN1) lands have been activated 
(i.e. consent obtained and development initiated) or after 3 years following 
adoption of the LAP, less than 50% of the RN1 lands have been activated;; 
- It can be shown that the housing / population generated by the proposed 
development would not result in the prevailing Core Strategy targets at the 
time of the application being significantly breached. 
 
Amendment No. 8 proposed as published, by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon 
and agreed by all present. 
 
-------------------------------------------------------  
 
B.4 TOURISM 
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
9A Blessington  
Greenway 
Amend the plan as follows:  
Blessington greenway 
The Blessington Greenway, a 6km walking and cycling trail, was opened in 2014. The 
existing Greenway passes along the lakeshore between the Avon, Burgage Castle, 
and towards Russborough House, terminating at Russelstown. The trail is well used 
by both residents and visitors alike. 
The proposed Blessington eGreenway, While An Bord Pleanala refused permission 
in 2024 for an extension of the existing greenway to a route of 33km, will linking the 
settlements of Ballyknockan, Valleymount, Lackan, as well as other attractions and 
tourist facilities at Russborough (proposed to be accessed via an underpass through 
a currently disused tunnel) and Tulfarris, Wicklow County Council is committed to 
enhancing tourism infrastructure and attractions in the Blessington area, 
particularly those related to the Blessington Lakes and those that bring benefit to 
the villages surrounding the lakes, subject to the utmost protection of the 

11 
 
 
 
environment, including water quality and natural habitats. Options for alternative 
projects around the Blessington Lakes that capitalise on, but appropriately 
protect, this asset are currently being reviewed. 
. This proposed extension to the Greenway has the potential to draw significant 
numbers of visitors to the area and have a transformative effect on the tourism 
economy in Blessington. On this basis, the priority tourism issue in the settlement is 
the provision of adequate tourist facilities to cater to the impending proposed 
extension to the Blessington Greenway, future tourism projects in the Blessington 
lakeside area including facilitating tourist accommodation within the settlement. 
Wicklow County Council has purchased the former HSE building on Kilbride Road to 
act as a hub for the eGreenway future tourism projects in the Blessington Lakes area 
which in turn would draw visitors into the town centre. Furthermore, this local area 
plan has identified a range of supporting infrastructure that would aid in the 
possible expansion of the existing greenway and lakeside tourism within the 
settlement. This infrastructure includes feeder routes for active travel users and 
additional Park&Ride locations for those accessing the eGreenway lakes area by 
private vehicle. See Map No. 7 ‘Supporting Tourism Greenway Infrastructure’. 
 
Amendment No. 9A proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
---------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
9B Tourism & Recreation 
Objectives  
Amend objectives as follows:  
BLESS18 
 
To facilitate and support future tourism projects in the Blessington lakeside area 
including but not limited to  links between the town centre and the lakes, and a 
possible extension proposed Blessington eGreenway as an expansion to the existing 
Blessington Greenway. 
BLESS19 
 
To facilitate the redevelopment of the former HSE building on Kilbride Road as an 
eGreenway Visitor Hub supporting future tourism projects in the Blessington area. 
BLESS20 
 
To facilitate and encourage the delivery of supporting greenway tourism 
infrastructure as indicated on Map No. 7 Supporting Greenway Tourism 
Infrastructure. 
 
Amendment No. 9B proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------   
 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
B.6 
HERITAGE/BIODIVERSITY 
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
10 Architectural 
Conservation Areas 
(ACA) 
Add ‘ACA boundary’ to maps as appropriate.  
Insert Figure X: Town Centre Opportunity Sites (blue) and Blessington 
Architectural Conservation Area (hatched orange) under Part B.1 Town 
Centre 
Regeneration, 
Blessington 
Opportunity 
Sites 
(OP
 
Amendment No. 10 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------  
 
 
PART B.7  
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
11 Transportation 
Objectives  
Include new objective: 
BLESS - XX 
In collaboration and with the support of the relevant transport 
agencies, to prepare a Local Transport Plan for Blessington. 
 

13 
 
 
 
Amendment No. 11 proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
---------------------------------------------------  
 
12 Transportation 
Objectives  
Amend objective as follows: 
BLESS 49  
To continue to work with the NTA on the improvement of bus services to 
Blessington and to provide for the significant enhancement of services, 
facilities and infrastructure at a suitable location in Blessington, including but 
not limited to, 
- 
Enhanced pedestrian and cycling connectivity and enhanced car / bike / 
bus parking. 
- 
Bus priority along Blessington Main Street via a reduction in through 
traffic through the town centre, upon completion of the Blessington Inner 
Relief Road. 
- 
Support for the NTA’s BusConnects programme as it relates to the plan 
area. 
- 
Support for the NTA’s Connecting Ireland Rural Mobility Plan as it relates 
to the plan area. 
- 
 
To continue to work with the NTA to promote the delivery of improved and new 
bus services, facilities and infrastructure within the plan area and connecting the 
plan area to the wider region by: 
 
supporting the development and delivery of bus service enhancement 
projects, under the Connecting Ireland and Bus Connects programmes and 
measures to improve bus priority such as additional bus lanes and priority 
signalling etc as may be deemed appropriate;  
 
facilitating the needs of existing or new bus providers with regard to bus 
stops and garaging facilities (although unnecessary duplication of bus stops 
on the same routes / roads will not be permitted); 
 
supporting the development of enhanced bus shelters, of secure covered 
bicycle parking facilities at key locations along bus routes,  
 
to promote and support the improvement of N81 in a manner capable of 
facilitating greater free flow of public transport, 
 
to support and facilitate the existing service providers and encourage the 
further development of the Local Link Rural Transport Programme (and any 
other or subsequent rural transport programmes). 
 
Enhancing pedestrian and cycling connectivity to public transport services. 
Amendment No. 12 proposed by Cllr. P. Mahon, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------  
 
 

14 
 
 
 
13 Transportation 
Objectives  
Amend objective as follows: 
BLESS - 50 
 
To protect the strategic function of the N81 (and any upgrade/bypassed route 
thereof) as it relates to the plan area.  in accordance with the Spatial Planning 
and National Roads Guidelines for Planning Authorities (DoECLG, 2012) and in 
compliance with TII Publications. 
 
 
Amendment No. 13 proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon, seconded by Cllr. G. O’Neill and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------  
 
 
14 Transport Strategy 
Maps 
Amend Transport Objectives Map as follows: 
- Add additional information on active travel projects 
- Add SLO areas 
- Add OP sites  
 
 
Amendment No. 14 proposed by Cllr. G. O’Neill, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
15 Flood Management 
Objectives 
Amend the objective as follows: 
BLESS 51 
Applications for new developments or significant alterations/extension to 
existing developments in an area at risk of flooding shall comply with the 
following: 
 
Follow the ‘sequential approach’ as set out in the Flood Risk 
Management’ Guidelines  
 
An appropriately detailed flood risk / drainage impact assessment will 
be required with all planning applications, to ensure that the development 
itself is not at risk of flooding and the development does not increase the 
flood risk in the relevant catchment (both up and down stream of the 
application site), taking into account all sources of flooding; 
 
Restrict the types of development permitted in Flood Zone A and Flood 
Zone B to that which are ‘appropriate’ to each flood zone, as set out in Tables 
3.1 and 3.2 of the Flood Risk Management Guidelines unless the ‘plan making 
justification test’ has been applied and passed; 
 
Where an development application site located in Flood Zone A or B a 
site has been subject to and satisfied the ‘Plan Making Justification Test’ 
development will only be permitted where a proposal complies with the 
‘Justification Test for Development Management’, as set out in Box 5.1 of the 
Flood Risk Guidelines.  

15 
 
 
 
 
Flood Risk Assessments shall be in accordance with the requirements set 
out in the Flood Risk Guidelines and the SFRA. 
Where flood zone mapping does not indicate a risk of flooding but the 
Planning Authority is of the opinion that flood risk may arise or new 
information has come to light that may alter the flood designation of the land, 
including the latest future scenario flood mapping, an appropriate flood risk 
assessment will be required to be submitted by an applicant for planning 
permission and the sequential approach shall be applied as the ‘Plan Making 
Justification Test’ will not be satisfied. 
Applications for new developments or significant alterations/extension to 
existing developments in an area identified as at risk of flooding (Flood Zones A 
and B) as set out in the SFRA and flood maps appended to this plan OR in Flood 
Zone C but within an area  
 that is deemed by the Local Authority at any time to be at possible risk of 
flooding having regard to new information with respect to flood risk in the 
area that has come to light; or 
 that is identified as at possible future risk of flooding having regard to 
climate change scenarios either on Map X attached to this plan or on any 
future maps prepared by the OPW during the lifetime of the plan; 
shall comply with the ‘Justification Test for Development Management’, as set 
out in Box 5.1 of ‘the Planning System and Flood Risk Management’ Guidelines 
2009 (as may be amended, supplemented or replaced during the lifetime of this 
plan) and shall be accompanied by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment.  Site 
Specific Flood Risk Assessments shall be in accordance with the requirements set 
out in the Flood Risk Management Guidelines and the plan SFRA. 
 
Amendment No. 15 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-----------------------------------------------------  
 
 
16 Other Infrastructure 
Objectives 
Add the following text and objectives: 
Water Protection  
The Poulaphouca Reservoir is a critical source of raw water supply to the 
populations of Dublin, Kildare and parts of Wicklow. Significant measures are 
required to be taken to protect the water quality in the reservoir, including the 
management of surface water runoff in adjacent towns and villages. 
 
Uisce Éireann recommends the use of the hierarchy of discharge outlined in 
the guidance document “Implementation of Urban Nature-based Solutions: 
Guidance Document for Planners, Developers and Developer Agents” to 
complement the approach to surface water management set out in the 
Wicklow County Development Plan. 
 
In particular, Uisce Éireann encourages a specific focus on the water quality of 
surface water runoff collected in Blessington town and discharged either 
directly to the reservoir or to watercourses which drain to the reservoir. This is 

16 
 
 
 
applicable to both new developments and to any planned improvements to 
existing urban spaces. 
BLESS-XX:   To protect both ground and surface water sources, to avoid water 
quality deterioration and reduce the level of treatment required in the 
production of drinking water, in accordance with Drinking Water and Water 
Framework Directives. New developments which could pose an unacceptable 
risk to drinking water sources will not be permitted. 
 
BLESS-XX:  To support and facilitate the improvement of the quality of surface 
water runoff that directly (or indirectly) will reach Poulaphouca Reservoir. This 
shall be applied to both new/expanded developments and to any planned 
improvements to existing urban spaces. In this regard, developments shall be 
designed in accordance with the guidance document “Implementation of 
Urban Nature-based Solutions: Guidance Document for Planners, Developers 
and Developer Agents” LAWPRO 2024. 
 
Amendment No. 16 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-------------------------------------------------------  
 
PART B.8 
ZONING 
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
17 Zoning Objectives 
Amend the text as follows 
Insert new sentence at end of Zoning table: 
Essential infrastructure, including roads / footpaths / cycleways and utilities that 
are necessary to support development lands, are generally permissible in all zones. 
Where such infrastructure would be required in OS1 or OS2 zones, and no other 
routes are viable, such infrastructure shall only be considered where it is shown it 
will not undermine the purpose of this zoning or give rise to significant adverse 
environmental impacts. 
 
Amendment No. 17 proposed by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed 
by all present. 
 
------------------------------------------------  
 
PART B.8.1 SPECIFIC LOCAL OBJECTIVES  
 
No. Section 
Proposed Amendment 
18 Specific Local 
Objectives (SLO) – 
preamble / general  
(a) 
Amend text as follows: 
The purpose of an SLO is to guide developers as to the aspirations of the 
plan regarding the development of certain lands where more than one land 

17 
 
 
 
use is proposed, where there is a new infrastructure necessitated on the 
subject lands or where the lands are zoned for ‘mixed use’ to give more 
detail on the development objective of these lands. A masterplan for the 
entire SLO area may be required to be submitted as part of the first 
application within the SLO. All masterplans / development applications shall 
have regard to the requirements of the Spatial Planning and National Roads 
Guidelines for Planning Authorities (DoECLG, 2012) and in compliance with TII 
Publications. 
(b) 
Add National Monuments points onto final SLO maps.  
 
 
Amendment No. 18 proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-----------------------------------------------------  
 
 
19 SLO2 – Blessington 
Demesne (West) & 
SLO8 – Blessington 
Demesne (East) 
Amend SLO2 and SLO8 as follows 
1. Merge SLO2 and SLO8 
2. Amend the land use of zoning of c. 10.4ha in SLO2 from AOS ‘Active Open 
Space’ to RN1 ‘New Residential Priority 1’  
3. Amend c. 2.3ha in SLO2 from RN2 ‘New Residential – Priority 2’ to RN1 ‘New 
Residential - Priority 1’ 
4.  Amend SLO2 and SLO8 Specific Local Objectives’ areas and text  as follows:  
Change from: 
 
Change to: 

18 
 
 
 
 
Replace existing SLO2 and SLO8 text with new text as follows:  
This SLO is located in the townland of Blessington Demesne. This SLO measures c. 
51ha and comprises 
- 
c. 4.5ha zoned for AOS ‘Active Open Space’,  
- 
c. 15.3 ha zoned OS1 ‘Open Space’,  
- 
c. 1.4 ha zoned for OS2 ‘Natural Areas’;  
- 
c. 3.8 ha zoned CE ‘Community & Education’,  
- 
c. 21.8ha zoned RN1 ‘New Residential Priority 1’ and  
- 
c. 3.3 ha zoned RE ‘Existing Residential’.  
 
The RN1 zones are located in two parcels – A and B (A being the parcel to the north 
of Oak Drive and B comprising two RN1 sites to the south of Oak Drive/west of the 
new park). 
Any development proposals for this SLO shall comply with the County Development 
Plan, this Local Area Plan and the following requirements: 
 
No dwelling units that may be permitted on foot of the RN1 (Parcel A) zoning 
may be occupied until the new town park, which shall include a dog park, 
located on lands zoned OS1, is completed in full. The development of the town 
park should have regard to and integrate demesne features and other heritage 
elements associated with the former Blessington Demesne, and should include 
appropriate buffer zones/mitigating measures in relation to habitats of 
biodiversity value (including areas identified as Local Biodiversity Areas). 
 
 
Any new residential development proposals for the RN1 (Parcel B) lands shall 
be accompanied by proposals for the concurrent development of community 
sports facility on lands zoned AOS measuring not less than 4.5ha, of a design 
and layout and including such facilities and support buildings to be agreed 
with the Planning Authority but which shall include at a minimum a full size 
polyurethane 400m 8-lane running track, with field athletics space within, a 

19 
 
 
 
separate full size (i.e. 90mx145m) multi sport all weather pitch, mixed use all 
weather sports courts (suitable in size and finish for a range of uses) and an 
all-weather 7-a-side pitch 
 
 
Car parking to serve the AOS lands should also be of a sufficient size, layout, and 
location to serve as an alternative car park for access to Glen Ding via the (under 
construction) green link that passes through the SLO from the town park. The scale 
of this car parking should not exceed that necessary to serve the AOS lands and 
alternative access to Glen Ding (noting the limited existing provision of parking 
spaces at the entrance to Glen Ding), and should not detract from the efficient use 
of the AOS lands for the primary purpose of active open space/sports/recreation 
uses. 
 
 
No dwelling units that may be permitted on foot of the RN1 (Parcel B) zoning 
may be occupied until this community sports facility is fully developed suitable 
for community sports use (including necessary buildings/structures, layout, 
drainage, surfacing, lighting, access and car parking) and is available for 
community use;  
 
 
This community sports facility shall be suitable for the needs of, and shared 
use by, potential future educational uses on the site reserved for such within 
this SLO. 
 
 
CE zoned lands (excluding the under construction childcare facility) measuring 
not less than 3.56ha shall be serviced as part of the development of the SLO 
and reserved for future education use. 
 
 
The development of structures along all existing and proposed arterial and link 
roads should provide a strong sense of enclosure as per Section 4.2.1 of the 
Design Manual for Urban Roads and Streets, subject to the adequate 
protection 
of 
visual/landscape 
amenity 
from 
Blessington 
Main 
Street/Blessington Inner Relief Road to Glen Ding Forest. 
 
 
Adequate areas should be left free of development to preserve the view from 
St. Mary’s Church to Bastion Wood and Glen Ding Forest. 
 
 
The development of appropriate buffer zones/mitigating measures which shall 
have regard to the setting and curtilage of structures and sites of heritage 
value, and habitats of biodiversity value including area identified as LBAs. 
 
 
Any new residential development proposals for the RN1 (Parcel A) lands shall 
be accompanied by proposals for the concurrent development of northern 
sections of the BIRR. No dwelling units that may be permitted on foot of the 
RN1 (Parcel A) zoning may be occupied until the northern section of the BIRR 

20 
 
 
 
is completed in full and is available for public use. 
 
 
Any new residential development proposals for the RN1 (Parcel B) lands shall 
be accompanied by proposals for the concurrent development of link road 
between Blessington GAA and the Naas Road. No dwelling units that may be 
permitted on foot of the RN1 (Parcel B) zoning may be occupied until this road 
is completed in full and is available for public use. 
 
Development within the SLO shall ensure maximum pedestrian/cyclist 
permeability into the (under construction) green link that passes through the 
SLO, and provide strong passive surveillance to this link. 
 
 
The following pedestrian/cyclist links shall be provided, alongside general good 
permeability via pedestrian/cyclist linkages through and between the SLO 
lands and surrounding areas: 
- from Blessington Inner Relief Road along the southern boundary of the SLO 
towards Glen Ding Forest (under construction), refer to Map No. 6 Active 
Travel. 
- from the town park northwards towards the SLO boundary, joining with 
links within SLO3, refer to Map No. 6 Active Travel. This link should cross 
watercourses in line with CPO 17.26 of the Wicklow County Development 
Plan 2022-2028. Elements of this link are under construction. 
- along the boundary of OS2 lands around the Deerpark watercourse, as 
relevant, as per objective BLESS48. 
 
Amendment No. 19 proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin as published with the minor modification 
recommended by the Chief Executive, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by all 
present. 
 
---------------------------------------------------  
 
 
20 SLO4 
Doran’s Pit 
(a) Concept Plan: Omit the cycling and pedestrian link to the Blessington Mart lands 
from the SLO4 concept plan (see following page). 
Change from: 

21 
 
 
 
 
Change to: 
 
(b)  Amend SLO4 boundary as a change consequent to Proposed Amendment No. 5  

22 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Amend the text of SLO4 as follows: 
Specific Local Objective 4 – Doran’s Pit 
This SLO is located in the townlands of Haylands and Holyvalley. The SLO measures 

23 
 
 
 
c.33.4 ha and comprises c.18 ha zoned MU ‘Mixed Use’ and c.15.4 ha zoned OS2 
‘Natural Areas’ zonings. For the avoidance of doubt, residential development within 
the area shall be considered RN2 ‘New Residential Priority 2’ for the purposes of 
phasing and in relation to the Core Strategy as set out in the Wicklow County 
Development Plan.  
The vision for this SLO is of a new compact urban residential/mixed use 
neighbourhood bounded by a link street linking the N81 and Knockieran Bridge, 
with a range of community, sporting, and tourism facilities adjacent to an area of 
recreational woodland, in proximity to the proposed Blessington eGreenway. the 
Poulaphouca Reservoir.  In relation to SPPR 1 of the Urban Development and 
Building Heights Guidelines for Planning Authorities 2018, this area is explicitly 
identified as an area where height increases may be suitable, subject to adequate 
screening from the Poulaphouca Reservoir.   
Any development proposal shall comply with the County Development Plan, this 
Local Area Plan and the following: 
 
 The delivery of the road objective linking the N81 to Kilbride Road/Knockieran 
Bridge. The layout of this road should form an arm off the planned roundabout 
at the northern end of the Blessington Inner Relief Road, while the road from 
Blessington Mart should terminate in a junction onto this road objective, with 
the exact layout to be agreed with the Planning Authority. Permission will not 
be considered for any development within these SLO unless accompanied by 
delivery of this road in full before any development is occupied / brought into 
use. 
 
 The development of a pedestrian/cyclist only street (with two-way segregated 
cycle track) running southwest-northeast through the SLO. Modal filters should 
be employed to restrict vehicular access onto this street. This street should link 
to Blessington Main Street in the south directly via OP8 with ancillary access via 
the public road serving the Tramway residential development. 
 
 The MU zone shall be developedment as follows: 
(a) Predominantly residential development, as per the RN2 zoning 
objective, shall be provided to the south/southwest of the road 
objective through this SLO, pending the agreement of the exact route 
of this road objective and in any event shall not exceed 12 ha in total 
area. This predominantly residential area should be laid out as urban 
streets and squares with a well-enclosed central park/plaza focal 
point and appropriate buffers to existing adjacent residential areas. 
Only 50% of the predominantly residential area may be developed 
without the complete provision of the above active travel link to 
Blessington Main Street via OP8.  
(b) The following additional infrastructure shall be provided within the 
predominantly residential area 
- A multi-purpose community building fronting onto the central 
park/plaza 
- A childcare facility of a sufficient size fronting onto the central 
park/plaza. 
(c) The development of at least c.3.3 ha c. 5ha of active open space / 

24 
 
 
 
sport uses and ancillary facilities on the north-eastern side of the road 
objective in the vicinity of the N81. The exact type and layout of 
active open space uses shall be agreed with the Planning Authority. 
Permission for residential development within this SLO will not be 
considered unless this sport ground will be completed and available 
for use upon the occupation of the 1st house. 
(d)  The reservation of land of not less than c .2.7 ha c. 1ha or the possible 
future development of an amenity car park and other tourism 
infrastructure. The location of this reserved land shall allow for easy 
access to both the above wooded area and the Blessington Lakes (via 
the road objective), while minimising the interaction between parking 
cars and cyclists/pedestrians. 
 
 The 
development 
of 
structures 
along 
the 
above 
road 
objective, 
pedestrian/cyclist street and Blessington Main Street/N81 should provide a 
strong sense of enclosure as per Section 4.2.1 of the Design Manual for Urban 
Roads and Streets, subject to adequate screening from the Poulaphouca 
Reservoir. 
 
 The lands identified as OS2 ‘Natural Areas’ shall be reserved in as natural a 
condition as possible with appropriate undeveloped buffer zones. Any 
development on such lands shall protect natural habitats, mature trees and 
hedgerows as identified in the GI Audit; road / cycleway / footpath crossings 
over / through OS2 lands shall be minimised to that absolutely necessary for 
access; any such crossing of OS2 lands shall be carried out in a manner that 
maintains ecological connectivity and maintains a natural character. The large 
wooded area within this SLO, located on the northern part of the lands zoned 
OS2 shall be made safe for public access with a series of low impact trails, 
which should include a trail leading to Kilbride Road at the eastern extent of 
the SLO. The above pedestrian/cyclist route should also continue through this 
area in the direction of Holyvalley while maintaining a level route, and include 
a spur north to the SLO boundary in the direction of Blessington Educate 
Together (refer to Map No. 6 Active Travel). A management plan for the 
phased regeneration of plantation woodland into native woodland in this area 
shall be included as part of any planning application. 
 
 The reservation of land of not less than c.2.7 ha for the possible future 
development of an amenity car park and other tourism infrastructure. The 
location of this reserved land shall allow for easy access to both the above 
wooded area and the proposed Blessington eGreenway (via the road 
objective), while minimising the interaction between parking cars and 
cyclists/pedestrians. 
 The development of appropriate buffer zones/mitigating measures which shall 
have regard to the setting and curtilage of structures and sites of heritage 
value, and habitats of biodiversity value, including Local Biodiversity Areas. 
 
Amendment No. 20 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------  

25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED 
Cllr Gerry O’Neill  
SECONDED 
P. Mahon 
 
Proposed Amendment Relates to: 
 
Proposed Material Amendment 
PMA21 – SLO6 
Reason for proposed modification 
To ensure that a range of development options will be open for 
the SLO6 lands in the event that parts of these lands are not 
required for future cemetery development.  
 
Proposals 
 
Part 1: Zoning Map  
 
To NOT change c. 0.8ha from MU – Mixed Use’ to ‘CE – Community & Education’ i.e. retain MU area 
as per the published draft LAP. 
 
Part 2: Text of SLO6 
 
Text in red and blue show the changes already proposed as part of Proposed Material Alteration 1. 
Text in purple shows the proposed modifications. 
 
Modify the proposed amended text as follows:  
 
This SLO is located in the townland of Burgage More and is in Local Authority ownership. The SLO 
measures c. 9.4 ha and comprises c. 5.8ha 5.0ha ha zoned MU ‘Mixed Use’, c. 0.8ha zoned CE 
‘Community & Education’ and c.3.6 ha zoned RN1 ‘New Residential Priority 1’. Consent is already in 
place for the development of the RN1 lands for residential purposes. The boundary with the OS2 zone 
is generally defined by the 194m contour. Any development proposal shall comply with the County 
Development Plan, this Local Area Plan and the following: 
 
Lands zoned CE shall be reserved for cemetery and associated car parking development; Lands 
measuring 0.8ha within the MU zone shall be reserved for cemetery and associated car 
parking development unless an alternative cemetery is developed elsewhere in the 
Blessington town or environs within the lifetime of this plan; 
 
Lands zoned MU may be developed for a range of uses, including (but not limited) to tourism 
(including tourism accommodation), sport, community (including cemeteries), employment and 
residential use, subject to the following criteria: 
 
1. Lands to the west of the north-south hedgerow / tree line: 
a) 
The development of a link street through the SLO leading from an agreed future potential 
crossing point from SLO5. This link street should continue south and west through the SLO to 
join to the junction at Burgage Castle estate/Burgage Cemetery. 
b) 
Development in this SLO shall provide vehicular access from this link street into SLO 7 to the 
south. 
c) 
The development of an active travel link from the potential crossing point from SLO 5 to meet 
the existing Blessington Greenway to the south of the Avon resort. Such a link should not 
include the levelling or draining of the low lying area zoned OS2 ‘Natural Areas’. 
 

26 
 
 
 
2. Lands to the east of north-south hedgerow / tree line: 
a) 
All mature trees and hedgerows on the lands shall be maintained other than where strictly 
required to facilitate appropriate development and detailed compensatory landscaping and tree 
planting to account for any loss due to the development and natural die back shall be provided 
b) 
No uses will be considered that require floodlighting; street lighting and residential lighting 
must be bat friendly as per Dark Sky guidelines 
c) 
Any development shall be designed following detailed ecological evaluation to ensure no 
adverse impacts, either directly or indirect, on biodiversity, protected species, European Sites or 
ecological corridors arise. 
 
Amendment No. 21 proposed by Cllr. G. O’Neill with minor modification, seconded by Cllr. 
P. Mahon and agreed by all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
22 Specific Local 
Objectives (SLOs) 
1. Amend zoning of land at Santryhill/New Paddocks measuring c. 2.4ha from 
‘RN2 New Residential – Priority 2’ to ‘RN1 New Residential – Priority 1’. 
2. Add new SLO area 
Change from: 
 
Change to: 

27 
 
 
 
 
Add new SLO as follows: 
 
SLO-Q Santryhill 
 
This SLO is located in the townland of Santryhill and measures c. 2.4ha. The 
SLO comprises lands zoned ‘New Residential’ (RN1 – Priority 1). 
 
Any development proposal shall comply with the County Development Plan, 
this Local Area Plan and the following: 
 
Access into the SLO shall be via the planned Blessington Inner Relief 
Road. No dwelling units that may be permitted on foot of the RN1 
zoning may be occupied until (a) the northern section of the Blessington 
Inner Relief Road is completed in full from the Naas Road to the N81 
and (b) continuous footpaths along the N81 from the town centre to the 
BIRR-N81 roundabout to the north of the site are completed. 
 
The design of any development in this SLO shall provide a high quality 
design and a strong sense of enclosure and passive surveillance along all 
road facing frontages i.e. along the planned BIRR and N81, as per 
Section 4.2.1 of the Design Manual for Urban Roads and Streets. 
 
Amendment No. 22 proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-----------------------------------------------------  
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
 
 
23 Specific Local 
Objectives (SLOs) 
Create new SLO area – ‘Specific Local Objectives’ at Blessington Demesne 
Change from: 
 
Change to:  
 
New text: 
 
SLO-Y Blessington Demesne (East) 
 
This SLO is located in the townland of Blessington Demesne and measures c. 
5.6ha. The SLO comprises lands zoned ‘RN1 – New Residential (Priority 1)’ and 
‘OS2 – Natural Areas’  
 
Any development proposals on these lands shall comply with the County 
Development Plan, this Local Area Plan and the following: 
 
Any residential development proposals for the RN1 lands shall be 
accompanied by proposals for the concurrent development of a 

29 
 
 
 
community building on the lands of not less than 300sqm GFA; 
 
No residential units that may be permitted on foot of the RN1 zoning 
may be occupied until this community facility is fully developed suitable 
for a range of community uses (e.g. community meeting / activity rooms, 
youth clubs, scouts, mens’ / womens’ shed)  and is available for 
community use; 
 
Lands identified as OS2 shall be retained and maintained in a natural 
condition; no development proposed on foot of this plan shall interfere 
with river / stream beds, banks and channels.  
 
Amendment No. 23 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
----------------------------------------------------  
 
 
24 Specific Local 
Objectives (SLOs) 
 
Amend zoning of land at Burgage More measuring c. 1.3ha from ‘E – 
Employment’ to ‘RN1 - New Residential Priority 1’. 
 
Add new SLO 
Change from: 
 
Change to: 

30 
 
 
 
 
Add new SLO as follows: 
SLO-Z: Milltown Gate 
This SLO is located in the townland of Burgage More and measures c. 1.3ha. 
The SLO comprises lands zoned ‘New Residential’ (RN1 – Priority 1). 
Any development proposal shall comply with the County Development Plan, 
this Local Area Plan and the following: 
- Any new residential development proposals for the RN1 lands shall be 
accompanied by proposals for the concurrent development of a small 
public car park of not less than 12 spaces located on the Burgage More 
Road along the southern boundary of the site. No dwelling units that may 
be permitted on foot of the RN1 zoning may be occupied until this car park 
is fully provided, with suitable access, layout, durable surface and marking, 
and is available for general public use; 
- No dwelling units that may be permitted on foot of the RN1 zoning may be 
occupied until the ‘Blessington Gateway’ road safety improvement scheme 
along the N81 (currently being developed by the TII) is completed. 
 
 
Amendment No. 24 proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon as published, with minor modification as 
recommended by the Chief Executive, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin and agreed by all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------  
 
B.8.2 
MAP AMENDMENTS (EXCLUDING MAP CHANGES IN SLO AREAS ALREADY DETAILED 
ABOVE) 
25 Map No.1  
Land Use  
Zoning Objectives 
Amend Map No.1 Land Use Zoning Objectives (and any changes consequent) 
as follows: 
Change from: OS2 

31 
 
 
 
 
Change to: E 
 
 
Amendment No. 25 proposed by Cllr. G. O’Neill, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
26 Map No.1  
Land Use  
Zoning Objectives 
Amend Map No.1 Land Use Zoning Objectives (and any changes consequent) 
as follows: 
Change from: RE 

32 
 
 
 
 
Change to: TC (including amended SLO4 boundary) 
 
 
Amendment No. 26 proposed by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed 
by all present. 
 
------------------------------------------------  
 
27 Map No.1  
Land Use  
Zoning Objectives 
Amend Map 1 to show zoning objectives for Blessington from Kildare County 
Development Plan 
 

33 
 
 
 
Amendment No. 27 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
28 Map No.1  
Land Use  
Zoning Objectives 
Change zoning of land measuring c. 1ha from OS1 ‘Open Space’ to TC ‘Town 
Centre’ at N81 – Naas Road junction.  
Change from: 
 
Change to: 
 
 
 
Amendment No. 28 proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon, seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-----------------------------------------------------  
 
 
 

34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 Map No.1  
Land Use  
Zoning Objectives 
Change zoning of lands at Blessington Demesne, north of Oak Drive measuring 
c. 0.5ha from ‘E – Employment’ to ‘SLC – Small Local Centre’ as follows: 
Change from: 
 
Change to: 
 
Add new zoning objective as follows:  
SLC: Small Local Centres 
To provide for small scale local services 
To facilitate the development of small scale local shop / retail services and other 
local scale employment and community service uses that meet only the retail or 
service needs of residents in the immediate catchment and are not of such a 
scale or type that would detract or draw trade from the town centre. 

35 
 
 
 
Uses generally appropriate for small local centres include small scale retail and 
retail services, health, education, parking, employment, office, tourism and 
recreational uses, community, including provision for religious use, 
childcare/crèche, utility installations and ancillary developments in accordance 
with the County Development Plan and this LAP.  
Amendment No. 29 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------  
 
 
30 Map No.1  
Land Use  
Zoning Objectives 
Change c. 6.9ha at Deerpark from ‘EX – Extractive Industry’ to ‘AOS – Active 
Open Space’  
Change from: 
 
Change to:  
 

36 
 
 
 
 
Amendment No. 30 proposed by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed 
by all present. 
 
-------------------------------------------------  
 
 
31 Map No 2A Built 
Heritage 
Include link to Department archaeology data sources www.archaeology.ie 
 
Amendment No. 31 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
----------------------------------------------------  
 
 
32 Map No.6 Active 
Travel Strategy 
Omit the active travel objective through Mart lands  
 
Amendment No. 32 proposed by Cllr. G. O’Neill, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------  
 
 
33 Map No.6 Active 
Travel Strategy 
Amend Map No. 6 Active Travel Strategy to include the below indicative 
pedestrian/cyclist route (greenfield/brownfield): 
 

37 
 
 
 
 
Amendment No. 33 proposed by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed 
by all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
Appendix 4 
 
Local Transport Assessment 
 
N
o. 
Section 
Proposed Amendment 
34 All 
Review numbering and headings of sections 
 
Amendment No. 34 proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-------------------------------------------------  
 
Appendix 5  
 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (see Addendum I to SFRA) 
 
N
o. 
Section 
Proposed Amendment 
35 Insert at end of SFRA  
Map 1 Flood Risk Zones (Present day) 
Map 2 Flood Risk Zones (Future Climate Change Scenario) 
Map 3 Overlay of Flood Maps with Zoning Map 
 
Amendment No. 35 proposed by Cllr. P. Mahon, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------  
 
Appendix 6 
 Blessington Infrastructure Delivery Schedule and Implementation 
 
N
o. 
Section 
Proposed Amendment 
36 Section 6 
Amend text as follows: 
BLESS 7 
Notwithstanding the zoning / designation of land for new ‘greenfield’ 
residential development (RN), permission will not be considered for RN2 
Priority 2 lands unless the following two conditions are satisfied: 
- 75% of Priority 1 new residential lands (RN1) lands have been activated 
(i.e. consent obtained and development initiated) or after 3 years 
following adoption of the LAP, less than 50% of the RN1 lands have 
been activated;; 

38 
 
 
 
- It can be shown that the housing / population generated by the 
proposed development would not result in the prevailing Core Strategy 
targets at the time of the application being significantly breached. 
 
 
Amendment No. 36 proposed by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed 
by all present. 
 
----------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
37 Section 7 
Insert new implementation tables as follows under Appendix 6: 
(note that the objectives details in the table to follow reflect the 
amendments proposed above) 
 
 

39 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Current servicing status 
Additonal 
infrastructure 
needs 
to 
support 
full 
development 
of site  
Site ID 
Water 
Supply 
Wastewater  
Surface 
Water 
Roads 
& 
Transportation 
 

44 
 
 
 
Infrastructure  
Infrastructure 
SLO1 Naas Road 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Roads 
– 
completion 
of 
link road within 
site to connect 
Oak 
Drive 
to 
Naas 
Road 
– 
Developer 
+ 
WCC 
Water Services – 
services 
available in Naas 
Road 
- 
developer 
delivered 
Community 
facilities (school 
site) 
– 
land 
reservation 
Amenity park – 
Developer +WCC 
SLO2 Blessington Demesne 
(west) 
(expanded to include SLO8) 
 
1 
2 
2 
2 
Roads 
(1) completion 
of link road 
within site 
to connect 
Oak 
Drive 
to 
Naas 
Road 
– 
Developer 
+WCC 
(2) completion 
of northern 
section 
of 
BIRR 
– 
Developer 
+WCC  
Water Services – 
services 
available in Oak 
Drive 
- 
developer 
delivered 
Community 
facilities (school 
site) 
– 
land 
reservation 
Amenity Park – 

45 
 
 
 
Developer +WCC 
Sports Park 
– 
Developer +WCC 
SLO3 Quarry Employment 
Lands   
 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Roads 
– 
completion 
of 
BIRR 
– 
Developer +WCC 
Water Services – 
services 
available 
from 
N81 or future 
BIRR - developer 
delivered 
Amenity park – 
Developer +WCC 
SLO4 Doran’s Pit 
 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Roads 
– 
link 
road within site 
to connect N81 
to Kilbride Road 
– 
Developer 
+WCC 
Water Services – 
extension 
of 
services outside 
of site – Uisce 
Eireann.  
Community 
facilities 
(community 
building) 
– 
Developer +WCC 
Sports Park 
– 
Developer +WCC 
Amenity Park – 
Developer +WCC 
Community 
/ 
Tourism facilities 
– 
Developer 
+WCC 
SLO5 Burgage More (north) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
N/A 
SLO6 
Burgage 
More 
(central) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
N/A 

46 
 
 
 
SLO7 Burgage More (south) 
1 
2 
2 
2 
Roads – access 
via 
SLO6 
- 
Developer +WCC 
Water Services – 
extension 
of 
services outside 
of site – Uisce 
Eireann.  
SLO9 Santryhill 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Roads 
(1) compl
etion 
of 
northe
rn 
sectio
n 
of 
BIRR – 
Develo
per 
+WCC  
(2) compl
etion 
pedest
rian 
infrast
ructur
e 
along 
N81 
from 
town 
centre 
to new 
BIRR / 
N81 
round
about 
- 
Develo
per 
+WCC 
Water Services – 
services will be 
available in BIRR 
- 
developer 
delivered 
SLO10 Blessington Demesne 
East 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Community 
facilities 
– 
Developer 
SLO11 Milltown Gate 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Roads – roads 
safety 
improvements 
along 
N81 
in 
area 
– 

47 
 
 
 
 
Amendment No. 37 proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
-------------------------------------------------  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon and seconded by Cllr. A. Cronin that; 
 
 ‘Having considered the Plan, the Proposed Material Amendments, the Chief Executive’s Reports on 
Consultations and the  
 
 
The Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Environmental Report for the Draft Plan 
 
The Appropriate Assessment (AA) Natura Impact Report and associated AA Screening 
Determination for the Draft Plan 
 
The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) for the Draft Plan 
 
The SEA Environmental Report for the Proposed Material Amendments and associated SEA 
Screening Determination (Addendum 1 to the Draft SEA Environmental Report) 
 
The Natura Impact Screening Report for the Proposed Material Amendments and associated 
Appropriate Assessment Screening Determination (Addendum 1 to the Draft Natura Impact 
Report) 
 
The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) for the Proposed Material Amendments (Addendum 
1 to the Draft SFRA) 
 
Written submissions relating to SEA, AA and SFRA made during the Plan preparation process 
 
Ongoing advice on SEA, AA and SFRA from the Council’s agents / staff 
 
The final, consolidated Natura Impact Report 
 
The final AA Determination  
 
 in accordance with the provisions of Section 20 (3) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended), the members agree, by resolution, to make the Blessington Local Area Plan 2025 - 2031: 
- 
with those proposed amendments that have been agreed today,  
- 
with those proposed amendments that have been agreed to make with minor modifications 
today,  
- 
without those proposed amendments that were not agreed today, 
- 
with any changes consequent required as result of the agreed amendments and with any minor 
data or document updates that have arisen during the adoption of the plan’. 
 
Was put to a vote and following a role call was passed by a margin of 25 for and 7 not 
present viz:- 
 
FOR (25) 
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, E. 
DOYLE, M. DUDDY, L. FENELON GASKIN, P. FITZGERALD, T. 
FORTUNE, P. GLENNON, P. KENNEDY P. MAHON, J. MULHALL, I. 
Developer, 
TII 
+WCC 
Community 
facilities (public 
car 
park) 
– 
Developer 

48 
 
 
 
NEARY, D. O’BRIEN, P. O’BRIEN, G. O’NEILL, G. RICHMOND, L. SCOTT, 
J. SNELL, P. STAPLETON, S. STOKES, N. WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY  
 
AGAINST (0) 
 
NOT PRESENT (7) 
CLLRS. M. BARRY, G. DUNNE, O. FINN, S. LANGRELL, P. LEONARD, M. 
MURPHY AND W. O’TOOLE 
 
 
 
 
ITEM NO. 2 
 
To consider the Proposed Material Alterations to the proposed Variation No. 3 to the 
Wicklow County Development Plan 2022 – 2028 (Blessington LAP), to consider the Chief 
Executive’s Report on submissions to the Proposed Material Alterations to the proposed 
variation and to consider making, not making or modify Variation No. 3 to the County 
Development Plan 2022 – 2028, all in accordance with Section 13 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 (as amended). 
 
VARIATION 3 Proposed Modification to published Proposed Material Alterations  
 
PROPOSED 
Cllr Peter Stapleton 
SECONDED 
 
 
Proposed Amendment Relates to: 
 
Proposed Material Amendment 
PMA1  
 
(a) To ensure consistency with PMAs 7, 8 and 36 to the 
Blessington LAP 
(b) To ensure consistency with the zoning objectives 
table provided in the Blessington LAP and with 
previously adopted Variation 2.  
 
 
Proposals 
 
Text in red and blue show the changes already proposed as part of Proposed Material Alteration 1. 
Text in purple shows the proposed modifications. 
 
5.0.2 
Zoning and Land Use Objectives 
 
The land use zoning map and key development objectives maps for each Local Area Plan is presented 
here. The land use zoning map for each settlement indicates the boundary of the settlement / LAP and 
the land use zoning objectives within each settlement. 
  
ZONING 
OBJECTIVE 
DESCRIPTION 
RE: Existing 
Residential 
To protect, provide and improve residential 
amenities of existing residential areas  
To provide for house improvements, 
alterations 
and 
extensions 
and 
appropriate 
infill 
residential 
development 
in 
accordance 
with 

49 
 
 
 
ZONING 
OBJECTIVE 
DESCRIPTION 
principles 
of 
good 
design 
and 
protection 
of 
existing 
residential 
amenity. In existing residential areas, 
the areas of open space permitted, 
designated or dedicated solely to the 
use of the residents will normally be 
zoned ‘RE’ as they form an intrinsic 
part 
of 
the 
overall 
residential 
development; however new housing 
or other non-community related uses 
will not normally be permitted. 
RN1: New 
residential 
 
Priority 1 
To provide for new residential development 
and supporting facilities during the lifetime 
of the plan.  
To facilitate for the provision of high 
quality new residential developments 
at appropriate densities with excellent 
layout and design, well linked to the 
town centre and community facilities. 
To provide an appropriate mix of 
house sizes, types and tenures in 
order to meet household needs and 
to promote balanced communities. 
RN2 New residential 
 
Priority 2 
To provide for new residential development 
and supporting facilities where it can be 
demonstrated that such development would 
accord with the Core Strategy housing target 
for that settlement after the activation of 
Priority 1 lands in accordance with the 
objectives set out in the relevant Local 
Plan. 
To facilitate for the provision of high 
quality new residential developments 
at appropriate densities with excellent 
layout and design, well linked to the 
town centre and community facilities. 
To provide an appropriate mix of 
house sizes, types and tenures in 
order to meet household needs and 
to promote balanced communities. 
RS: Special 
Residential  
To protect, provide and improve residential 
amenities in a format and a density specified 
in the relevant local plan. 
To facilitate for the provision of high 
quality new residential environments 
with excellent layout and design, 
reflecting the density and character of 
the surrounding area. 
TC: Town Centre  
To 
provide 
for 
the 
development 
and 
improvement of appropriate town centre 
uses including residential, retail, commercial, 
office and civic use.  
To develop and consolidate the 
existing town centre to improve its 
vibrancy 
and 
vitality 
with 
the 
densification 
of 
appropriate 
commercial 
and 
residential 
developments ensuring a mix of 
commercial, 
recreational, 
civic, 
cultural, leisure and residential uses, 
while 
delivering 
a 
quality 
urban 
environment, 
with 
emphasise 
on 
regeneration, infill town and historic 
centre conservation; ensuring priority 
for public transport where applicable, 
pedestrians 
and 
cyclists, 
while 
minimising the impact of private car 
based 
traffic 
and 
enhance 
and 
develop the existing centre’s fabric. 
VC: Village Centre  
 
To 
provide 
for 
the 
development 
and 
improvement of appropriate village centre 
uses in areas that are secondary or subsidiary 
area to the main town centre. 
To develop and consolidate the village 
centre 
zones 
in 
an 
appropriate 
manner and to an appropriate scale 
and with such uses as specified in 

50 
 
 
 
ZONING 
OBJECTIVE 
DESCRIPTION 
each town plan given their roles as a 
secondary or subsidiary area to the 
main town centre.  
NC: Neighbourhood 
Centre 
To protect, provide for, and improve a mix of 
neighbourhood centre services and facilities, 
which provide for the day-to-day needs of 
the local community. 
To provide for small scale mixed use 
commercial / community / retail 
developments that serve only an 
immediate catchment or planned new 
areas 
of 
significant 
residential 
expansion.  
 
LSS: Local Shops & 
Services 
To 
provide 
for 
small 
scale 
local 
neighbourhood shops and services  
To facilitate the limited development 
of small scale local neighbourhood 
shops and retail services and other 
local service uses that meet only the 
retail or service needs of residents in 
the immediate catchment and are not 
of such a scale or type that would 
detract or draw trade from lands 
designated town centre. 
SLC: 
Small 
Local 
Centres 
 
To provide for small scale local services 
 
To facilitate the development of small 
scale local shop / retail services and 
other local scale employment and 
community service uses that meet 
only the retail or service needs of 
residents in the immediate catchment 
and are not of such a scale or type 
that would detract or draw trade from 
the town centre. 
E: Employment 
To provide for the development of enterprise 
and employment 
To facilitate the further development 
and 
improvement 
of 
existing 
employment areas and to facilitate 
opportunities for the development of 
new high quality employment and 
enterprise developments in a good 
quality physical environment. 
CE: Community & 
Education 
To 
provide 
for 
civic, 
community 
and 
educational facilities 
To facilitate the development of 
necessary 
community, 
health, 
religious, educational, social and civic 
infrastructure. 
AOS: Active Open 
Space  
To protect and enhance existing and provide 
for new active open space 
Subject 
to 
the 
protection 
and 
enhancement of natural biodiversity, 
to facilitate the further development 
and improvement of existing active 
open spaces, formal exercise areas, 
sports grounds, playing pitches, courts 
and other games areas and to 
facilitate 
opportunities 
for 
the 
development of new high quality 
active recreational areas. 
OS1: Open Space  
To protect and enhance existing public open 
space and provide for recreational open 
space. 
Subject 
to 
the 
protection 
and 
enhancement of natural biodiversity, 
to facilitate the further development 
and improvement of existing parks 
and casual play areas, to facilitate 

51 
 
 
 
ZONING 
OBJECTIVE 
DESCRIPTION 
opportunities for the development of 
new high quality amenity open areas 
and 
to 
restrict 
developments 
/ 
activities 
(such 
as 
the 
use 
or 
development of such lands for formal 
sports grounds for organisations that 
are not available for a broad range of 
the public) that would reduce the 
opportunities for use by the wider 
public. 
OS2: Natural Areas  
To protect and enhance existing open, 
undeveloped lands. 
To protect, enhance and manage 
existing open, undeveloped lands that 
comprise flood plains, buffer zones 
along watercourses and rivers, steep 
banks, green breaks between built up 
areas, green corridors and areas of 
natural biodiversity. 
PU: Public Utility 
To 
maintain 
lands 
providing 
services 
infrastructure  
To allow for lands to be designated 
for public utilities such as waste water 
treatment plants, large ESB sub-
stations, gasworks etc 
T: Tourism 
To provide for tourism related development 
To 
provide 
for 
the 
sustainable 
development 
of 
tourism 
related 
structures, uses and infrastructure. To 
provide 
for 
the 
development 
of 
tourism 
facilities 
including 
accommodation 
of 
an 
excellent 
sustainable 
design 
and 
aesthetic 
quality. Tourism related office, civic 
and 
cultural 
and 
commercial 
development will be facilitated. 
MU: Mixed Use 
To provide for mixed use development 
The 
nature 
of 
the 
mixed 
use 
development 
envisaged 
for 
any 
particular site is set out in the text of 
the relevant local plan.  
AG: Agriculture  
To provide for the sustainable development 
of agriculture, forestry and essential rural 
development. 
Subject 
to 
the 
protection 
and 
enhancement of natural biodiversity, 
the rural landscape, and built and 
cultural heritage, to facilitate the 
further 
development 
and 
improvement of agriculture, forestry 
and 
essential 
rural 
development 
including rural-related enterprise and 
amenity / utility related infrastructure. 
EX: Extractive 
Industry 
To provide for extraction / quarrying and 
associated activities including processing of 
extracted materials and land restoration 
To facilitate the development of 
extraction/ 
quarrying, 
associated 
activities and land restoration 
Applicable to Wicklow Town – Rathnew LAP area only 
CC: Wicklow County 
Campus 
To provide for educational facilities, research 
and development (R&D), and enterprise 
development uses. 
To develop Wicklow County Campus 
in conjunction with the SETU and 
other stakeholders as a third level 
education facility and as a centre of 
excellence for enterprise development, 

52 
 
 
 
ZONING 
OBJECTIVE 
DESCRIPTION 
education, 
training, 
research 
and 
development, with a focus on the film, 
food and renewable energy sectors. 
This will entail the development of 
appropriate 
infrastructure 
and 
facilities including classrooms, lecture 
theatres, labs, workshops, kitchen 
units, offices, etc and other necessary 
student facilities.  
WZ: Waterfront 
To 
provide 
for 
the 
development 
and 
improvement of the waterfront zone, to 
facilitate the continuation and development 
of existing employment / maritime / port, 
residential, public utilities, and community / 
recreational uses and to promote and 
provide for new residential, tourism and 
other mixed-use development. 
To facilitate the continued and more 
intensive / efficient use of the existing 
employment, maritime and port uses ;  
To maintain existing and support the 
development / improvement of high 
quality community, amenity, leisure 
and  tourism uses;  
To facilitate commercial and retail 
uses at a scale that do not undermine 
the role of the existing Town Centre; 
To facilitate the provision of high 
quality new residential developments 
at appropriate high densities with 
excellent layout and design, well 
linked to the existing town centre, 
community 
facilities 
and 
water 
amenities.  
 
The box below gives typical appropriate uses for each zone type. The planning authority shall 
determine each proposal on its merits, and shall only permit the development of uses that enhance, 
complement, are ancillary to, or neutral to the zoning objective. Uses that are materially inconsistent 
with and detrimental to the zoning objective shall not be permitted. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for residential (RN / RE) zoned areas include houses, apartments, 
residential open space, education, community facilities, retirement homes, nursing homes, 
childcare/crèche, health centres, guest house, bed and breakfast, places of public worship, home 
based economic activity, utility installations and ancillary development and other residential uses in 
accordance with the County Development Plan (CDP) and applicable Local Plan.  
 
Uses generally appropriate for town and village centre (TC/VC) include residential development, 
childcare / crèche, commercial, education retail, retail services, health, restaurants, public house, public 
buildings, hotels, guest houses, nursing / care homes, parking, office, tourism and recreational uses, 
community, including provision for religious use, utility installations and ancillary developments for 
town centre uses in accordance with the CDP and applicable Local Plan. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for neighbourhood centre (NC) include retail, retail services, health, 
restaurants, public house, public buildings, hotels, guest houses, nursing / care homes, parking, 
residential development, childcare/crèche, commercial, education, office, tourism and recreational 
uses, community, including provision for religious use, utility installations and ancillary developments 
for neighbourhood centre uses in accordance with the with the CDP and applicable Local Plan. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for local shops and services (LSS) include retail, retail services, health, 
public house, guest houses, parking, residential development, childcare/crèche, commercial, office, 
tourism and recreational uses, community, including provision for religious use, utility installations and 

53 
 
 
 
ancillary developments for local shops and services uses in accordance with the with the CDP and 
applicable Local Plan.   
 
Uses generally appropriate for small local centres (SLC) include small scale local services as specified 
in the applicable Local Plan.  
 
Uses generally appropriate for employment (E) zoned land include general and light industry, office 
uses, enterprise units, education, appropriate warehousing, petrol filling stations (as deemed 
appropriate), public transport depots, open space, including sports grounds, childcare / crèche, 
community facilities including community and sports centres, utility installations and ancillary 
developments for employment and industry uses in accordance with the CDP and applicable Local 
Plan. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for community and educational (CE) zoned land include community, 
educational and institutional uses include burial grounds, places of worship, schools, training facilities, 
community hall, nursing homes, health related developments, sports and recreational facilities, utility 
installations and ancillary developments for community, educational and institutional uses in 
accordance with the CDP and applicable Local Plan. 
 
Uses appropriate for active open space (AOS) zoned land are sport and active recreational uses 
including infrastructure and buildings associated with same. Education use may be considered 
appropriate in accordance with the objectives of the applicable Local Plan.  
 
Uses appropriate for open space (OS1) zoned land are recreational uses such as formal / informal 
landscaped parks with off-road walking / cycling paths, as well as playgrounds, skate parks, Mixed Use 
Games Areas, outdoor gyms, and allotments.  
 
Uses appropriate for natural areas (OS2) zoned land are uses that protect and enhance the function 
of these areas as flood plains, buffer zones along watercourses and rivers, green breaks between built 
up areas, green corridors and areas of natural biodiversity. The development of these lands for 
recreational uses may only be considered where such use is shown to not undermine the purpose of 
this zoning.  
 
Uses generally appropriate for public utility (PU) zoned land are for the provision of necessary 
infrastructure and services such as roads / footpaths / cycleways, carparks, train station, water and 
waste water treatment plants, large ESB sub-stations, gasworks. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for tourism (T) zoned land are tourism accommodation and tourism / 
recreational uses such as Bed & Breakfast, cultural uses, holiday homes, hotels, recreational facilities. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for any mixed use (MU) area will be specified in the applicable Local Plan. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for agriculture (AG) zoned land are agricultural uses (and associated 
buildings) including crop cultivation, horticulture, animal husbandry, forestry, residential (subject to 
policies in relation to housing in the open countryside as set out in the Wicklow County Development 
Plan), farm shops, agri-business and agri-tourism where required to be in a rural location, equestrian 
uses, kennels, allotments, sustainable energy installations and utility structures, amenity walks and 
greenways. 
 
Uses generally appropriate for extractive industry (EX) zoned land are extractive industry uses (the 
winning of all minerals and substances in or under land of a kind ordinarily worked by underground or 

54 
 
 
 
open cast mining), including value added production, such as concrete, asphalt and block production, 
and ancillary developments in accordance with the County Development Plan. 
 
Applicable to Wicklow Town – Rathnew LAP area only 
 
Uses generally appropriate for Wicklow County Campus (CC) zoned land include car park, 
community facility, childcare / crèche, education, enterprise centre, industry (light), laboratory, office-
based employment, open space, playground, public services, recreational building, recreational 
facility/sports club, residential1, restaurant/ public house2, skate park, film sector, food sector, 
renewable energy sector and ancillary developments for Wicklow County Campus uses in accordance 
with the County Development Plan and WTR LAP.  
 
Uses generally appropriate for waterfront (WZ) zoned land include aquaculture / fishing, residential, 
childcare/crèche, civic / cultural uses, community facilities, education, employment / office uses, 
general and light industry, harbour uses, health related service / uses, hotels, maritime uses, 
recreational and leisure uses, retail, restaurants, parking, public house, tourism uses, utility installations 
and ancillary development in accordance with the CDP and WTR LAP. 
 
 
 
 
 
Essential infrastructure, including roads / footpaths / cycleways and utilities that are necessary 
to support development lands, are generally permissible in all zones. Where such infrastructure 
would be required in OS1 or OS2 zones, and no other routes are viable, such infrastructure shall 
only be considered where it is shown it will not undermine the purpose of this zoning or give 
rise to significant adverse environmental impacts. 
 
Many uses exist where they do not conform to the designated zoning objective. When extensions to, 
or improvements of premises accommodating such uses are proposed, each shall be considered on its 
merits and permission may be granted where the development does not adversely affect the 
amenities of properties in the vicinity and does not prejudice the proper planning and development of 
the area. 
 
Whilst the land-use zoning will give an indication of the acceptability or otherwise of particular uses in 
particular areas, proposed development will also be assessed in terms of compatibility with the 
development control guidelines and standards outlined in the Wicklow County Development Plan and 
this plan. Factors such as density, height, massing, traffic generation, public health regulations, design 
criteria, visual amenity, availability of services and potential nuisance by way of noise, odour and air 
pollution are also of importance in establishing whether or not a development proposal conforms to 
the proper planning and sustainable development of an area. 
 
Phasing 
 
The lands that are needed to be zoned to meet the current target will be zoned ‘New Residential’ and 
identified in this plan as ‘RN 1 - New Residential Priority 1’ lands.  
 
                                                          
1 Only student accommodation related to the college 
2 Strictly only to meet the needs of the student population  

55 
 
 
 
In order to ensure a long term supply of zoned residential land, in particular to ensure flexibility in the 
event of an increase in housing targets during the lifetime of this plan, some Local Plans provide for 
additional zoned residential lands, over and above that needed to meet current targets, zoned ‘RN2 – 
New Residential Priority 2’. Permission will only be considered for RN2 lands during the lifetime of 
the plan in accordance with the objectives set out in the relevant Local Plan. 
 
It is an objective of the Council that development is undertaken in an orderly and sustainable manner. 
The development of zoned land should generally be phased in accordance with the sequential 
approach:  
 
Development should extend outwards from the town centre with undeveloped land closest to the 
centre and public transport routes (if available) being given preference, i.e. ‘leapfrogging’ to 
peripheral areas should be avoided;  
 
A strong emphasis should be placed on encouraging infill opportunities and better use of under-
utilised lands; and  
 
Areas to be developed should be contiguous to existing developed areas.  
 
Only in exceptional circumstances should the above principles be contravened, for example, where a 
barrier to development is involved. Any exceptions must be clearly justified by local circumstances and 
such justification must be set out in any planning application proposal.  
 
The Council may, in certain cases, phase permitted development where this is considered necessary 
for the following:  
i. 
the promotion of an appropriate balance of employment, residential and service facilities 
(schools, shopping, community facilities etc.) and other uses that are required to increase the 
self-sufficiency of the settlement, or  
ii. 
ensuring the delivery of infrastructural services in tandem with development, including water, 
sewerage and road infrastructure, that is required to safeguard the environmental quality and 
public safety of the area. 
 
European Sites  
 
There are a number of ‘European Sites’ (SACs / SPAs) located in or in proximity to the plan area. The 
sites themselves are protected from inappropriate development through the legal provisions of the 
Habitats and Birds Directives, as well as the Planning Act. Such sites, where they are located within the 
plan boundary, are shown on the land use map and the heritage map associated with the plan as SAC 
/ SPA as appropriate. 
 
In a number of locations, there are lands adjoining European Sites, which while not being included in 
the legally designated site, are linked to the site in terms of similar or supporting habitats, water flows 
or other characteristics which render them important to protect from inappropriate development 
which may have a direct or indirect effect on the designated site itself3. 
 
The approach to zoning lands adjoining European Sites has been as follows: 
 
1. 
No lands within the actual European Site have been zoned. 
                                                          
3 In accordance with Article 10 of the Habitats Directive, the aim is to protect and maintain linear landscape 
features which act as ecological corridors, such as watercourses (rivers, streams, canals, ponds, drainage 
channels, etc), woodlands, hedgerows and road and railway margins, and features which act as stepping 
stones, such as marshes and woodlands, which taken as a whole help to improve the coherence of the 
European network 

56 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Where there is existing developed areas, the lands have been zoned for their existing use, which 
will essentially allow for the continuation of the existing use and its enhancement. In 
accordance with the provisions of the EU Habitats Directive 1992 and the Planning & 
Development Act, any proposed development with potential to impact upon the integrity of a 
European Site shall be subject to an Appropriate Assessment; 
 
3. 
Where there is existing undeveloped lands, the lands have only be zoned for new development 
where it can be justified that such zoning and development arising therefrom is essential for the 
town to achieve its development vision and strategic objectives. In accordance with the 
provisions of the EU Habitats Directive 1992 and the Planning & Development Act, any 
proposed development with potential to impact upon the integrity of a European Site shall be 
subject to an Appropriate Assessment; 
 
4. 
Where there is existing undeveloped lands, and the development of these lands is not essential 
for the achievement of the development vision and strategic objectives for the town, the land 
will be zoned ‘OS2’ – natural areas. The only developments that will be considered in such area 
are those which contribute to the objective of the natural areas zone (detailed in this plan) and 
that can be shown to not diminish the role and function of such areas, will not result in adverse 
impacts on the integrity of any EU protected site and will not diminish the biodiversity value of 
the lands or the ability of plants and animals to thrive and move through the area. 
 
European Sites Objectives 
 
To protect European Sites and a suitable buffer area from inappropriate development. 
 
Projects giving rise to adverse effects on the integrity of European Sites (cumulatively, directly or 
indirectly)  arising from their size or scale, land take, proximity, resource requirements, emissions 
(disposal to land, water or air), transportation requirements, duration of construction, operation, 
decommissioning or from any other effects shall not be permitted on the basis of this plan4. 
 
Ensure that development proposals, contribute as appropriate towards the protection and where 
possible enhancement of the ecological coherence of the European Site network and encourage the 
retention and management of landscape features that are of major importance for wild fauna and 
flora as per Article 10 of the EU Habitats directive. All projects and plans arising from this Plan will be 
screened for the need to undertake Appropriate Assessment under Article 6 of the Habitats Directive. 
 
In order to ensure the protection of the integrity of European Sites, the planning authority is not 
limited to the implementation of the above objectives, and shall implement all other relevant 
objectives of the CDP and LAP as it sees fit. 
 
 
Amendment No. 1 proposed by Cllr. P. Stapleton, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
---------------------------------------------------   
 
 
                                                          
 

57 
 
 
 
PROPOSED MATERIAL ALTERATION NO. 2 
 
Alter Map 1 Land use Zoning for the Blessington LAP 
 
[This Proposed Material Alteration to the Proposed Variation relates to the land use zoning changes 
proposed to the Draft LAP via: 
- Proposed Material Amendment 19 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 21 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 22 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 23 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 24 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 25 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 26 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 27 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 28 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 29 to the Draft LAP 
- Proposed Material Amendment 30 to the Draft LAP] 
 
 
Amendment No. 2 proposed by Cllr. P. Glennon, seconded by Cllr. J. Mulhall and agreed by 
all present. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
PROPOSED MATERIAL ALTERATION NO. 3 
 
Alter Map 4 Indicative Flood Zones Maps for the Blessington LAP 
 
 
Amendment No. 3 proposed by Cllr. J. Mulhall, seconded by Cllr. P. Glennon and agreed by 
all present. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
PROPOSED MATERIAL ALTERATION NO. 4 
 
Alter Transport Strategy Maps for the Blessington LAP 
 
 
Amendment No. 4 proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. P. Mahon and agreed by all 
present. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
 

58 
 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. A. Cronin and seconded by Cllr. G. O’Neill that; 
 
 ‘Having considered the Variation, the Proposed Material Alterations, the Chief Executive’s Reports on 
Consultations and the  
 
 
Strategic Environmental Assessment screening report and associated determination for the 
Proposed Variation and the Addendum I to the SEA Screening Report 
 
Appropriate Assessment screening report and associated determination for the Proposed 
Variation and Addendum I to the AA Screening Report for the Proposed Variation 
 
Screening for Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Determination for the Proposed 
Material Alterations  
 
Screening for Appropriate Assessment (AA) Determination for Proposed Material Alterations  
 
Written submissions relating to SEA and AA made during the variation preparation process 
 
Ongoing advice on SEA and AA from the Council’s agents / staff 
 
The final AA Determination  
 
 in accordance with the provisions of Section 13 (6) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended), the members agree, by resolution, to make Variation Number 3 to the Wicklow County 
Development Plan 2022 -2028: 
- 
with the proposed alterations that have been agreed today,  
- 
with any proposed alterations that have been agreed to be made with minor modifications 
today,  
- 
without any proposed alterations that were not agreed today, 
- 
with any changes consequent required as result of the agreed alterations and with any minor 
data or document updates that have arisen during the adoption of the variation  
and to proceed in accordance with Section 13 (8) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended) to publish notice of the making of the Variation’. 
 
Was put to a vote and following a role call was passed by a margin of 25 for and 7 not 
present viz:- 
 
FOR (25) 
CLLRS. D. ALVEY, J. BEHAN, S. BOURKE, M. CORRIGAN, A. CRONIN, 
M. DUDDY, L. FENELON GASKIN, P. FITZGERALD, T. FORTUNE, P. 
GLENNON, P. KENNEDY, P. LEONARD, P. MAHON, J. MULHALL, I. 
NEARY, D. O’BRIEN, P. O’BRIEN, G. O’NEILL, G. RICHMOND, L. SCOTT, 
J. SNELL, P. STAPLETON, S. STOKES, N. WHELAN AND C. WINSTANLEY  
 
AGAINST (0) 
 
NOT PRESENT (7) 
CLLRS. M. BARRY, E. DOYLE, G. DUNNE, O. FINN, S. LANGRELL, M. 
MURPHY AND W. O’TOOLE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________                                        ________________________ 
CLLR. MELANIE CORRIGAN 
 
 
 
MS. HELEN PURCELL 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
 
 
 
A/DIRECTOR OF SERVICES/ 
WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 
 
 
Confirmed at meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday the 7th July 2025   
