  
ORIDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW 
COUNTY COUNCIL HELD VIA  
A ZOOM CALL  
  
  
 ON   
  
  
MONDAY 11TH JANUARY 2021 AT 2:00 P.M.   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:   
Certify the following to be a transcript of 
the stenographic notes in the above-named 
action for communication support.    
  
  
  
JUDITH MELEADY  

 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon everybody, can you all hear 
me?  Can I just start off by wishing everyone a happy New Year.  
It's a different type of New Year and we are where we are, and 
we'll keep working for our constituents in a safe manner.  
Before I get into the agenda, I would ask Lorraine to do a roll 
call. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  (roll 
called) Okay, mobile phones should be switched to 
silent.  It's advisable to locate yourself in an area 
where there will be no interruptions or distractions and 
please do not leave the online meeting without 
notifying the Cathaoirleach.  Please keep your 
microphones on mute.  Frame the camera correctly so 
you can be seen clearly.  Members should inform the 
meetings administrator by telephone if you lose 
connection in accordance with the provision of standing 
orders thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Lorraine. Now votes of 
sympathy.  
CLLR O'NEILL:  Sean Crowley of Arklow.  Sean passed 
away two-days ago and he was secretary of the Irish 
amateur boxing association for many years and 

secretary of his local club in Arklow and secretary of 
the Wicklow county board of the IABA and I would like 
to offer my sympathies.  Sean was a lovely man and 
very helpful to all the clubs in the country and offer my 
deepest sympathy on my behalf and I know was a 
poplar man in the Arklow area and my colleague Cllr 
Fitzgerald knew him as well and Sean was very grateful 
for the help that Cllr Fitzgerald and Wicklow County 
Council in their help over the years with getting their 
premises to the state that it is it's a great club.  So, 
Sean will be really missed, and he worked right up.  
Although he was in his early 90s, he worked right up to 
the last for the boxing.    
CATHAOIRLEACH:  There's good few hands, Cllr Cullen 
is next. 
CLLR CULLEN:  I would just like to send my 
condolences to his wife Susanne and family. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Cullen.  Cllr Dunne. 
CLLR DUNNE:  My Sympathies for Peg, two of her sons 
work for Wicklow County Council and great well-known 
person and sad to see her go.  Thank you, Chairman. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Dunne.  Cllr 
Fitzgerald. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I just want to go back to Sean 

Crowley who was a personal friend of mine and hugely 
involved in the boxing club and Arklow Credit Union 
and a great asset to the community.  So, I want to 
offer any sympathies to his family, and he is a huge 
loss to the town. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Fitzgerald.  Cllr 
Walsh. 
CLLR WALSH:  Sympathies to the Byrne family on the 
sad loss of their mother Louise.  Her husband is a long 
serving member of the fire service.  So, the Byrne and 
Monahan family and Louise's dad Shay passed away.  
So extended sympathies. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Walsh.  Cllr O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  It's okay.  Cllr Dunne already done for 
Peg. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr O'Brien.  Cllr Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS:  I would like to offer a vote of 
sympathy to our fellow Councillor, Sylvester Burke and 
his family on the sad passing of his father.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Timmins.  Cllr 
Ferris. 
CLLR FERRIS:  I'd like to offer a vote of sympathy to 
Michael Lawlor on the passing of his wife Greta and I 
would like to pass sympathy to Michael and Erin.  So, I 

am sure all the members here, you will know Michael, 
or you will know of Michael and you will join me in this 
request. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Behan did you want to come 
in?  
CLLR BEHAN:  It was just in what Ann said in relation 
to Michael Lawlor's wife Greta. 
MS GALLAGHER:  There are a number of staff.  Gavin 
Brehan and Larry Roe and Alice Doyle and 
mother-in-law to Mary Doyle and Annette Jameson and 
I would also Cathaoirleach for Sean McCourt, Mark and 
for Lila Faulkner a sister of our colleague here in 
Wicklow County Council.  
CLLR KENNEDY: I would like to offer sympathies to her 
family and thank the members for their condolences 
and for myself and the family on the passing of my 
father over Christmas. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Kennedy, Cllr Blake. 
CLLR BLAKE:  I would like to pass on sympathies to 
the Burke family and the Lawlor family on the death of 
Greta.  Also, to the Wilson family on the death of their 
son Anthony Wilson who passed away last week, his 
father is an outdoor staff member here. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Vincent.  I would like to 

add to that to the Kerins family on the passing of 
Maura from Rathdrum.  So, we take a moment to 
remember the families and the pain they are going 
through at this time.  Item number one on the agenda 
is to sign the minutes for the meeting in December.  
Proposal for that?  Proposed for Cllr Ferris and can I 
have a seconder for that?  Cllr Wash.   
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed members?  Thank 
you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To consider the disposal of 0.0237 
hectares, 0.059 acres or thereabouts of land situating 
in the townland of Templerainey, Arklow, Co. Wicklow 
to Ms Teresa Enright, Ballymoney, Arklow, Co Wicklow 
as per notice previously circulated.  Proposed by Cllr 
Tommy Annesley and seconder for that? Seconded by 
Cllr Bourke. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed by all?  Thank you, 
members. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number three is to consider 
the disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of transfer 
order in property situated in the townland of Wicklow 
being 17 Seafield, Wicklow Town, Co Wicklow to Mr 
John Sexton and Ms Louise Sexton, 17 Seafield, 
Wicklow Town, Co Wicklow as per notice previously 

circulated.  Can I have a proposer for that.  Cllr 
Dunne and seconder?  Cllr O'Brien.   
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed members?  Thank 
you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number four is to consider the 
disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of transfer 
order in property situated in the townland of 
Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow being 34 Centre 
Road, Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co Wicklow to Mr James 
(otherwise Seamus) Driver and Ms Helen Driver, 34 
Centre Road, Ballygannon, Rathdrum, Co Wicklow, as 
per notice previously circulated.  I am familiar with 
this one so I will propose that myself.  Can I have a 
seconder?  Pat Fitzgerald.   
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed members?  Thank 
you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number item five.  To consider the 
disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of transfer 
order in property situated in the townland 38 
Mountainview, Blessington, Co Wicklow to Mr Eugene 
Tyrrell, 38 Mountainview, Blessington, Co Wicklow, as 
per notice previously circulated.  Can I have a 
proposer for that?  Cllr Glennon.  And seconder?  Cllr 
Cronin.   

MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed members?   
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number six is to consider the 
disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of transfer 
order in property situated in the townland of 
Knockanragan Lower, Arklow, Co Wicklow being 37 
Fernhill, Arklow, Co Wicklow to Ms Elizabeth Doyle, 37 
Fernhill, Arklow, Co Wicklow, as per notice previously 
circulated.  Can I have a proposer for that?  Pat 
Fitzgerald.  Can I have a seconder? Cllr Bourke. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed members.  Thank 
you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number 7.  To consider the 
disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of transfer 
order in property situated in the townland of 
Corporation Lands, Wicklow Town, Co Wicklow being 10 
Glenside Road otherwise 10 Colley Row, Wicklow Town, 
Co Wicklow to Ms Margaret Duffy, 10 Glenside Road 
otherwise 10 Colley Row, Wicklow Town, Co Wicklow, 
as per notice previously circulated.  Proposal for that?  
Cllr Snell.  And seconded by Cllr Dunne. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed members?  Thank 
you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number 8.  To consider the 
disposal of the Freehold Interest by way of transfer 

order in property situated in the townland of Arklow, 
Co Wicklow being 38 Fernhill, Arklow, County Wicklow 
to Ms Mary O'Neill, 38 Fernhill, Arklow, Co Wicklow, as 
per notice previously circulated.  Proposed by Cllr 
Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr Annesley. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed members?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number nine.  To consider 
the disposal of 0.2017 hectares or thereabouts of land 
comprised in Folio WW4484 Co Wicklow at Property No 
293, Plan 18 at Millands, Coolafancy, Tinahely, Co 
Wicklow to Mr Martin Hennessy and Ms Eleanor 
Hennessy, Millands, Coolafancy, Tinahely, Co Wicklow, 
as per notice previously circulated.  Can I have a 
proposal for that?  Cllr Blake and seconded by Cllr 
Mullen.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed members?  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number ten is to consider the 
Chief Executive's Monthly Management Report, 
December 2020.   
CH. EXEC:  Just mentioning a few items first, 
Covid-19, we have an increase amount of staff now 
working from home that are contactable by email and 
mobile et cetera.  The offices are opened by 
appointment only.  Libraries are online and there is a 

very good home delivery service, and the recycling 
centres remain open and planning continues as normal.  
In terms of roads and our own road staff, we're doing 
emergency works only.  Critical infrastructure in terms 
of roads is allowed to proceed.  So TII and NTI decided 
their schemes will proceed.  So, the various footpaths 
they will continue.  In terms of housing, the housing 
projects will close but there are exceptions for schemes 
completing and will be completed by 28th of February.  
So, there is allocations ongoing there and it's just 
snags to be completed and similarly Jameson Heights 
in Kilmacanogue, it will be allocated by Bray in the 
coming week.  Rathnew, similar and a bit of work to 
be done and Killbride Lanes there is 23 completed.  
FCA Hall, Wicklow Town close to completion and a 
project in Greystones that will continue and Fairgreen 
Manor in Dunlavin most units are complete and 
Rathcairn House in Baltinglass will continue and Cecil 
Oaks in Wicklow and Granville Hill in Tinahely that's 
currently being finished.  So, the rest of the schemes 
will stop until the end of the month.  Second thing I 
would like to mention is the town and village 
allocations and good schemes approved there and 
remedial works on the village blocks, Lara, adaptation 

to facilitate digital hub and big one for Scotford for the 
provision of community shop and cafe and meeting 
places and housing units and playground.  And Avoca 
development of picnic areas and Annamoe footpaths 
and safety measures and last item is the fire stations.  
We did well in the fire services capitals allocation and 
one for Baltinglass to commence construction in 2023 
and one in Dunlavin to commence from 2023 and both 
1 million Euro and one new fire tender.  Take the rest 
as read Cathaoirleach, take any questions. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Just before we proceed.  This is our 
first statutory meeting held by zoom and just to advise 
that the press are present thank you Cathaoirleach.  
Cathaoirleach are you on mute? 
MR CURRAN: Yeah, he is on mute, I think. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can you hear me now?  Cllr 
Lourda Scott did you want to welcome in.  
CLLR SCOTT:  Just three points I want to raise. I 
welcome the opening of the new Greystones Park 
before Christmas and this was something very much 
anticipated by local residents for some time and a very 
valuable resource as we go into other lockdown and it's 
been very widely used.  I have already had complaints 
of littering and overflowing bins and I would ask that 

Wicklow County Council ask SISK, who manage the 
park, to provide a litter management going forward 
and particularly in the summer months when there will 
be increased footfall on the cliff walk.  Myself and Cllr 
Doyle were notified of an incident where staff members 
were not wearing masks, and this is a breach of 
guidelines and I was just wondering if you could state 
what the management instructions are to the staff of 
all the council's recycling measures.  And thirdly back 
in September 2019 I raised the question of the 
provision of sign language interpretation.  I was just 
wondering could you update us on the progress for this 
matter?  Thank you, Chief Executive. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I will take them in three, Cllr 
Bourke. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Just one question and I mentioned to 
the Chief Executive about turnkey projects when we 
advertise for turnkey projects should we just be more 
specific in areas we're looking for or against because 
one developer is unhappy, he has been turned down in 
Rathnew and it's something we should be more sure 
about when we advertise. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Timmins. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thank you, I would like to 

compliment the county planner staff in the effort for 
securing funding for the fire stations in Dunlavin and 
that's very welcome and is there any update on when 
the rural regeneration fund will commence particularly 
in relation to the streetscape and the parks as well, 
thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Timmins.  I will 
bring the Chief Executive in now. 
CH. EXEC:  Thank you, just in relation to the 
Greystones we'll have a look at the litter situation and 
management plan and bring it to the attention of SISK.  
I wonder if we're better off without litter bins and force 
people to take their litter home.  There are guidelines 
with regard to face masks and that's been issued to all 
staff and staff have been trained and we have three or 
four people employed to travel the county and carry 
out inspections to ensure people are complying.  So, if 
there is any issue, we'll follow up on that and ensure 
there are no breaches, but we have people employed 
to look after that.  The sign language skills we'll have 
a look at that in terms of the customer care centre and 
I will come back to you on that the Cllr Bourke in terms 
of housing, turnkey, there are some areas where we 
don't have a demand for housing so obviously it's not a 

priority but maybe in future adds we'll be specific in the 
areas where we do have high demand.  The IRDF 
tender documents are almost complete and I will come 
back to you with a start date on that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Chief Executive.  Cllr 
Dunne.  We can't hear you; you are muted. 
CLLR DUNNE:  Can you hear me now, just a question 
on lighting.  Airtricity seem to be carrying out a lot of 
work around the place and I am glad to see that, we 
have a number of sites, one in Ashford there by the 
school going out by the Coop and a number of sites 
where they have done some work but it's taking a long 
time for the ESB to come back and power up the lights 
and I am just wondering would it be worth our while to 
invite the ESB into the Council to find out why it's 
taking so long.  It seems to be taking a period of time.  
The one in Ashford, it's a dangerous stretch of road and 
we really need to prioritise that.  Thank you 
Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Shay Cullen. 
CLLR CULLEN:  First of all, I just want to get 
clarification on policy and playgrounds, are we in a 
position to leave them open or should we have them 
closed?  The second point is I want to congratulate 

late Michael Nicholson and his team with the recent 
announcement of the town and village funding.  It will 
make a huge difference and it's very much welcomed 
and my third point is probably more serious point, I am 
sure people are aware that the uplands areas were 
inundated with people parking in what is well outside 
their five kilometer radius and it caused a lot of 
difficulty and there was cars abandoned and the 
weather was poor in terms of ice and snow and I know 
the Council had been putting out messages in terms of 
the Sally Gap being impassable but we need to 
emphasise or enforce to people they shouldn't be 
outside their five kilometer zone.  It was scandalous 
what went on, it was absolutely crazy, so just in terms 
of our communication Chief Executive, if we could keep 
that communication going in conjunction with the 
Gardaí, that's important. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Mags Crean  
CLLR CREAN:  Just to thank the Chief Executive for all 
their work and now with schools closed again staff with 
under more pressure and they are always professional, 
and I would like to put on record thanks to them all.  
In relation to housing there is two part-fives listed for 
Greystones but there is a lot of development in 

Greystones.  Part fives were not included, and I 
wonder if it's possible to get a report or something in 
relation to this in writing, so I have information on the 
issue.  Two, in relation to housing just to put on the 
record that was a housing development approved at 
Greystones MD level for a site in Greystones that I 
opposed on the basis that there are biodiversity issues.  
So, I would like to put that on record here that I still 
have concerns about that decision, and I wonder if 
there is any way it could be visit for discussion.  Three, 
just coming to the ICT, it's great to have the press here 
but I am concerned with zoom meetings, I know there 
is a live stream, I have looked at that and it's not very 
accessible in terms of literacy and older people and 
people with impaired vision.  I think if we look at some 
kind of webcast or something, I think it's a major 
omission and an issue for us.  In relation to 
environment, the last environment, 2020 it was 
discussed at a designated bathing area.  At the end of 
that meeting it was agreed it would be looked at so 
just want to know what it means in terms of timeframe 
and finally from relation to procurement.  This is back 
and forth in relation to green and social value.  I just 
want to see, and monitor are we implementing it out.  

I did get an email back to query I raised about the kind 
of social value criteria, green criteria used particularly 
in the active travel and the mobility schemes and Colm 
came back but, in the plan, there is KPIs around the 
number of tenders, so it would be great to get 
quantitative data.  It's really important we start taking 
note on that on our procurement. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I will go back to the Chief 
Executive. 
CH. EXEC:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, just in relation to 
the lighting we can certainly get the ESB in here.  We 
can raise those issues and I will ask Colm to come back 
in relation to that.  Policy and playgrounds are the 
same as the national policy which is to keep them 
open.  So that's what we're doing at the moment and 
they have their different reasons for that in terms of 
kids playing but that's the national policy.  The 
uplands area I agree with you, we're in constant 
communication with the Gardaí and if they ask us to 
close the car park, we always do it and that 
communication will between us, but I agree with you, 
we need to get the information out to the public as well 
because there were some dangerous scenes over the 
weekend, so I take that on board.  Cllr Green, we can 

get a report on the part five in Greystones, what is 
coming through and when it's likely to come through et 
cetera.  The ICT issues, in relation to that, we have 
the live streaming in addition to the zoom and the live 
streaming is something that's effective.  Staff et cetera 
will look at that and it's more cost-effective as opposed 
to webcasting.  In relation to the designated bathing 
areas, we'll certainly pass on to the environment 
section and procurement, it is a policy number four in 
your procurement policy, and it's passed on to all our 
consultants.  Sometimes it's not always possible to get 
a particularly green option but we will get to that and 
together with what you requested there in relation to 
that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just to relation to the meeting. 
MS GALLAGHER:  This is our first statutory online 
meeting, the press are present.  The public are not 
precluded, and we have the live text streaming, and we 
are the only county council in Ireland that does that.  
However, we'll keep under review the area of live 
streaming our meetings moving forward in terms of 
cost. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Lorraine. 
CH. EXEC:  Just in relation to the housing schemes 

approved in Greystones, we agreed MDs would approve 
their own part eight.  So, it's done and dusted and 
voted by the members and doesn't go anywhere else 
after that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Mitchell. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  I had a couple of questions on 
mostly on the roads and that was the roads section 
doesn't mention there are certain other things in the 
capital budget, there was also other things in the 2004 
levy scheme, Delgany Road improving and the other 
point in relation to enterprise and enterprise centres, 
Cairn are due to supply one of the enterprise centres 
as part of the development.  So, it's useful and there 
are some questions over the dog park as to whether or 
not people do or don't agree with what was built even 
though it did get full planning permission and we need 
to try when a company is supplying something as part 
of a planning permission, we should get on top of the 
specification of it and it should be imminent.  I would 
like to get on top of that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Just in terms of the energy efficiency 
and just wonder if it's possible to put in some of our 
targets so we get a sense of progression and we'll be 

judged on those.  So it would be nice to get a sense of 
it in terms of progress and otherwise just to say, 
congrats again on the county wise magazine and also 
give some credit to all the Lier stuff, it's something 
that's very prominent and you can see by the data and 
stats that the Enterprise Office is doing is really 
important and valuable job and the last thing I would 
say is, the community response forum as well doing 
really important work and I imagine this will continue 
and all the commitment to having cohesive response 
across the county is having an impact.  Thanks, 
Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Walsh.   
CLLR WALSH: Just the phase five lockdown period in 
March, April what contingency plans are in place in 
relation to tenants paying their rents? Bear in mind 
we're back in that situation, just to prevent that figure 
rising again to a large extent.  The other question in 
relation to the outdoor staffing levels and I raised this 
at the budget meeting.  There is an increase of six in 
the last year, I mentioned in particular the situation in 
Greystones where the outdoor staffing levels have been 
depleted and there was a promise there was two new 
operatives to be supplied there.  So just wondering, 

the finished goods, if there is an update on that and 
the last is on the -- or the start grant plus schemes and 
the ones approving but not paid by the end of 
November.  So just wondering if those have been paid 
in the interim?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Walsh. 
CH. EXEC:  Delgany to Blacklion, I know the CPO is 
ongoing and the whole intention is to proceed with that 
scheme.  In relation to the enterprise centres, we have 
seen quite a high-quality design and one is a 
community enterprise centre and the other is an office 
block, they haven't come back since but it's part of the 
planning permission before moving on, they have to 
build the enterprise centres, so I will come back to the 
members on that.  In relation to the energy efficiency, 
we have the solar panel starting here in the Council 
Cash Park and we have the foyer, the energy standard 
was improved there, and the members rooms were all 
fully insulated, and a lot of work has been done in the 
fire stations.  So, a lot of progress being made, and we 
would have a done a lot of energy retrofitting, so we'll 
have windows and doors and roofs and heat pumps et 
cetera.  So, all that will increase our numbers, so 
certainly including that in the Chief Executive's report.  

Just in relation to housing arrears, last year we had a 
rent review and always people's rent goes up et cetera 
and arrears go up, but they usually level off after a 
year or two.  COVID hasn't helped and door to door 
collectors aren't going out.  So, we're trying to get 
people on a household budget and direct debit and 
payroll deduction, just to make contact with all our 
tenants in relation to how they pay their rent when we 
don't have that service and hopefully when COVID 
finishing the rent collectors will be out there something 
and it's something we're working on.  The restart 
grant.  I think it's all paid at this stage, 15.8 million 
has been paid out between restart and restart plus.  
The staffing members, we have replaced/filled all the 
vacant GSS posts, so there are people acting there and 
they have all been filled.  So that resulted in about ten 
two posts and we took on six extra last year and that's 
moving on and we'll replace that as we need and that's 
the workforce plan that's agreed with the unions. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr John Mullen. 
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks for the report, last week we 
had very poor weather and a lot of rural roads, a lot of 
them don't seem to have been gritted enough to 
relation to keeping the roads safe for users and I was 

aware I thought we had a winter emergency plan 
where there would be gritting points for local 
landowners, but they have been depleted and have not 
been restocked in quite some time.  So, I would hope 
you could attend to that and follow on from that in 
relation to footpaths and footpaths last week were 
quite treacherous with people trying to access 
pharmacies.  It might be an idea to have public access 
points for gritting in various villages and towns in the 
county reviewed to make sure we have quick and easy 
access to that, even for volunteers to do it to keep the 
paths safe.  And finally just the Pure Project which is 
as we all agree a flagship project that this county 
spearheaded, has only been renewed for one year and 
it's seeking a multi-annual budget and I think it's one 
of the projects that this county can really be proud of 
as regards a project that's led by Wicklow and could be 
easily rolled out nationally in regards to managing our 
environment and tackling illegal dumping and I hope 
you are following up with other local authority 
colleagues to make sure the Minister has just to sign 
the multi-annual funding and does so as soon as 
possible. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  I just can't see them.  I 

see Cllr O'Neill up there now.  Sorry, Cllr Fortune.  I 
didn't see you.  Sorry. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Just if I can ask the CEO regards the 
COVID and the list we have there as regards housing 
developments that can continue, what is the case with 
other developments, housing developments?  Because 
of what regulations are in place to enforce that?  
Because in West Wicklow it seems some work is 
continuing on estates and they are not covered in that 
list.  Number two, just to echo what Cllr Mullen said 
there.  In the West we have had a fairly treacherous 
roads and how well are we prepared for bad weather in 
rural roads and the sand and salt we would usually 
have out, and we did start with yellow bins a couple of 
years ago that could be placed in areas that are needed 
for gritting and I think that we should redouble our 
efforts that these yellow bins are in place in rural areas 
because it can mean people having to get out or not 
get out.  There are some areas around the lakes or 
whatever and we have them at the bottom of the hills 
or the council staff know where they would be, but I 
am a little bit concerned, do we have the amount of 
salt and sand for a bad winter if we do get something 
like we got three-years ago? 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Neil.  Cllr Murphy. 
CLLR MURPHY:  At the beginning of the report the CEO 
said about staff working from home which is good to 
hear and also there is mobile numbers, and will they be 
distributed to the relevant councillors and also great to 
see the report on the mobility allowance, but I have 
one or two questions on it in the sense of, I know there 
was public awareness about the availability of the 
grants.  Is that telling me that all the applicants have 
been fulfilled and there is, I suppose, funding there?  
And if the money hasn't been spent will we lose that, or 
will that be carried over?  For priority applicants to say 
the very low level, has that been fulfilled?  Also just 
like to say it's great to see the customer service being 
put in place and how it's working, and will this be 
reviewed to see it there any pitfalls that can be 
improved going forward?  And is that housing grant 
available in the sense of heating and insulation and is 
all the stock brought up to standard and one or two 
dealing with some damp issues and is there grants 
available for that and going forward this year will our 
own stock, all levels be able to be brought up to 
standard?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Murphy. 

CH. EXEC:  Yeah, just in relation to the housing stock, 
we'll be surveying all the housing stock and the idea is 
to bring all the stock up to B2.  So, it may mean 
revisiting stock and that work will be continuing in this 
year, 2021.  In relation to the housing grant aids for 
people with disability, we can only go into houses 
where the people will allow us in and dealing with 
emergencies at the moment but any grants that were 
approved will be honoured and that scheme goes from 
year to year.  In relation to accessing staff.  If you 
contact the main customer care desk if they are at 
home, it will be transferred to the home and a lot of 
the senior staff have mobiles but there shouldn't be 
any difficulty contacting staff.  In a lot of cases if you 
ring the number of the staff member and they are 
working from home it transfers automatically.  The 
housing just Councillor O'Neill, just finished at 6 pm on 
Friday and in some cases just had to do works today to 
close them up but the only exceptions were social 
housing which could be finished by 28th of February 
which I mentioned earlier.  It's not up to us to enforce 
it.  The Pure Project, I don't think there is a problem 
with ourselves and I will check with Wesley to see how 
that's going.  In relation to the roads and the 

footpaths, I might ask Colm Lavery to come in on that 
one.  The yellow bins and the grit, certainly something 
we can look at.  Footpath repairs we're allowed to 
under the restrictions.  I might just ask Colm to come 
in. 
MR. LAVERY:  Thank you Chief Executive, we have the 
winter maintenance plan in place, you will see the 
group written map is set out in the magazine so you 
can see the route, and which is grit on a daily basis.  
We have been made aware in some areas where a 
farmer asked for supplies of salt so they can grit local 
roads and private roads.  And where possible we 
provided those supplies.  So if there are particular 
areas in the Baltinglass some of them have been 
brought to our attention and I followed up on that as 
well and normally where there are yellow bins in place 
those stocks have been refilled but if there are 
particular areas of concern either let myself know or 
the district engineer know and we'll do our utmost to 
get supplies of salt out there but just to say we have 
been doing double runs in the last week or so in terms 
of the bad weather that we have had.  So, our gritters 
have been out at least twice at night time.  There is no 
gritting tonight.  Thankfully, there is a rise in 

temperatures, but we have a maintenance plan and 
we're fully stocked with salt and we hopefully will be 
able to meet any of the bad weather events that may 
come our way this year but if there are particular areas 
please let us know and we'll do our best to supply salt 
to those areas.  Maybe when I have the meeting as 
well, just to refer back to the LED and the public 
lighting, it is fair to say we're having difficulties with 
getting the ESB to attend to faults.  We have a lot of 
faults actually fixed ourselves by SSE Airtricity and 
we're waiting ESB to attend where there are cable 
issues that we can't deal with and we're fully aware of 
that issue in Ashford and a number of councillors and 
members of the public and we have been on to ESB 
into terms of trying to speed them up in terms of 
getting them out.  We'll continue to push that as well 
and SSE Airtricity are also using their contacts in the 
ESB to speed that up.  In terms of the faults, there is 
a bit of a push to try and get those down.  The figure 
you have in the Chief Executive's Report states there is 
just under 500 faults that figure is down to 381.  So, 
we're at 2.56% of the stock of public lights currently 
out and these include the ones ESB are required to fix.  
Thank you. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and thanks 
Chief Executive for your report, as usual it's very 
comprehensive.  Can I wish everybody a very happy 
New Year and hopefully the mad virus disappears as 
quickly as possible.  Just to start with housing and 
perhaps if I could get some kind of maybe some more 
detail on the capital advance leasing situation.  What is 
the programme behind that and how is that delivered 
to us and can I also get an understanding of what the 
pipeline is for part five housing that's coming up and 
maybe particularly in the Greystones district area but 
in general I would like to know and also in the 
homeless supported accommodation, what is the 
current situation for homelessness?  It's still a very, 
very serious problem.  And just again like some others 
mentioned on the energy efficiency upgrade, I would 
like to know what the plan is across our own district in 
particular and what the plan is for that and also I would 
like to suggest at the next meeting we would talk about 
climate change and how we're impacting it in our 
decisions because the recent decision that Cllr Crean 
and the CEO referred to, I think that was a really 
disgraceful decision and perhaps you might confirm 

that we're going to indemnify the residences in 
Burnaby Court, Lawn, Avenue and Millbrook and are we 
going to inform the insurance company based on that 
decision that there is no floodplain there because there 
was the bases of your decision?  So, some other 
questions as well Cathaoirleach.  Can I get an update 
on the tourism strategy and where are we with it and 
what is the plan over the next four to five-months?  
And the Glendalough Master Plan and just to get a 
picture on what is happening there and also the 
Wicklow Naturally Training, what is behind that and 
what is involved in that and also the food poverty?  
Can we get more detail on that one? And finally can I 
just say well done on the restart grants, I have 
received some feedback, very positive feedback on that 
and I think that's been dealt with very well and we 
have done a super job and as a local authority in 
general I think we have done a super job in regards to 
the whole COVID world we're living in right now and I 
would like to thank all the various departments that are 
doing great work but there is obviously lots of 
questions that need more detail so maybe Chief 
Executive you will come back to me on each of those. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Cronin. 

CLLR CRONIN:  Thank you very much Cathaoirleach I 
just have a few questions, firstly thanks to the staff 
and all the communities in their successful projects for 
the Town and Village Renewal Scheme and we had 
great success with the Stratford project for the 
community cafe and we have great news with the two 
fire stations.  So, thank you very much for all the work 
on that.  I also just want to echo Cllr O'Neill and John 
Mullen on the gritting situation and the only other thing 
I wanted to mention was Irish Water, we had Councillor 
clinics, I am still waiting for a reply.  So, thank you 
very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Mary Kavanagh. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Sorry, I was on mute there.  
Happy New Year to everybody and I would like to echo 
Cllr Fortune's desire that we'll get through that 
pandemic as soon as possible and get back to normal.  
I have two issues I want to raise; they are not 
necessarily from the CEO's report but very important 
one is five-years ago there was a meeting held in the 
Grand Hotel about the coastal erosion and all the local 
TDs were there and there were assurances given that 
something would be done such as funding sought.  I'm 
on the Greenway Committee and I know it may or may 

not happen, in the meantime the coastal erosion is 
continuing and the whole of the Wicklow Walks, the 
Murrough and it would be a disaster if anything 
happens to it.  So, given there was assurances given 
five-years ago is there any way that funding could be 
sought to put groins in along the beach which was the 
recommended solution, and it was given to us by a 
consultant and came up with a plan and break waters 
out in the sea or groins along the beach.  If you look 
at old photographs about a hundred years ago there 
was groins along the breach, just cement blocks to halt 
the waves hitting the delicate shoreline and take the 
impact out of the waves and I think they would have a 
huge impact on the Murrough, and I would like to know 
in there is any plans to seek any funding to do that 
because five-years passed and nothing has been done.  
Second thing just back to Cllr Scott about 
communications boards in the new council offices, I 
have had a request from a parent of a nonverbal child 
to me to see if communication boards could be erected 
in one playground in every location.  These 
communication boards are particularly free for use by 
children with various kinds of disabilities, any on the 
autistic spectrum who can't communicate verbally but 

can communicate on these boards and I think given the 
number of children who use these playgrounds I think 
it would be hugely beneficial.  So, what I'm really 
asking is, can some kind of funding stream to tap into 
to seek these boards, they have recently been installed 
in Meath and they have been very popular and well 
received and I just wonder if Wicklow can do the same?  
CH. EXEC:  That sounds like a good idea and certainly 
something we'll investigate and come back to you on.  
On the coastal erosion there is a daft feasible report 
done covering the whole coast of Arklow right up to the 
Merrion Gates, it's funded by Irish Rail but also 
ourselves and the OPW have been involved in it and its 
various proposals, for the area you are talking about its 
offshore break water but it's a different solution in 
different areas, it's only just complete and it's with 
Irish Rail and their board at the moment.  It's going to 
be big money.  200 million to cover the whole coast 
but it's necessary to protect the rail service and also in 
terms of the Greenway you mentioned.  So, it's 
something that really has to be into the next national 
development plan, it's a big scheme.  What I will do is 
I will contact Irish Rail and Arup Engineering and see if 
we can get a presentation but there is a lot of work and 

proposals done and cost benefit analysis and 
preliminary costs.  Just going back to Cllr Fortune.  In 
terms of Wicklow Naturally that's a company that came 
out of the Wicklow food strategy.  So, looking at food 
producers in the county, they are looking at the 
training which is something that you mentioned in 
providing training for each other and training in 
general.  They are looking at possibly a food 
distribution centre and a food integration centre and 
linking into the Dublin market.  And they looked at 
food poverty and they have done a mapping exercise in 
relation to that.  What are the issues and what can we 
do about is it and they are looking at food waste, 
maybe we'll get a presentation for the full Council in 
relation to that.  In terms of tourism, one is 
Glendalough and that's been led by Failte Ireland and 
ourselves and I know the Wicklow Municipal District 
and local stakeholders’ group is meeting on the 21st in 
relation to that.  It's the whole national park and the 
signage and what is needed, and the advantage is they 
have the grants, and they will be the people giving out 
the grants and there is a very good chance for funding, 
so something we need to be careful about ourselves 
and liaise with them, but consultation is difficult.  The 

other areas that they are looking at in terms of looking 
past COVID and what do we need in terms of 
accommodation and hotels and guest houses and 
holiday homes and hostels et cetera and what is 
needed and how do we attract people into the county.  
So, there is a report done on that and the other side is 
making town centres more attractive and a lot of work 
there in terms of the public realm and the other area is 
marketing.  A lot of it is online and the focus at the 
moment is the summer season for 2021 staycations.  
So that's the stuff that's happening at the moment in 
terms of tourism and working continuing and meetings 
are on zoom but there is a lot of stuff there look 
beyond COVID and seeing what we can do.  On the 
housing I might bring Joe Lane in if that's okay 
Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay. 
MR LANE: Okay.  Cllr Fortune sent an email regarding 
those and you will get a specific reply on that but on 
the issues raised.  The flood report and the clarification 
given to elected members including the one on the 
continuation is the commitments that the local 
authority give.  Anything else is a matter by the 
private company and that will be dealt by email to you.  

It might be better giving a -- I can go through the 
capital advances scheme, it's a funding mechanism for 
approved housing bodies where they get a percentage 
of money as a grant and then they pay repayment and 
availability.  I might get a website and forward it to 
you individually or do we want to detail on that.  I 
might be better off breaking it down and giving it to 
you rather than going through it today, it's just a 
mechanism for the approved housing bodies and they 
can have two methods of funding house, one is the 
capital advance scheme and the Newtown scheme with 
be an example of that, and the rest is a funding, it's a 
mechanism paying a mortgage that they take over 
20-years.  But depending on certain areas and 
depending on the rental value in the areas, the 
percentage of the rental value or the shadow rent 
based on the market value of the area may not fully 
pay the mortgages and they are issues and therefore 
they also get a capital advance, but I will give you a 
better report on that, just more of an explanation and 
we'll also give it to the SPC also.  Part fives, yeah, 
they look on average we're getting about 25 to 30 
across the county a year.  We'll include it in the Chief 
Executive's Report.  The problem is sometimes we 

won't be able to give the commitment per area 
because sometimes there is a timing issue between 
when we think we'll get them but included in the report 
for something like the amount given the previous year 
compared to the next year and then the amount per 
area or something like that.  But it doesn't, amount 
per area will be a bit problematic. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Just on that --- there is a massive 
amount of housing being built in Greystones.  
MR LANE:  You have to accept it is 25, it's 25 last year 
and the year before.  There may be some in the future 
in the scheme but that's what we're getting and it's on 
the rebuilding Ireland website. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Does that answer all the questions I 
asked?  You are going to answer me separately? 
MR LANE:  Yeah. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thank you Joe. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Patsy Glennon. 
CLLR GLEESON:  Thank you for the report and I would 
like to join on welcoming the two fire stations in 
Baltinglass and Dunlavin and I know there was a lot of 
hard work and I would like to acknowledge the Chief 
Executive in that decision and yourself Cathaoirleach 
also involved in addressing the inadequacies in those 

two stations.  So, in regard to the money for Stratford, 
I think it will make a tremendous difference to a small 
rural town in West Wicklow and I would like to 
acknowledge the tremendous work of Minister Donnelly 
in making sure it wasn't forgotten about on this 
occasion and it's important to acknowledge inputs 
when they are meaningful.  I know he worked hard on 
it on behalf of the committee.  Finally, I was going to 
ask Colm about the white line at the top of the Wicklow 
gap, but the weather is too -- I would like to thank 
Breege and Pat and Dermot and their work has been 
tremendous, and no holds barred in getting the job 
done here by all of them.  Thank you very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Blake. 
CLLR BLAKE:  The first one is in relation to the 
purchase scheme, still a question there over it.  On 
page 9 of the Management Report there is a comment 
that social housing on Council owned land, there is a 
preferred proposal identified.  Could I have some 
indication on what it means?  And the last point, there 
is a lot of criticism in terms of social housing 
completions and it's only fair to acknowledge the work 
that's been done by the Housing Department in 
completion of housing, whether it's rapid build or own 

build or turnkey but a huge number of houses have 
been delivered and it's good to see the projects out 
there will be completed and people are desperate to 
get houses and it's important we continue, so thank 
you very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Blake.  Cllr Melanie 
Corrigan. 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  Thank you and thank you for the 
report.  Just two things, we're delighted about the 
town and village money and want to thank the staff for 
all the support they gave us on putting in the 
application.  Several years money and application has 
been put in for the town clock restoration and the 
community garden is going to be great and there will 
be a part eight on the pedestrianized area.  The other 
point Cllr Kavanagh was saying about the community 
boards and we had a motion in about community 
boards.  So that was proposed and granted at the last 
CCSD meeting, so hopefully after Christmas Mike 
Nicholson will look at getting those in the playgrounds 
so we're delighted that was passed.  Thank you very 
much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Not a lot of questions 
in those two so I will add in the next two speakers.  

Cllr Irene Winters. 
CLLR WINTERS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, in relation to 
the report that's with Irish Rail on the coastal 
protection, the Chief Executive said he understood it's 
with the board at the moment.  It's been with Irish 
Rail and delivered by the consultants since August, 
that's five-months ago.  If they are not going to read 
it, can they just give it to us, and we can read it.  They 
cannot take five-months, surely, we're as entitled to 
have a look at it and five-months is completely 
unacceptable. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Winters, Cllr 
O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you and I want to thank the 
Chief Executive for his report.  A lot of good work done 
in Wicklow Town at the moment and there was an 
announcement before Christmas in relation to the 
Abbey Grounds and I just wonder has there been an 
update on that situation?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Chief Executive, I will bring you 
back in now. 
CH. EXEC:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, we had some 
queries from the parish priest and hopefully that will 
progress in the right way.  We'll be hoping that we can 

advance that, and we have a grant of I think it's 
500,000 from Failte Ireland.  So, the report on the 
coastal erosion, I will try and get a presentation in 
relation to that and I will contact Irish Rail and it's 
something we need get out there and it requires 
significant government funding.  So, it's something we 
need to push, Cllr Blake, the tenant purchase scheme, 
the reason it doesn't succeed is people don't have the 
income or they failed the income test or have existing 
commitments and the scheme is applied as fairly as it 
can.  Unfortunately, we're governed by the rules.  
There is an appeals mechanism in place.  Building 
council houses on council land we have built a number 
of houses; 1,321 I think it is in total at the end of 2021 
and there will be a new programme starting after that.  
So, we'll be going out to buy more, land and we'll 
continue to do that.  I think that's it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Chief Executive, Joe did 
you want to come back in?  Okay.  Cllr O'Neill.  You 
wanted to come in there on something.  You need to 
un-mute Gerry. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Yeah, are you there?  It's just my 
colleague and friend Cllr Glennon, he has high praise 
for a Minister from Greystones in regard to interference 

with funding.  I don't think it's appropriate that any 
Minister would get.  I don't think we should be 
promoting any TD from that side of the county over 
here and in regard to interference with these projects 
and grants, I didn't think it's right.  So maybe we 
might be better leaving these lads out of it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr O'Neill for that 
comment.  I don't think there is anything else showing 
on the Chief Executive's Report, is there anybody else 
showing, I think I have got everybody.  I don't want to 
leave anybody out.  Okay thank you.  Just my own 
comment on the Chief Executive's Report, I would just 
like to acknowledge the work that the Chief Executive 
and the directors and management team and all the 
staff.  The work they are putting into all the 
applications for funding right around the County.  I 
would like to put on the record and thank all of the 
staff and yourself Chief Executive and the management 
team on behalf of all the Councillors present.  So, 
thank you for that.  Item number 11 on the agenda is 
to receive a presentation:  An introduction to proposed 
local authority climate action training programme, 
Tuesday 29th January 2021 and climate action update 
from Wicklow County Council.  Alan Dunney, are you 

with us?  You are very welcome and thank you for 
taking its time to be with us today. 
MR. DUNNEY:  I will share my screen.  
(comfort break during presentation). 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Alan and thank you for 
the presentation, there is certainly a lot of work going 
on in the background and its very important work and 
work we all need to engage with, Alan I have to bring 
in our own Director, Breege Kilkenny.  Alan, can you 
stay with us for a few minutes? 
MR DUNNEY:  Yes. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, so I will bring in Director 
Breege Kilkenny. 
MS KILKENNY: Thank you very much.  Can you hear 
me.  I will just share my screen.  Everybody sees 
that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Yes.  We can see that.  
(Presentation) 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  And thank you for that 
presentation and it was most informative and most 
enjoyable.  Can I bring in Cllr O’Connor? 
CLLR O'CONNOR:  I just wanted to come in as the 
Chair said, to say how proud we are to have that 

information laid out.  As you know this is a new SPC 
and we went through a storm, general election 
happening and losing our two Chairs and then a 
pandemic and even with those two things happening all 
members of the SPC have been working really hard and 
well.  Just one comment which I think could be applied 
to other presentations in the future from a Council 
perspective is to have all the sustainable goals in the 
corner, so we know they are being followed.  That's a 
really good habit to get into, thank you very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Bourke. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Thanks, Breege and Alan as well for 
an excellent presentation but not a perfect one either.  
There was a lot covered but there were a few gaps in it 
there that I would just like highlight where I would like 
to see for consultation with the farming sector.  There 
is no information on what the farming sector are doing 
to mitigate climate change.  I would like to see more 
of a hand in glove working together.  Just to caution 
about one thing, it's gone a bit casual in the way of, 
let's throw out glyphosates.  It's a very important part 
of farming and a lot of tillage formers are considering 
switching from ploughing to direct drilling which means 
no tilling and the huge amount of diesel that's saved in 

that is colossal because the build-up of carbon in the 
soil.  It needs the use of phosphate for the destruction 
of the weeds before drilling and it's something there is 
not enough awareness of, and I would like to see 
members keeping an open mind on this because a lot 
of farmers would like to switch to the tillage system. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks.  Cllr Lourda Scott. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Just to thank all the Climate Action 
Team.  It's a pleasure to be working on the SPC group, 
there is great cross-party cooperation and the other 
SPC members, as we work towards a common goal and 
that's reflected in the work that was shown in the slides 
here, just worth mentioning as all the work progresses 
and new policies have been drafted, conversation must 
be kept at the forefront in Wicklow County Council as 
to staffing levels.  It's great to have the work being 
rolled out and a policy on paper but they must have 
bodies on the ground to put them into effect.  I was 
glad to see the awareness and education piece 
highlighted and I wonder are these presentations 
available for the public.  I am contacted regularly by 
the public and it's just so important to keep informing 
the public of what work is being done and bring them 
on the journey with us.  So just like to know if the 

presentations are available and if they can be sent to 
the elected members and spread them on our own 
social media pages.  In terms of the roundup, I hear 
what you are saying, in terms of what we're doing in 
climate SPC is looking at Council's use, in terms of 
spraying around spaces. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Kavanagh. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thank you very much it was a 
really interesting presentation by both of you and there 
is obviously a lot of work going on.  So well done to 
the climate action SPC group. My point is in relation to 
glyphosates and having account to farming and 
reiterating what Cllr Scott said, my query is in relation 
to the Council's use of it outside of farming.  In time 
glyphosates will be ruled on in Europe and Ireland is 
still one of the only countries still using it and it may be 
banned and there will be an alternative substitute 
product.  But you mentioned the foam stream is going 
to be rolled out in Bray.  I would really hope following 
quickly out from that it will be rolled out in the other 
districts as well, it's just not healthy and it's not good 
for biodiversity and it's not unknown that wherever it's 
been sprayed there are bodies of bees and other 
pollinators found, it's even happened in the estate 

where I live and it's shocking given that the demise of 
pollinators is and how important it is to keep them alive 
because if anything happens to them we're in serious 
trouble.  So, I really want the foam stream to be rolled 
out as soon as possible.  Thank you.  Breege 
Kilkenny: Cathaoirleach, do you want me to answer 
any of those? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Cathaoirleach are you on mute?  
You go ahead and answer that, if you want to come in.   
MS KILKENNY:  Grand, so just to address the issue 
and yes, Cllr Bourke and Cllr Scott are correct.  This is 
just in relation to the Council's use and also, to address 
Cllr Kavanagh's query, we have purchased the foam 
streaming as a pilot in order to get it in here because 
as you know we have to follow through the 
procurement process.  So that will be part and parcel 
of this year is to actually follow a proper procurement 
process and, but we needed to find out the 
effectiveness of its use to begin with because as you 
know dealing with Japanese knot weed there is 
suspicion as to whether or not the foam stream will be 
effective in its use.  It was also a way for us to get to 
started.  So, the Bray Municipal District just showed its 
initial interest to get it off the ground.  Maybe we can 

rotate it until we get our framework up and running to 
the various districts, I am particularly interested in its 
use in Blessington and the Baltinglass district as well. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can you hear me now?  Cllr 
O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you and brilliant presentation 
and very insightful and just again, I give, I won't with 
over what Cllr O'Connor and Cllr Scott said in terms of 
the recognition as a member of the SPC myself 
agendas are only as good as the team driving them 
and we have a serious team there compassionate and 
passionate about this issue and one thing I was going 
to ask Alan in terms of the roll out of the training, how 
important do you think it is?  There is a broader team 
and that's all the senior elected members of staff and 
it's critical that everyone sees themselves as part of 
the team and sees a role for themselves and one thing 
that strikes me is the tension in politics about short 
termism where there is an emphasis or focus on short 
termism and there is always a tension there in terms of 
the political life span.  Like if you can comment on 
that.  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and I know it was the first 
thing you said, the climate was the thing that stood out 
in terms of their contribution to Wicklow as well. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr O'Brien, Cllr Mags 
Crean. 
CLLR CREAN:  I just have three questions.  One is in 
relation to the pre management piece and the 
community planting, it's good to see that and hopefully 
there will be more data on that and secondly the public 
lighting.  I think the LED rollout is brilliant.  Are there 
any plans to improve smart lighting just in terms of 
being safe?  And thirdly then in relation to the climate 
change piece and proofing, I know there was a report 
done in the States and the UK had one around local 
authorities’ stock and public housing in the US context, 
where those houses were most at risk because they 
were usually built on bad land or floodplains.  So, are 
there plans to do an audit of the local authority stock in 
relation to climate and flood risk?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Crean.  Alan can you 
take this one from Dermot and if you want to take Cllr 
Crean. 
MR DURNEY: Just before I go to the two most recent 
ones, the round up for the glyphosates, I would say all 
counties are trying to do trials on how best to replace 
glyphosates and Kildare County Council are trying to 
get so much research off the ground with Maynooth 

University.  So, I might talk to Breege and Mary about 
that to see how we can coordinate that work.  In 
terms of the training Cllr O'Brien, it's an extensive 
training programme and all 28,000 staff will get 
training and it will be available to every member of 
Irish Local Government and it's only one of the many 
tools I suppose that Local Government is using.  You 
have climate action mainstream through your corporate 
plan.  Wicklow were the first county to establish the 
climate action SPC and there are the climate action 
indicators and there is the training and there is 
mainstreaming climate action through the delivery plan 
and getting it down into everybody's PDPs and working 
with the existing networks to get into us communities 
and older person's council and PPN.  And all we'll do is 
remove one more barrier that's there, so for me it's a 
bigger mainstreaming piece.  It needs to go into 
everything we do.  But definitely it has, like you have 
seen the presentation there from Breege and the work 
that's going on in Wicklow is amazing.  And on the 
housing stock there is no real plans to do a reasonable 
review of housing stock in terms of flooding or anything 
like that.  A lot of that work has been done by the 
OPW.  So those GIS layers are available if an audit is 

required, I suppose would be my answer. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  Thanks, can I bring in Cllr 
Fortune now. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, first of all just 
thank Breege and Alan for the presentation, very 
informative and very well I would suggest, put 
together.  I suppose the one comment I want to make, 
I think the training aspect of this is very important and 
I personally, as some members might be aware, I get 
frustrated when we get a whole lot of information that 
seems to be fantastic, but we haven't been told about 
it.  I would ask that all of the members are kept totally 
involved and up to speed because at the end of the day 
we're the ones going to end up pushing it and driving it 
in addition to the staff.  So rather than trying to 
spread it to the world which is fine I don't want to see 
any of the members excluded.  Cathaoirleach thanks 
Tom, can I just thank Breege and Alan for the 
presentations, there is a huge amount of work going 
on.  So, can I thank you for that and wish you every 
success and please continue to educate us as you move 
forward because we all need to be part of it moving 
forward.  So Breege thank you for all the work you and 
your team are doing and Alan all the work you are 

doing.  The climate, we have to look after it because 
we need to hand on to the next generation.  So, thank 
you for all the work you are doing, it's something in the 
last couple of years we have all got interested in, but I 
didn't realise the volume of work you were doing, and I 
did enjoy your presentations.  So, thank you very 
much for all of that and everyone would be in 
agreement with me for all the work you are doing. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Can I ask that all the presentations are 
made available to the members?   
MS KILKENNY:    Absolutely.  I will send them on.    
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I am going move on.  To ratify the 
appointment of Cllr Erika Doyle.  Proposed by Cllr 
Ferris and seconded by Cllr O'Connor is that agreed?  
Agreed.  Correspondence Lorraine.  Do we have 
correspondence?  
MS GALLAGHER:  After the meeting in September, we 
received an acknowledgment from the Department on 
Monday 21st of December.  Elected members will have 
been circulated with correspondence from Andrea 
Dunne.  So they were circulated with an email on 6th 
of January about the requirement under legislation to 
return your local elections of disclosure and it has to be 
back by 31st of January and this morning you would 

have been circulated with another email asking you to 
complete the declaration of interest and that's required 
by legislation and it has to be back by end of February 
to the ethics officer and then elected members were 
circulated with correspondence from the department of 
health dated 24th of December 2020.  Thank you 
Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Lorraine.  Members I am 
very conscious of the fact there is a lot of notice of 
motions, I am going to try and get through some of 
those.  So, the first notice of motion is Cllr Lourda 
Scott.  So, Lorraine I am going hand over to you. 
MS GALLAGHER:  This is Notice of motion on the name 
of Cllr Lourda Scott.  It's in relation to the issue of 
period poverty which has been raised in the Oireachtas 
by the Women's Parliamentary Caucus.  This petition 
has been referred to the Department of Health and that 
Department sought the views of the Strategy 
Committee and the extent of period poverty in Ireland, 
particularly schools and universities, students and 
homeless and those in direct provision and 
recommendations for possible measures to address the 
issue.  A subcommittee has been established and 
chaired by an official of the Department of Health and 

there is a representative of the local authority.  The 
subcommittee met on two occasions.  Dun Laoghaire 
and Dublin City Council participated in two pilot 
projects.  It's recommended that Wicklow County 
Council await the report and recommendations of the 
subcommittee and the national strategy committee on 
a sectoral response to the issue.  In the meantime, it's 
suggested that matter can be referred to the 
Community Cultural and Social Development SPC for 
consideration.  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Lorraine.  That answers 
that.  Item number two is Notice of motion on the 
name of Cllr Anne Ferris and Cllr Paul O'Brien. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Can I just reply to that please, I just 
want to make the point that I think we can involve 
ourselves and help the people in Wicklow who 
experiences period poverty at the moment while we 
wait for the subcommittee to convene.  We have a 
serious pandemic going on at the moment which is 
accentuated the problem with period poverty, and this 
is noted by Homeless Ireland and I acknowledge what 
Lorraine said in terms of the subcommittee and there is 
a commitment in government to providing free sanitary 
products in educational settings.  However, at the 

same time we have to acknowledge the study which 
showed 50% of Irish teenage girls find it difficult to find 
period products.  So, what I would like to propose 
while we're waiting for the recommendations from the 
subcommittee we can still as a County Council provide 
a basket of towels and products.  I have been working 
with Lorraine Hunt, so I would like to propose that we 
still go forward with that proposal rather than sitting 
back and waiting, I don't know if it needs to be 
discussed further or the Executive is happy with that. 
CLLR FERRIS:  I want to support Cllr Scott and I think 
it's very timely.  I hear what Cllr Scott says in 
response to the official reply to the notice of motion 
and I think we shouldn't wait until committees meet on 
this, there is an urgent need for this motion.  We 
should take action on this motion.  Showing leadership 
in Wicklow County Council is very important and I think 
there is enough of us women on the county council to 
be cognisant of the need for young women and 
teenagers have this need and there is indeed what they 
call, a period poverty in the country.  Dublin City 
Council and Dun Laoghaire Council did adopt a motion 
similar to this and put in place the products in their 
public buildings and I think we shouldn't wait.  I think 

we should show leadership here now and go ahead with 
this while we're awaiting the reply back.  I note, it's 
going to be referred to the CCSD of which I am a 
member but that probably won't meet for two or 
three-months, so I think we should take action and 
again I thank Cllr Scott for bringing the motion. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Lorraine can you come back on 
this. 
MS GALLAGHER:  I have been keeping in contact with 
my colleagues and other local authorities, Wexford 
County Council piloted in their library and I think 
Cathaoirleach if you leave that with myself and I will 
liaise with Deirdre Whitfield with a view to progressing 
it further.  Is that okay?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much.  Item 
number two is Notice of motion on the name of and 
again Lorraine can I ask you to come with the 
response. 
MS GALLAGHER:  In relation to the accessibility of the 
website and the Council aims to have an accessibility 
website to assist blind, visually impaired and on 
occasions PDFs are uploaded and such files are the 
signed minutes and agenda of meetings.  The files are 
originally PDFs and you can upload unsigned minutes 

and agenda to the website.  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CLLR: It's great news, this motion has been down since 
November 2019, I think.  It's great news it's will be 
more accessible because as you mentioned the 
Lorraine people who are blind have difficulties in 
reading the PDFs and they are entitled as anyone else 
to access the files uploaded.  So that's good news 
again and perhaps at maybe next month you might 
give us an update on it as well.  Thanks, 
Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Murphy. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Can I just say thank you for putting 
that motion in and it's items like this that will come 
under our accessible and inclusion committee and I 
think it's great to see other councillors bringing forward 
motions like this instead of me always.  But also, it's 
commenting on any documentation that the council is 
sending out.  Whether it's the full Council or there are 
the districts for our own staff.  We need to be 
conscious of large print and all that and even at our 
events we need to be conscious of that.  So, it's a way 
forward but I think it's great to see that motion.  
Really appreciate that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number three is Notice of 

motion on the names of Cllr Grace McManus and Cllr 
Dermot O'Brien.  Lorraine. 
MS GALLAGHER:  This relates to figures in relation to 
child homelessness.  The data on homelessness and 
breakdown of clients in emergency accommodation is 
in the Chief Executive's monthly report.  It's not 
considered to have it as a specific agenda item and 
also to note that standing orders sets out how the 
order of business is discussed which is agreed in 
advance with the Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I think that's answered there to be 
fair.  Sorry, I think if you listen to the response it was 
answered.  I am moving on because we never get 
through. 
CLLR MC MANUS:  Cathaoirleach, sorry, I have been 
waiting for a year. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm sorry Cllr McManus, this has 
already been answered. 
CLLR BEHAN:  A person that puts down a motion is 
entitled to speak on it.  The Councillor is entitled to 
speak on their own motion, and you are completely out 
of order Cathaoirleach to prevent the Councillor 
speaking.  We should hear what she has to say. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr McManus go ahead. 

CLLR MC MANUS:  The motion calls that we would 
have space to discuss the data as a stand-alone item 
on the agenda, not forever but because of the numbers 
that I am seeing in child homelessness every month, I 
think it is it constitutes an emergency, and we need the 
space to formulate a response to the emergency.  I 
see it's in the Chief Executive's Report but we're not 
getting to drill down into the issue and not getting to 
monitor the issue and I want to make sure we're 
looking after our staff who are under pressure with 
those numbers, 488 presented up to November 2020 
that including children and that's during a pandemic.  
So that is emergency levels for me.  So, I am asking is 
that it's on the agenda as a stand-alone item, there is 
so much in the Chief Executive's Report that we need 
to talk about and that's really important work but so is 
this and I am very worried about what message we're 
sending out if we don't prioritise this issue, what could 
be more important.  So, I am asking if the other 
councillors agree that we create that space to take 
action and respond to the numbers we're seeing in the 
Chief Executive's Report. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  It's a fair point but the point is, 
Chief Executive can you come in?  

CH. EXEC:  We'll keep it as an item.  I know we had a 
presentation, and we'll get something from the housing 
SPC in the next month to deal with housing in detail 
and maybe do one on the construction programme and 
one on the other housing issues and deal with it in 
detail on that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I think we should have an opportunity 
to have a vote on this particular motion Cathaoirleach, 
unless Cllr McManus, you are happy with what the 
Chief Executive just said there now?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I am going to go back to Cllr 
McManus are you happy with the response? 
CLLR MC MANUS:  I'm happy to bring it to a vote but if 
Councillors want child homelessness as an agenda 
item, I am happy with that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Murphy.  You are muted 
Miriam. 
CLLR MURPHY:  That one was my last one. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Sorry.  I think there is somebody 
else trying to come in.  Cllr Leonard, did you want to 
come in? 
CLLR LEONARD:  I just think it really is a baseline and 
there is an awful lot of unseen homelessness and 

things being masked and its baseline of who we are as 
a society and it's a very real problem and I commend 
Grace for bringing it to all of us. 
CLLR CREAN:  Yeah, I appreciate you have to chair the 
meeting and keep us on time but when there are 
motions for over a year, I think it's extremely unfair to 
not giving her a right to reply.  I have a motion sitting 
from for a year and I would certainly like a right to 
reply. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Lorraine can I bring you in. 
MS GALLAGHER:  The standing orders.  Standing 
orders or resolution of the Council for transactions at 
such meeting, other business set for in notice of 
convening the meeting and notice of motion and Cllr 
McManus is looking for a space to discuss the matter of 
the homelessness figures and that space can be 
created within the Chief Executive's monthly report.  I 
suggest we have a protocol committee directly 
following this meet to go discuss it there but if the 
members wish for a vote I can.  
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you, there is an awful lot of 
stuff we have to get through each month and there is 
an awful lot of important item in the Chief Executive's 
Report.  I don't think we should be highlighting 

something as well as when it's in Chief Executive's 
Report.  I think it would be useful and people can ask 
questions on it and I think it would be useful to have a 
presentation on what is being done in relation to it at a 
meeting, but I don't think it should be at every 
meeting, that would be my view. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  The reason we have put this to a 
motion is to see if people feel it's necessary, so I think 
I would like to go to a vote on it because I think it's 
necessary to have as an item.  It's so important it 
should have a place on the agenda.  So, I would like it 
to go to a vote. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Snell. 
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, obviously it's a 
huge issue and everyone knows that.  But the reality 
is that the spaces created there on every meeting 
through the Chief Executive's report, we spent an hour 
and 20 minutes on the report alone, the space was 
there to ask any question on any item and particularly 
the item and if we go down the road of putting it in, 
this will be an item on the agenda, as long as I am on 
the Council for over 11 years there is always 
homelessness.  Governments are all trying to deal with 

the issue and we in Wicklow County Council are doing 
the same.  Cllr McManus is a member of the SPC the 
same as myself.  This is an item on the agenda all the 
time and I believe the presentation the Chief Executive 
asked we provide in the next meetings would be very 
worthwhile for all the members because everyone 
needs to grasp what is happening in Wicklow County 
Council particularly on this issue but right across 
council and I think you are setting a dangerous 
precedent and if it goes to a vote, 32 Councillors will all 
vote for it, I do believe the reality is any member is 
free to as any question on the Chief Executive's Report 
and that goes for homelessness the same as any other 
issue and previous speakers have asked issues at most 
Council Meetings and got the same answers, doesn't 
stop them asking the same question. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I have three more speakers and 
there is three minutes. 
CLLR WALSH:  Could we have a report or a 
presentation on the next meeting or the February 
meeting on the issue of housing and in particular to 
focus on the issue of homelessness and we can revisit 
it thereafter.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Walsh.  Cllr Fortune. 

CLLR FORTUNE:  Yeah, just picking up on what Cllr 
Snell was saying, I think the managers’ report should 
be three-hours rather than one and a half hours.  It's 
such important work for all of us and we should 
compromise on what Cllr McManus asked and I think a 
compromise is we should agree what she's proposed 
four the next three-months and I think it's a very 
serious issue and it does deserve that attention. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Murphy no.  Lorraine can I 
come back to you on that.  Sorry Cllr Ferris.  I didn't 
see you. 
CLLR FERRIS:  How do you miss me with the purple 
hair.  I want to say that Cllr Grace McManus, I know 
it's an issue very close to her heart and she's spoken 
about this at the Bray Municipal District meetings but I 
honestly Grace if you don't mind me saying so, I don't 
agree we put it to a vote because the perception will be 
if we don't vote for the motion it will show that we 
don't care about the problem but that's not true, but it 
could be swung that way and I think the item would be 
on next month's agenda on that part as you said Frank, 
the part of the Housing Report that will cover 
homelessness.  I think we should listen to that and Cllr 
Snell is right, it's on the Chief Executive's Report, Joe 

Lane was sitting in on the meeting, but if you put it as 
a separate item on the agenda you are setting a 
president because some other Council might want 
something else.  So, what I would say to you, can you 
leave it, even if you withdraw your motion and you 
know, that there is no decision you can withdraw your 
motion and we can have a listen to the housing item 
presentation that we'll get at the next meeting and 
then we can come back to your motion. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr McManus is that all right with 
you because we're just out of time. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  Well, I think, I am happy not to put 
it to a vote, but I think Cllr Fortunes suggestion of it 
being an item for three-months, this is a precedent I 
would want to set.  Every month for about a year I ask 
questions about child homeless figures and we're 
seeing them on the increase every month.  So, I do 
think we know more than that space, I don't want to 
divide the members and not interested in spinning it 
anyway and I have listened to what people have to 
say, so as a compromise for the next three-months 
there will be a small part of child homelessness and if 
it's not adequate I can resubmit the motion.  Is that 
agreeable?  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  I think that's agreeable and I want 
to thank you for your understanding on that and look.  
Members we're out of time, we have just gone five.  I 
would ask you to. 
MS GALLAGHER:  I make it ten to five. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  My watch is a minute past five.  
Apologies, my watch. 
MS GALLAGHER:  You just got ten-minutes back of 
your life. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I didn't realise it sorry.  It's green 
on time, I think you are right.  So, we'll take another 
one. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  I had my hand up there, I am very 
supportive of what Cllr McManus motion there, but I 
would agree with Cllr Walsh, in West Wicklow we don't 
even have accommodation for people who are 
homeless, emergency accommodation and it's 
something that's very important.  So, I would go along 
with Cllr Walsh's approach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're on a hundred percent with 
Cllr McManus on this.  Item number four is a Notice of 
motion on the name of Greystones Municipal District 
Councillors.  Lorraine?  
MS GALLAGHER:  We have received a response in Irish 

Water and the reality is fountains are considered a 
commercial connection and subject to sections 
application to Irish Water and will be subject to 
commercial water charges.  These section supplies are 
regulated under the CUR regulator.  While as an 
organisation we can promote the reduction of single 
use plastics.  The above position may change at some 
point and we're keeping in contact with Irish Water, 
that's the answer to the motion Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  Thanks Lorraine.  Does 
somebody want to come in from the Greystones 
district?  Cllr Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I hear what Lorraine is reading out to 
us but it's not Lorraine's fault, but I think it's a 
ridiculous response. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  Anybody else?  Cllr Scott. 
CLLR SCOTT:  I just want to echo what Cllr Fortune 
said, we can't pursue water conservation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is it something we should be 
bringing up at the clinics with Irish Water and 
something we should be asking our colleagues as well.  
Item number five.  Notice of motion on the name of 
Cllr Mags Crean.  
MS GALLAGHER:  The Gardaí do have powers to deal 

with such events, the law and public order offense is 
set down in the criminal justice public order act 1994 
and it deals with how people behave in public place, it's 
an offense if you don't comply with the Garda’s 
requests.  The opinion of the law agent has been 
sought and a local authority can make by laws in 
relation to the use, operation or protection regulation 
management of any land.  Where it's of the opinion 
that it's desirable in the interest of the common good 
to do so, that the activity or the matter should be 
regulated or controlled by law and any nuisance should 
be controlled or suppressed by law, but a byelaw may 
not be made under the subsection.  So, firstly just in 
relation to that, when the council makes a byelaw it 
excludes lands other service not under its control and a 
byelaw may not be used by purpose and the third one 
is the Council has duty of care to its staff and 
employees and the suggestion of enforcement of which 
a byelaw would oppose a risk to staff or agent of the 
Council.  And any issues concerning posters and 
leaflets are governed by the litter act of 1997 and the 
opinion of the law agent is it would be ultimate. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Crean. 
CLLR CREAN:  Thanks Lorraine, it would be happy to 

keep the motion for the next meeting but just to make 
a quick reply.  I put the motion in was at the 
beginning of COVID when there was an issue in the 
media, so at the moment there is a little bit of a space 
to look at this and I think that that legislation is going 
to take some time to come and when it does there will 
be delays and we need to show a time and already 
people question function and powers of local councillors 
we need to say we have a roll above and beyond and 
we have powers and functions, there is the whole issue 
about the byelaws so same argument could be made 
they are covered by the Gardaí and our criminal law 
but we can still make bylaws like those, if they do 
where we feel it's in the common good of the local 
community that the activity are other matter needs to 
be regulated or controlled and if you look at the UK 
there is this approach until there is a more national 
approach and I spoke to some organisations over the 
last number of months and there is support there for 
us to look at something like this as a valuable interim 
measure and I just would like to get a bit more of a 
debate than just the end of the meeting and just to 
make it clear it's not about going back to an issue 
that's already been debated.  It's about discussing 

access to health and women's access to health and 
that's the way I want to frame the discussion thank 
you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  Lorraine. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Normally in my experience in 
relation to byelaws when there are issues of complaint 
or incidents, I am not sure Cllr Crean, you and I had a 
long conversation about it, and I know where you are 
coming from. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Cathaoirleach, I would oppose that 
motion in a big way.  The right to assemble and the 
right to protest.  I have heard nothing from Gardaí.  I 
think it's not right, what you have in the States at the 
moment is people can invade Capitol Hill and get away 
with it and then the blacks can't assemble.  It's a 
dangerous road where we don't allow people to 
assemble and protest.  Once they are peaceful.  For 
us to try and bring in bylaws I think we're going 
nowhere.  Once they are peaceful assemblies of 
people, I fully support the right of people to meet and 
protest. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Scott. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach I just want to 
support Cllr Crean's motion.  Maybe we need more 

discussion of the byelaws and the role of the Council.  
These so-called peaceful protests have occurred 
regularly outside our maternity hospitals in particular 
pre COVID and they were extremely distressing for 
women and their partners attending those hospitals for 
all sorts of reasons. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Sorry Gerry. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Just let me speak.  Thank you 
Cathaoirleach.  I just want to say there is a very good 
valid reason for Cllr Crean bringing this motion, I would 
be interested to hear if there is been any protests 
outside of doctors’ surgeries and clinics in Wicklow and 
I do think if the motion was passed or maybe amended 
Cllr Crean, we should be asking the relevant minister 
Donnelly, we should be asking him to accelerate 
legislation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Crean can I come back to you, 
there is three or four other people and if my watch is 
right, we have about half a minute left.  Can I just ask 
you and I think there is three or four people looking to 
come in and to give the notice time that we leave it on 
the agenda because I think I will bring to protocol to 
see can we hold a meeting to see can we deal with all 
the notice of motions to give them the merit. 

CLLR CREAN:  Really appreciate that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Last week was the Young Scientist 
and we had many students from Wicklow and I just 
wanted to say a huge thank you to the students and 
the teachers and their parents and I know Cllr 
Fitzgerald wants to come in on this. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I just want to pay tribute to a 
young girl from Arklow, Elizabeth Burke and she's the 
daughter of Cllr Bourke and Lizzy was very successful 
and received the overall award and I think it's a great 
honour for this county as well as the other people that 
did well there and for her family and I know she's a 
very successful Gaelic footballer and I just want to 
congratulate her, it's a great achievement for the 
County and for Arklow. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Corrigan. 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  It was a fantastic achievement, and 
I am so proud of them.  So, thank you for 
acknowledging it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Leonard. 
CLLR LEONARD:   I want to congratulate her and also 
like to thank Joanne English, and this isn't the first time 
Joanne has been successful in achieving such a high 
status in awards and they are really the leaders 

Wicklow spearheading all of these and thanks a mill. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Thank you members, I will pass on 
those and I just realised how Cllr Kennedy is always 
one step ahead of us, he is in a different time zone.  
Now I know why. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I got a watch for Christmas and I 
didn't set the time.  Can I just suggest something that 
the Council, on behalf of all of the members, would 
write to the schools.  I don't think there was that 
many schools that entered, I think there was about six 
and we get the list of the schools and achievers that 
got recognition or prizes and the Chief Executive would 
sign that letter on behalf of all the members wishing 
the school well and wishing the students the best of 
luck in their future education.  I think they are the 
future of tomorrow.  Can I just thank everybody. 
MS GALLAGHER:  It I just come in just to go back to 
Cllr Scott in relation to the sign language, so I have 
just got confirmation I just wanted to confirm all the 
laptops in the customer care facility can facilitate sign 
language meetings and these can be pre booked with 
the customer care hub, team following COVID of 
course. 

CLLR MURPHY:  Can I propose an evening meeting for 
the motions because with people back home schooling, 
it's very hard to have morning so maybe have an hour 
some evening. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I am going to bring that to 
protocol.  
CLLR MURPHY:  Maybe an evening meeting would be 
more benefit. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I am conscious of the fact that 
people have put notice of motions and they are 
subjects close to their heart.  So, I want to make sure 
they get the time.  So, thanks everybody and thanks 
for participating and I am sure when we bring it to 
protocol Lorraine will circulate the date and time for 
that meeting, is that all right with everybody?  Thank 
you very much everybody.   
