 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
SHORELINE LEISURE CENTRE, GREYSTONES, CO WICKLOW  
 ON  
MONDAY 15TH JUNE 2020 AT 2:00 P.M.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a transcript of the stenographic notes 
in the above-named action for communication support.   
 
 
 
Elaine McCarthy 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If you could find your names and 
sit down. Before we start the meeting properly I 
would just like to say that there is an echo and 
it is really important if you put your hand up that 
you wait for me to call your name so they can switch 
on your mic, if I say your name they will switch 
on the mic, it is important that you speak into the 
microphone because other than that, people will 
have no idea what you're saying. 
And also before we start I would now like to say 
I've always wanted to invigilate a Leaving 
Certificate so if you take your papers out and they 
will be passed out in a minute and when we sound 
the bell you can turn the papers over and we'll 
start.  First thing on the agenda this evening is 
vote of sympathy so Lorraine. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes Cathaoirleach, for John 
Munnelly father of Ian, Bridie Cardiff former 
Director of Wicklow Enterprise Park.  For Bridie 
Cussen father of Ned and Damian Cussen.   
For Mavea Adamson sister of Peter Lawlor. 

And for Christina Lily Keogh mother of our 
colleague Gary Keogh and Michael McGovern father 
of our retired colleague Frank McGovern. 
  
CLLR BLAKE:  On behalf of myself I would like to 
offer sympathy to Mags Murray Chair of Lama a Cork 
woman, member of Fingal County Council until last 
year and Chair of LAMA until last year and stood 
in the last local elections and to her family and 
to her husband, daughter, two daughters and her 
son, and brothers and sisters, I would like to pay 
our sympathy to her, she was a great woman to speak.  
She had a word for everybody, she certainly wasn't 
one of those people who ignored you, she didn't ask 
political affiliations in any shape or form, family 
big loss and LAMA, her contributions she made there 
is large so, so to her family our sincere sympathy 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Propose sympathy to Irene Gillis 
former MEP that represented Leinster. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I would like to be associated with 
the condolences, to all of the people but in 
particular to Mags Murray I worked and served on 
LAMA with her almost ten years, and she was a very 

vibrant and energetic lady and she’ll be a huge loss 
to her community, she was a fantastic local 
representative. 
We stand. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Oh, Cllr Shay Cullen. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks Cathaoirleach, I'd like to 
propose a suggestion of expenses of standing for 
Irish Water refusing water connections in 
Newtownmountkennedy and Wicklow Hills Development 
of the issue is now in the town there is a lack of 
water storage and not a lack of water supply. 
Permission has been granted to developments for a 
temporary reservoir as part of the Wicklow Hills 
Development. 
Irish Water want a more long-term reservoir 
solution to be built at Newtown at a cost of €8 
million with no timeline given.  The issue will 
affect all developments in the Newtown, Kilcoole 
area and if not dealt with now Irish Water need to 
engage with developers to resolve this issue.  We 
cannot allow building and the completion of houses 
to stop particularly when we're in a housing 
crisis.  Solutions need to be found, and fast, and 

I'm calling on Wicklow County Council to engage 
with Irish Water and if necessary, to arrange a 
meeting with the elected members of Wicklow County 
Council to deal with this matter urgently. 
  
CATHOIRLEACH:  OK.  Are members, - sorry, Cllr 
Gerry Walsh. 
CLLR WALSH:  I'll like to support the proposal 
there. This has serious impact on proposed 
developments in the area and not alone for housing 
development but could have possible potential for 
employment, lands there in the area as referenced 
by Cllr.  Cullen. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll take it at 4.15, are people 
in agreement?  OK 4.15.  Item one on the agenda. 
to confirm.  I just want to take apologies for the 
meeting. From Cllr Miriam Murphy.  She sent me a 
lovely message personally this morning as well. 
OK, and item one on the agenda, to confirm and sign 
the minutes of special meeting of Wicklow County 
Council held on Monday, 25th of February. 
Proposed by Cllr Gail Dunne, and seconded by Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke. 
Agreed? 

OK, item two, to confirm and sign minutes of the 
Ordinary Meeting of Wicklow County Council held on 
Monday 2nd of March, proposed by Cllr Vincent Blake 
and seconded by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Just where we had a very good 
presentation from Airtricity in that particular 
meeting and it was agreed at the end of the meeting 
they would come back in the next few months and give 
a follow up on it.  I think most members of that 
meeting were concerned about the level of lights 
throughout the county that were out and before we 
head into another winter it would be important to 
come back in September/October, give us an update 
where we are with the LED aspect of the whole thing.  
So, I think it is a very important meeting the day 
they were there, and I think it would be equally 
as important they come back to us September/October 
and give update as to where we are with it. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  They have been in touch throughout 
the last couple of months and they're very ready 
to speak with the councillors again. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item three, to confirm and sign 

the minutes of special meeting of Wicklow County 
Council held on Friday 29th of May 2020, shortest 
meeting we've ever had.  Can I have a proposer or 
somebody who was at it, Cllr Joe Behan and seconded 
by Shay Cullen.  And you'll have to excuse me, I 
have new hearing aids last week, and the feedback 
at the moment is just - I'm adjusting, OK. 
OK, number four, to consider the disposal of all 
of Folio. WW3817L - Co Wicklow being the property 
known as 32D Ledwidge Crescent, Bray Co Wicklow to 
Ms Shirley Vij, 36D Ledwidge Crescent, Bray Co. 
Wicklow.  Can I have a proposer? Cllr Anne Ferris 
and seconded by Cllr Joe Behan. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed. 
So, five:  To consider the disposal of all of Folio 
No WW344L being the property known as 46 St Peter's 
Place, Arklow Co. Wicklow to Mr David Doherty and 
Ms Bernadette Doherty, 46 St Peter's Place, Arklow, 
Co. Wicklow.  
Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and Cllr Tommy Annesley. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed. 

MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you.  Number six, to consider 
the disposal of 0.0049 hectares or thereabouts of 
land in the townland adjacent to 32 Connolly 
Square, Bray, Co. Wickow to Ms Audrey Collins, 32 
Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow. as previously 
circulated.  Proposed by Cllr Anne Ferris and 
seconded by Cllr Dermot O'Brien. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  And item seven.  To consider the 
disposal of 0.0017 hectares or thereabouts of land 
comprise in Folio No WW2882L - Co. Wicklow being 
a strip of land adjacent to 5 Upper Grattan Park, 
Greystones, Co Wicklow to Mr Fergus Ryan, Legal 
Representative of Ms Carmel Ryan of 5 Upper Grattan 
Park, Greystones, Co Wicklow.  As previously 
circulated.  Proposed by Cllr Gerry Walsh, and 
seconded by Cllr Tom Fortune. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number eight, To consider the 
disposal of 0.0094 hectares or thereabouts of land 
being a plot of land to the rear of 4 Connolly 
Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr. John Butler and 
Ms Maureen Doran, Personal Representative of Ms 

Teresa Butler of 4 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. 
Wicklow.  As per noticed previously circulated.  
Proposed by Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy and Cllr Joe 
Behan.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed. 
>>:  Agreed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number nine - To consider the 
disposal of 0.192 acres or thereabouts of land 
situated at Villa Mena, Dunbar Park, Wicklow Town 
by way of Fee Simple to Mr Ciaran Kelly and Mr. Aidan 
Kelly, Legal Representatives of Mr Patrice Kelly 
of Villa Mena, Dunbar Park, Wicklow Town. and 
proposed by Cllr Gail Dunne, and seconded by Cllr 
John Snell. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed? 
>>:  Agreed. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number ten, to consider the 
disposal of 0.0104 hectares or thereabouts of land 
comprised in Folio No WW4484 Co Wicklow situated 
at 6 Lourdes Crescent, Aughrim, Co Wicklow to Mr 
Kevin Byrne and Ms Melissa Byrne, 6 Lourdes 
Crescent, Aughrim, Co. Wicklow.  

As previously circulated, proposed by Cllr Pat 
Kennedy and seconded by Cllr Sylvestor Bourke.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed? 
>>:  Agreed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number eleven.  To consider the 
disposal of all of Folio No WW2211L being the 
property known as Cnoc Rua, Hollywood, Co. Wicklow 
to Mr Finbar Mulligan and Ms Joanne Fox, Cnoc Rua, 
Hollywood, Co. Wicklow. proposed by Cllr Patsy 
Glennon and Cllr Edward Timmins.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed thank you?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item twelve.  To consider the 
disposal of the Freehold Interest of the piece of 
plot or ground with dwelling house known as 37 Wolfe 
Tone Square East, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr Michael 
Barry and Ms Ashling Beirne, 37 Wolfe Tone Square 
East, Bray, Co. Wicklow.  As per notice previously 
circulated. Proposed by Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy 
and seconded by Cllr Dermot O'Brien.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed? 
Agreed. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number, item number 13, to 
consider filling the vacancy of the Chair of the 

Climate and Biodiversity SPC created by the 
election of former councillors Cllr Jennifer 
Whitmore and Cllr Stephen Matthews to Dáil Eireann.  
And Cllr Tom Fortune and sorry ... 
 
MS GALLAGHER:  I have e-mail here to read out.  Yes 
Cathaoirleach, I have e-mail from Cllr Tom Fortune, 
on 27th of March advising the technical group 
completed a voting process to select the two Chairs 
to share the Climate and Biodiversity SPC and the 
group have selected Cllr Rory O'Connor sharing 
first-term and Cllr Lourda Scott the second.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Tom Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I'm proposing that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do we have a seconder, Cllr Peir 
Leonard I need actual glasses.  Agreed.  Item 
fourteen, to consider filling the vacancy on the 
Eastern and Midland regional Assembly created by 
the election of Cllr Stephen Matthews to Dáil 
Eireann. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, I received 
e-mail from Cllr Tom Fortune on 27th of March the 
group have selected Cllr Tom Fortune for the 
regional authority. The Midland Regional Assembly.  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  So, proposed by Cllr Mary 
Kavanagh. And seconded by Cllr Rory O'Connor.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item fifteen, to consider the 
filling of the vacancy on the AILG arising from the 
resignation of Cllr Rory O'Connor. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, Cllr Rory O'Connor has stepped 
down and the proposal is for Cllr Joe Behan to 
replace him as the AILG rep, again e-mail received 
from Cllr Tom Fortune on the 26th of May.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I have a proposer? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Proposed Cllr Mary Kavanagh and 
seconded by Cllr Tom Fortune. Thank you is that 
agreed? Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  16, to consider the filling of the 
vacancy on the Wicklow County Council Protocol 
Committee arising from the vacancy created by the 
election of former Cllr Stephen Matthews to Dáil 
Eireann. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Could we have a proposer? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Rory O'Connor.  
CLLR O'CONNOR:  I put forward Cllr Lourda Scott for 

the position. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do we have a seconder? 
MS GALLAGHER:  For the Protocol Committee, Cllr 
Lourda Scott is on the protocol committee, it would 
normally be to ratify if Cllr Erika Doyle we placed 
Cllr Stephen Matthews and Cllr Jodie Neary replaced 
Cllr Jennifer Whitmore so that would be the normal 
course of events.  Is Cllr Erika Doyle here? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Fortune. Do I have a seconder 
for Cllr Erika Doyle, from Cllr Aoife Flynn 
Kennedy. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you is that agreed? 
>>:  Agreed.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  17, to ratify the appointment of 
Cllr Erika Doyle agreed by the Bray Municipal 
District members to the Bray Harbour Joint 
Development Committee arising from the vacancy 
created by election of former Cllr Stephen Matthews 
to Dáil Eireann. 
MS GALLAGHER:  This was considered by the Bray MD, 
so, proposer? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed yeah.  Ms Lorraine 
Gallagher Cllr Pat Kennedy and seconded by? 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Dermot O'Brien and ...  Cllr 
Grace McManus.  Sorry, you're just out of my line 
of vision.  
MS GALLAGHER:  That's agreed? Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To item 18 to ratify the 
appointment of Cllr Erika Doyle agreed by the Bray 
Municipal District Members to the Greystones/Bray 
Cliff Walk Management Plan Sub-Committee arising 
from the vacancy created by the election of former 
Cllr Stephen Matthews to Dáil Eireann. 
Cllr Anne Ferris and Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy is 
that agreed? Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To ratify the appointment of Cllr 
Erika Doyle agreed by the Bray Municipal District 
Members to the Special Amenity Area Order for Bray 
Head Committee arising from the vacancy created by 
the election of former Cllr Stephen Matthews to 
Dáil Eireann.  Proposed by Cllr Melanie Corrigan 
and seconded by Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy is that 
agreed.  Thank you. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To ratify the appointment of Cllr 
Erika Doyle so the Planning and Environment SPC 
arising from the vacancy created by the election 

of former Cllr Stephen Matthews to Dáil Eireann, 
proposed by Cllr Dermot O'Brien and seconded by 
Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed. 
>>:  Agreed. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 
CHAIR:  To ratify appointment of Cllr Jodie Neary 
to the Climate and Biodiversity Action SPC arising 
from the vacancy created by the election of 
foreigner Cllr Jennifer Whitmore to Dáil Eireann. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Proposed by Cllr Lourda Scott and 
seconded by Cllr Mags Crean. 
Is that agreed. 
>>:  Agreed.   
MS GALLAGHER: Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number 22, to consider the 
adoption of the Wicklow County Council, Wicklow 
Port Explosive Bye-laws 2020, and I think we'll 
have a presentation.  Breege Kilkenny. 
>>:  Merlin has difficulty, he just texted me there 
now, he will be here in ten minutes so if you want 
to perceive to 23.  Thank you. 
 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  23, to receive update on Wicklow 
County Council Covid-19, and we'll have Frank 
Curran.  
MR CURRAN:  Just as I said when we had Teams meeting 
a few weeks ago it has been unprecedented challenge 
for the staff of Wicklow County Council since the 
first case of 27th of February.  But there's 
phenomenal goodwill across the organisation, 
indoor and outdoor staff, health and safety has 
been our number one priority in terms of good 
hygiene practice, additional hand sanitizing and 
physical distancing and as people return to work 
we have a suite of standard operating guidelines 
indoor and outdoor staff will operate with, and it 
is important we have that. We have a safety 
committee established and safety reps indoor and 
outdoor and Covid-19 compliance officer and number 
of inspectors that are numbering that everything 
is done in accordance with those standard operating 
procedures.  And we've looked at all the offices 
in terms of the two metres distance, so that when 
people are in there is full physical distancing. 
We've had a crisis management team that's been 
meeting on a regular basis, daily initially and now 

at least weekly if not twice weekly, we have 
business continuity plan that's changing as we 
resolve.  At the moment we have about 50% of staff 
back, the rest generally working from home, the 
planning counter is open on appointment and 
planners come in once or twice a week, get the files 
and deal with them generally at home.  Now and 
that's working out fine because as you know there 
is a break there for six weeks in terms of planning 
and statutory timelines, but we'll be ready to go 
when the time comes. 
The end of June we will open the other departments 
on incremental basis, probably initially on 
appointment-only and we might try to bring that 
back to 22nd of June and then on the 20th of July, 
we will look at full reopening, I would like to 
compliment Lorraine and her team throughout the 
Covid-19 experience in terms of getting the message 
out to members and general public on what was 
happening.  We had group that consisted of 
ourselves, represented by myself and Gardai Coilte 
National Wildlife Services, we looked at carparks, 
beaches and toilets and you know they're mostly 
open now, and we didn't make a decision not to open 

the Bray to Greystones cliff walk because you 
couldn't get the physical distancing on that, but 
we'll review that as things go on and maybe in 20th 
of July you'll have a full reopening, but beaches 
and toilets are all open but will be watched and 
that group meets on a regular basis. 
We had the community forum as well, which chaired 
by myself, we had representatives from the PPN from 
County Wicklow partnership, County Wicklow 
volunteer centre, HSE, Local Link, an Post, HSE, 
Alone and Citizens Information Centre, the 
Cathaoirleach was on it as well and the big one 
there was the community support helpline, and I'd 
like to compliment the staff in that over the course 
of a weekend and took calls of anybody who needed, 
e-shopping delivered or needed assistance in 
regard to medication or any help that group could 
provide, there was meals on wheels, and volunteers 
provided PCs and laptops and things that people 
that needed it had so a huge amount of volunteering 
around that, it was useful. Also, just on the CCD 
side, libraries are open on Click on collect and 
pretty much ready to open now and I know centre 
Government want us to open on a trial basis, we will 

open one in Municipal District, so that people with 
browsing and that can happen from next Monday. 
Housing of course has been busy, needless to say 
we've been dealing with rents so people who got a 
reduction on income could contact with us and got 
corresponding reduction in rent.  People with 
Covid-19 payments we organised rent, new houses 
came on in Farrenkelly, Whitehall and Baltinglass 
and PPE houses coming through in Wicklow. HAH and 
homeless, HAP were busy throughout, we had a number 
of self-isolation units set aside should we need 
them for either people who needed to self-isolate 
but couldn't for our clients and travellers and et 
cetera, and did a lot of work over traveller halting 
sites in cleaning and providing sanitary 
facilities.  The Cold Weather Initiative had to 
have a new operating model, opening hours were 
extended, sanitary facilities from improved, 
modifications to improve temporary, and dinners 
were increased for weekend, and plans to relocate 
to a more suitable facility where 24-hour 
accommodation would be provided environment 
section busy, civic amenity sites stayed open 
throughout which is useful.  And roads are back 

fully now, they were on an emergency basis, during 
the lockdown, and water continued the whole way 
through, similarly with fire and civil defence, 
they did a lot of work in meals on wheels and made 
equipment available to people but did a lot on that, 
Local Enterprise Office huge increase on workload 
because of the grants and Trading Online Vouchers, 
we will go into detail because it is important 
people are aware of what is out there.  And the 
restart grant, we'll give presentation on how it 
works et cetera, a lot of the work on finance 
section in terms of the mortgage waver, commercial 
rate waver, on the commercial rates waver we will 
get compensation from Government for businesses 
that were forced to close for three months, so that 
is welcome. 
But, we have made a case at national level all the 
local authorities in relation to businesses who are 
badly affected who may have difficulty in paying 
rates, we have made that submission, we will make 
a submission in terms of direct costs that were 
forced into paying due to Covid-19, for instance 
providing PPE, providing laptops for people at 
home, work with the Gardai in terms of carparks and 

HSE, in terms of developing testing et cetera. So 
we have built up a bill there looking to be paid 
by the government and made another case in goods 
and services, so the loss of income due to parking 
and rents, planning fees et cetera, so, now again 
those submissions have gone in, and Brian will go 
through more detail shortly.  In terms of Wicklow 
Tourism, we met last week, and we're doing a survey 
at the moment in terms of who is going to come back 
and when.  Now, the two/one metre debate a lot will 
depend on that, as soon as we get it, we'll do a 
marketing campaign that Wicklow reopened, 
particularly for the domestic tourists and we'll 
try to get a marketing campaign around that.  Bray 
MD have reopening committee which is useful, it's 
got Cathaoirleach, Cllr Anne Ferris and a number 
of others working with the Chamber of Commerce in 
relation to the supports that are there, what we 
can do in terms of widening footpaths et cetera so 
we will do that in all the other towns to link in 
with the business community and provide as much 
support and help as we can. 
The NTA have looked for proposals, in terms of in 
the towns in terms of widening footpaths, providing 

cycling lanes, narrowing the lane with reduction 
to one way and they're saying stuff that will help 
business come back from Covid-19 and also stuff we 
want to try on a trial basis.  The engineers have 
come up with suggestions that go to the NTA, who 
will turn them around in terms of funding, we 
contain the number of elements implemented without 
going to the perspective municipal district, we 
will go back to them with proposals on what we do 
in terms of widening footpaths, narrowing the road 
and possible one-ways et cetera. 
We're looking at the area of outdoor seating in 
terms of having a scheme in place that doesn't go 
down through the full planning route that takes at 
least six to eight weeks that we're looking at a 
scheme that we'd waive the charge between the end 
of June and September, and that would come into 
planning as usual but goes straight to Municipal 
District and they would liaise with the applicant 
and turn it around quickly.  The engineers working 
on now what we need in terms of people with physical 
disabilities and buggies, so we have standard 
guidelines and we'll finalise that quickly.  
Cathaoirleach, the construction needless to say 

restarted on pretty much all housing schemes, 
Wicklow library, Kilmac safety works, N81, the 
roadworks programme is back up and working as well.  
So, what I might do is ask, to cover the LEO stuff 
and Bryan to cover the finance stuff and then take 
questions if that's OK. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Vibeke Delahunt. 
MS DELAHUNT:  Thank you very much, can you hear me? 
I'm, if you can't hear me raise your arm and I'll 
speak up a bit.  So, my name is Vibeke Delahunt I 
lead the Local Enterprise Office Wicklow team based 
in Wicklow County Campus Rathnew, and I'm going to 
tell you a little bit about the business supports 
that we have on normally in place, but in particular 
the Covid-19 business supports that have been 
rolled out in the last ten weeks.  I'm conscious 
that I haven't met all new councillors before or 
you might not be completely with what the Local 
Enterprise network in Ireland provide, so, if Mick, 
you wouldn't mind bring up the next slide 
There you can see the Local Enterprise Office is 
basically a first-stop-shop for new and existing 
entrepreneurs and business owners, usually our 
remit is for businesses, micro-businesses under 

ten employees, we provide signage support so when 
business owners come into us, we will inform them 
of the supports that we have available but also that 
are open to them through other agencies, 
development agencies, training programmes and so 
forth. 
So, we really are the first place for new start-ups 
and existing entrepreneurs to come to give you a 
feel for the landscape.  Since 2014 the Local 
Enterprise Offices are embedded in the local 
authorities, and there is a network of 31 Local 
Enterprise Offices throughout Ireland.  But, the 
bulk of our funding would come through the 
Department of Business enterprise and innovation 
and is channelled through our LEO unit sitting 
within Enterprise Ireland so we share a lot of our 
procedures and our guidelines with Enterprise 
Ireland as well is our commission and vision 
Just so that you kind of have that background. 
We also have protocols in place, you saw that in 
the last slide with different agencies that we 
share information with and we actively promote and 
work with, so I'm talking about the revenue the 
Department of Social protection education 

training, skills net in particular with 
micro-finance Ireland, I will ale tell you that 
later, the credit review office, fault that 
Ireland, and so forth. 
So, on that slide there you see as I said there's 
31 Local Enterprise Offices throughout Ireland. 
One in each county, typically and then there's a 
number throughout county Dublin in Dublin city 
centre, and our nearest one would be Dun Laoghaire 
Rathdown, south Dublin and Wexford as well as 
Kildare on the other side so we work closely with 
all of them and we have regular weekly calls with 
regional committee to make sure that our approach 
to our support is exactly the same throughout the 
network. 
And also, weekly calls into the department, in 
particular in the last ten weeks so that we can keep 
the finger on the pulse and report become what works 
where there is issues and what we hear back from 
our clients in particular, issues they're 
struggling with, for instance, insurance, working 
with the banks, trying to access funding and so 
forth. 
So, I've brought with me, two-page sheet but 40 

copies of them, can you find this on our national 
website which is called 
LocalEnterprise.ie/response, which is where the 
Covid-19 business supports are listed. 
I have copies with me but Gillian will circulate 
them to you so you have a soft copy in your office, 
you're working with constituent clients if you want 
to let them know what is out there for them.  
Everything I talk about today is on that sheet as 
well. 
So, there's the brochure there and the next slide 
there. So, to start off, some of the supports the 
soft supports that are there, we're running all the 
time are mentoring, programme and a training 
programme, so we specialise in running very 
specific short-term courses, they're usually not 
accredited, they're highly subsidised and 
delivered by experienced trainers who are 
entrepreneurs in their own right.  Normally we do 
that in small groups in our training room in, on 
the campus 
We've moved all our training on-line, through Zoom 
or other suitable platforms and all our training 
is free now. 

I'm going to tell you more about training in a 
minute, or actually you see there a list of all the 
train supports that we normally offer but in 
particular in the last ten weeks we've had about 
13 extra courses, now most of them are half-day or 
full-day, and sometimes a little longer, in 
particular responding to the Covid-19 crisis, so 
you see courses such as leading your business 
through Covid-19 how to deal with cash management 
and pairing back overheads and battening down the 
hatches and trying to survive. 
Then we had a webinar on opportunities for food 
producers how to move business on-line, and so 
forth, I'm not going to read them all out so you 
can see them, this is quickly evolving situation 
as you know, and our clients there's been a huge 
appetite for on-line training so, courses we put 
up they get booked out overnight and I just put 
figures in there to give an idea what that meant 
in terms of how busy we have been, 13 additional 
courses in ten weeks, normally we run a summer 
spring/summer and autumn/winter programme and 
about 13 courses would be within that programme so 
we've responded to the needs of our clients, and 

we're trying to put on as much as humanly possible 
and that resulted in over 5getting on-line from the 
middle of March. 
Normally we don't have a big budget for this, so 
it is typically ring-fenced for our clients that 
are eligible for grant fund and with that, I mean 
businesses that are either manufacturing or in an 
internationally trade and service, which is quite 
rare but we think tech business with on and so on, 
so we're looking to up to 50 employees and all 
sectors, that resulted in 67 mentor sections being 
put on in the other supports.  Normally in a year, 
we assign about 76 mentor sessions so again, it goes 
to show how busy we have been. 
And all that mentoring is free, and it all takes 
place on-line. 
So, while we are considered a critical service, and 
most of us have continued to work in our offices, 
because we just get more done that way, the actual 
walk-in office is closed and all our meetings and 
training is has moved on-line overnight. 
Then to move on to the Business Continuity Voucher, 
this is a new scheme that was announced the end of 
March by our minister.  It opened the beginning of 

April, so the Business Continuity Voucher has been 
proven extremely attractive and popular with 
businesses and as I already mentioned earlier, our 
remit is usually to businesses under ten employees, 
for the business continuity voucher, businesses up 
to 50 employees could apply for it. 
And in all different sectors from hospitality to 
tourism to professionals, retails, businesses that 
normally we can offer soft support to, but wouldn't 
generally be eligible for our grant supports. 
So, the business continuity was basically, a 
voucher for up to €2,500 in consultancy to help put 
together a survival strategy for businesses so 
businesses that were impacted, and had to pivot or 
had to try and get support or get advice on how to 
deal with staff, so HR issues, finance management 
issues, how to work remotely, how to move a whole 
team on working remotely so, what does that mean 
in terms of ICT.  So, by the time this scheme closed 
on 15th of May, we received 300 applications and 
a team of us within our six-person team have been 
working away through the applications, making 
contact with each applicant, doing diagnostic with 
each of them and arrange supports that are there.  

So, all of these have now been contacted but there 
will be many months actually administrating this 
scheme and reporting back to Enterprise Ireland on 
it. 
254 of the applicants have been approved for the 
actual voucher and this carries a cost of 373,000 
in addition with what we would normally do, this 
is a completely new scheme, at the beginning and 
end, it is closed now.  And we are awaiting the 
funding from the department to move along and pay 
third party consultant within the scheme. 
A new or scheme already in place, you would have 
heard it before, you were probably aware of it, it 
was called Trading Online Voucher, so this has 
become extremely important now because what it was, 
for the last four years is voucher up to €2,500 in 
support to pay web designers or digital marketeers 
to develop your business website and incorporate 
e-commerce payment options, booking systems, a 
shop front and everything and so forth, so, their 
expansion of Trading Online Voucher scheme was 
announced early May and matching funding criteria 
was changed so up to that moment it was 50-50 
situation, 50% was paid by the client and 50% they 

would claim back.  Now it is gone up to 90%, so 
€2,500, so the client is paying 270 themselves and 
also, businesses can apply for second voucher so 
that was a new element as well.  Again, this is a 
very, very attractive offering and resulted in a 
very large volume of enquiries, e-mails, calls, 
from base businesses applying again, wondering can 
they apply, are they eligible and everything else 
and up to now, 70 applications have been approved 
and letters of offers have been issued to them.  We 
have another 100 applications on our desk, that 
were in the process of assessing and we have to 
budget for to approve as well. 
And we have gone back to the Department of 
Communications who fund the scheme looking for 
further allocations for the rest of the year.  This 
is, this scheme, is embedded within the national 
broadband strategy so it is an important scheme and 
I have to say, many of our clients, you know, feel 
the urgency to move on-line thousand, this is the 
way they should go and could be a vital lifeline 
for them to continue trading and have some income 
while they're pivoting or getting ready to reopen.  
So, there's urgency about processing these and 

again, there's a real pressure on the team to keep 
all this moving. 
Just to tell you a little bit about the criteria 
there, the next slide please Mick, so a business 
to be eligible, this scheme is targeting existing 
SOBs, have been trading for ten months, and have 
turnover of less than 2 million and attend a seminar 
before they can apply. 
Now this is just a short half-day seminar with very 
important tips to make sure that they seriously 
consider all the implications what it means to 
trade on-line, it is not about having a website, 
you have to have the resources, you need to keep 
the website up-to-date.  And you need to have 
procedures in place to help you with on-line orders 
as well.  So, there's a lot more to it, and we want 
to make sure that when our clients apply, they do 
it properly and get value for money from the web 
developers as well. 
Another support that was already in place but was 
changed for Covid-19 is the micro-finance finance 
loan, it will be on the next slide.  So, 
micro-finance Ireland is an bank that provide loans 
to small businesses under ten employees who have 

been refused funding from their pillar bank and 
we've been working with micro-finance Ireland for 
many years.  We provide mentor support for any 
clients who want to apply for a loan in terms of 
helping the mentor will help them with filling in 
the applications, preparing the financial 
projections and making sure the application is a 
very best it can be to be successful and approved. 
The Covid-19 business loan on offer by 
micro-finance Ireland is extremely attractive.  
It is interest-free and every payment free for the 
first six months but as I said, businesses will have 
to approach their own bank first for a loan and it 
is only if they're turned down and they can't access 
funding through their own bank they can consider 
applying for this business loan. 
This business loan has been improved, to 50,000 per 
application.  And the interest rate has been 
lowered so it is typically an interest rate of 5 
had 5% but any client avails of the mentor support 
through the Local Enterprise Office can avail of 
1% reduction in the interest rate so it is 4.5% 
then. 
And again, this has resulted in very considerable 

amount of inquiries, people who want to know what 
it is all about, are they eligible? 
And can they work with the mentor? 
It is kind of a mixed response I have to say, not 
each business has the appetite to apply for further 
loans, they're not long after paying off loans or 
just not sure if they viable into the future.  So, 
in many cases, we would appoint a HR or sorry 
finance mentor to work with them first, to go 
through best case and worse case scenarios of 
financial projections and see how that works for 
them before they make the decision.  So again, it 
is a very good scheme, but it is a lot of additional 
work comes along with the scheme. 
And then, I already mentioned, we have each Local 
Enterprise Office have their own website but we 
have a national website called Local 
Enterprise/response and that's where all the 
Covid-19 supports are listed but this is also, a 
very important hub with all sort of expertise and 
guides that businesses can tap into.  Sorry I've 
just jumped ahead of myself, the slide that you see 
there, is all about the grant supports that we have 
in place all the time. 

But as I said, these are eligibility criteria 
around these, so these are primarily for business 
that is make something, whether it is a physical 
product, or a food product, it has to be something 
unique and innovative so there's no displacement 
or businesses that are have the potential to trade 
internationally in the services sector. 
And for those we have a feasibility study grant 
which is exactly what it says on the tin it is to 
explore a business concept, that could be for a new 
start or existing business, and it is up to 50,000 
euros in match funding, and it is to see if that 
concept is viable and to do market research, maybe 
come up with a prototype that kind of thing. 
And then, we have other supports called priming and 
business expansion grant.  These - the priming 
began is for businesses who are in existence under 
24 months, and business expansion grant is for 
businesses over 24 months, it is essentially the 
same and the focus is growing on the capacity of 
a business and creating jobs at all times so when 
the applications are assessed by evaluations 
committee, which is chaired by Frank Curran, due 
diligence will be done and it will be looked at what 

the value added value is to the business but value 
of money of each job that will be created through 
the intervention. 
So, there's considerable work involved in our 
business advice working with clients preparing the 
application and then being going forward to the 
evaluation committee. 
Other programmes we're running is the Lean 
Programme, it is about the lean principles which 
is a Japanese business model, that really looks at 
how businesses can work more efficiently and 
effectively and there be, reduce costs and become 
more competitive. 
So, on any given year we would run one programme 
during the year with about eleven or twelve 
businesses taking part.  Again we accept 
businesses over ten employees, and we've been 
seeing absolutely fantastic results of up to 40% 
in reduction in costs on particular projects that 
the business would have tackled with the 
consultants so it is a very good scheme, and 
unfortunately some of the people that had signed 
up at the earlier in the year had to pull out due 
to Covid-19, other businesses have expressed an 

interest, so we're still running a full scheme. 
Then the agile innovation fund comes into its own 
right now because it is all about funding enough 
businesses that are pivoting innovating and what 
we're seeing is that a very high percentage of our 
portfolio clients are doing that right now.  
They're looking at new revenue streams and how they 
can ensure their business survival.  So, agile 
innovation funds are coming into on its own.  And 
just to highlight that we have Network of 
Entrepreneurial Women to support them as it is well 
recognised female entrepreneurs need to be 
supported more and to really helped along more so 
than male entrepreneurs so we have this Network of 
Entrepreneurial Women, they normally week 
bimonthly, now we're meeting every month through 
Zoom and very high interest and take-up on that. 
If you weren't aware of it, please let your clients 
know our next meeting is on the first of July. 
I mention it had earlier the central website 
LocalEnterprise.ie/response it is like a library 
of on-line resources so it is sector-specific 
information.  There's the library from Enterprise 
Ireland that clients can tap into through that, 

there's a HR guide, we're delighted most of our 
webinars are available now, but other resources so 
the return to work safely protocol, we keep any of 
the National Standards Authority of Ireland 
guidelines are there, and they've come up with 
really good booklet that are sector-specific.  So, 
that is an important hub to clients and business 
owners can happen into in their own time. 
And the next slide shows a little bit of that. 
So, maybe just to let you know, we did a survey in 
April, amongst our portfolio clients to see how 
they were affected, who was still trading and we 
found that of the responses, 25% of businesses had 
completely closed. 10% were busier than usual.  
14% were working away as normal and 51 working in 
a reduced capacity.  This is April, we're looking 
to do a similar survey again just to get an idea 
of where our clients are at and how we best support 
them. 
But as you can appreciate, we are a team of six, 
we have been extremely, extremely busy and we will 
be for many months to come to support our small 
entrepreneurs and SMEs, within County Wicklow. 
Right now, and in many months to come. 

That's just one slide with additional supports, 
that were announced on the 2nd of May.  Not all of 
those are relevant to the LEO so I won't go into 
them.  You see the restart grant, our head of 
finance, Mr Brian Gleeson will talk about that 
next.  I will be happy to take questions. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do you want to? 
MR GLEESON:  Just to do a short presentation on the 
financial impact that Covid-19 has had on the 
Wicklow County Council budget which is quite 
significant. I'm going to discuss four major areas 
income reduction, additional expenditure, 
Government compensation, and number of financial 
support schemes we've implemented due to Covid-19.  
I'll move on to the next slide. 
This slide outlines the income collection in 
relation to commercial rate. 
The rates income for the annual budget represents 
32 million, that's 28% of the overall budget so as 
you can see, that's extremely significant.  The 
table there, provides analysis of the commercial 
rates receipts to the end of May, and compares it 
to 2019, so as you can see, 2019, we had taken in 

10.4 million which was 37% collection rate and up 
to the end of May, 2020, we've only taken in 4.5 
million and that's a collection rate of 20%. 
So, we're down cash flow terms nearly €4 million 
in a year and obviously as I said the collection 
rate is even lower because of the fact that the 
overall annual demand for the year is up 32 million 
versus last year was 28 million. So, it is quite 
significant the impact. 
Additional analysis we did in relation to our 
different rate payers and the impact that Covid-19 
will have on them, we've estimated nearly 60% of 
the rate book value 32 million will be impacted in 
various degrees, that means some businesses there 
have closed fully over the period restriction 
period so that's impacted 100%, others stayed over 
but turnover would be dropped considerably so 
there's varying degrees, but as regards the overall 
value we see maybe 60%, that would be impacted, we 
are making assumption our global utilities which 
will cover the likes of ESB networks, Irish Water, 
and amounted to 6.4 million that's assumption is 
made by all local authorities going forward. 
The next major collection area is on housing rents. 

Our annual budget for 2020, is 17.2 million, this 
represents 15% of the overall budget. 
The analysis in comparison to last year, shows that 
up to the end of May last year we had 5.6 million 
collected, 39%.  This year we have 6.3 million 
collected which is 37% so.  While we increased, our 
collection in value, we've gone down a collection 
due to the fact that the budget was increased from 
14.6 million last year up to 17.2 million this year, 
following the rent review that took place in the 
latter half of last year. 
The full impact of Covid-19 on rent collection 
isn't known at this stage. 
And that's likely to do with the Covid-19 pay 
subsidies, so, ... 
If we look at while the receipts are up 6.3 million, 
basic extrapolation over twelve-month period of 
that figure would bring it to 15.1 million which 
is 2 million short of the budget so we expect to 
be significantly Down Under that particular area. 
Next slide this is to highlight other income 
reductions that have also been impacted, and 
obvious one is parking. 
We're down year to date 400,000 while parking 

wasn't suspended it was illegal parking enforced 
and no real enforcement for any sort of parking over 
the restriction period so that's dropped 
considerably. 
Road opening, income has dropped obviously with the 
lack of activity obviously now with the resumption 
of activity in this area and project work, this will 
start up again.  However, there will be delays in 
projects and slowdown as projects come to terms 
with new procedures that are being put in place in 
line with Covid-19 measures is a planning, 
extension of the planning application period 
effectively suspended the process and while the 
planning office is back open for the public since 
May 25th this is on appointment only and there's 
basically represents a gradual return to normal 
levels so we're already down nearly 170,000 year 
to date on planning receipts so with further 
slowdown, albeit applications will be coming in, 
we see a considerable under collection in that 
area. 
Civic amenity sites are down 14,000 a year to date.  
Litter fines, obviously restrictions on 
enforcement and court activities, seen reduction 

here, 11,000, other recreational income, that 
would cover franchises of Brittas Bay and 
Glendalough, they were shut, and for a while there 
and will be reopening so we should get money in 
there. 
Harbours with reduced activity, the income has gone 
down there, we're under budget by nearly 88,000 and 
Wicklow County Campus, 38,000, obviously our main 
tenant in Claremont is Carlow IT and with lectures 
being suspended, that's not in use at the moment 
so we will be in discussions with them with regards 
to their future plans, so as you can see adding up 
those particular areas we are nearly a million 
Euro-on projected income on the end of May so that's 
significant. 
If we move on to the next slide, please.  We're 
incurring additional expenditure, unbudgeted 
expenditure on Covid-19, we set up a specific job 
code to record this expenditure, costs incurred 
relate to PPE, masks, gloves, hand sanitizer, 
traffic restriction works in conjunction with 
Gardai, we have seen works done with Sally Gap and 
signage, constant signage requirements the most 
recent would be in relation to the reopening of the 

playgrounds. Emergency accommodation works, bulk 
of the expenditure would come in under this heading 
of housing. 
We're also, indicators to measure social 
distancing, building works in the county council 
offices, such aspirer specks screens separating 
staff et cetera. 
And also cleaning products and additional IT 
services as well to address the remote access 
working requirements for staff, who are working at 
home so additional licenses and hardware. 
So, I suppose on the plus side the department are 
allowing recouping of emergency re-let works and 
amount of 12,500 per annum depending on the works 
done, so that's a positive. And move on to the next 
slide. 
Government compensation, obviously this is going 
to be the key, can you see from the previous slides 
that the amount of money that we're leaking is 
hugely significant, we need Government support in 
this area. 
The Rate Waiver Scheme was announced in May in 
relation to covering 260 million from April to June 
for businesses that's closed as Chief Executive 

mentioned earlier, an additional proposal has gone 
to Government to cover businesses that have been 
impacted but stayed open and also address support 
for the post-June period so that area is being 
looked at and in line with the phases of the road 
map. 
A further submission has been made through the CC 
finance committee, to the department and deeper in 
relation to goods and services income losses, and 
in the areas that I've outlined such as parking, 
rent et cetera. 
So, that's under consideration at the moment. 
After that, there will be a commission will be 
prepared in relation to the expenditure that's been 
incurred, I suppose these papers and submissions 
that have been developed and submitted they're I 
pose they have anticipate been prioritised the 
rates is the big one, or the biggest amount of 
expenditure, is being impacted on secondary goods 
and services and third would be priority-wise would 
be the additional expenditure that's being 
incurred. 
The impact on the budget of Wicklow County Council, 
any cutbacks to the budget or within the budget will 

be fully dependent on the level of Government 
compensation that's provided.  I suppose at the 
moment we're not making definitive cutbacks until 
we first know the level of compensation that will 
be provided by the Government in these areas. 
However, in the meantime we are looking at 
expenditure, savings, being identified across the 
areas all the directorates I suppose we're looking 
to identify maybe for want of a better description 
natural savings that would be generated through say 
obviously there's a slowdown in recruitment, as a 
result of Covid-19 so there's no doubt will be 
savings under payroll and lack of restrictions, 
we're doing Zoom meetings as well so there will be 
savings on travel, so they're the first areas we'll 
look at to try and generate and identify some 
savings.  But, you can see from the figures I've 
gone through, they're so substantial and so big we 
can't address this without Government support, so 
that's going to be the crucial factor going forward 
and we're working very hard as an overall sector 
with all the local authorities together to try and 
secure additional funding in this regard. 
And just final slide, it is just outlining the 

financial supports we've put in place for local 
businesses and borrowers in County Wicklow, the 
Rents Waiver Scheme, 260 million has been approved 
by the Government, details of the scheme due to the 
fact we're looking to extend it, and look for 
additional support post-June, details of the 
scheme haven't been issued so we're awaiting 
details on that before it can be implemented. 
A three-month mortgage break option was made 
available to local authority brothers, to date 
we've had 23 applications in and approved each of 
them.  The major scheme is the Business Research 
Scheme announced recently, and on-line application 
form has been open and available on the council 
website since 22nd of May and to date we've had 684 
applications. 
In order to qualify for the grant, businesses must 
have a turnover of less than five million, just have 
50 or less employees, the business must have 
suffered a projected 25% loss in revenue between 
start of April and end of June.  It must commit to 
remain open or to reopen if it was closed.  And 
business must also declare the intention to retain 
employees that are benefiting from the temporary 

wage subsidy scheme.  The grants that are payable 
will equate to the 2019 rates bill of the business 
and that subject to minimum of 2,000 and maximum 
of 10,000.  As I said, 684 applications have been 
received to date and we've received an initial 
allocation of 5 million from Enterprise Ireland for 
this scheme, so it is fully funded.  As regards we 
won't be eating into your own resources, it is 
payment the payment for the grants is paid up front 
and then we will process the applications and pay 
them out to the businesses. 
So that concludes the financial analysis.  If 
you've any further questions thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Any questions?  Cllr Sylvestor 
Bourke Cllr Tom Fortune.  So, Cllr Sylvestor 
Bourke first. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  Cathaoirleach, in relation to the 
restart grants Brian, a couple of people asked me 
how long they will have to wait to get paid the 
grant.  You didn't mention how much has been paid 
out yet, you have 550 applications but when will 
be able to start paying them out? 

One opening today asked me, mentioned to me they 
had to spend 1,000 on screens to get reopened today 
and the grant would be very beneficial to them and 
helpful if it could be speeded up. 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  It would be terrible if I was 
talking to myself! 
Can I say on Frank's presentation, well done to the 
community call and it is a great service that's 
provided during the Covid-19 craziness we've had 
over the last few months.  And a big thanks to the 
volunteer groups and associations throughout the 
county. The only one comment I'd pass on this and 
I've said it before, the funding allocated should 
have been allocated to all groups, nobody should 
be left out.  I'm aware of one group that was left 
out.  The Mental Health Grant, which was excellent 
part of it, looking at it, we could have done with 
a little more, I'm sure that could be done in the 
future. 
I think there's been a good few initiatives coming 
out to create goodwill around the pressures that 
have been there.  Just, on the presentation, due 
to Covid-19, we haven't been allocating a lot of 

money under LEO.  We allocated 137,000, I know you 
gave a long presentation, which is hard to take in, 
there was a lot in it.  Are we planning to use any 
funding that we've saved over that period to boost 
existing business? 
I'm wondering have we any plans do that? 
And on Brian's presentation, I'm not sure whether 
your presentation ties back into the Annual Report 
or not? 
I'm sure there is some crossover, but, in reading 
this, some of the stuff we've got, I'm just 
wondering that we in some of the reports we got for 
the meeting that we've installed something like 
14041 LED lanterns, what's the estimated saving 
that we're going to get from stuff like that? 
And again, I've a couple of questions but they in 
for the report.  Thanks. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  On the CEOs presentation there, like 
Cllr Tom Fortune I would like to commend the council 
on their response to the crisis and the level of 
communication that was, we're all kept up-to-date 
via e-mail but the community response form is one 
that worked particularly well and from first-hand 

experience being involved in one of the volunteer 
groups here in Greystones, there was a fantastic 
reaction to that and portrayed all that is good in 
society and I wanted to say well done to the Michael 
Nicholson's department there.  On Ms Vibeke 
Delahunt's presentation, it is obvious they were 
flat out giving the support all they could to the 
SMEs to go through a process to get into business, 
one comment I had was on MFI loan option there and 
the interest rate of 4.5%, by today's standards is 
particularly high and I'm not surprised that 
there's a slow take-up on that.  So, otherwise well 
done to Ms Vibeke Delahunt and her team in the LEO, 
and on Brian's presentation in relation to the 
rents, the rents collection rate is that down by 
comparison to previous years? 
I know we went, it had to be done on-line or via 
phones, the other thing I wanted to, is dumping was 
an issue not just in Wicklow but across the country.  
And you know enforcement measures, were there any 
enforcement measures in relation to dumping 
incidents across the county? 
Again, I want to thank the council on keeping the 
fact they kept open recycling centres, I made good 

use of it and that was very well during the period. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Can 
everybody hear me? Yeah. 
Thanks for the very comprehensive report.  There's 
just one section of the community that I just wanted 
to make representation on behalf of here today and 
that's the traders.  They have been very, very 
badly hit.  They've lost an awful lot of trade. I'm 
talking about small shops and businesses in towns 
and villages around the place.  They have 
effectively, they will lose an awful lot of their 
profits this year, when they opened again they had 
to install protective screens, me had to more or 
less have somebody standing there daily at the door 
to ensure that people were only coming in every two 
metres apart and only when somebody left the shop.  
And we've been inundated, well I have anyway and 
I think some of my fellow councillors in Wicklow 
have about approached by a lot of business toss see 
if there's anything that can be done by trying to 
incentivise people shop in the areas and they're 
mainly requesting a review of the parking 
situations, even on a temporary basis. 
Even something like a three-month amnesty, I know 

there's a three-month race waiver and Government 
compensation for that, but, as well as 
incentivising businesses we have to incentivise  
shoppers, we have to make people want to come into 
a place to shop and people may say well, parking 
charges aren't terribly expensive but the bottom 
line is, if you can go to a place where you're not 
going to be charged as opposed to a place where you 
are going to be charged, you're not going to pay 
out money that you don't have to pay.  There's 
terrible excuses for incentives shopping in a place 
where there's charges because not everybody has 
Smartphones and apps that they can use, a lot of 
people would be what I call senior people would like 
to shop locally.  But, they often don't have coins 
in their pockets, they often don't have data in 
their phones, they probably don't know how to use 
Smartphones some of them, so, because of the fact 
that the shops and traders are going to take such 
an enormous hit this year, despite the fact they're 
get ago three month rates waiver, the council would 
benefit long-term by just even allowing the 
carparks, not on street parking but the carparks 
to be free for a couple of hours every day.  I know 

that Cllr Paul O'Brien mentioned this to me as well, 
he suggested it too, and the fifteen-minute grace 
period we have in Wicklow, you can spend fifteen 
minutes queuing outside a shop just to get in.  So, 
I'd love to see that extend today half an hour.  And 
anything to bring people back into the towns to 
shop.  To help the businesses because the council 
will benefit long-term from increased rates.  So, 
I think it is like spending a little amount of money 
in order to get a bigger return. 
CLLR CULLEN:  I want to follow up on Frank's 
presentation based on tourism I suppose this is 
based on.  And I've raised this at Municipal level, 
we're facing unprecedented volume of visitors to 
our county in the coming months particularly with 
obviously foreign holidays been maybe 
out-of-bounds a certain amount anyway.  But, it is 
to really to do with parking facilities across our 
county, I'm sure we're very much aware of issues 
of parking in on private property and gateways and 
double yellow lines and all these things and it is 
not sending out a nice message to people to visit 
our county.  So I suppose, certainly I have spoken 
to some of the directors on this, and we're getting 

good support but it is important to prioritise this 
issue, there's no doubt there's a major parking 
issue particularly around our tourist attractions 
in the county and places like Glendalough, 
Avondale.  Because there's an economic benefit of 
people coming to our county, so it is important to 
have things right for people to visit and we can 
attract visitors to our county, I do believe we're 
facing any number of visitors and to make the 
experience welcome for them and I think it is 
something we really need to focus on from a tourism 
point of view. 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thank you very much.  I want to extend 
a big thank you to all the work the council staff 
have put in during the crisis, it is very much 
appreciated on the ground. 
Just a question to Brian on the restart grants, 
several people are in touch stressing the need for 
accelerated payment they need money to open and 
they would really like an answer as to when they 
could expect grants to be landing in bank accounts. 
Similarly to Vibeke, thank you for the 
presentation, a couple of comments sent from small 

businesses said they weren't advised or weren't 
aware there was limited funding on the TOV scheme, 
and again, is there an indication of lead times that 
people are waiting anxiously for the money to land 
after having applied for the voucher as soon as they 
could. Finally just to Frank's presentation and 
I've been back and forth to you on this topic, 
thanks to the community call team they've done 
fantastic work and the community forum, community 
response forum, but I do want to speak on half of 
probably some of the most vulnerable people in the 
county who weren't represented on the forum, so, 
our people living in Ashford, Bray and Wicklow 
direct provision centres weren't directly 
represented on the community response forum.  And 
I know it was something I raised to Frank and it 
was difficult, probably fair to say there was a lack 
of communication between central and local 
government on this matter. 
I have received clarification from the Department 
of Housing, that the matter of who sits on the 
community forums is actually a matter for local 
level and each individual forum to attend to. 
So, with this in mind I wonder would Wicklow County 

Council move to include residents from direct 
provision on the community response forums? 
And also, just considering any measures to address 
this, if there were future similar forums to be 
brought up.  Because it has been shown 
particularly in housing when there's collaborative 
work between different departments it works so much 
better to prevent whether disease outbreak in this 
case but better preventative medicine so I would 
like to see this happening going forward thanks. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Again, I'd 
like to thank the county council’s response to the 
Covid-19 crisis, this in particular I'd like to 
thank the community section who expanded their role 
in response to what communities were doing on the 
ground throughout the county.  And I think 
particularly in the rural areas there was a huge 
sense that the communities in each area would have 
to organise themselves as best they can, but they 
had huge backup with the phone service there and 
people were able to plug into various services set 
up from scratch so I'd like to thank the community 
sector of Wicklow County Council in particular. 

For the work they did to keep us all informed, 
north, south, east and west. 
Just one question, just that the playgrounds I know 
some of them were open today and again, just for 
people probably hardest hit in this crisis were our 
older members of the community and our very younger 
members of the community and maybe when if we have 
to deal with this type of thing again we have some 
sort of plan that play facilities for young kids 
or kids with particular needs, who need to get 
access to a playground over a scheduled basis. 
Maybe we could do that rather than putting a chain 
around the gates and saying goodbye and good luck 
to you. I know there's a safety aspect to that, but, 
we need to be, now that we've all learnt from this, 
we need to put in place measures that we can just 
give our very young, and our very older members of 
the community some access to community facilities 
CLLR CREAN:  I'll be brief, I want to reiterate 
Cllr Lourda Scott's point in relation to the 
community forum, firstly I would like commend 
management and staff the great work that's done, 
it was phenomenal, thank you. But I think the 
community forum, it would have benefited from 

having the correct representation from people 
living in direct provision, so that's certainly is 
a gap and going forward should be addressed if it 
can be decided at local level.  The other issue I 
would like to raise and I know the decisions had 
to be made, it was an emergency situation in terms 
of closures of facilities and amenities, but we had 
a situation in Kilcoole in the Greystones district 
where car pack remained closed, after the phase 
where most other carparks had reopened.  And that 
actually took an organised public campaign to get 
that reopened, and when I was arguing that it should 
be opened in line with other carparks, the response 
I got was that there's a silent majority that are 
happy.  My concern going forward there's a 
democratic process around closing public spaces or 
how we use the public space, and I don't think it 
is good enough that we kept one car park closed on 
a local agreement between Irish Rail and the Gardai 
and the Greystones office, when every other car 
park was open.  And there were substantial numbers 
of people in the community that weren't happy at 
all with that situation.  So, going forward I'd 
like commitment any changes to public spaces go 

through a process of consultation as us with 
councillors or local community.  We had a similar 
situation over the last week where a public right 
of way was blocked in Greystones and took a public 
campaign to have that reopened quicker than it 
would have been in both cases it is about the right 
to have access to public spaces and needs to be a 
key priority.  And finally just in relation to 
Brian's mention on the financial piece, I hear your 
compensation dictating cuts one the reports was 
over 20 million overdraft facility, I don't know 
what the situation is, if there isn't compensation, 
I would like to avoid cuts, I don't think ordinary 
people should be penalised for a public health 
crisis.  Thanks. 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Can I just start by offering myself and my colleague 
from the Labour Party our sincerest condolences to 
all those who passed in the county and throughout 
the country.  And our sincere thanks to all council 
and frontline staff who kept the country afloat. 
Cathaoirleach and fellow councillors we have 
entered unprecedented times, and we're now about 

to enter difficult times.  In fairness to the 
council they've been creative so far and I'd ask 
they continue to be creative and not just go back 
to as Cllr Mags Crean said just the cuts, we need 
to be creative and imaginative and keeping our 
businesses afloat as Cllr Mary Kavanagh said, even 
in terms of our parking.  So, I would just ask the 
council, when formulating the budget keep the 
councillors informed, we are the elected 
representatives of the people. 
And I think we should be included in the 
decision-making process, not just on Budget Day but 
the process as well thank you 
CLLR NEARY:  Yes, again I'd like to reiterate a 
thank you to all the staff in Wicklow County Council 
for their speedy response and adapting to Covid-19 
interruption and restrictions.  I want to 
reiterate with Cllr Lourda Scott was saying with 
the representation gap on the community forum.  I 
did mention at the beginning the councillors as 
well were not included on the forum directly.  And, 
we're not informed of the setting up of the forum 
from the start and I know it was very, a very 
difficult situation to try and get everything up 

and running but, we do have to be conscious of the 
fact that there are vulnerable people out there who 
were there not directly represented and in fact 
they were the ones at the coalface of Covid-19, I 
would like to reiterate the point that Cllr Mags 
Crean made about consulting the public for any 
decisions made about public spaces.  And that, we 
keep engaging with the public throughout because 
this could be a long process.  And we don't know 
when it is going to end. 
Also, when the department, departments in the 
council are reviewing spending if they would 
consider those most vulnerable, those in receipt 
of council payment and in relation to rents 
especially, and that generally overall the most 
vulnerable people in our county are considered 
first and foremost when looking at our budget in 
the context of Covid-19. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thanks.  Can you hear me? 
Thanks Cathaoirleach and I know that my colleagues 
have already said this but I want to say this as 
well it was a lot of hard work went in straightaway 

there was no waiting around, it was - nobody has 
been through a pandemic before so I appreciate how 
difficult it must have been for the council staff 
and I'm  sincerely send my gratitude for all the 
effort you put in so far.  It strikes me when we're 
talking about businesses bouncing back and how we 
can support businesses to bounce back, I have a 
concern about that we as a council will have a 
challenge within the next three to six months 
around housing.  A lot of the NGOs are saying 
people currently within the private rental sector 
as the notice to quit are lifted, and people who 
lost their jobs might be falling into rent arrears, 
I wonder are we going to see more and more people 
present themselves for housing support? 
And I think we need to be mindful going forward we 
plan for that as soon as possible and I have no doubt 
we will be able to do so seeing the energy put in 
so far but it is something I want to flag because 
I think it is coming down the track pretty soon for 
us. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'll go back to, F rank do you want 
to answer them. 

  
MR CURRAN:  The community call and funding, look 
we tried to distribute it, it wasn't as Cllr Tom 
Fortune said enough money it was 80,000 but we tried 
to spread it as much as we could.  There may be 
further funding and if you give details of the group 
you mentioned we will see what we can do in that 
regard.  Cllr Gerry Walsh in relation to dumping 
and enforcement, that was considered a critical 
service that continued the whole way through so we 
will have cases coming to court that were picked 
up about you you're right, dumping increased during 
the pandemic but, our dies were out there, 100% of 
the time.  Cllr Mary Kavanagh in terms of 
park - look it is something we can look at but we 
are down a lot of money as it is, and parking over 
the three months, next three months is worth 
something 800-900,000 so it is something we have 
to be conscious of, and any time we look at it the 
traders in towns is conscious if there's free 
parking staff will come in, park the car and doesn't 
help shopping and turnover so it is a delicate 
balance but something we will have a look at.  Cllr 
Shay Cullen in terms of tourism - yeah, and the 

parking facilities we have a new car park coming 
on stream in Glendalough just down in the Lara side 
which will take 300 spaces, Mullaghmore.  A local 
landowner, and negotiations will be finalised and 
Luggala and Avondale, the new scheme 800 million 
grant will update the quality of the car parking 
spaces out there. Cllr Lourda Scott the community 
call, community forum, yeah, when we set it up, we 
set it up exactly as part of the guidance and the 
Cathaoirleach was on it myself and all the groups 
that I mentioned early why they are and it was big 
and difficult to manage on team meetings, we'll 
take on board about direct provision.  As a general 
rule it is Department of Justice that deal with 
direct provision, we give them every help we can, 
and as people receive status to remain, we'll be 
there to help them with homeless help or whatever 
we need to do, so we'll have a look at that.  The 
play facilities, again, as I said they're open 
today.  I take on board what Cllr John Mullen said 
in the future we need to plan for people with 
particular needs, definitely take that on board.  
And, the just in relation to finance side, I know 
Brian will deal with it, we will be creative and 

certainly not to cut but just tell you exactly what 
John Paul, minister for Local Government is saying, 
because he issued a statement on it and it is on 
the website saying "Impact of Covid-19 and business 
on rate payers has been very significant and 
Government responded by announcing a waiving of 
realities for all businesses forced to close due 
to public reality requirements from 27th of March 
for three months, this will come at a cost of 360 
million met to be executor and my department is 
finding guidance for this initiative:  The 
position will be reviewed as parted of wider review 
to enterprise and employment and associated local 
and funding applications in public health 
restrictions that help and evolve conversation". 
How much extra money the money for the three months 
will we get? Its only then over the next month or 
so, we will know what position we're in.  Cllr 
Jodie Neary, I take on board what you're saying in 
relation to the community forum, the direct 
provision, the public spaces and I know Cllr Mags 
Crean mentioned this as well the car park in 
Kilcoole was part what I was talking about why 
engineers are looking at areas where they can be 

innovative and in terms of widening footpaths and 
dealing with one way, closing a car park and coming 
up with small, relatively low cost schemes and 
funded by the NTA to make things easier for people 
coming about be to work and doing it on trial basis.  
As I said earlier, we won't proceed without going 
through the Municipal Districts first, so each 
meeting now, next meeting will have a number of 
proposals that will go through the members of. 
And, Cllr Grace McManus yeah definitely take that 
on board in relation to the housing challenge 
because, we are, we don't know what recession we're 
heading into, so look if we need to increase the 
staff and resources in that area we certainly will.  
Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
  
MR GLEESON:  OK, and I'll address Cllr Sylvestor 
Bourke and Cllr Lourda Scott's question about the 
restart scheme first of all. 
Just to say, we only received the 5 million from 
Enterprise Ireland on Friday, so we hope to pay out 
applications from this week onwards.  What I would 
say is and I'd ask businesses to have some a bit 
of patience, due to the volume of applications 

we've had to develop and all the local authorities 
in conjunction with LGA, a solution had been told 
to process these grants due to the volume and the 
amount of information involved in them and there's 
a huge amount of validation that has to be done.  
So, it's I suppose on top of our normal day job we're 
trying to process these applications so, we will 
be prioritising obviously businesses and phases 
one and two, and try to get the payment out to them 
first rather than the later phase businesses.  
But, as I say, now that we have the money in the 
account, we can start actually trying to make the 
payments. 
So, that's the plan of action, but as I say, it is 
and time-consuming process due to the amount of 
information that's in the applications and they all 
have to be validated and unfortunately, the nature 
of on-line applications as well, a lot of 
information, if it is incorrect, that's been 
entered we have to go back and contact the 
individual business to get the accurate 
information so it takes a bit of a while but we're 
working around the clock on that in order to process 
them as quick as we can. 

In relation to Cllr Tom Fortune's comment about the 
LED lights I think you're referring to the AFS 
report mentioned about 1400 lights, I suppose the 
big saving we're going to have in relation to LED 
light is the national programme, as you recall we 
the members approved a loan of I think it was 8 
million earlier this year for LED programme whereby 
we will be replace be public lighting with LED and 
that's why the substantial savings will be 
generated, it will take a couple of years before 
they start kicking in, as regards next year it 
probably won't solve our budget problem for this 
year or next year. 
Cllr Gerry Walsh - this relation to rent 
collection - yes as outlined in the presentation 
on rent, while we've collected 6.3 million in rent, 
that's against increased budget of 17.2 million so 
collection rate is down to 37%, it was 39% at the 
same stage last year, we collected 5.6 million but 
against a lower budget of 4.6 million so slightly 
down on the collection rate but as I say we won't 
maybe see the full impact of Covid-19 on the rent 
collection until there's changes in the pay 
subsidies and the impact that has on individuals. 

Regarding the parking that Cllr Mary Kavanagh 
mentioned as the Chief Executive highlighted, it 
is substantial amount of money for three-month 
period, June, July August last year it would be 
850,000, I suppose, we have to be careful in that 
if we're putting forward a submission to Government 
looking for compensation, we won't get 
compensation for an area that we've decided to 
suspend collection on so we just need to be careful 
on that.  But obviously, we'll look at that 
particular area and take on board your comments and 
I suppose, also, in relation to I suppose helping 
businesses and helping them get back on their feet, 
we will be in Wicklow and other towns of Arklow and 
Blessington doing an initiative that Bray did, 
looking to do a similar initiative in Wicklow Town 
working with the chamber and the Town Team to try 
and help local businesses get back on their feet. 
In relation to the point made by Cllr Mags Crean 
the 20 million overdraft facility, thankfully we 
haven't had to dip into this facility yet but I 
suppose that's only for helps news relation to cash 
flow purposes, that we have enough money in our bank 
to pay suppliers and pay the salaries, it doesn't 

actually I suppose help the situation in relation 
to the annual budget, it is just more so addressing 
the cash flow 
And I think, Cllr O'Brien mentioned the parking and 
creatively looking at savings, as I said in the 
presentation first and foremost the last thing I 
want to do is start taking out a big knife and 
cutting things and we're resisting from doing that 
until we get the full picture from Government but 
as I said we hope to look at naturally generate a 
savings through as I say payroll where there's been 
a slowdown on recruitment because of Covid-19.  
Due to the fact that there's less travelling there 
should be savings on travelling and subsistence and 
also particular schemes, new schemes or projects 
due to be implemented this year, there might be a 
slowdown that might generate savings as well this 
year.  So, we will look at all those areas first 
of all in conjunction as well as trying to get as 
much funding from the Government before we have to 
make any hard decisions 
OK thank you. 
Just to go will you some of the questions raised 
there, Cllr Tom Fortune, are we planning to pay any 

of the business with additional money? 
Just to clarify Tom we didn't get additional 
funding, the 370,000 I mentioned is specifically 
to cover the cost of the business continuity 
voucher which is going to pay mentors on our mentor 
panel or to pay the third party consultants to help 
clients work with their recovery strategy. 
So, it is not like we have additional funding to 
pay out. 
And then, in addition, our regular funding the 
measure, the measure of funding we get through 
Enterprise Ireland through Department of Business 
and enterprise, this is European funding through 
the ERDF and ESIF fund so, this is not discretionary 
funding it is very clearly sped how this can be used 
and we certainly don't have additional funding in 
our budget to allocate to spend to businesses 
locally.  So, if any new support schemes are 
announced by the department or the minister 
As part of the new programme for Government, they 
will be rolled out and they will be resourced 
through the department and that brings me on to the 
question from Cllr Lourda Scott around the Trading 
Online Voucher.  This is not funded through or 

regular Department of Business Enterprise and 
innovation, this underlying cost to the Department 
of Communications directly because, it an action 
within the National Broadband Strategy, so, we get 
annual allocation around 40, which is 40 times 
2,500 regularly but that doesn't mean we get that 
money as budget but as an allocation.  Then we got 
in addition to the 40 we got at the beginning of 
the year, we got additional 30, which brought it 
up to 70 and last Monday, not this week but last 
week we got additional allocation of another 100, 
but that just covered the applications we had on 
hands on our desk and we've been instructed by the 
Department of Communications that we cannot go over 
that allocation.  So anything over those 170 
applications we cannot currently approve and 
that's why we flagged it with the department, our 
own and Department of Communications that we will 
require further budget for the remaining of the 
year and that's where the delay comes from in any 
of the clients coming to you, questioning that.  
We're acutely aware of it, we've made all the 
relevant people aware of it and they're working on 
it, but there was a literally a period of three 

weeks where we were waiting for the additional 
allocation and our hands were tied, we couldn't 
approve anything during that time. 
Then to come back Cllr Mary Kavanagh's shop local, 
that would be a very good initiative.  Certainly 
it would have to be done with partnership with the 
chambers and Town Teams and economic development 
team, during the lockdown, Wicklow naturally was 
launched which is a new website flowing out of 
development strategy for the county and 
highlighting to people to buy locally produced food 
from local food producers so that was one action 
towards that. 
Cllr Shay Cullen I share sentiments about tourism 
and hospitality, there's certainly sector that 
extremely badly hit.  We're working with many of 
the hotels, the providers, pubs, food providers, 
activity centres, trying to work through this 
situation.  And giving them the support that we 
can, and it certainly is a sector that needs as many 
supports as they can get.  And again, we've been 
nagging to the department that there's a real role 
for Failte Ireland that haven't been very active 
up to now 

CLLR FERRIS:  I had been indicating, I would like 
to thank frank and Brian and Vibeke for the 
presentation, and Mike and his Covid-19 team for 
all they have been doing for the entire county since 
the outbreak. 
And in particular, I would like to thank Lorraine 
Gallagher, David Ford and Liam Bourke in the 
county, they have been doing tireless work to help 
the people of Bray to keep them safe.  And I know 
that the reopening committee was mentioned a couple 
Frank and Brian, and it is to allow businesses get 
up and running again as safely as possible we're 
giving them, and it is all of these things that will 
encourage people back to the shops again and in a 
safe way and to keep staff as well safe but I wanted 
to put their names on the record. 
Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Merlin is here now so back to item 
22 to consider the adoption of Wicklow County 
Council Wicklow Port byelaws 2020 
  
MERLIN:  Thanks very much, to give you background 
to these byelaws, Wicklow County Council took over 

the operation of Wicklow Port in 2016, and 
following the takeover that's part of Department 
of Justice advised us we need Explosive Bye-laws 
in place if we were continue importing explosives 
through Wicklow Port.  As it stands the Department 
of Defence can import explosives without any issue 
at all but for a company to import them we need to 
have Explosive Bye-laws in place and so, we 
commenced consultation with the Department of 
Justice and with our own law department and have 
drafted a set of byelaws which were advertised on 
the 20th of November, 2019, and following 
publications there was no admissions so went 
straight to department for sanction and 28th of 
February the Minister Charlie Flanagan sanctioned 
these bylaws to give you background the benefit of 
having byelaws will facilitate the importation of 
explosives but bring with it additional materials 
that can be imported through Wicklow Port.  Which 
should increase commercial activity and increase 
income coming in through the port. 
So, I suppose what we're looking to do today is get 
approval for the bylaws. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I have a proposer, Cllr Shay 

Cullen and Cllr Gerry Walsh. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  We'll go for a vote because we're.  
... 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Lourda Scott sorry ... 
CLLR SCOTT:  Sorry it was for the earlier one, I 
wanted a few words I missed the boat, I missed the 
submission, because it is by law maybe it could be 
looked into, Arklow Port be considered or the bylaw 
extend today Arklow Port as well as it has 
facilities to take down explosives in, or shipping 
in as well, and plus they wouldn't be, it would take 
the pressure off Wicklow to be used as a port for 
that as well, as Wicklow has and a special area 
of - so maybe it could be considered going forward 
extend today Arklow as a lot of the foot work has 
been done for it? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do you want to respond to that n 
>>:  Consideration to that, we would have to look 
although ISPI area, in Wicklow it is ISPS approved 
facility, so we need to look at that as well as doing 
draft by laws. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  So, we have a proposer and 

seconder and we've to go for a vote. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Proposed by Cllr Shay Cullen 
seconded by Cllr Gerry Walsh, Cllr Tommy Annesley?  
... 
That's 34 and 2 not present. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item 24, to note the circulation 
of the Chief Executive's report for March and April 
2020 and to consider the Chief Executive's report 
May 2020, copy circulated. 
And the Chief Executive will say a few words and 
I'll take them questions.   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: On housing side Whitehall Estate 
is it Baltinglass is allocated and Farrankelly, 24 
units and PP in Wicklow Town is nearly, colleagues 
that's 51 units, two phases but only a few weeks 
between them.  We didn't do official opening yet 
because of Covid-19, but we'll come back.  N11, our 
consulting engineers has designed a bus lane, so 
they'll work with the existing scheme.  We got 
delivery as well as new velocity dispatcher, so 
they're effective in terms of potholes and short 
sections of resurfacing, and CCSD the later a 
Roundwood playgrounds were open this morning and 

the town and village scheme has been launched now 
for this year so accelerated one scheme for 
Covid-19 to that works around towns.  So one on the 
3rd of July, two we're out six schemes this year, 
it is 90% funding because of the Covid-19, and we 
can put 10% of our own admin and partition funding 
into it, and so, we have avenue, we won't have the 
public meetings at the moment like previous years 
but we are contacting the community groups and 
outlining the scheme is.  And similarly, in C 
almost, there's a measure one funding there for 
school and community safety, and measure two, on 
community recreation, and measure three meals and 
wheels and mobility and cancer care so we will check 
that area.  And in relation to anything they have 
on that and outdoor recreation infrastructure 
scheme, measure one, up to 20,000, measure two, up 
to 200,000 and measure three we're allowed usually 
one, is up to 500K so working with the recreation 
officer and County Wicklow partnership in schemes 
on that.  On the economic side, we mentioned 
Wicklow naturally does that, comes from food and 
bench strategy in April 2019 so there's a strong 
network, they produced website which showcases 

everything Wicklow that is in food and drink 
protection, Nationwide is coming down to do a 
programme on it which is good of free advertising 
et cetera.  But we'll done official launch when we 
get over the Covid-19.  And Tracks and Trails, 
we've new ten-minute videos, going on-line one in 
Tinahely Hiking Trail and the other Bray Head to 
Sugarloaf we'll try to do a promotion on-line to 
that.  And SSE, you'll have heard the OOMM facility 
in Arklow that will have a boost it is 2 billion 
scheme, 200 turbines and green electricity and 
finally the county development plan, you'll have 
got the Chief Executive's report following the 
initial public consultation, following the issues 
paper et cetera, that's completed, and it will be 
discussed in detail at the September meeting so, 
the forward planning team will be go to each 
Municipal District in the interim to go to any 
issues you have, further meetings can be arranged 
in relation to any specific items, workshops or 
whatever, so, we're all available and particular 
the forward planning team from now until September 
and particularly for new members who haven't gone 
through the process before, they are available for 

that.  So, it addresses in great detail the 
submissions and detailed document now and will 
include the draft strategy, following the 
September meeting taking on board the directors of 
the members a draft will be circulated in September 
for the members thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Erika Doyle and then Cllr 
Gerry Walsh. 
  
CLLR ERIKA DOYLE:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Just referring to the homeless situation.  I just 
want to refer to the provision of the homeless 
facility in San Remo in Bray and thank you the 
housing department on all their work up until now, 
I fully support the provision of a homeless 
facility, we all during the last few months we're 
told to stay home, very conscious of the people who 
don't have a home and who are at risk at all times 
from Covid-19 and had no safe space. 
With that in mind with are in urgent need of an 
adequate homeless facility in north Wicklow. 
That being said, residents in the area feel they 
have not been receiving the information that they 

would like.  We all know that these facilities work 
best with a community buy-in, and I think giving 
as much information as possible to the residents 
can help create that community buy-in. 
Up until this point there doesn't seem to have been 
any engagement with the Simon Community.  
Residents have asked me, they have four core 
questions, I know some of these may need to be 
responded to in writing but to put them on the 
record, the current status of San Remo, is what is 
it, what is the status of the sale and when can we 
expect it to be operational?  Residents are keen 
to know about any community assessment that was 
carried out.  Was one carried out, if so, what form 
did this take? 
What are the plans in terms of the sale of the 
building? 
Will it be sold to the Simon Community, they've 
heard differing report and would like a response 
to that on the record, will it be fact be sold to 
the Simon Community? 
And the last part is, when we met at Bray Municipal 
District at the start about this, we asked a liaison 
committee so that everybody concerned would have 

a voice and I include the service users in that, 
the local Gardai, the council, and we're being told 
that the Liaison Committee can't be formed until 
it is up and running, I would like to see that coming 
together in advance.  I would like to know the 
status-to-behalf that is, resident would like a 
point of contact for the facility and at this point, 
nothing has been forthcoming, so I really do feel 
information is key here.  The more information 
that people have, the less likely there are to be 
fears and concerns about the facility which as I 
said is much needed and hugely important.  Thank 
you. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks, and for the Chief Executive 
for most comprehensive report.  I'd like to take 
the opportunity to congratulate this council on the 
Farrankelly, 24 units and the tenants received 
their keys for those units on Friday last. 
And I must say the reaction has been overall been 
very, very positive and the overall standard of 
this development has been outstanding.  So, just 
congrats on that.  And a lot of happy tenants out 
there. 
Just on the tenant purchase scheme, the figures 

there, reflect 80 there up-to-date this year and 
against 18 last year, if I'm reading correctly, it 
you comment on that with the increase and again on 
tourism looking at the Failte Ireland report 
published on accommodation needs in the county 
there are 225 hotel rooms required for Wicklow, so, 
there's a big task at hand to three and boost our 
tourism offering, that's including of course 50 
rooms that are, have planning permission but have 
not been delivered yet.  But that's 225, so that's 
a big challenge and one other quick question on page 
56 on pollution control the septic tank inspections 
there were suspended there was a new programme 
introduced in 2020, for inspection plans, so just 
wondering whether there was update on that, or have 
we those inspections been taken up again thank you. 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, 
three points more for clarity - the first one is 
in relation to the homeless facility which Cllr 
Erika Doyle has referenced so I won't repeat the 
questions that have been put there.  But just in 
relation to that matter the current Cold Weather 
Initiative has been deemed as not suitable.  And 
that's why the officials are work something hard 

to try and find something else that's more 
appropriate.  At our last briefing was it 
indicated that the cold weather initiatives the 
individuals used in that service would transfer to 
the new service, on an intern measure under maybe 
a lease agreement until the sale was completed, so 
just looking for an update on that. 
The second item in relation to the children and B&B 
numbers I know that Cllr Grace McManus has a motion 
on this matter and I suspect that we probably won't 
get to it - but it is quite difficult to understand 
the children that are referenced the individual 
children are the same children or different 
children and I think we probably need clarity on 
that, so it is Cllr Grace McManus's motion when it 
comes to be heard.  And finally, the references 
made to the food poverty group which I think is a 
really, good initiative.  Just looking for 
additional information on that, it references six 
members and if we get the information who the 
members will be, and terms of references will be 
thank you.  
CLLR FORTUNE:  Chief Executive thanks for your 
report. As usual it is very comprehensive.  I think 

we probably could have a meeting just to discuss 
your report alone. Just a few points - some 
observations - the restart grants, who actually in 
Wicklow County Council is actually dealing with 
this? Who deals with it hands on? 
And the housing, how the housing department in 
Wicklow does an excellent job under very extreme 
circumstances, but just on the HAP side of it, and 
I'm just wondering, is it possible we can do a 
better deal ordeal better with the HAP client.  I 
know how busy everyone is, but there appears to be 
a gap in how the gap thing is followed through. 
It is obviously very important in the current 
climate because, the amount of rental properties 
is a challenge for people.  How many approved 
housing bodies are we actually dealing with? 
And maybe you might comment on the two million rent 
arrears. 
And are we happy that the social distancing is in 
place on all the reopened development sites that 
were responsible for.  And I'm wondering how many 
Part 5 unit in addition to your report do we know 
as we look forward and anymore, we think we're going 
to get.  And I don't need a full answer on the next 

two points but maybe we get some kind of explanation 
on the turnkey concept and also on the Capital 
Advanced Leasing Facility just to understand that 
in a better form. 
And also, the home improvements grants, it is 
interesting that we've no budget in that area, and 
I'm wondering why, or when are we going to have a 
budget because again it is a key area.  And on the 
whole area of homelessness, just looking at the 
report, we're talking about 83, 30 families, 54 
adults and children, I know in previous meetings, 
Cllr Grace McManus brought up about how we were 
progressing in the area of homeless children and 
I'd like to get more detail on that.    And, also, 
the amount of people, there's more and more people, 
becoming at risk of homelessness, a lot of the calls 
a number of calls I would get and I'm sure it is 
the same for other public reps would be people in 
fear of becoming homeless, because maybe their 
landlord has told them their time is up or it is 
going to be up and there seems to be no option.  I 
just think we need to be more on top of that part 
of it. 
And can I make just a general comment, I mean this 

to be constructive and not just be critical.  But 
I think there's a gap in the whole area of 
communication.  To public reps and I'm referring 
to e-mails, that go into the council to senior 
people in the council and don't get responded to.  
We need to get better and more accurate and more 
quick, quicker information I believe on funding and 
the various funding streams that are becoming 
available.  And a lot of that information could be 
fed down to is through the district councils and 
I think the district councils, perhaps this is not 
the local authority's fault but the district 
councils certainly need to be given more 
responsibility, and my concern about all of this 
is, to me, and I've said this in previous years, 
is that there appears at times to be a lack of 
respect for public representatives, I don't mean 
that to be emotional, I just mean it is an issue, 
that I think needs to be put on the table. 
And again, two other examples of the communication 
gap - is the Irish Water issue in regards, to what 
is going on with the need for this storage plant 
in north Wicklow.  That will be talked about at 
4.15 but that's a serious issue and I only heard 

about that third-hand.  That shouldn't be the 
case. 
And Cllr Gerry Walsh in his input earlier, 
mentioned about the keys being distributed to the 
tenants in Farrankelly, I don't know about other 
public reps, but I knew nothing about that.  And 
I, just think that there's a serious gap I think 
in communications and it is contradictory in terms 
of our commission statement.  If you read that 
we're not living it with regards to public reps and 
it is something I feel very strongly about.  
Thanks. 
  
CLLR CRONIN:  Thanks. I firstly I want to thank the 
council staff for all their work during Covid-19 
and especially in our Municipal District in 
Blessington they were always on hand any time we 
needed them. 
I just have a few points to raise, firstly I can't 
let the opportunity go we're here in a big leisure 
facility in Greystones with a swimming pool, and 
I just think it would be great if we would have one 
in west Wicklow. 
A swimming pool campaign has been going on for two 

years now, the team themselves have been working 
tirelessly to try to raise funds.  They've worked 
alongside the district and alongside the directors 
in the council but I'm just wondering if you have 
any update for the committee and if you have any 
commitment that can be made by the council 
regarding a proposed site for the swimming pool. 
Also, I just want to ask you for update of the bus 
stop at Hollywood Cross, we raised this numerous 
times with the council and waiting to hear any 
developments on the matter.  And also, in relation 
to the market housing in Dunlavin, I spoke before 
this relation to some maintenance work that needs 
to be carried out.  This building is obviously a 
very unique building and historic building and I 
would appreciate if I could have update on any work 
that can take place and when you hope to start that 
work.  And lastly, regarding the housing 
development in Dunlavin, I'm wondering when phase 
two already allocated.  I'm aware that the letters 
have been sent out and people have been notified 
of phase one but just wondering and they're due to 
move in at the end of July but just wondering when 
will people be notified of phase two, when they're 

going to be allocated thank you. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  Thank you very much for your report 
Chief Executive, another excellent report.  It was 
mentioned there at the March meeting and recorded 
that Arklow hadn't been successful in its 
application under the outdoor recreation grant 
scheme for repairs to the seafront promenade and 
you did undertake to give a commitment you would 
look at ways of funding it inhouse, and I didn't 
notice any report back on that and I just wondered 
if you could clarify that for us as to whether we've 
managed to get that sorted for us. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks to the Chief Executive for his 
detailed report, a couple of quick questions, echo 
Cllr Avril Cronin's on the current status of the 
west Wicklow Municipal District swimming pool.  On 
the county development plan and something to look 
for advice as to what is the best way to go about 
it - I think there should be prevision made in the 
planning aspects of our county plan learning the 
lessons of the last few months to ensure adequate 

zonings for residential spaces for elderly 
community in every town and village in Wicklow 
because it is important that all residents would 
have access to either independent living or 
supported living complexes, in every town and 
village not just in the ones they exist at the 
moment. 
Secondly, just, on Irish Water have they come 
back - we've had clinics with Irish Water and some 
councillors expressed including myself, deep 
frustration at the responses of Irish Water to 
repeated requests on facilities that they provide 
in particular to upgrades of ways water and water 
treatment plants in towns and villages and smaller 
towns and villages, thank you. 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. I just wanted 
to lend support to Cllr Avril Cronin's comment 
about the provision of a swimming pool in west 
Wicklow.  Just particularly as we're having our 
meeting here in Shoreline and we have our own 
beautiful pool the community in Greystones and 
surrounds are lucky to enjoy, and I know as a parent 
we've all missed not being able to use this facility 

and it is terrible that members of our fellow 
Wicklow communities over in the west don't have the 
facility permanently and it really I completely 
support Cllr Avril Cronin's comments on naming a 
site for the pool there, thank you. 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you to the Chief Executive for 
his report as well, I too want to echo my support 
for Cllr Avril Cronin's call for a swimming pool 
in west Wicklow, we have four excellent facilities 
along the east coast and I believe the west should 
benefit from these facilities.  I want to 
congratulate Arklow on receiving the SSE project 
I'm disappointed for the county town of Wicklow, 
and I know the councillors on the Wicklow Municipal 
area put in a lot of effort, we are disappointed 
but I hope the county town does have some benefit 
from this project. 
I'm going to raise an issue that might sound trivial 
here today but not trivial to the residents in 
Wicklow Town especially and that's in relation to 
rubbish bins, we're going to look at more stay cases 
I hope and we are after all the Garden County and 
the lack of rubbish bins around the town is leaving 

the town looking dirty to be honest with you.  This 
is not household rubbish as the excuses have been 
given, this is rubbish from people leaving them at 
the bins because they're overflowing, although it 
sound like a trivial matter today I would ask the 
council to look at providing more rubbish bins 
around not just Wicklow Town but the entire county 
thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Before we go to any I don't think 
there was anybody else, sorry, Cllr Peir Leonard 
and Cllr Rory O'Connor, Cllr Melanie Corrigan, Cllr 
Gail Dunne, and Cllr Dermot O'Brien - when the 
questions are done, there's going to be no answers 
today because we have statutory business that we 
have to complete before we go on to the annual 
general meet. Something all the answers are to come 
back from the officials in writing from the 
questions raised today.  No Cllr Peir Leonard. 
CLLR LEONARD:  I want to thank the Chief Executive 
for his report and want to make a few quick points 
wanted to make them early why but are just in 
relation to homelessness I spent the last few 
months first hand witness to the reality of what 

it is like to be homeless and with the Covid-19 
pandemic play as well it is extremely difficult for 
people out on the streets and lack of services in 
south Wicklow for people that are homeless is 
unreal.  I think we should look at something going 
forward.  I know there's a new homeless hub in 
Bray, but I think we need some sort of sheltered 
accommodation, even for women down in south 
Wicklow, going forward to protect them. 
Also I think the pandemic payment the Covid-19 
payment being widened to two weeks will drive a lot 
of people into homelessness, people suffering from 
addiction and more complex things, so I think that 
would be good if the council could I don't know 
contact the relevant minister and ask for that to 
be reduced back to one week going forward now that 
the restrictions have been lifted. 
And just in relation to the economy the local 
economies and recovery of it, I'm wondering would 
it be possible to look at exploring having more 
allocations for casual traders and more affordable 
casual trader licenses for businesses, plus, more 
outdoor furniture for public spaces going forward 
as well as a solution. 

Thanks. 
  
CLLR O'CONNOR:  Thanks Cathaoirleach, I'll make 
this quick - last time I raised about the Kilmac 
bus shelter and I understand from my communication 
there was talks and I just wanted to see what the 
update was or if there was any updates about the 
shelter thank you. 
  
CLLR DUNNE:  Cathaoirleach and again thank the 
Chief Executive for his report.  I have to say 
personally I'm very disappointed over SSE's 
decision to base their operations in Arklow.  I 
think it is great for Arklow, 70 jobs there and 
along with the data centre they're doing quite well 
but I come from an area of the county the capital 
down where nobody looked up or down at us over the 
last number of years with jobs, I challenge anybody 
here in the meeting and the officials to tell me 
when was the last time anybody looked at any jobs 
come into Wicklow Town, as far as I see we're awe 
commuter town and that's the way we want to look 
at it, the county development plan is coming up and 
it is something we should look into providing 

proper facilities to companies start up in Wicklow 
Town, I know there's another company starting 
hopefully starting wind turbines and I know there 
will be other ports looking to make sure that their 
store their place there, but I think Wicklow Town 
would be an ideal location for it.  And I would ask 
the council to make sure that they endeavour to make 
sure that they do come to Wicklow Town and provide 
jobs that is badly needed, and that people are not 
going up the N11 every day to Dublin.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thanks Cathaoirleach, 
quickie, thanks for the report Chief Executive but, 
I'm looking at the, question maybe it is for the 
JPC, maybe not but the 33 fires in rural parts of 
Wicklow, callouts from the fire service and I'm 
wondering do we have data on those fires? I know 
we notice a lot of, if a young person does something 
wrong somewhere in Wicklow or gather during the 
Covid-19 they get demonised on every Facebook forum 
but I never hear people convicted for lighting 
fires they shouldn't be if there's data on that I 
would appreciate it. 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  Thank you Chief Executive for the 

report. I just wanted, show my support for the San 
Remo facility in Bray and thank Cllr Erika Doyle 
for further information and stress how important 
it is we need to work with the local community and 
look at their need and support and creation of the 
Liaison Committee is very important and I think 
that should be happening as an immediate thing just 
to support the local community.  Also, having come 
out of this the Covid-19 crisis a real need 
particularly in our community the rural areas, we 
should look I know it is more of a central 
Government thing but look at the rural planning, 
a lot of the calls we would have got locally is from 
families who had to move to owe quantities because 
they can't afford to live in the community or 
couldn't get planning on local family farms or 
land, that's something that is important to look 
at if we're facing a crisis like this in the future. 
Just another point is about the dumping, I know it 
is mentioned before, I think in some areas in urban 
areas I think we should be putting more 
responsibility on to some of the traders who are 
they're dealing with more take away foods so 
there's a lot of boxes and pizza cartons and things 

like that, they have to have some responsibility 
for what they're giving out.  That's why the bins 
are all filled but also, the dumping that's done 
in the rural areas like the work that Pure Mile is 
doing, and the community teams the council teams 
is absolutely fantastic, thank you. 
  
CLLR FERRIS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, I would 
just like to thank the members of the Bray Municipal 
District for raising the issue of the San Remo which 
hopefully will be a facility for the homeless 
community in Bray.  There are still a number of 
issues outstanding and answers we whether or not 
like to get answered and update on the liaison 
committee, but I do, from my understanding I 
believed that the lie yea son committee was to 
commence once the centre was up and running but I 
may be wrong on that.  But I would like to get the 
answers as Cllr Erika Doyle asked for on the small 
few points that seem to be outstanding, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that it for the Chief 
Executive's report? OK.  So, is that OK with you 
Frank. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  We'll get the replies out in 
writing to each individual councillor yeah. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To note, item 25, to note the 
annual financial statement 2019 and approve by 
resolution additional net expenditure in excess of 
budget in accordance with section 1047 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 and Brian will talk throughs. 
MR GLEESON:  The main points to note in the 2019A 
FS, are that we had a surplus of 305,000 this was 
used to reduce revenue account deficit down to 2 
million and the Capital expenditure increased last 
year from 55,000, compared to 2018, to 55 million, 
up to 4 million to 2019, this was due to the 
acceleration of our housing programme throughout 
the year.  In accordance with section 1047 Local 
Government Act 2001, members are required to 
approve by ease are resolution areas of additional 
net expenditure in excess of budget.  These are 
division roads, 171,000 and division D, are 
division C water services 71,000 and environment, 
818,000. 
Obviously, those overruns are overset by underruns 
elsewhere in the budget. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I have a proposer, Cllr Shay 
Cullen and Cllr Gerry Walsh. 
LORRAINE:  Agreed by all?  Agreed. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number 25 to note - the we have 
just done that - 26, to adopt the Wicklow County 
Council Annual Report, 2019, section 221, of the 
Local Government Act, Lorraine. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Well in accordance to section 221 
of the act we're obliged to prepare and adopt Annual 
Report by the 30th of June each year and there's 
certain information that needs to be included in 
this report.  Due to Covid-19 restrictions of the 
annual financial statement has just been put in 
front of you so we will be required to include those 
figures in the Annual Report for publication after 
the meeting and then we're obliged to summit 
performance indicator figures to NOAC and we should 
be including the Annual Report, again that's pushed 
out to July, so, that with the members consent if 
you could put the Annual Report as circulated and 
including separate allocation to those figures the 
following date. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I have a proposer, Cllr 

Sylvestor Bourke.  And seconder? Cllr Vincent 
Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE:  Quick question on the NOAC report is 
that coming back to our next meeting because.  It 
is comprehensive report and we do it each year. 
MS GALLAGHER:  We are preparing the figures; they 
should be given to NOAC but because of the Covid-19 
pressure in resources it is pushed out to July, but 
we will come back to you.   
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that agreed? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item 27, adopt the Wicklow County 
Council Annual Service Delivery Plan 2020, section 
134A of the Local Government Act. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Under the Local Government Act as 
soon as practical after adoption of the budget we 
are obliged to prepare Annual Service Delivery Plan 
it is prepared having regard to the high level of 
four strategic goals set out in the Corporate Plan 
going off the strategic objectives it was 
considered at the corporate policy group although 
their meeting on the 6th of April, Derek Mitchell 
did ask for if the TWES1 could be include the words 
"public" and "private" and the corridor be as 

objective and that will be included in the team plan 
moving forward. 
Again, it also gives overview of the budgetary 
landscapes terms of delivery of the annual service 
and plan we will have to have regard to the annual 
budget.  So, if you have a proposer and seconder 
for that please. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Proposed by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald 
and seconded by Cllr Pat Kennedy.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that agreed?  OK.  To item 28, 
to note the review of the Wicklow County Council 
Corporate Plan, is 2015-2019 is the.   
MS GALLAGHER: That goes back to the previous plan, 
and carrying out review of the invitation of that 
plan.  So, we will, and to submit it to them by the 
27th of June with the objectives contained therein 
so we're asked to bring it to the attention to the 
corporate policy group and elected council, so this 
is for noting Cathaoirleach. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. Number 29.  To note the 
Wicklow County Council joint policing committee 
report for 2019. 

MS GALLAGHER:  We're obliged to prepare a report 
submission by the 31st of March each year, there's 
a six-year plan in place. The key areas are policing 
community, tackling crime this rural areas and then 
tackling alcohol and drug issues so that the big 
I suppose, the biggest thing was the establishment 
of the policing plan committees by Municipal Plan 
Area last year, and we were to welcome Commissioner 
Drew Harris and hopefully we will welcome him to 
our September meeting.  Cllr Gerry Walsh is the 
chair of this committee, so, do you want to say 
anything Cllr Gerry Walsh. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  For the report and something for the 
Policing Authority were we looking for so good to 
be in a position to present it to them.  So, as I 
say, we've been unable to hold public meeting due 
to Covid-19 and hopefully we'll get back on track 
on wards, and the Commissioner will, reschedule the 
appearance at our meeting before the year is out.  
Thank you. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Can I have a proposer and seconder.  
Cllr Gerry Walsh and seconded by Cllr Paul O'Brien. 

 
MS GALLAGHER:  Elected members that select Wicklow 
County Council are obliged to present reports to 
the elected council at your request Cathaoirleach 
or annually so that the report submitted have been 
circulated and they're just for noting. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  32, correspondence, 
suspension and standing order, you spoke, do you 
have anything further to say or can we get the 
council to meet with Irish Water? 
>>:  I’m happy with the council take a lead on this, 
and try to and resolve it, it is a serious issue, 
we're basically facing into housing estates being 
stopped building if this issue isn't sorted in 
north Wicklow particularly in Newtown and Kilcoole 
so, look, certainly we do need action on this, if 
that means a meeting with the councillors that's 
fine but the council need to take a lead on it.  
Thank you. 
MR CURRAN:  We'll take it up with them in terms of 
delivering that and the interim solution, I don't 
know if you want to comment on it, I think: 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  31 to ...  

>>:  We're waiting on details to be supplied from 
the developer in relation to connections for the 
next stage of the development up there, so they 
don't anticipate any delay in those connections. 
But, we will take up the issue with the in terms 
of the permanent reservoir with Irish Water, 
obviously the issue is the timing of that, and when 
it is proposed to be delivered, I know there's 
proposals a couple of years ago for that reservoir 
in Newtownmountkennedy and obviously the 
intervening years with the economic town turn, 
there wasn't a requirement for it.  So we'll take 
up the issue with Irish Water and to ascertain first 
of all their plans for the plant and the time frame 
for that, but obviously our position is we don't 
want to delay the development of any housing in the 
industry or industry for that point either.  And 
I understand that the planning permission has been 
granted for a temporary it is facility to 
facilitate a number of developments in that area 
and we'll raise that Irish with Irish Water and see 
if that is acceptable to them in the meantime. 
in a euro that. 
  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK, so item 31, to agree the date 
and location of the next meeting of Wicklow County 
Council. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, Cathaoirleach, before at the 
at our next meeting the annual meeting we will be 
agreeing a schedule of meetings, but I suppose we 
are. This is our first meeting since March with the 
landscape we're operating in.  We are we have to 
meet in a physical space if we're doing statutory 
business, there isn't statutory business to be 
considered between this and the next meeting that 
we know of in July, so, the proposal would be that 
we meet the first Monday in September, in physical 
space and fending what the landscape is. 
You'll know we had to meet as quorum to pass 
resolution because we're not in our council chamber 
but so I would be asking maybe that you know we 
propose we meet in September and depending on the 
landscape that we're in, that we pass a resolution 
that maybe we'll agree with the location of the next 
meeting in consultation with the Cathaoirleach. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I've thought about this, and 

originally I said to Lorraine yeah maybe that would 
be handiest but I do actually think we're sitting 
here today and not getting answers to questions it 
is three hours amounted it is extremely difficult 
to get the business done.  One of my regrets is I 
never got through an agenda despite my best 
intentions, and so, I can see how difficult it is 
and the setup is very expensive, as well, and we 
have to be mindful of finances, but I think even 
if we're not meeting in a statutory basis I think 
it is probably important we meet be it a Zoom or 
teams or whatever meeting, and then, if statutory 
business has to be done, that after we've had our 
Zoom meeting and people have had their say that the 
statutory quorum could come together to actually 
vote the way their groups want to vote.  I don't 
know what members think of that. 
  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, I'm 
just wondering and it is for clarity for my own 
information we have a lot of motions that are on 
the agenda, some dating back as far as October, can 
they be dealt with in that sort of platform or do 
they need to be dealt with face-to-face. 

MS GALLAGHER:  We can give written responses in 
relation to motions of notice, and we did that 
before and those who weren't happen CI world with 
written responses they reappeared on the agenda so 
we could give written responses and through Zoom. 
You can't pass resolutions on them obviously, there 
are motions of there that require the resolution 
of the council to send it on maybe to another body.  
So, you couldn't do that. 
>>:  You could only discuss them.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  What do the members think would 
they prefer to meet like this in July or meet on 
Zoom? And then if we have statutory business that 
each technical or group would send forward people 
to vote the views of their group?  If you want to 
meet in this forum again in July if you could raise 
your hands? 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  This particular space may not be 
available. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  This type.  For July. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  It will be available in July. 
  

>>:  What alternatives do we have to the Shoreline 
to meet in July, is there another alternative 
before we take a vote n 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I mean the alternative we don't 
all meet as 32, unless the social distancing 
requirement is reduced because if it was reduced, 
we would fit in Claremont.  When it is two metres, 
we don't have a space to fit.  If it is reduced yes. 
MS GALLAGHER:  As a sector we wouldn't be  
convening such a large group for business where 
there's no statutory business, that is the policy 
we're working under for health and safety reasons 
we don't convene in such a large group, while 
Covid-19 is with us.  So, it makes sense we 
wouldn't ... 
 
>>:  Social distancing is reduced to one metre 
could we delay actually agreeing to meet in July 
until next week the week after to see what happens 
with social distancing is that an option? 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Yeah, how do people feel about 
that? Sorry, Cllr Tom Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Chair, I think we should have a Zoom 

meeting in July. And if there's statutory items 
we're waiting three months to deal with statutory 
items today, so what's the problem with waiting 
until September to deal with statutory item, I 
think it is essential and we should meet in school. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  People who want to meet in July. 
Sorry, Cllr Vincent Blake. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Can that be delegated to the district 
in the meantime, statutory items we need to 
discuss? 
MS GALLAGHER:  There are no statutory items at the 
minute, so the proposal is each you news pal 
district be briefed, meet and discuss matters on 
Zoom and then we convene again September as a 
statutory council.  
>>:  No statutory. 
MS GALLAGHER:  No statutory business at the 
minute.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Gail Dunne. 
>>:  We break for August anyway we should have a 
meeting in September because by that time the 
landscape so could have changed a lot and we could 
have a meeting like this in September or maybe, 

social distancing will be down to one metre so I 
think we should have a Zoom meeting in July, we 
don't have a meeting in August anyway and by 
September we should know where we're going. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  How many people want a Zoom 
meeting in July?  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I couldn't figure out what was 
being said a lot of the time.  And that's not - I 
wouldn't be prepared to sit here again and second 
guess what people are saying.  I could have moved 
over there, I'm sure you had the same problem, and 
Cllr Gerry Walsh I couldn't hear what was going on, 
there wasn't much going on so I couldn't hear, I 
wouldn't be prepared to sit here and be ignored I 
couldn't hear what was going on. 
>>:  I agree with that. 
CLLR FERRIS:  I agree with that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Grace McManus. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  So, just, I appreciate that what 
we're trying to battle out here but on Zoom meetings 
constituents can't come and watch and hear and the 
press aren't there, so is there something about how 
we're going to overcome that challenge if it does 
interrupt on-line because people want to see us out 

taking a leadership role and while it mightn't be 
statutory we have a role to play in the resilience 
and coming back from this, and I would be concerned 
from that, if our people don't see us doing that 
on Zoom that's a problem. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Look we're talking about one meeting 
here, so I don't know what the expense incurred 
today but I believe it is significant to hold this 
meeting here today so really if it is not necessary, 
you know we'll have a meeting regardless this 
September, if Claremont is fit to be purpose we're 
in Claremont if not we're obviously back here, but 
either way I think we should go with Zoom for July.  
Once there's no statutory business.  And if there 
is, we have plan B in relation to the quorums. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  How many people want it to be a 
Zoom meeting in July.  Hands Up. 18. And there's 
30 present. 
So, 19, so it will be 19 for and 11 against, so we'll 
have a Zoom meeting in July. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that my Municipal District so do 
a member want a Zoom meeting with all their 32 
members. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Have a district first of all and 
if we want, we have a full meeting where we talk 
about the manager's report.  In fairness, each of 
you can have: 
MS GALLAGHER:  You don't have the legislative 
freedom to meet as a statutory council by Zoom, you 
got advice in that regard and direction from the 
department, so, meeting for a discussion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You would be meeting for a 
discussion and to go through.  OK.  So, if we leave 
it at that.  
MS GALLAGHER:  While we're on by way of update 
about the elected members,  construction 
reconvened on 18th of May so council chamber and 
members rooms are stripped and walls to the new 
extension has been erected, interview rooms and 
public toilets reconfigured so phase one, 
refurbishment, customer care hub we should have 
that completed by the end of August so the full 
completion date for the project is for the full 
project is mid-December so hopefully back in our 
new chamber in January. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Any correspondence.  That's it.  

OK. Cllr Joe Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I just want to propose a vote of thanks 
Cathaoirleach to yourself, Chief Executive, and 
the staff, for going to the extent they did go to 
facilitate this meeting, we know it is not perfect 
but a lot of effort went into it, we have the 
screens, we have the microphones we have the social 
distance, we have the refreshments beforehand and 
press and some of the public and other staff and 
I think given the circumstances, great credit is 
due to the staff and yourself Cathaoirleach for 
going ahead with this meeting, I accept it might 
not be what people want in the future but I don't 
think it could be done any better than it was today 
and I want to thank everybody involved. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you that convenes the last 
meeting of my Cathaoirleachship, and we will have 
the AGM, can I have a five-minute break and convene 
the AGM then. 
OK. 
Break before the AGM 
 
 
 

 
 
