 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ONLINE 
VIA ZOOM 
 
 
 ON  
 
 
MONDAY 1st MARCH 2021 AT 2:00 P.M.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a non-verbatim transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for communication 
support.   
 
J Sinnamon 
E McCarthy 

TRANSCRIPT OF MEETING HELD ON MONDAY, MARCH 1st 2021:  
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, everyone, it's just 2.00pm, so we will kick off, if that is 
all right. Lorraine, if I could ask you to do a roll call first.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Yes, before we go to the roll call I will remind members of 
the etiquette. If you could keep your mobile phone on silent. Please don't 
leave without informing the Cathaoirleach so the corium remains. You can use 
the raise the hand functions or send a message in chat. Please keep your 
microphone on when speaking, when you are not speaking keep your 
microphone on mute. So, members, please inform the meetings administrator 
by telephone if you lose connections during a vote. So, members of the public 
and press you are very welcome, please keep your mics on mute and your 
cameras off and observe any directions by the Cathaoirleach. So Cathaoirleach 
we will go for a roll call.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Tommy Annesley.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Vincent Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE:  Here. 
ADMINISTRATOR:  Cllr Sylvester Bourke.  Cllr Melanie Corrigan?   
CLLR CORRIGAN: Present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Mags Crean?   
CLLR CREAN: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR:  Cllr Shay Cullen.  
CLLR CULLEN: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Erica Doyle.  
CLLR DOYLE: Here.  

ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Gail Dunne.   
CLLR DUNNE: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Anne Ferris.  
CLLR FERRIS: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Pat Fitzgerald?   
CLLR FITZGERALD: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Tom Fortune?   
CLLR FORTUNE: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Patsy Glennon?   
CLLR GLENNON: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR:  Pat Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Peir Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Grace McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Derek Mitchell.  
CLLR MITCHELL: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr John Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Miriam Murphy.  
CLLR M MURPHY: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Jodie Neary.  
CLLR NEARY: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Dermot O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Paul O'Brien.  

CLLR D O'BRIEN: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr R O'Connor.  
CLLR R O'CONNOR: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Lourda Scott?   
CLLR SCOTT: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: John Snell.  Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Gerry Walsh. I know you are there.  
CLLR WALSH: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Irene Winters.  
CLLR WINTERS: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: I will ask again, Sylvester Bourke?  Cllr M Kavanagh?  Or John 
Snell?  They may join us later. Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Lorraine. If anyone has any votes of sympathy, 
they wish to express?   
ADMINISTRATOR: I might go ahead first for John Turner brother-in-law of Fiona 
Turner our colleague here and former employee of Wicklow County Council. 
For Pat O'Rourke, father of our colleague, Anne Byrne Wicklow County Council. 
For Eilie Griffin mother of our colleague Jackie Donnelly. For Joyce Fagan, 
mother of our friend and colleague Michael Fagan.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Lorraine, any of the members any votes of 
sympathy they want to?  Just in case, I can't see anyone, so I don't want to 
miss anyone. If they just say. Okay, we will take a minute to remember all of 
those that have passed away.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Eternal rest grant on to them My Lord, may your perpetual 
light shine on them, may they rest in peace.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: I have a request for a suspension of standing orders, and I 
will deal with that in a minute. First, I would like to make a statement on the 
recently published report on the commission of investigation into Mother and 
Baby Homes. I know, Cllr Neary, you have a motion in relation to this matter so 
if you bear with me as I read my few words. I would like to take this 
opportunity to acknowledge the publication of the report of the Commission of 
Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes in the State.  
 
Following this publication, And Taoiseach, Michael Martin issued a formal 
apology on behalf of the State to residents of Mother and Baby Homes and 
County Institutions. Wicklow County Council echoes the apologies of the 
Taoiseach for the wrongs on those mothers and children who found 
themselves in mother and baby and county homes. As the Commission and a 
Taoiseach have said they should not have been there. Wicklow County Council 
would like to pay tribute to the former residents of these institutions and to 
acknowledge their courage and dignity in coming forward with their 
testimonies. Their stories and their truth can now be heard, acknowledged and 
understood.  
 
It is important that Wicklow County Council, as a local authority, acknowledge 
that they, like other local authorities, had a role in the provision of healthcare 
and hospital services until 1970 when the Health Boards took over those 
functions. From 1922 until 1970 Wicklow County Council, as the County Health 
Authority was responsible for the County Home in Rathdrum.  The 
Government now intends to give detailed consideration to the report over the 
coming months with a view to developing a comprehensive Government action 
plan to address eight specific teams:   

 
These teams are to include a survivor-centred approach, an apology. Access to 
personal information, archiving and databases, education and research, 
memorialisation, restorative recognition and dignified burial. Wicklow County 
Council actively participates with the Government in furthering the 
development of the Government's action plan as it relates to local Government 
and the council is also committed to supporting local measuring that form part 
of a suite of follow-up actions. Ms Catherine Wright, County Archivist, is 
dealing with inquiries relating to the county home and Wicklow County Council 
will engage sensitively with survivors living in our area who can benefit from 
the Council's services. Arrangements will be made to make a copy of the 
Commission final report available in all libraries once they have reopened.  
 
In addition, the County Archive Services proposes to reprint the book, 
'Time Did Not Stand Still' by Kevin Byrne for anyone connected to or interested 
in the history of the county home in Rathdrum. Mr. Byrne has given his 
consent to the reprint of this book.  
 
Thank you, members, and I know you will concur with the sentiments 
expressed. To reiterate the words of both the Commission and A Taoiseach 
they should not have been there. I would also like to thank, Cllr Neary who I 
spoke with this morning and Cllr Neary has a Notice of Motion on this. I would 
like to thank you for your support on this and I want to, I don't know will we 
get to the Notice of Motion today, I would like that Notice of Motion to remain 
on the agenda and we will all get to have an input in time. Thank you, 
members for your time and thank you for listening to me.  
 

I will now move to the agenda. I will read the minutes first and then I will come 
to the proposed suspension of standing orders. To confirm and sign the 
minutes of the special meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday 
25th of January and a copy was attached. Do I have proposer for that?   
CLLR DUNNE: Proposed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Seconded by Irene Winters. To confirm and sign the minutes 
of the ordinary meeting on 1st of February. Gerry O'Neill and Cllr Fitzgerald.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Agreed, thank you. I have a request from Cllr John Mullen for 
a suspension of standing orders. That request is seconded by Cllr Gail Dunne 
and it's to do with the announcement of the, from Bank of Ireland today with 
the closure of three branches in our county. Members, are you agreed to that 
suspension of standing orders?  Is there any dissent on that?  Irene Winters?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Agreed. I think everyone is agreed. Cllr Mullen if you are 
agreeable, I will take that at 4.30pm.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item number three on the agenda is...  
CLLR S CULLEN: Could I come in for one second if possible.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Cullen.  
CLLR S CULLEN: Just a quick item. I would like to see if possible, could we put it 
on the agenda for the April meeting. It's to do with the new land development 
agency, there was a recent bill published and I think we need a proper 
discussion in terms of our county. This could have serious ramifications for 
disposals of land and certainly could undermine the powers, our powers in 
terms of councillors when it comes to disposals of land. So, I would ask with 
your permission we have this as an agenda item. I think it's an important topic 

to be discussed as soon as possible. I would ask you to put it on the April 
agenda, if possible. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Cullen.  
CLLR BLAKE: I second that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We will make that an agenda item next month. Not a 
problem. Item number three, I know we have a long agenda so we will do our 
best to get through it. Item number three is to consider the disposal of 0.036 
hectares. 00.856 acres of land situated in the townland of Ennermount, 
Sandymount, Brittas Bay to Ms Catherine Altman and Ms Emily Byrne. Do I 
have a proposer for that?  Cllr Irene Winters and seconded by Cllr Gail Dunne. 
Everyone in agreement?  Yes, thank you.  
 
Item number 4, to consider the disposal of 3.5 acres situated in townland of 
Ballinalea Ashford, from a further period of 30 years from 1st of April 2033 to 
31st of March 2063. Proposed by Cllr Paul O'Brien and seconded by who?   
CLLR SNELL: John Snell.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Agreed?  Agreed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item number 5 to consider the disposal of 0.037 hectares 
situated in townland of Hollywood Cross, Knockroe to Finbar Mulligan and 
Joanne Fox as per notice circulated and proposed by Patsy Glennon and 
seconded by Gerry O'Neill. Agreed?   
CLLR WINTERS: Agreed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Item number 6 to consider the disposal of 0.04 
hectares comprising part of fellow WW5279F being the strip of land to the rear 
of Hawthorn Road to Lesley Hopson as per notice previously circulated, 
proposed by Cllr R O'Connor and seconded by?   
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I will second that.  

ADMINISTRATOR: Agreed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To consider the disposal of WW2274L, county Wicklow being 
the property known as one Dargle Villas in the townland of Bray county 
Wicklow by transfer order to Ms Denise McCoy as per notice previously 
circulated.  
CLLR FERRIS: I propose.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposed by Cllr Ferris and seconded by Cllr Aoife Flynn 
Kennedy.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Is that agreed, members?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item number 8 is to consider the disposal of property 
compiling 3758F being lands at Victoria Road in the townland of Rathdown 
Lower by deed of transfer to Mr William Fenlon. As per notice previously 
circulated. Gerry Walsh is proposing and seconded by Derek Mitchell. Got that. 
Is that agreed?  Agreed. Thank you. Item number 9 is to consider the Chief 
Executive's Monthly Management Report and I will go over to our Chief 
Executive for that.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I will take the programme as read. 
Just one or two items. I mentioned the NTA works last month and the 7.5 
million which we have got which is very welcome for roads and footpaths 
throughout the county compared to 2.5 million last year. We will do a 
presentation of each Municipal District and go through the schemes I think on 
that. But just on the staff, just one or two queries in relation to that. We have 
set up four teams now in roads. One in terms of design, which is Conor Page, 
Fiachra O'Connor and then we are going to recruit another three engineers for 
that team. The second team under Brendan Vial. He has two technicians, and 
we will recruit another three for that team. We then have Margaret Hartnett, 
Declan O'Brien and another team looking at various different projects and then 

the main standard kind of roads projects coming through, we have Pat Clarke 
who is back with us now and Connor carte and Pious owe doer tee. We are 
looking to take on 12 workers as a lot of this is best done by direct labour. I will 
take everything else as read.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Peir Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: Just under the maritime section, thank you for the report, I 
just want to raise three quick things. I just want to ask, if you are confident that 
Wicklow and Arklow courts have significant water depth to ensure they are 
viable for the future offshore wind economy. Dredging is a huge problem. I 
wonder if the Chief Executive could look into looking into opportunities for the 
dredging team and liaise with the OPW and Irish Water T to look at how three 
projects can be combined into one for a nature-based protection off the shore 
of Arklow. Lastly as part of the Flood Relief Scheme in Arklow, I just want to 
ask, has glass panelling and access been incorporated into the flood relief 
scene and can the Chief Executive give a commitment prior to the scheme, 
going for planning that this will be looked into and that myself and my fellow 
Arklow Municipal District councillors will be part of the decision to put the 
glass in. Thanks.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr Fortune, I will take them in threes, because it 
will be quicker for us. Cllr Tom Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Thank you for your report, 
comprehensive as usual. You answered my question on the projects. Maybe 
when the projects are being explained to the Municipal Districts, you might 
actually, they might actually include the rationale behind each of them. I would 
ask for that in morning. On the house, on the HAP, more so the housing HAP, 
how many of a team in the council have we got dealing with that and what is 
our engagement with outside agencies in relation to the homeless HAP?  Just a 

comment then on Carrig Eden, the project in Greystones looks really good. So, 
I am looking forward to that when it's opened. On the Housing First, the Peter 
McVerry Trust, can someone explain how that is going to work?  Under energy 
efficiency, how are we selecting, your entry in the report, how are we selecting 
the various programme we have in place, what is the criteria for various areas 
getting on that programme?  And under the environmental services and Irish 
Water as we know there has been a serious problem with looking after 
wastewater into the future in the, particularly in the Greystones district. Is that 
now sorted and how has it been sorted. On water, I was asked the question a 
couple of weeks ago and ended up in just a general discussion and I wasn't 
really properly informed, but do we have any water quality issues at the 
moment anywhere in the county and particularly in the area I operate in had?  
On the transport study, or under the transport study we have talked about for 
the Greystones District for a while now, are we taking that into account when 
we are making planning decisions?  For example, how are we doing that?  So, 
when we look at a planning situation, are we building into it the transport 
study issues that may come up in that when it's done and what is going into 
planning decisions to cope with that. On the employee numbers, I note that we 
are saying that by the fourth quarter we have 775 employees, excluding 
firefighters. How do we look at the overall situation in regard to staff, like do, 
we have 7 or 8 departments within the local authority? Is there real proper 
cross fertilisation taking part within that situation. If so, how does that work?  
My apologies, I think that is my phone.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Fortune. Cllr Paul O'Brien.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: I was trying to get in earlier, can I commend Cllr Cullen.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I need you to stick to the agenda.  

CLLR P O'BRIEN: And I look forward to discussing the motion. Thank you, 
Cathaoirleach and thank you the Chief Executive for his comprehensive report. 
I also want to welcome the NTA funding and I look forward to working with the 
engineers in relation to any future works. My question then, Cathaoirleach is I 
believe Wicklow County Council has applied for a grant for Wicklow Swimming 
Pool through the LSIAF. Can I ask when this submission went through, what its 
current status is and whether any external consultants were brought in to 
assist Wicklow County Council and if so, who are they?  And is it possible to 
have a copy of the report, please.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can you please come back on in on those.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Yeah. Just on the dredging in Wicklow and Arklow ports. 
They both need it. We need to start working on that in design for both and 
they will require a dumping at sea license from the EPA I take on board what 
Cllr Leonard said about combining those with flood relief. It's a good idea. The 
glass panelling, I think is in, I will certainly get Mark to give you details of what 
is in there in relation to that for the flood relief scheme. Cllr Fortune, the 
rationale for the various different schemes under the NTA funding that can be 
brought forward under the Municipal Districts. I suppose you have to 
remember this is Year 1, this will go on for a number of years. I would say 
members should be thinking about other schemes. Homeless HAP, one 
full-time staff member liaises with landlords and the homeless individual as 
they arrive. Working out quite well. How it operates is that people who have 
various different issues, who are homeless, be they addiction issues, they are 
given the house first and the wrap around supports follow. It's an innovative 
way of dealing with thing, rather than going through a homeless shelter, 
halfway house then into accommodation. You go to the accommodation first 
and then the wrap around support. We will see how it works. We have a target 

with Peter McVerry Trust. In terms of transport and the County Development 
Plan, again we get a report from roads on each application. They will look at 
the transport side of it, taking into account the County Development Plan, but 
we will have the Greystones and Arklow Traffic Management Plans, so that will 
be taking into account. In terms of employee numbers, we will be looking on a 
workforce plan that we developed a few years ago on the ideal members of 
staff. You are right, we try to avoid people working in silos too much and we 
have various different teams involved in land management and in climate 
action that people can work together so that they figure out what is happening 
in each section. There would be a mobility section, where we moved staff 
around for their own experience. I might ask Colm Lavery to cover the issue of 
wastewater in Greystones and any water quality issues there. Also, Michael 
Nicholson in relation to the funding for Wicklow Swimming Pool. We did get 
funding. That has gone to the department for approval, but the name of the 
consultants might have that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Colm, do you want to come in first?   
COLM: Just in terms of water quality, we monitor water quality, Irish Water 
monitor quality in all of our water treatment plants. We have an issue at the 
moment in Barndarrig, there is a do not consume notice there at the moment. 
I think there is over 3,000 homes affected and we are providing, in conjunction 
with Irish Water we are providing bottled water at a location in Barndarrig for 
the affected households. In terms of wastewater, I am not aware of any 
particular issues in relation to Greystones, if there is you might bring it to my 
attention. I would just say that we continue to liaise with Irish Water in relation 
to both water and wastewater issues and actually at 2.30pm a meeting is 
kicking off between a senior engineer in relation to waste water issue, just 
extending the network in Greystones up the road. We are also considering the 

wastewater, there are combined sewers in Greystones and working with the 
district engineer there. We are looking at how we could encourage our get 
Irish Water to fund or assist us in separating those combined sewers out into 
wastewater and surface water sewers, to alleviate any problems that may be 
caused when there are storm water overflows in the Greystones area. Thank 
you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Director Nicholson, are you there, do you want to come in 
on the swimming pools.  
MICHAEL: Thank you, yes, we did receive a grant. Information concerning a 
grant in relation to a pool in Wicklow. Now we had to send in more 
information to get the final approval. We have sent in a lot of information and 
the department have come back look for a full financial appraisal. We have 
procured a contractor for that, there is a bit of topping and tailing be done this 
week, hopefully it will be in this week and as soon as that is sent in, we hope to 
get final approval and then we can go to a contractor to engage the work. 
Mainly it's a refurb of certain elements of pool.  
 
Changing rooms, there is a lot of work to be done on that. So hopefully before 
the end of March we will hope to get final approval and we can go to contract 
on that job.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Can I ask who is consultant was?  
MICHAEL: A guy called Mark Coleman.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Lourda Scott.  
CLLR SCOTT: Can you hear me okay?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  
CLLR SCOTT: I want to say thank you to the Chief Executive for his report. First 
of all, I want to say I am looking forward to the Women's Day event on March 

11th. A big thank you for helping us to organise that. I was just wondering if I 
could get an update on where we are with the part 8 accessibility scheme and 
my final comment is on the issue of dog fouling. I have been in undated with 
people making representations from this. I note from the report there was 21 
litter fines issued. I wonder if there was any issued for dog fouling. It's a key 
problem at the area, a combination of more people buying dogs and people 
exercising in the same 5K. I know I have spoken to the Green Dog Walkers 
Scheme there are people looking for more bins. Have they looked into the 
feasibility of DNA testing dog faeces, it's been done in the UK and has reduced 
it by 90%?  
 
Also, I note you are advertising across social media platforms at the moment, 
but I was wondering if you would consider making some educational videos on 
the dangers of waste and perhaps showing people how to collect it up and the 
public health aspects of it. If you could comment on that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I will get to everyone. Grace McManus and then I will go to 
Cllr Edward Timmins and then John Snell. Grace McManus is next.  
CLLR McMANUS: Thank you very much and thank you to the Chief Executive 
for your report. I like to say a huge thank you for our staff who are involved in 
the Ireland Reads campaign. I enjoyed seeing what other councillors and 
everyone was reading. I think it was run very well and I know they are 
promoting getting the county reading and it was a very positive campaign, so I 
want to say my heartfelt thanks to everyone involved in that. Under housing I 
have been really concerned, seeing a lot of organisations coming out about the 
increase in domestic violence during the lockdown period. I am wondering if 
we require a policy response, especially in terms of housing for that.  I don't 
know where that is at, but just if the Chief Executive could comment or see, do 

we need to see about increasing emergency accommodation?  Approximate I 
know the refuge is there, but if there is going to be an increased demand in 
housing because the domestic violence and also if the department of housing 
has been involved, I would appreciate any information on that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Just two points. Under the RRDF for Baltinglass, I just wonder 
has there been any further application in relation to the footbridge over the 
River Slaney that was flagged that that would be part of a further application in 
relation to that. I wonder is there any progress on that?   
 
Secondly, in relation to Glendalough, the master plan, which I received various 
documentation a few days ago, just one point on the map of Wicklow, which 
they display. I know you are not going to squeeze everything into a map, but a 
few things stood out at me at first glance. Firstly, three individuals in West 
Wicklow, large villages, Stratford on Slaney was omitted from the map 
completely as was Valleymount and Manor Kilbride, I thought that was a 
glaring omission, to leave out important villages on a map that is supposedly 
showing important sites in county Wicklow, but actually full villages were left 
out.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I will go to the Chief Executive. Chief Executive will you take 
those?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just in relation to the part 8 for 
Delgany Village. That was passed. That was submitted to the NTA first they 
weren't going to fund it, but things have changed with the NTA and I certainly 
fee that getting funded over the next year or two, I might ask Colm to 
comment on that. Dog fouling, I think we need to do everything we can, it's a 
combination of education and enforcement. We have done everything down 

through the years, providing pooper scoopers free of charge, but I like the idea 
of the educational videos and get them online, absolutely. The DNA testing. It's 
the first I have heard of that one, but we will try anything. No matter what we 
have tried and the same with other counties it hasn't worked, but maybe that 
is something that could be a runner. We will have a look at that, absolutely. 
Grace McManus, under domestic violence, we have a good relationship with 
the women's refuge, and they have raised it and the Gardaí have raised it. So 
maybe it's something for the SPC that, do we need to take further action?  We 
will work closely and do whatever we can with the Gardaí and the women's 
refuge and if there are extra resources, we can do that. The RRDF and we are 
doing a design and part 8 for the bridge over the river Slaney as you know. I 
will just double check with Colm, have we applied for that as yet?  I don't think 
so. Just the plan at the moment is to do with the design and part 8 and then 
apply to our RRDF. On the Glendalough Master Plan, Stratford, Valleymount 
and Manor Kilbride they should be included. I might go back to Colm on 
Delgany Village and the bridge over the Slaney in Baltinglass.  
COLM: Baltinglass first. We carried out a feasibility study on the proposed 
pedestrian bridge and in summary, it's feasible and would require an NIS that 
goes over the river Slaney and obviously a CPO would be required. As you said, 
councillor, it's not part of the current funding for the RRDF, but we have 
indicated that we will be seeking a variation and as Frank says, we just need to 
firm up on the exact cost of that before we go to that variation request...  
CLLR TIMMINS: Could I come in on that?  When I spoke to the Department 
they said if we didn't compromise any of the rest of the RRDF that some of that 
original funding, if there was any leftover could be used for a variation to add 
on once the original RRDF allocation wasn't compromised. That if there was 
funding left, just to be aware of that.  

COLM: Obviously, it will be an expensive overrun additional to what is 
required. It will involve CPO as well so the cost could be quite large on it. Just 
in relation then to the Delgany Black Lion project. I, we are currently finalising 
the CPO documentation and we have included in the capital plan for this year 
and next year, which we will be discussing later on, on the agenda.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thanks, Director Lavery. John Snell now.  
CLLR SNELL: I am looking to raise an issue with the Chief Executive and it's 
something I want, obviously there will be no discussion on it, I am not looking 
for clarification or a debate, I am just looking for a little bit of reassurance that 
the Chief Executive will work with yourself, Cathaoirleach, in regard to High 
Court action that is taking place. Obviously, we can't discuss anything that is in 
front of the courts, but as we know, public representatives in the past have 
been around here for a while will know there have been many High Court 
actions involving Wicklow County Council. It's something that is taking place at 
the moment involving Bray Boxing Club. I am just looking for reassurance that 
you will liaise with the Cathaoirleach on behalf of all of the 32 members and let 
them know what is happening. I appreciate it's a sensitive issue and it won't be 
discussed here today, but I am just look for that little bit of, the Cathaoirleach 
will know what is happening.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Thank you, Cllr Snell. Is there isn't anyone else. 
Vincent Blake, are you looking to come in?   
CLLR BLAKE: Yes. Thank you, Cathaoirleach, thank you for the presentation. 
Just a quick comment, regarding extra staff, like the CEO mentioned there, a 
number of engineering staff, he also mentioned 12 outdoor staff and I want to 
know if that is additional outdoor staff or is it replacement of staff that would 
have been retired in the past?  And, also, a question, maybe it's for Colm 
Lavery, but there have been a lot of discussion recently in regards the upgrade 

in sewerage in Tinahely and Aughrim and also the water quality in Dunlavin 
and Rathdrum?  Any update with regard to those particular issues?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank You, Councillor. Gerry Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Just a quick one on our total HAP tenants. On our total HAP 
figures there, it's up HAP and RAS are up over 2,000 tenants. Overall cost for 
2020, I know we have estimated in the budget just over one million for 20, for 
this year, there is another figure there. Just to get my head around the total 
cost...  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Are you finished, Gerry?  You are gone. Hello?  I will bring 
the Chief Executive back in because I think you are finished, Gerry.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I will talk to the Cathaoirleach, Cllr Snell in relation to the 
High Court action. The extra staff are additional staff, so we will fill any 
additional vacancies. The sewerage schemes and water schemes have been 
prioritised, but I will ask Colm to come in, if that is okay. Just in relation to the 
HAP funding, that is all recouped from the Department and then we have extra 
recruitment for the staff that are involved in administering it. So, and the same 
with RAS. With RAS we are making a small profit each year, but they want to 
move away from that now and just let us break even. That is the whole idea, 
that we break even on HAP and RAS. If Colm wants to come in on those.  
COLM: Irish Water have launched a small town and villages growth 
programme. We have been working with Irish Water in the last year or so in 
relation to setting out what our priorities are. The councillor mentioned 
Tinahely and Aughrim were two of the priorities we highlighted. We continue 
to engage with Irish Water on it, they have indicated they are considering our 
top four priorities on our list, which includes the two schemes that you have 
mentioned. They are carrying out their own feasibility and cost estimate on the 
works that is required, and they have indicated they will let us know as Quarter 

2 of the year goes on, if those schemes are deemed feasible and within the 
funding available to the small town and villages growth programme. So, I will 
be very confident that they will be feasible and will be deliverable within the 
envelope. So, we just await the final approval from Irish Water in relation to 
that. You have also mentioned water in relation to Dunlavin and Rathdrum, I 
think. We have been working with Irish Water again to try and increase the 
supply. In Dunlavin we were looking at another borehole in the area, but 
unfortunately it hasn't been able to deliver the level of water, or the required, I 
suppose additional water needed for the area.  
 
So, we are now looking at a connection into the supply from Ballymore Eustace 
in Rathdrum. We are also looking at a connection from our water treatment 
plant to increase the water in both Rathdrum and Gleneely and Irish Water 
have indicated to us that they are predisposed towards funding those two 
projects as well. So, there will be a connection to Ballymore Eustace for 
Dunlavin and a connection to Knockroe for Gleneely.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Gail Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you for letting me in there. Thanks, again, Chief Executive 
for the report. Just a couple of items there. I am obviously delighted to hear 
that we are going to be taking some more outdoor staff on. I think, at the 
moment, as you know, chairman, that we have a lot of schemes going to be 
started are being funded and its great news to hear that we have some 
outdoor staff, hopefully going to be starting in the next while. 12, I think he 
mentioned. That is a positive. Last Monday I raised at the Municipal meeting 
about Ashford and a traffic hazard waiting to happen in Ballinahinch road. The 
old Roundwood Road and Laragh that former junction it's an accident waiting 
to happen. I know the work is supposed to be done at phase 2, but I am 

looking to be moved up as quickly as possible. It's one of the most dangerous 
areas in the county. Someone that stood there recently I was really worried 
about the speed of the traffic coming down that way. Just I also might ask just 
about sewerage going to Gleneely. Maybe a pipe going into Gleneely as you 
know it has to be emptied out every couple of weeks.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I will be quick. Just in relation to the motion that was 
passed for Bray for the review of the full-time fire service. I am looking for an 
update from the Chief Executive or Colm, or if not, now they could give a 
presentation to the Bray Municipal District on the plan on how we are going to 
implement that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Derek Mitchell. You need to unmute.  
CLLR MITCHELL: Sorry, you are right. In relation to a question which Cllr Scott 
asked, and I was also curious about. The CPO for the part 8 for the Delgany to 
Black Lion road we have been told every month since July that it's about to be 
publicised. It's been totally held up for eight months and there is a huge pace 
of developments that is happening and is going to happen along this road. Can 
we have some more information or detail or timeline of when it's going to be 
published?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Mitchell. I am going to take another couple 
because they are fairly straightforward. Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Can you hear me?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Just last year we underspent on the Housing Adoption 
Grant. I see this morning we got a grant of 1.56 million and obviously the 
Council have to provide match funding of 390,000. I want to pay tribute to the 
staff who have been dealing with the grants, but there is suggestion that we 

are going to get further people in to deal with the grants, because that is 1.25 
million.  
 
Last year we underspent by about 500,000. So, I am aware of the work that has 
been done by the people in that department, but in my opinion and I am not 
able enough, but there needs to be far more people dealing with housing 
adaption grants. We shouldn't come back at the end of this year saying we 
couldn't spend the 1.526 million that we have been allocated this morning and 
match funded 390,000. There has been tremendous work done, but I know 
myself I have seen a back up already up there. How we plan to increase 
support to the people dealing with the Housing Adaption Grants, because it's 
essential for people in this county. There are many people looking for funding. 
Maybe last year, it was well-advertised, some people are not aware of it, but is 
there any plan, as I say to improve the numbers in that department?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Chief Executive, I will go back to you.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just in relation to Ashford, the 
Ballinahinch Woods there. We will certainly look at that. It's due, as Cllr Dunne 
said in Phase 2, but if it's a traffic hazard we can expedite that.  Similarly, with 
the Glenealy we can look at that. We had identified Brian Sweeney as the most 
suitable expert to do this. I know Colm is in discussions with people, I might ask 
him to come in in a minute in relation to that. Delgany to Black Lion Road. I 
think the documents are there, they have been reviewed by our legal 
department and a barrister to make sure everything is okay, but my 
understanding and I ask Colm to confirm it is we are ready to go on that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Colm.  
COLM: Look, I can understand your frustration, but obviously given the CPO, 
Cllr Mitchell we need to ensure that it's right. I can tell you that work has 

moved on substantially since the last meeting. Our barrister looking at the CPO 
documentation for us has raised a number of issues with our transportation 
section and the engineers dealing with the project, which we responded to, so 
that the documents are very close to being published.  
 
In relation to the full-time fire service, as the Chief Executive said we identified 
Dr. Brian Sweeney as the person with the relevant expertise and the best 
understanding of fire services, both here in Ireland and internationally. I have 
been speaking to Sean Hogan who is the head of the National Director of Fire 
Emergency in the department. He will come back to me hopefully this week 
with a timeframe for the delivery of that independent analysis of the report 
and, bearing in mind that the reports that are Chief Fire Officer here in 
Wicklow has produced. So, I should have an up-to-date position within the 
next week from Sean Hogan in the National Directorate in the department of 
housing.  
 
Just in relation to Ballinahinch Woods. Our senior engineer has been out and 
looked at the issue. As you know there are a couple of pedestrian crossings 
going in in the location, but also our engineers are going to work with the 
Municipal District engineer to come up with a design that will work for the 
road. As you know the road is quite narrow in places and it will probably 
require a little bit of land acquisition to allow for pedestrian and cyclist 
facilities there. So, we are going to work up the design and in relation to 
Gleneely, we will raise the issue with Irish Water, obviously a connection into 
wastewater plant in Wicklow will have implications for capacity there which 
will need to be fully understood, but we will definitely raise the issue with Irish 
Water. Thank you.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: I have two more?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Relation to Cllr Fitzgerald. Usually with DPG, the reason the 
money isn't spent is they don't come in and people find it hard to get a builder 
and they drift into the following year. I will discuss it with the director of 
housing, if there are any issues on our side, we can certainly address those.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Chief Executive. I have two more people looking 
to come in. Cllr M Kavanagh.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just, thank you, for the CEO's 
report. It's great to see all the funding that has been achieved through 
applications and it's great to see so much going into foot paths and roads and 
things like that. I just want to draw the Chief Executive's attention to a road. I 
just got photographed of it this morning, it's the road between Kiladreenan 
Church and St Catherine's School. It's appalling. It's basically 19 buses, 50 staff 
and at least 20 parents not to mention delivery trucks using that road every 
day. It's just like something out of a warzone, it's appalling the potholes on it. 
Is there anything that can be done. There was a temporary filling of the 
potholes in 2019, but something really needs to be done. It's appalling.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Kavanagh.  
CLLR FERRIS: You will recall that at our last meeting in February we were 
supposed to get a presentation on the Draft Migrant Integration Strategy. We 
ran out of time and it wasn't reached, and I am disappointed to see it's not on 
this month's agenda. Can you, maybe the Chief Executive can let us know 
when is that going to happen?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Ferris.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Just on the road there, St Catherine's School, we will verge 
have a look at that. They are working despite Covid, for emergency repairs so I 
will bring that to their attention. The migrant strategy we tried to put it on 

today and we looked at today's agenda and we decided to put it on to the April 
meeting and that is the only reason to be honest, it was just that the agenda 
was getting so big. We will have it for April.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, everyone, thank you for your comments and 
questions. Cllr Gerry O'Neill.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Just two points there. Again, thank you to the CEO for his 
presentation. Maybe for next month's report we could have a look at the 32-
acre site, Council-owned site at Avonrea. We hear talk about a master plan 
being put in place. At the moment we don't know what is happening for it. 
There is already a zone for AB and E, again could I just say that the 50,000 
allocation for the swimming pool. That is to be welcomed, okay, but what we 
want to really know is that we don't believe, at least I don't believe that a 
swimming pool, a standalone swimming pool will work on its own, I really 
believe it has to be part of a leisure centre, maybe a new hotel. We are starved 
of all of those things there. I like to see the 50,000 being spent on the building 
of the swimming pool within the complex. We have already had reports on and 
feasibility on the swimming pool before and I mean we have had, there is a lot 
of shapes being thrown around on social media by the five TDs. In fact, we 
were going to have the swimming pool in place according to Minister Harris six 
months ago. We are doing the backstroke here at the moment. What I would 
like to see is clarification on that 32-acre site, what is happening, is the zoning 
proposed to be changed or what?   
 
It is an ideal part of the town for a new hotel and for a new swimming pool 
within a leisure complex within that site.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, Chief Executive.  

CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. We did a feasibility study, you are 
right, for the swimming pool. That concluded that if we did receive grant 
funding it would be feasible in terms of the number of people who would use it 
from the region, and it would break even each year. That was done and it was 
part of the application we sent in for the large-scale capital funding. All we are 
planning to do now is look at the area that is zoned active area and do a 
feasible to show where you would fit a swimming pool, along with various 
different sporting facilities. Have that sorted out and decided on, which will 
assist in any future application. That is all we are trying to do moment. Is look 
at that area and do a master plan, just to identify the location of the swimming 
pool, location of what are playing pitches, etc and in time, when the 
opportunity arises, we will apply for any regional sports capital funding that 
becomes available.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Chief Executive. I am going move on to item 
number 10 and thank you, Chief Executive, for that comprehensive report. 
Item number 10 is to consider the report by Wicklow Municipal District and 
there is a slight typo. It says Cllr Irene Winters, it should read Cllr John Snell, to 
the Local Traveller Accommodation Group. That agreed?  Proposed by Cllr Shay 
Cullen and seconded by?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr R O'Connor.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Is that agreed members.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Agree.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Before I move away from number 10, I would like to take 
this opportunity to wish Cllr Irene Winters a happy birthday! So now. Thank 
you. Item number 11 is to note the National Oversight Audit commission 
report on local performance indicators. I will go to Lorraine for this one.  

ADMINISTRATOR: Yes, Cathaoirleach. Just to say that this report is prepared by 
NOAC, the National Oversight Audit Committee it's their sixth report and it's 
150 pages long. It's scrutinises the performance of local authority against 
relevant sets of indicators over a wide variety of services and, Cathaoirleach, 
there has also been circulated a summary from the LGMA in its relation to local 
authority performance indicators. I would take it as noted, Cathaoirleach, if 
anyone has any questions in relation to the report, they can email me, and I 
will be happy to answer them.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Just a brief comment. These are excellent reports and very 
meaty and a lot of stuff in them, but I would urge all relevant people in 
Wicklow County Council to read it and see the benchmarking against other 
counties. But a second point is this report is based on 2019 figures. Is there any 
way we could request these reports are produced earlier? The older 
information the less value they have, like could they be produced within six 
months of the year end. We got this, I think it was at the previous meeting, 
certainly January over a year later than the figures they relate to, it would be 
more helpful if the figures could be produced earlier. When figures are old 
people don't pay attention to them and they don't have as much weight or 
value.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Lorraine, can I come back to you on that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Our hands are tied in that, the report we have is for 
performance indicator figures for 2019. We only received a copy of that in late 
November. We are presently working on compiling figures for NOAC for 2020, 
so look it, your point is well-made, Cllr Timmins, but we are in the hands of 
NOAC in that respect.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: Then number 12 is to note the Wicklow County Council Joint 
Policing Committee end of year report 2020. I will go to you, Lorraine on that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: We are obliged by the end of the year, by 31st of March, the 
Joint Policing Committee to prepare a report on the preceding year and submit 
it to the policing authority. So that report sets out the activities of the 
committee, so it's for noting and we send it into the Policing Authority.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Lorraine. Cllr Gerry Walsh, you are the chair of 
the Joint Policing Committee do you want to say something briefly on that?   
CLLR WALSH: Just briefly. I mean the setting up of the district policing 
committees has worked quite well. We had some very productive meetings 
with the commissioner in November last. He outlined the works of the work in 
relation to Covid and the additional works and demands on the organisation 
across the board. So, look, we all say as recently as last Saturday, with the 
disturbing scenes from the city, but the new policing model is obviously of 
interest to us and that is becoming, in the next year, so we will need that, and 
the Commissioner is going to come back to us to give further detail on that. So, 
it's, we have had our last number of meetings I would say online, so we are 
hoping to get back out to the community with the community meetings before 
this year is out, we had to cancel two meetings thus far. So hopefully in quarter 
three this year we will be back out with a public meeting.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Walsh, we look forward to those meetings 
coming back into the community. Item 13 is to receive a presentation from the 
Wicklow County Council Audit Committee. A copy was attached. I think we 
have Tom Gregan, the Chair and Noel Geraghty with us. Tom, are you there?  Is 
Tom with us?   
TOM: Can you hear me?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: We can, Tom, you are very welcome.  

TOM: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, thank you very much indeed. So, I shall be 
brief, Cathaoirleach, you will be glad to hear. So dear councillors, thank you for 
the opportunity to address the Council here today on the work of the Wicklow 
County Council Audit Committee for the 12-month period up to the 31st of 
December 2020. It's a statutory committee established in accordance with 
Section 59 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014. The other committee 
has five members, who are as follows: 
 
D Gregan, Chairman, Noel Geraghty, Mary Savage and Cllr Gerry Walsh. The 
role of the Audit Committee is to support the elected members by providing an 
independent assessment of the corporate governance environment, the 
quality of the risk management, financial reporting, financial management and 
audits. The function of the Audit Committee is set out in the Local Government 
Audit Regulations and include the following: 
 
Internal assignments for 2020. For 2020 the programme implementers on their 
SICAP were assigned to the internal audit unit of the local authorities. Two 
programme implementers are engaged to administer the SICAP programmes, 
in Wicklow County Council, administer area and these are Bray area and 
Wicklow County Partnership. The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic and the 
restrictions imposed as a consequence has seen a revaluation of the approach 
to assignments. Site visits were temporarily suspended. Nevertheless, the 
internal audit reports were finalised and reported to Audit Committee during 
the year. Development contribution schemes final report, SICAP Bray area 
partnership, 2018.  
 

All of these audits are commenced and due to be finalised shortly. SICAP, 2019 
partnership and SICAP Bray area partnership 2019. Wicklow County Council, 
this report is reviewing the governance structure and reporting relationship of 
the Mermaid County Wicklow Arts Centre and the Shoreline centre. Public 
spending code and the quality assurance report. Internal audit in collaboration 
with the procurement section completed the annual quality assurance report 
as part of Wicklow County Council compliance with Public Spending Code.  
 
The Public Spending Code has a number of objectives for review. The reports 
include the required index on the following areas. Administration of homeless 
service, Kilbride Lane housing, social housing, housing acquisition, in Arklow. 
Baltinglass Fire Station, further details are outlined in appendix one of this 
report. The next heading is Annual Audit Plan. The Annual Audit Plan sets out 
the proposed assignments for the coming year. The plan is drafted following 
consultation with the Chief Executive, Director of Services, head of functions 
and progress on audits will be reported to the Council in due course. Next 
heading is meeting with the local government auditor, Mr. Daragh McMahon 
attended a meeting in January.  
 
The other committee was circulated with a copy of the statutory report in 2019 
in advance of the meeting. The local government auditor outlined the main 
elements of his report to the committee and I am pleased to report to the 
members that the audit report is unqualified. Furthermore, no audit 
adjustments arose as a result of the audit. The Audit Committee is keen to see 
progress on the implementation of an up-to-date risk management strategy 
and organising that this is an important area in the governance framework. As 
required by Section 121 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by 

Section 60 of The Local Government Act 2014 I have attached a report to the 
council on the committee for consideration of local audit report in appendix 2. 
Another important ed heading here... procurement. In a similar meeting we 
saw a report on the developments in that section. The ongoing progress being 
made by the council in this area. The other committee were particularly 
interested in procurement Sections response to the challenges presented by 
Covid-19 pandemic.  
 
The following areas are indicative of activity in this area. Competitive tendering 
on supply or the procurement office for the purpose of hand sanitisers, 
procurement of essential PPE for Wicklow County Council staff. Creation of a 
Covid-19 emergency response. Appropriate amendments to ensure that they 
are operational benefit from the value purchase card system. Enhanced 
monitoring of expenditure. Then moving on to our training day, Regulation 5 of 
the local government and regulation 2014, require the training needs of the 
other committee are reviewed on an annual basis and reported to the local 
authority. I can advise the members that the training about the event was held 
in November in collaboration with the institute of public administration and 
the key themes of this were Audit Committee functions, Audit Committee 
appraisal, annual operational plans, risk management, the role of audit 
committees in corporate governance. Audit Committee [INAUDIBLE]... 
regulation 13 of the committee regulation 2014 states that the other 
committee shall undertake annually a review of its own effectiveness and shall 
report to the local authority on its findings. The other committee was complied 
with this for the use of extensive evaluation questionnaire. I can confirm that 
the other committee books its business in accordance with the Local 
Government Audit Committee regulation 2014. So, Cathaoirleach, Annual 

Work Programme, the committee's Annual Work Programme involves regular 
meetings throughout the year. The Annual Work Programme may be 
summarised as follows: 
 
Periodic meetings as required to consider statutory regulations. Considerations 
of the annual audit plan. Meetings with the members of the Senior 
Management Team. Chairman's meeting with the Chief Executive, annual 
training day, review of the risk management system and consideration of 
internal audit report, including those prepared in connection with the public 
spending code. Consideration of reports issued by the National Audit 
Commission. Consideration of any departmental reports review, meeting with 
the local government auditor for the consideration of the annual statutory 
audit report. The Annual Work Programme is outlined above and submitted for 
adoption by the local authority in accordance with Section 9 of the Local 
Government Audit Committee regulation 2014.  
 
In conclusion, I would like to thank you, and it's of the Wicklow County Council 
for their ongoing support and assistance rank assure you of our ongoing 
commit to the work of the Audit Committee. We acknowledge the continuous 
support of the Chief Executive, Mr. Frank Curran and we like to express our 
appreciation to Mr. Daragh McMahon. I would also like to thank Lorraine 
Gallagher, Director of Services, Brian Gleeson, Head of Finance for all of their 
support to us over the year, they have been great.  
 
I would also like to take this opportunity, Cathaoirleach, to congratulate 
Lorraine Gallagher on her appointment as Director of Services and I look 
forward to working with her in the future. I like to take this opportunity to wish 

the Chief Executive and his management team every success in their efforts in 
had the year ahead and particularly under the current circumstances. We look 
forward to working with you constructively towards the achievement of your 
objectives and to better times ahead.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Tom, thank you for the report. I know on behalf 
of myself and all of the members and indeed the management team we want 
to thank you and Noel and indeed Cllr M Kavanagh and Gerry Walsh and all the 
work you do on that committee and Mary Savage. I know Cllr Edward Timmins 
is looking to come in.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Thank you very much, Tom, for your report. I would like to 
compliment all of the members of the Audit Committee it's a challenging 
committee to be a member of and I would commend you on the work you 
have done.  
 
Two points I would like to add. Firstly, it's very important that the Audit 
Committee gets full support from the management and it is getting support 
from the management, but plenty of support is given in relation to resources.  
 
The Audit Committee is only as good as the resources it is given, and the 
resources given to the people to do the internal audits. So that is the 
information that you are working on. I, I like to ensure that there is plenty of 
resources coming. It's an important committee, it may look like a boring 
committee when you hear the word 'audit ' as a founding member it's far from 
boring and it's a very important committee. Just finally then, just a 
development contribution scheme, could I ask that we continue to focus on 
that?  It's a very difficult area, but just that we focus on it and maximise that 

Wicklow County Council received all of the money that is due over the last few 
years. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Does anyone else want to come in on this?  Chief Executive 
did you want to say something?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: No, I just wanted to thank the Audit Committee for the work 
they have done. I meet them once a year as does the local government auditor 
and the consultants, we have employed to do the internal audits. They ask all 
the right questions and are very thorough and I want to thank them for our 
work. It's good from our point of view to have such a professional Audit 
Committee in place.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Tom, thank you, if there is anything else you 
want to say before you go, I will give you a minute there.  
 
TOM: I am fine, Cathaoirleach, that is great and sure look we will talk again.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Please God, stay safe and send our thanks to Noel and Mary 
and Mary Savage and Gerry Walsh and Mary Kavanagh. 
TOM: I must say it's a pleasure working with these people on the committee, 
absolutely great.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Tom. Item number 14 on our agenda is to receive 
a presentation from Deborah Meaghan on the Avondale Project. This is a 
present I am most looking forward to as well. So, Deborah, I hope you are with 
us?   
DEBORAH: I am going to try and share my screen. Let's go for the technology 
and hopefully you can see it. All going well the presentation should come up. 
Can you see it now?  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  

DEBORAH: Thank you very much for your time this afternoon. To yourself and 
the Executive and all of the members of the Council, delighted to be with you. I 
am going to give you a quick overview of where we are at Avondale. We are at 
a very exciting junction in the project. We would be slightly more excited if the 
Covid restrictions had lifted in March, we are on the cusp of starting this 
project and this is to just to update the council where we are. We want to 
remind the County Council as to the project itself. Avondale Forest Park is the 
home of Irish forestry, the home of the Parnells.  
 
Samuel Hayes was the originally developer of the forest. It's an important 
forest park for Coillte and for Wicklow as well. It's a park which has been a 
little unloved to be fair. We are looking forward to redeveloping it and bringing 
it into the 21st century and really creating a destination for, not only for the 
people in Wicklow, but for everyone in Ireland and to bring in international 
tourists when the time is right. There is a number of different parts to the 
development.  
 
The first piece is obviously around the house itself and we will be doing some 
restoration work in the house and turning it into a living history. Traditionally 
people will have remembered the house as a more traditional museum, 
walking around and guided tours. We are hoping to turn it into a much more 
interactive space where you get to meet and greet and talk with the Parnell 
family and all of the amazing stories associated with that family and the house 
itself. So, it's a living history and a much more interactive way to enjoy 
Avondale House itself. We are also looking at creating inside the walled garden 
is a new forestry provision which will showcase cutting edge of technology, the 
history of forestry that we have and look at it as an education space on areas 

such as climate change and biodiversity. So, again, education and nature are a 
key piece as we go forward, particularly with the variety of trees and the 
nature in the park itself. So, it's a perfect opportunity to engage in these topics 
that are so relevant today. We will be building a new Seed Cafe in between the 
old store house and the big shed. The big piece of that is piece behind the 
walled garden. We are going to reimagine that, put in playgrounds and 
pathways. So again, it becomes very much a useable space as part of the 
Avondale Park. Then, again, I suppose the piece de resistance is going to be our 
treetop walk. So really engaging people in nature. This is about going up into 
the trees, through the trees, below the trees. There will be a tunnel section 
and eventually up to our viewing tower, which will bring people right through 
the forest to the top of the canopy. We are going to have beautiful 360-degree 
views of Wicklow from there. So again, it really is, there is a number of 
different key elements and between ourselves and our strategic partner, Failte 
Ireland, it's been in the making for a number of years.  
 
We are very excited; I suppose the last 12 months no one needs to mention 
the challenges that have been here. We have to be optimistic and look to the 
forward. If nothing else, we have discovered how important the great outdoors 
is to our physical and mental wellbeing. I think Avondale provides a wonderful 
opportunity to leverage what is the park there. We have over 500 acres was 
beautiful estate to enjoy.  
 
I am going to run through. There are a few slides here. Most is just pictures and 
to describe the development as we go through. So, as I said, we are already 
looking at the likes of branding it and we are something like Beyond the Trees 
creating an experience to last in Avondale, where it's not just about the trees, 

it's about the history of Avondale House and nature and engagement and 
creating a wonderful space and hopefully opportunities for events and other 
developments to happen on the site.  
 
So, it really is, it's more than just the Forest Park as was. It's a much more 
enhanced visitor attraction, so what we are looking at, if you can see the map 
in front of me. I am not sure if you can see my cursor. You have Avondale 
House to the centre of the picture. To the left is where the development works 
are happening. We will be, as I said, reimagining the walled garden. To bringing 
it back into life and having a market garden section in that that will source 
some of patriot dues for the Seed Cafe. So again, we have a double-fronted 
large cafe, a meeting area and that will lead out on to a terrace into the walled 
garden. There will be a number of different accesses into the walled garden, 
but we will be creating a new walkway from the existing car park, you see it in 
yellow, into that kind of main courtyard of the working buildings we have. 
There will be an orientation space where people can get ticketing and 
orientated on the site on what is available and then the cafe and meeting 
spaces. At the end of the walled garden, you will see again in purple that is the 
start of the treetop walk. There are a couple of different elements. It will go 
over what was originally called Lover's Leap, but we will be renaming it Lover's 
Look Out. A key piece here is the different types of trees we have in Avondale. 
This walk will highlight that and that is what is exciting about the treetop walk 
here is the different forms of nature. There will be educational pieces on it, 
interactive elements to the treetop walk, I won't ruin the surprise and 
ultimately it comes down to the viewing tower which will bring you up through 
the canopy. That is where the main work will be happening and a point I will 

make at the end, through all of this development The Forest Park will remain 
open.  
 
Obviously, key areas will be closed at certain times, but it's quite contained 
within this top section of the park. For those of you familiar with Avondale 
there is lots of other tracks and trails and they will all remain open during the 
development works. We talk about the Seed Cafe, this is a few down on it, if 
you look down you will see the big shed and then to the left the L-shaped 
building that is the old Courtyard and the original seed store. Where we are 
talking about the new Seed Cafe is in between those two buildings. Fronting on 
to the walled garden. This is a visual representation, but again there will be 
paths and tracks and trails through the walled garden. It's a double-heighted 
fronted cafe. The cafe will be on the ground floor and on the top floor it's a 
meet and greet and seated area. Again, with all of the services and facilities 
you would expect. And inside, again, a key piece here is going to be showcasing 
Irish timber. As you can imagine, it's a Coillte project, we are looking forward 
to using Irish timber throughout this project. Particularly on the treetop walk 
we are looking at sourcing some of the Douglas firs right here in Wicklow.  
 
So, sustainability is at the heart of this development, we will have solar panels 
making sure the buildings are as efficient as possible and again keeping as 
much material and hopefully employing people on this site will be local people 
from the area, so again it's hugely important, as an economic stimulus to the 
Rathdrum area and the wider Wicklow area. We will move on to show you the 
old seed stores.  
 

That is to the right of the cafe. Part of these will be converted into the offices 
for the operator. To the right-hand side we are going to create another gallery, 
crafting space and this small Courtyard, we are taking down some of the older 
buildings in the back wall will provide opportunities for farmers' markets and 
different events. So, bringing the space back into use and having it as a 
multifunctional space that can be used for a variety of different events that can 
be held there.  
 
Again, you might see looking to the right-hand side there is a small garden. 
That will be a sensory garden, a quiet smaller space to create a sensory garden 
for people who need a little bit of time out. As we move on, just to the Coillte 
Pavilion that is going to be inside the walled garden. You will see it in the lower 
right-hand photograph. It's a wooden structure. The idea here is showcasing 
technology about technology, the history of forestry and really what is current 
here we are talking about climate change and biodiversity. It's a 
multifunctional space so it can be used for meetings and small gatherings and 
lecturers. Trying to make everything we do in Avondale have that ability to fit 
many purposes and uses throughout its lifetime. At home with the Parnells. It's 
a light touch restoration on the house. We will be putting in, doing work on the 
wiring, on the heating system in there and again it's just making it, as I said, 
you know your traditional museum was don't touch, don't sit, don't do 
anything, this is more about going in and interacting with the house and 
interacting with the history. When you talk about the Parnell, his centres Annie 
and Fanny and the role that they played in the Women's League and 
throughout history how this house and land has played a fundamental role in 
developing Irish history and basically Irish democracy. We want to bring that to 
life and really engage with people.  

 
There will be a history element to it, we still have the American room there, so 
we will have more of that historical museum piece in the upstairs but the 
downstairs becoming that living history. The treetop walks. This is, we spent a 
lot of time in 2020 redesigning it, bringing it an expert, EAK from Germany. 
Really trying to create something that no one will have seen in Ireland before. 
The walkway, as I said, will be in total, from the start of the walk at the end of 
the walled garden to the top of the viewing gallery will be about 1.2km in 
length. The fully accessible. All of the gradients are less than 6% and really the 
key thing here is about making it a real integral part of the forest, showing off 
the Irish forest and it was interesting when we did have, we managed to get a 
brief visit of German designers over before Christmas before the lockdown 
again and what they found was amazing in Avondale compared to some of 
their European installations is the variety of trees we have in Avondale and 
showing off those different trees. It's a key feature to the new walkway and 
making it interactive and making it follow up and educational. I think ultimately 
coming to the tower, as you see it, at the centre. Obviously, this is a, it's not a 
photo, it's a visual representation of the tower, but it's going to be completely 
surrounded by trees at the top of the great ride. So, this is just to help you see 
it. As you said you go around at a very gentle gradient all the way up to the top 
of the tower. You go right then to the tree canopy and there you have some 
magnificent. We had a drone up there, beautiful 360 views of Wicklow, right 
into the Wicklow Mountains. For those who like fun there is a slide to take you 
all the way back down if you want to, or you simply walk back down the ramp. 
This will be both an architectural piece of timber structure in the middle of the 
forest, but really showing off the forest that we have and bringing people to 
see the forest from a position you very rarely see which is sitting on top of the 

canopy. So, we are excited about that. This is the company that we are working 
with, EAK. They are going to help design and operate the treetop walk, they 
have built a number of them around Europe. They have about 12 in operation, 
and they are developing new ones in the US. So again, they are absolute 
experts at this. We have been working closely, as said, looking and sourcing 
Irish timber to put into the structures and to engage with them on the 
education piece, making it very relevant to the Irish context and very much to 
Avondale itself.  
 
So, as I said, if you were to, the visual representation on the left, but where it is 
going to be tucked in right at the top of the Great Ride in the middle of a 
eucalyptus stand. But the idea is that the tower is right in the middle of the 
woodland and you journey through the wood, above the wood and come up 
above the canopy itself.  
 
Just on the Arboretum. Avondale, I have mentioned it, magnificent forest park, 
a lot of magnificent species and different trees. A key piece of the work we are 
going to be doing as part of this work is the forest management plan for 
Avondale. I suppose Avondale, there hasn't been a huge amount of work 
carried out on the forest in Avondale, a lot of the planting dates back to the 
1900s, where there really has been very little development of young forest 
underneath. So again, we have brought in two experts, end pent experts, 
Dr. Michael Carey and Nick Keane who have done a detailed report to look to 
see what needs to happen to the forest in Avondale to ensure it survives and 
thrives for hundreds of years to come.  
 

So again, we will be doing work on the forest thinning it out, to allow natural 
regeneration of the various different stands of timber we have in there. Some 
will need some underplanting. There is a lot of invasive species, there is a lot of 
laurel there, that covers the forest floor, so we can have that regeneration 
underneath. So, we have various different age profiles to ensure the survival of 
the forest in the future. There will be a small amount of clear felling where we 
are taking out the Norway spruce and the Sitka. That is what Avondale was 
about when it started. Have you these trial plots and 55 species of trees and 
we are looking at introducing when they think about climate change and what 
is it, we should be growing in Ireland into the future?  So, providing fantastic 
opportunities for science and again forestry looking forward as to how we 
develop.  
 
That is a key piece of this, it's not just about the recreation side of the 
development, but it's making sure we protect and enhance the forest park 
itself.  
 
So, we will also look at the track trails. Again, a fantastic array of tracks and 
trails. We don't plan to increase a huge amount, but maybe upgrade some of 
them. Very much improve the signage. I know it's easy to get lost in Avondale if 
you are not familiar. Looking at that, the signage, doing some interactive play 
throughout the forest itself. So that is a full experience and people can come 
and enjoy the woodlands, whether it's the river walk, the cycle tracks and 
again making sure it's very accessible and very understandable for people 
when they come to the forest park. At the moment, as I said, there is signage 
there, but it really needs to come up a standard. We will be working on that 
through the year.  

 
Finally, just to say a project update. We have all of the planning, we amended 
the planning through 2020, so all of the consents are in place from quarter 4 of 
2020. Ray Jordan is the project manager. Rogerson and Reddan are our project 
management. EAK are the walk developers and Sisk will be our main 
contractor. We had hoped to start construction towards the end of March, but 
due to current restrictions that won't happen. We look forward to the 
Government lifting the restrictions and progressing this project. In the 
meantime, again we are doing up a new kind of information slides. Again, what 
is on site at the moment is out of date and we will be putting up new 
information boards, talking about not only the forest management and the 
redevelopment, but just informing people of the timeline of the project.  
 
Our hope is, depending on Covid restrictions we will look to open in spring of 
2022. Ourselves in Failte Ireland are keen to get the site up and running and 
we think based on what has been clear the demand for outdoor recreation and 
people to get back to nature. Whether there are international tourists or not, I 
know there is a huge market in Ireland alone to what Avondale can offer not 
only to the local community but to the broader community in Ireland. As I said, 
the park will remain open in the development and limit the impact as works 
progress on the forest and the redevelopment of the Seed Cafe.  
 
That is, it. A bit of a whistlestop tour. I hope I didn't rattle through too quickly. I 
wanted to give you an overall sense of where we are with the project.  
 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thanks Deborah, I'll wait for the members to get on 
to the screen so we can see them. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Deborah, I'd like to say a few words on it 
myself, being from someone from the area and someone who grew 
up amongst those trees in Avondale, every other week I was in 
Avondale and still am, I very much welcome the redevelopment of 
Avondale.  It is going to mean so much, so much to the community, it 
is going to mean so much to the old, retired foresters to see the 
activity there, and from talking to them, they'll enjoy the new 
experience of Avondale, so they are. 
I also want to thank you Deborah for the engagement that all the 
members of Coillte, undertook with the community, when you were 
starting this process, not only did you have information evenings but 
called to the neighbours all along the road, and they were all, all had 
full buy-in, and there's a great excitement if that's the way to put it 
in the town for this development to start.  And I think people will 
want-to-it started but not only will they want it started, as soon as it 
is started, they want it finished because they won't be able to wait to 
get into it.  Cllr Shay Cullen cull wants to come in first, are you there. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Thank you, and Deborah, thanks again for the 
presentation, do you great work and on all Coillte projects so I must 
commend you on that.  A couple of questions I suppose in terms of 
the tracks and trails that are available in Avondale at the moment, 
you were saying there would be some work to maybe upgrade 
those, I suppose they're so popular in terms of running and walking 
and family exercise, I think that's imperative that is probably one of 
the first things if possible, to be upgraded.  My second point is, the 
whole connectivity to Avondale, we know the road network isn't 

wonderful from Rathdrum to Avondale and I want to comment, 
commend the Cathaoirleach, he had the initiative to and get 
involved in a footpath from Avondale to Rathdrum or Rathdrum to 
Avondale but I suppose, I envisaged this to be a huge, hugely popular 
venue and I'm a little concerned about the road structure network in 
and around the Avondale site whether that's, you know capable of 
taking possibly the amount of traffic that would be on the road when 
this opens up.  And my third point is charging for the activities, I 
suppose I just want to, I'd like to make the point we're going to 
expect a lot of families and a lot of family visits to Avondale and 
make sure that in terms of charging for activities that is affordable 
for families because at the end of the day we're looking to attract 
people, not only to Avondale but to Wicklow as a county and that's 
something I'd be strong in terms of the value for money experience 
that families would have.  So, once again, well done, and really, 
really look forward to it, I'm keen on the whole tree-top experience 
so looking forward to it all and well done. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Deborah, I'll take them in threes if you don't 
mind, Cllr Lourda Scott. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Thanks Deborah, I remember your presentation last 
year and particularly being restricted to 5K, I can't wait to get down 
to Avondale myself.  Second the question on charging and being a 
parent of young kids myself it is really important that certain, I 
understand you have to charge into certain activities, but a large part 
of the park will remain open to ramble around.  That would be 
important.  On the upgrading of tracks and trails, and I'd know why 
they need to be done but make the point I hope that would be done 

with environmentally sensitive material, and not just slapping down 
a pile of cement in our lovely forest, and the tree top walk and 
education piece on trees and the fact you're minding the forest and 
rehabilitating forest, that's so well and the fact getting families and 
people up to really value the nature that as much as they're going to 
enjoy and participate activities to value nature and hopefully learn 
about minding it will be valuable as wall. 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN: Thanks Deborah are for the presentation and 
Cathaoirleach because my family connections I spend a lot of time in 
the country there, and they're showing their integrated, 
multifunctional educational outdoor spaces and it is great to see I'll 
show off something in the future and Cllr Shay Cullen asked a 
question I was going to ask about the whole infrastructure and 
importance of joined up thinking about maximising this absolutely 
breath-taking opportunity that we have.  So yeah to comment on 
that and how important that is, and again, Cathaoirleach, I'm sure, 
you would be familiar with this, about you it is so valuable to see 
how the county operates in terms of the LCDC and leader funding 
where we're funding project who are also may become assets for the 
outdoor educational stuff like outing and initiative coming there so 
the potential for coming up of all the actions and activities of the 
council could bring this to a whole other level but fantastic 
presentation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Deborah, before I bring you in, and can you come 
in then, but I'll ask director Colm Lavery in relation to the roads, 
because I know he will be up to speed with that.  And then I'll come 

back to you is that all right. You're on mute. 
  
COLM:  Yeah, I suppose we have spoken before in relation to the 
roads infrastructure, and obviously it would require some upgrading 
in terms both of surface and maybe there's a requirement forever 
additional footpath as well I've looked at the road when I was out on 
low at issue is around coaches that will be travelling in to the park 
and obviously the road as it is at the moment is two-way but my 
understanding is that it is proposed that it will be a one-way system 
within the park itself.  And that coaches will be allow today travel 
one way on the road in particular, but we agreed we'll work Coillte 
to come up with a solution that best suits getting people in and out 
of the visitor attraction.  Like everyone else we expect that it is going 
to be very popular, and it is going to attract a lot of tourism and the 
last thing that we want is to create a traffic problem in the area.  
We're also looking how best to connect Avondale back into 
Rathdrum and we're looking at various improvements in Rathdrum 
as well. 
Both in terms of the main street and the public realm within the 
town.  We're also putting in at the moment a crossing across the 
main road to connect a pedestrianised crossing to connect Rathdrum 
to Avondale, so we continue to work with Coillte and the members 
of Arklow Municipal District to improve the roads infrastructure 
around Avondale thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, and just at this point, Colm I want to 
thank you for the interest you have taken and work you've done 
here. 

DEBORAH:  Welcome to Colm and support of the council and 
reiterate there will be a one-way system in and out of Avondale for 
the tourist traffic, the main road in and out will remain as a two-way 
road but the idea is you'll drive in through the main gate into the car 
park and creating and a new exit on the back road that will leads on 
beyond and re-joins the Rathdrum road so the tourist traffic will flow 
in one direction so should limit any significant impact on the main 
road in and out of Avondale, particularly as residents, that will 
remain two way so a lot of thought has gone into that so it works 
well, the situation in Glendalough, one way in and out does create 
challenges and we worked hard to ensure that's not the case of 
Avondale.  Tracks and trails, upgrade, I was running in there over the 
last few years and sometimes as a runner, you want the muddy trails 
and it is fantastic and I love it but there's trails we need to sure 
they're fully accessible, family cycling and disabled access and having 
the challenging trails where you don't want a proper big path U you 
want the interaction with nature, rough and muddy trail so we're 
looking at all of that, but the plan isn't to build signatories it is work 
with what we have because there's lovely wild trails in Avondale and 
to maintain those, and getting back to the pointed that Lourda 
brought up the park remains open, it is open forest policy in Coillte 
so people to go in and enjoy the park it is there as a public amenity 
and always will be there.  We are obviously will be the two main paid 
attractions and that's going to be the living history in the house and 
tree top walk.  The walled garden people will access, this isn't going 
to be the private realm of the cafe or anything like that, everywhere 
else will be free and people will access the park as they do today.  

So, it is really those two elements which they do need, there's costs 
to run and build them, overall, I suppose the investment in Avondale 
if you combine both the works of Coillte doing and EAK with the tree 
top walk you're talking about 15 million investment so it has to be 
commercially sustainable, we're not looking fund but we're looking 
for a site that self-sustains itself and generates a small income to 
generate in the park itself.  There was a question with regard to the 
nature and that education piece and that is absolutely fundamental.  
We think this fantastic opportunity to for people to engage with that 
I fewer, I have a new team of ecologist and we've done a biodiversity 
management plan and everything from how we take out the laurel 
and look at the impact of that and how we'll thin the trees because 
we need, I know people will hear a chain saw, the trees need to be 
thinned and young trees growing up, multi-age vibrant forest in 
Avondale so that's why we brought in the two independent experts 
to bring up the management plan.  Every Forrester will watch what 
we do because it is such an important history of sites.  Especially for 
the Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy, I want to commend you ionizability and 
inclusion that's clearly gone on when you look at the different 
elements of the project and make sure the greatest number of 
people in our community have access to t there's one area I 
wondered had there been considered, there was talk previously and 
that's about put ago Changing Places in the Facilities and Cllr Miriam 
Murphy has raised this, it is something as county of wide level we're 
looking at and if you could comment whether that's been included in 
the plans, that would be great. 
DEBORAH:  We are made sure there's a space big you have and 

designed an accessibility toilet in the outbuildings for that, what we 
don't have, I don't have in my budget is to fit it out as a changing 
place, but it has been designed to scale and scale it is there, and can 
be done, so we have considered that as part of the plans yes. 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  That's the first step. 
CLLR WALSH:  Yeah, just again, thanks Deborah for the presentation, 
hugely exciting project and going to be a much-anticipated addition 
to the Wicklow, but my question has been asked, I take it the 
one-way system that you referred to will apply to the construction 
stage of the project as well, for construction traffic as well. 
CLLR KENNEDY: Cllr Paul O'Brien I want to help the project, as 
someone walked in the treetops in South Africa, I want to welcome 
it, Avoca river, have you plans to incorporate the plans in this, as 
someone who frequencies there with the dogs it is a beautiful park 
there's scenery down there and old buildings covered over, along the 
way as well so, it would be interesting to see something done with 
the walking trails down there as well. 
 
DEBORAH:  On the construction traffic, obviously we need to build a 
new access road out of the park so again that will all be part of the 
construction management plan so initially we will have to in and out 
of the front gate until we build the extension of the car park and exit 
out of the estate so we will work with construction team with Sisk 
with that and inclusive min mise the local residents in the area, but 
luckily we have a huge amount of space to work with here so it 
shouldn't be too disruptive, Avon more river, the river walk, so 
separate to this project I do know the design, someone sent e-mail 

there's a bridge going past the rugby club that will connect the castle 
so ultimately you will be able to walk from Lara, and get all the way 
into Avondale so that walk will be completed into Avondale which I 
think is absolutely fantastic, it is a stunning walk, I totally agree.  And 
again, but it is a wild walk, what we would like is maintained as the 
wild walk, this is not a place where we want to build a large trail, we 
want people to go down through the woods and because you have 
to cross the river it is a challenging walk.  But, yeah, absolutely, so, 
that's, one thing we're looking forward to is we will have a direct link 
not only through the train station, but we also talk through 
infrastructure and again it will be seeing how we again can attract 
people on day visits come by train and walk into Avondale because 
there's a path directly into Avondale from the railway station.  So, 
yeah, there is plans for that, and we look forward to getting tag 
second bridge built to connect to the castle. 
 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you.  One of the most interesting things to 
me about Avondale park was the mature trees planted as specimen 
trees and next to them as forest trees the same type of tree and I 
just, would like to see that sort of side is emphasised, it is unusual to 
see mature trees in that contrast, so I hope that's preserved. 
Cllr Peir Leonard I just want to commend you as it is fantastic, I've 
been liaising and part of a another project that would connect into 
this lovely with Cllr Pat Kennedy we're working to harbour to head 
project with the east rivers trust whom I'm a board member of, in 
relation to it I'd love to tie in with you to link them together and 
there was a fantastic presentation by a gentleman called Coly 

McLoughlin about the ancient forests along the river and it could tie 
in with the whole educational viewpoint of Coillte and the forest and 
biodiversity and everything.  And just in relation to using this timber 
that's fantastic but wondering could I maybe put a little bit of 
pressure on to use locally sourced paving and stuff instead of 
important paving from China and you know to look at local crafters 
as well and stonemasons and incorporate that as much as possible 
into the plan.  Thanks. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks chair and Deborah for her presentation 
today, it is very exciting news and definitely going to be a 
game-changer for Rathdrum and for Wicklow.  I just have a couple of 
questions - I think the answered one of them but just want to have 
reiterate position with regard to just casual Walkers who go there 
regularly to walk, I'm assuming they won't be charged, and it will still 
remain a public amenity.  With regard to the trees, I'm wondering if 
there are any old historic trees there, such as there are in Cool Park 
where WB Yates and lady Gregory and people like that used to sit 
around and carve their initials in, I'm wondering if there are old 
historic trees related to Charles Stewart panel, maybe photographed 
beside and whoever he was visiting and just hope they would be 
preserved if possible.  I suppose you can't really give us a completion 
date because of COVID-19, and I just wish the project well and 
hopefully it won't be too long before we're all going out there. 
Deborah:  Absolutely, maybe touch on the trees and getting back to 
Cllr Derek Mitchell's comment, this is about protecting the trees, 
there are magnificent trees throughout the estate and we will look 

to thin some out to let new generation come up and we will be 
looking to have a strong robust forest, we have a number, like 26 
Irish champion trees, 12 UK and Ireland champion trees in the 
estate, these are well known and marked and we absolutely 
preserved as part of this, so it does, Avondale has incredible heritage 
of mature and champion trees so that's part of the forest plan we 
brought in Mick Kean to ensure the preservation of those, so that's 
part of the forest management plan to protect those trees but it is 
looking at the broader landscape within the park and bringing and 
making sure the arbitration is there in the future.  There will be a 
small of clear fell taking out newer commercial trees and develop 
new trial plots so Avondale, there's 55 different species of trees 
broadly conifers and they were laid out in different plots to see how 
they grew in Ireland and we hope to do that as part of the project, to 
introduce new trial plots and look at forestry for the future, there's a 
key element is maintaining and enhancing the forest within 
Avondale.  Going back to Cllr Peir Leonard's question around 
connecting walks, absolutely we have local trail officer, and he's 
been involved with the connection over at the castle and the river 
walk so happy to talk to you after this about that.  Again, this is all 
about people have really discovered how important the outdoors is 
and walk amenities are for everybody at the moment so the more 
we can have the better we have the trails linked through Coillte sites 
or anybody else's land, that is something we should work towards so 
happy to discuss that. 
And the Walkers piece again, as today, the forest is open again, we 
will be putting in a car park, they will be charging the annual cars but 

anybody from Rathdrum, they can walk in Avondale as we can with 
any forest parks, and it cost you nothing.  We will reduce the charge 
the car park, and annual passes is 40 a year, but if you're walking in 
from Rathdrum there's no charge to use it, and never has been and 
won't in the future. 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  Two more speakers looking to come in. 
CLLR CREAN:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Thanks for the presentation, it 
sounds brilliant.  I was particularly impressed with the management 
piece in terms of sustainability approach to using local timber and 
local employment.  Was that part of your criteria award for the 
procurement of the project? 
 
>>:  Yes, the procurement obviously is based on public procurement, 
we go through a standard process of advertisement to OG and so on, 
but key piece we're doing with the likes of EAK is working with Irish 
timber and our own foresters, there's a bit of competition in Coillte 
to source the beautiful Douglas, and Wicklow team are playing an 
absolute blinder in pack making sure we have structural stuff 
sourced in Wicklow so you know it is about we want to showcase 
this, is Coillte, this is a view to what Irish timber can do and our 
beautiful forest, so again, we're doing everything in our power, 
within procurement constraints to ensure we do that. 
And again, working with Sisk, they want to work with us on these 
issues, I can't say everything will be sourced and locally provided in 
Wicklow, that's never the case but we're doing as much work as we 
did can, to ensure it is local. 

 
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and thanks for the 
presentation, exciting days for Avondale.  Just wondering, some 
people were offer the impression there might be a playground as 
part of this project is that still the case and could you confirm that? 
  
>>:  Of course, absolutely.  So, we have, you know where we have 
the playground at the moment, we will be moving a playground into 
the walled garden, and again it makes it a safe place where kids 
people can sit in the garden and know their kids are corralled to as 
much as you want them in a formal playground, but we're looking at 
interactive play throughout the estate itself.  Wooden timber to 
climb on, proper natural play areas throughout the estate but will be 
a formal one in the walled garden but natural play areas in and 
around the estate as well. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Just before I let you go, and I will he give the Chief 
Executive the last word because I know he's very interested in this 
redevelopment.  Just to acknowledge the work that the foresters do 
out there, and also assayed earlier on the way you kept the 
community informed all the way through the whole process, when 
you are starting the construction, there's not that many houses from 
Saville Seas Cross to Avondale maybe call to those again and let 
them know when you are he starting, one of the former for rest 
managers lived beside the gates I introduced that to him and maybe 
call to the houses to keep the people up to speed and I know Barry 
and Tom and Jasper do all great work out there.  I'll bring in the Chief 
Executive in to give him the final word. 

Chief Executive:  It is extremely welcome from a tourist point of view 
and I can see whole generations of school tours going there from 
education point of view, and it will be hugely successful, I'm looking 
to know that a grant of 8 million is the largest grant that Failte 
Ireland has ever given out, they have a strategic relationship with 
Coillte natural parks and wildlife and ourselves so you don't have to 
go through a competitive process for the grants so that's bodes well 
in the study of Glendalough and National Park, I was hoping to tap 
into that funding, so congratulations to you and Coillte, it is a great 
project and best of luck with it. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thank you very much for your time for being with 
us, we look forward to the start and we definitely look forward to 
the finish, our best wishes to awful the team developing Avondale 
thank you. 
  
>>:  Thanks very much indeed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item is to receive a presentation in the county 
welcome low outdoor strategy 2020 to 25 and was deferred in 
February and we have Humphrey with us are you with us today. 
>>:  I am indeed. 
>>:  Thank you, we look forward to your presentation.? 
>>:  Thank you.  I'll share the screen then. 
  
HUMPHREY:  First of all, thank you very much for inviting me here 
today to go through the strategy.  And I suppose, there's a couple of 
key elements within it.  This current strategy again didn't appear 
from out of the blue, it is built on previous recreation strategies and 

I'll go through that and the consultation process to that reengage 
with the members of the community and various other agencies and 
so on.  I suppose then the final part of the presentation will look at 
what does the strategy say and where is it bringing us.  But the key 
theme that runs through the entire strategy is this one of value.  So, 
valuing the outdoors and valuing outdoor recreation in Wicklow in 
particular.  The first strategy, existing strategy, 2009 that was first 
strategy in the country around outdoor recreation and led to a 
number of specific outcomes and one of the importance was 
development of Wicklow outdoor recreation committee and that 
brings together the various agencies who were involved in 
landownership and outdoor recreation in general, it's proven to be 
effective means for our forum for those different organisations and 
points of view to gather and to look at what is needed within the 
county and then to realise the development of outdoor recreation. 
Part of that process, and as part of the wider partnership agenda 
that's come about within recreation in County Wicklow, again 
organisations such as uplands partnership where the landowners 
and various other organisations involved in the uplands and 
recreation uses there's interaction in order to head off problems and 
come up with good sluice solutions there's various others as well, 
County Wicklow is the first county to put together a set of guidelines 
for events, we're looking at the Suas came and Blueway water based 
concept emanating from County Wicklow and will stretch down to 
Wexford and border of Cork. 
Currently as well, there's a lot of animation taking place and 
animation I suppose is a nice way of getting people active in the 

outdoors, beyond simply putting in infrastructure.  So, the Wicklow 
Tourism Wicklow local sports and recreation partnership and 
Wicklow rural recreation is involved, and local people to engage in 
the outdoors in their neighbourhood. 
The central element to this entire story of outdoor recreation of the 
county are the landowners.  Without access to the land, through 
Coillte or the National Parks, but also primarily with local landowners 
and farmers there's no outdoor recreation in the county and we 
continue to rely on their generosity and the generosity and 
forbearance of the communities that host outdoor recreation 
participants, volunteers and organisations that support that access 
and indeed work in areas such as repairing trails and so on.  Now, 
that outdoor recreation strategy of 2009-2014 was present as we 
see a host of other strategies that point to the outdoors as being 
fundamental to their agendas, if it is the health agenda, heritage, 
sustainable transport, biodiversity, they point to the outdoors as 
being this is where these things happen where their agendas can be 
met as well.  So, County Wicklow will fix the right approach in terms 
of the strategic approach and also, we're seeing the other national 
strategies and so on, more or less following the same agenda.  And 
the challenge now is not so much as it was back then-to-of 
highlighting the value of the potential of the outdoors in County 
Wicklow the challenge has shifted and this I suppose is one of the 
key themes and focus of the new strategy, the challenge is now 
managing that volume of use and the diversity of use in the outdoors 
within the county.  There's increasingly number of events held here 
and diverse range of activities taking place, and again, this is leading 

to points and pressures on the host communities and on to the 
infrastructure.  And what was coming through from the research, 
where a number of themes, avoiding the overload, making sure the 
landowners and communities aren't being overloaded with the 
pressure of outdoor recreation participants, likewise the place has 
the infrastructure and environment that's used that equally is 
treated with respect. 
And also, then there should be benefit, that the communities that 
people that live in the areas should have the communities and the 
motivation to take part in the outdoors as well.  And also, then this 
ongoing issue of maintaining and improving the quality of what's on 
offer.  And one of the key themes again that's popped up, is the 
extent to which the local economy is benefiting from the outdoors.  
Again, the consultation identifies a number of concerns from the 
commercial and also from the communities, that a lot of money was 
spent out on the M50 by visitors, they buy sandwiches and patrolling 
and so on and into County Wicklow but not necessarily spend in the 
local economy and how do we improve that and change not just the 
practical issues but culture.  How do we create local multiplies from 
a direct recreation?  And this is consistent with the tourism strategy 
for the county of increasing the tourism spend in the area.  When we 
talk then about the community benefiting from outdoors, it is things 
like the key issues popping up were more village trails Maces to walk 
off the road close to the small communities likewise cycleways more 
water access for activities on the water.  Levels of inclusion, more 
diversity of activities and places to go to, and again water sports and 
again having more of a community centred, valuing the visitors more 

outdoor recreation opportunities for those communities, particularly 
for the outline areas.  And again, those opportunities are affordable 
and close by. 
So, the strategy identifies in broad terms three, Wicklow is 
wonderful, there was no complaint about what is on offer in the 
county.  The challenges though are and again you will be aware 
there's a pressure demand on those locations, not just in terms of 
the hosts, but also on the ecosystem that is provide the basis of the 
outdoor recreation experience itself.  But also, then it is untapped 
potential and number of tracks, places, locations, and amenities that 
aren't being used to the extent they could be, and how do we tap 
into that.  This then is the strategy, in essence there, are four key 
pillars within the strategy, planning side, increasing awareness, 
awareness not just of the location but responsibility, resources 
required and how do we animate that.  The strategy identifies then 
some key actions around those.  Again, looking at more outdoor 
recreation hubs and clusters throughout the county, more marine 
and water opportunities, I suppose the structure strategic approach 
to managing and increasing trails, increased spend on public 
transport links and infrastructure and working with the neighbouring 
counties around outdoor recreation, particularly the Dublin hills.  
Again, generally more awareness, not just in terms of environmental 
or physical awareness but cultural awareness of what people should 
be doing when they come into the county, such as spending money 
locally and so on.  Having agreed a world view in terms of how we 
can develop outdoor recreation in the county, and to manage those 
relationships and again working, continuing to work with the 

communities and businesses and enterprises in the county. 
Again, resources, there's a portfolio of projects that have been 
identified that can be delivered as part of this strategy, prioritising 
those and having targets around them and again the training needs 
required in order to deliver outdoor recreation effectively.  And 
indeed, an important element then is the staff required for that 
strategy to be delivered.  And then continuation of the animation, 
that everybody is outdoors, particularly in the, from the local 
community there's outdoor recreation timetable and a lot of work 
being done in this area and it is about continuity, really of a lot of the 
work that the County Wicklow outdoor recreation, sports and 
recreation partnership are doing at the moment.  So, at the far end, 
the strategy when it is delivered should result in these key themes, 
or these cross-cutting areas, there should be a greater level of 
participation but dispersed around the county.  And also, more data 
on what type of participation, where it is and taking place and more 
inclusion for people with disabilities. 
There could be a greater range of infrastructure.  Improved public 
transport and parking and also, more retail and commercial activities 
to benefit from outdoor recreation participation.  Continuing to 
manage the brand, and the perspective of what people have around 
Wicklow, the growth in marine based activities and commercial and 
club level.  And then also, that we should see economic return at 
local level from the development of outdoor recreation within the 
county. 
And again, for this to happen we're looking again at more skill settles 
agencies being involved, collaborating on the realisation of the 

strategy, the ownership and the staff that are required in order to 
deliver the various elements of strategy, expertise and then, this 
significant challenge of securing 20 million of resources, to deliver 
strategy over the next five years.  And again, formalised structure or 
rather further formality to the structure with what exists and current 
people who are involved in the outdoors in the county, what's being 
asked by the strategy extends beyond that, it is clear that a 
dedicated member of staff, take responsibility and lead out and 
prioritise the various aspect of this strategy.  That's more or less me 
folks, I don't know if there's thoughts, questions or comments on the 
proposed outdoor strategy for the county. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, I'll wait until I see the screen back. 
Great.  Thanks for the presentation, I'm going to bring in director 
Michael Nicholson first. 
MICHAEL:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, just want to that I Humphrey 
for all his work and consultation producing excellent report.  Also 
want to thank Carol without whose help would be possible and 
mention the Wicklow outdoor committee who tear steered us 
through this whole consultation period and produced a fabulous 
document, it is a great document to have for our outdoor recreation 
scheme applications and others we will make in years to come when 
you have a document like this it gives great weight to any application 
we make.  So, I hope now we can make this to bring more money 
into the county and that's it Chair, just to thank you everyone 
involved in this, it is a great piece of work. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you director. 

CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  And thanks Humphrey for 
your presentation and Carol and Michael and all the team and 
committee that's involved.  I suppose as somebody who lives in the 
uplands area and has a very serious interest in everything to do with 
recognition creation, I suppose I'm getting increasingly concerned 
about the landowner situation.  And Humphrey mentioned we're 
dependent on the generosity of landowners, but I'm getting the 
impression that landowners are taken for granted and we're on a 
slippery slope we're on if not addressed.  One way to address this is 
the walk scheme that's available and that's primarily able to 
landowners and around the Wicklow way, we're opening up an awful 
lot more walkways around the county that aren't connected to the 
Wicklow way but as far as I'm aware the walk scheme isn't generally 
available to those people so, I'm asking, in some shape or form the 
outdoor recreation committee, put forward some sort of 
presentation to Government to try and extend the walk scheme to 
bring more and more landowners into the net because at the end of 
the day, unless we bring the landowners on board, and give them a 
reason to commit to opening up their land, you know why would 
they, you'd have to ask yourself why would they get involved.  I 
suppose, the second point, we're all very clear that Wicklow is a 
playground for the population of Dublin, and we see, summer after 
summer, where we need extra facilities, particularly in and around 
parking.  And Humphrey mentioned the economy and the spinoff for 
the economy.  Well, I think we need to plan for the economy, and 
what I mean by that is we need to make it easy for landowners and 
people on the routes of trails you know if they want to open up a 

Café or bike hire or camping or glamping or something like that, we 
need from a planning point of view to make it easier for that to 
happen.  I speak to landowners every other day of the week with 
regards to walks and different facilities and the one thing they will 
say to me is there's no point me looking for planning, it won't be 
given so there's a fear for landowners to get involved.  And I think 
we have to overcome that.  And, you know, we have a fantastic 
product in Wicklow in terms of what we can offer people, but we 
have to open it up and think I suppose that phrase "think outside the 
box" but I really feel we can do so much more in Wicklow so there 
are my thoughts on that. 
CLLR O'CONNOR:  Thanks, just one observation, I just wanted to say, 
looking at the delivery themes I would have liked to have seen 
preserving the ecosystem as one of the delivery themes ace long 
side with all of them.  That's just my small comment thank you. 
JOHN:  Hubs, you have 20 million additional spend I presume that's 
additional spend on monies committed, especially green ways, they 
will be multimillion project, so a break down on that, there was 
initiatives, a Government announcement on additional staff to 
deliver outdoor recreational tourism in Ireland and I presume 
Wicklow will be at the heart of that and I just wonder, I know I've 
been on to Michael Nicholson about that, is there confirmation on 
the additional staff and allocation made towards Wicklow? 
And then, just on the landowner consultation, I agree 100% with Cllr 
Shay Cullen but landowner consultation is key, I've been involved in 
managing trails in Tinahely for ten years and we deal with 
landowners every day, I want to see the consultation, particularly as 

the season kicks back in, like trail standardisation all that type of 
thing, and finally, county development plan, regards to the shortage 
of, short-term accommodation, how does the strategy interplay with 
that to make sure we can deliver short-term accommodation for 
people who actually want to stay in the county, we obviously want 
more people to stay in the county as they enjoy the trails throughout 
the county. 
CAROL:  Yes.  I'm actually, taking some of these questions and then if 
you have questions around the process and creating the strategy and 
research, then I'll ask Humphrey and there's one question I'll ask 
Michael.  I'll address the ones I can.  So, yeah, Cllr Shay Cullen I 
completely agree with you with the landowner situation and the fact 
the walk scheme has been limited the Wicklow way, we have the St 
Kevin's way, we have trail expectation inspections on Friday morning 
and waiting on those, two landowners there, and there is a review 
under way of the walk scheme at the moment, and the hope is that 
the outcome of that will be a further extension of the walk scheme 
and also further allocation of rural recreational officers as needed.  
Because different counties have a different need and Wicklow is 
pretty high. 
Yeah, and also, one of my parts of the strategy that interests me, 
aside from all of it is the playground for Dublin people and plan for 
the local economy and certainly under that section of the 
deliverables, there's a couple of project around really working with 
people in the local communities and people who have a business to 
work through understanding product development what, might they 
need to tweak a little bit to gain a whole lot more of the market 

share, what project are people coming, in why are they leaving and 
what trick are we missing and bringing in external expertise to work 
through that and perhaps if we tweaked our offering 10% to the 
right, it would be very beneficial so, that's quite a big part of the 
deliverable is helping to bring money into the local economy and 
keep it here rather than being an afternoon playground for Dublin.  
And then Rory, absolutely under the awareness banner of the 
strategy there's a large piece about protecting ecosystems and biros 
diversity I will get a cop I of the strategy to anyone who would like it, 
if you mail back to, send me an e-mail, I'll put it in the chat and get 
one out to the post to anyone who would like it.  And then John, 
yeah, about 20 million was not based on any current funding so that 
was what we need to make this strategy happen over the next five 
years.  So, yeah, if you take Greenway out of that, that's a chunk out 
of it already, so not there.  In terms of the constant consultation with 
landowners that an output of the walk scheme review, we made it 
clear, I have 80 landowners and currently it is OK, because 
everything is closed but when things start opening up again, I 
suspect we will have a repeat what we had last year with a lot of 
camping, litter, dumping, dogs not on leads and not under control 
and yeah, we will need extra resources to help keep it constant 
consultation through that. 
I'm going to ask Michael if he could come in on the additional staff 
question and short-term accommodation piece.  I'm going to ask for 
Michael to steer on that as well.  I'll put my e-mail address in the 
chat box if anyone would like the strategy piece, let me know. 
  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Humphrey, have your hand up are you coming 
back in. 
>>:  No. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Sorry, so Carol did you want Michael to come in. 
MICHAEL:  Thank you in relation to staff members will be aware 
there's an active travel programme announced by the Government, 
we're going to commit 1.8 billion over the next five years under an 
active travel promotion, and it's not just walking it is walking and 
cycling and they're going to be allocating certain number of staff 
with local authority, we haven't received 100% confirmation who 
we're getting or grades we're getting, there's indicative figures out 
there, but waiting on final confirmation, that may not be 
nostophobia reassigning some staff but a certain amount of staff on 
promoting cycling and walking routes across the county which fits in 
nicely with our new strategy and committee and all the work we've 
done.  And also, we will be looking at a combination as well, as 
mentioned by Carol short of accommodation, if we want to 
encourage people to come to the area, we need to look at 
accommodation and that might be for leader programmes or 
something like that, so looking at that as well and accommodation 
element of the leader programmes which may suit some of the ideas 
as well. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Miriam Murphy. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Lovely to hear the strategy, and excitement, delighted to hear that 
disability was mentioned twice in it which brightens my face up.  I sit 
on the tourist board for a long time, and this is a problem that's 

raised many, many times is how do we keep people, visitors in our 
county and I think some of the problem is that Wicklow, we don't 
have probably high level of light entertain at the same time in towns 
and villages, OK, they like the like outdoor recreation but night time, 
they also like the night entertainment and that's with we fall down in 
our towns and villages as Cllr Shay Cullen said with the landowners 
we're waiting on Shillelagh to progress in that form as well.  Also, 
Carol I said to a meeting to you last week about the inclusion of large 
print on the walks and trails of people with visual impairment, which 
was highlighted at a disability meeting we had, some weeks ago, and 
I thought it was very good point to make.  Also, information boards 
to make sure they're accessible as well so thank you for your 
presentation. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Peir Leonard. 
CLLR LEONARD:  A lot of my points have been answered already, but 
I think, a couple of nails hit on the head - I think it maybe the 
experience there was a brilliant programme being run by Wicklow 
partnership at the moment the entrepreneurs academy and if it 
could be Extend today some of the local small businesses that have 
the guts of an experience and help them diversify, I think it would be 
fantastic if something like that could be rolled out to help small 
businesses to move into areas to provide more experiences and keep 
people here for longer and just in relation to your accommodation, I 
agree full heartedly, And just the whole marine and offshore, 
beaches and stuff like that, it would be great to incorporate more, 
we're sitting with the Irish Sea on those posts here there and it is 

totally underutilised and rivers as well and in the coming rivers when 
Avoca is cleaned it will be a hive of activity. 
  
CAROL:  Yeah, so, Miriam I think that's it is a very good point about 
the inclusion of large print and making signage accessible, it is easy 
fix, and something not often thought of.  You think accessibility and 
think wheelchairs but you're right and we have a lot of signage under 
way at the moment, so I'll ensure that's taken on board.  Pier that's a 
great idea about the entrepreneurship academy, it is practical help 
we can hover in the areas where we're looking to develop and 
looking to help local people to figure out, well, what do I need to do 
to grow my business and it is not that anyone's doing anything 
wrong they could change 2% and it will unlock the whole thing for 
them and the on the coastal piece, it is designated recreation hub in 
this strategy because it is absolutely recognised that all we talk 
about is walking in Wicklow and all about the walking trails and so 
much on the coast to offer and we should encompass that, and we 
should embrace it, and help it to rise up in the same way as hill 
walking and outdoor recreation has. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks a million, and Humphrey thanks for a most 
interesting report.  I think Wicklow is ... 
CLLR WALSH:  Quickly a word, two interesting presentations we had, 
one from the Glendalough master plan and the other one is 
accommodation subgroup accommodation report, so they're 
referred to outdoor recreation sector, ... 
Are you receiving me?  You know the dispersal of the numbers, 

honey pot sites, connectivity and the accommodation vacuum 
obviously and the fact we need to encourage existing B&Bs to 
expand and encourage people into the tourism accommodation 
sector which incentivises them, that's well in the report and in the 
other report, it is well identified.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR CORRIGAN:  Can I come in as well please. 
Thanks very much.  Thank you that was an excellent report, really 
well received.  I just want to agree with wholeheartedly with Cllr 
Shay Cullen I know everybody else has as well but end game with 
landowners is key and I really welcome the walking scheme being 
extended out but we need to at least come down, the farmers need 
to be told and landowners need to be informed about it, we're doing 
it as councillors, but more engagement is needed there.  Another 
problem up on the uplands and the Wicklow area is we've 
mentioned parking, it is a huge problem on weekends, farm 
gateways with cars abandoned and road you can't pass, I spoke 
about this too with the tourism, Park and Ride I think would be a 
great idea working more engagement with bus services, where you 
can leave a small village, walk a certain area and get on the bus then 
and it will take you back and encourage just less cars to be brought 
out as well. 
Yeah, you mentioned there about more signage I really welcome 
that, I was going to bring that up.  We need that hugely out in the 
mountain area, dogs on leads, particularly with lambing season it is 
causing huge problems, ever river weekend in the Enniskerry it is on 
the forum, a dog is lost, and I mean, people don't realise the damage 

that can cause - gates have to be closed, and walls not climbed over 
and broken down, bring your litter home, simple messages and as 
Cllr Miriam Murphy said a sign with a picture depict a huge thing but 
it would be very welcome.  The mapping of walks also, there's 
engagement at the moment with mapping out the walks which 
would be hugely helpful with the Park and Ride for people in the 
future.  Where you can go from one area to the other and also, 
bribing trails as well the bikes are doing a huge amount of damage in 
some areas where they're not official trailside' like to see, more 
signage saying no bikes in this area if possible.  Because I know 
there's a lot of, where money has gone into official bike trails so it 
would be nice to concentrate on those areas as opposed to 
damaging other areas, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Carol, last word with you. 
CAROL:  Address a couple of Melanie's points there and wrap up.  
Yeah, it is very, it is so important that we engage with landowners, 
without them we have nothing, and Coillte and NPWS is 
accommodating with their land but they have a reason to be.  
Whereas the goodwill of farmers is just so underappreciated and 
without it we would have no Wicklow Way or Kevin's Way, we would 
have no Dublin Mountains Way, it is vital, so, yeah, I am certainly 
going to take that on board and figure out how we can do better.  In 
terms of Park and Ride that's absolutely on the exploratory plan for 
both the Glendalough programme and within this strategy.  Yeah, it's 
very important.  We have two mapping project under way at the 
moment, that, so, County Wicklow partnership and host B as rural 

officer and Michael team and CWP we applied for nine RS project 
and two tech-based and about mapping so we're currently digitising 
all the trails if Wicklow so that instead of you want to go to Coillte 
forest and you have to go do Coillte site and down load a paper map 
and the same with NPWS you have to know where you're going so 
we have a contractor is digitising all the Coillte trails and NPWS and 
county council trails and 30 routes well used in the county and they 
will all be available on an online platform in one place, that's phase 
one and hopefully once we get the measured two decisions out we 
will have a proper outdoor recreation website. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I interrupt you for one second and I will come 
back to you.  But unfortunately, due to the way the time works, 
members, can I propose that we go for time extension, it is a large 
agenda and we're getting through it quite well and I'd like to finish 
the agenda and get on to the notices if at all possible, can I have your 
support we go for time extension until 5.30.  Agreed.  Thank you.  I 
have to do this that before 4.30pm.  Sorry for the interruption. 
DEBORAH:  Not at all, perhaps I should truncate my speaking, so, 
mapping is under way, and we know it is very important and it is not 
great the way it is currently.  Bike trails, yeah, in that specific 
mountain issues or scrambler issues or both. 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  Mountain bike issues. 
CAROL:  I'll talk to Deborah offline because it is illegal for mountain 
bikers to be on Coillte land unless designated trail so perhaps it is 
more of awareness piece on that.    But, overall, this has been a great 
process, Humphrey's work is phenomenal the depth of analysis and 

research that went into building that document is world class and 
we're very lucky and privileged to have it.  And I think it gives us in 
Wicklow a fabulous road maybe for the next five years, we know, 
we've got the jewel in the crown, we have mountains, sea and 
Glendalough, and this gives structure to manage that really well and 
to protect the value we got in the tone so yeah, it is extremely 
exciting and I'm really glad that you're all here to hear about it and 
thank you for your time. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you for all the work you do in the county, it 
is all starting to bear fruit and we appreciate it, thank you both. 
We're going for a time extension, so what I'll do is go with item 16 on 
the agenda now.  Is to receive presentation from Wicklow County 
Council's deck later on the housing construction programme and B 
part which is the homeless figures as was agreed at the council 
meeting held on Monday 11th January, so deck later and Jackie and 
then we'll take the questions so.  Declan are you with us. 
DECLAN:  Good afternoon.  Can you hear me all right? 
I'll just put up the presentation now.  Just to mention David Porter 
will be coming in as part of the presentation about part five in 
particular.  So, just to cover the housing supply programme 
particularly the Capital projects.  This is our supply for last year and 
this year, as you can see, we achieved the department targets for 
both, last year, and we're, we were on target to achieve for 2021, 
until the lockdown hit so we don't know yet, it depends when 
construction is allowed back before we'll know what effect that will 
have on our targets for this year.  But you can see the direct build 
has become a bigger part of our targets and next slide will show that 

more graphically.  Just show it there in 2018 the direct build was 
quite a reasonably small part and again in 2019, but, for 2020, and 
2021, it is much more significant part.  The numbers are overall as 
well.  But proportionately the direct build forms a bigger part of our 
deliver review business programme.  This is the schemes that were 
delivered in 2020, spread pretty much around the county, you can 
see we had schemes in ever I Municipal District and part of the 
delivery in some schemes that are finished off at the moment and 
then, towards the end there, we have some turnkey schemes from 
Wicklow County Council directly and through Part Vs, that's an aerial 
photograph of the Kilbride Court development in Bray, which is 
nearing completion, a number of units were handed over before 
Christmas, and the rest are being finished off at the moment, but we 
will be occupying those together because it is quite a tight site it 
wouldn't be possible to do a phased occupation. 
I just want to thank Paul Driver who did the drone footage for all of 
the photographs I have.  And for 20201 this is our proposed delivery 
the remainder of Kilbride Court, and Carnew, that's finished now, 
those eight houses are allocated at the moment.  Merrymeeting in 
Rathnew, is being finished out as well, Delaney Park, that's closed 
down and we're waiting for that to reopen.  The last is very much 
dependent on when the reopening is allowed to whether they'll 
deliver this year or not and the number of the turnkeys, we've a 
large number of SHB turnkeys and that's dependent when the sites 
are allow today reopen as well. 
That's our development in Jameson Heights is Kilmac which is fully 
occupied now.  As you can see it is a nice development of 20 units.  

Proposed delivery for 2022 then and some of these maybe affected 
by the shutdown, Avondale Heights in Rathdrum and Mountain View 
were due to start in January but obviously those delays, those starts 
have been delayed now, Arklow is out to tender, Cedar Court in Bray 
finalised document and Wicklow, our design team are going through 
a tender analysis at the moment.  And Charlesland in Greystones, 
we're finalising tender documents and hopefully going to tendineae 
the next few months on that one. 
That's an aerial view in Baltinglass delivered late 2019 and early 2020 
yeah.  That's a scheme of 34 units in Baltinglass post-2022, we're 
looking at various sites around the county and we will be bringing 
them to individual Municipal Districts before we do a Part 8, a 
number of them are at advanced stage with infrastructural 
difficulties in some towns, I suppose, the biggest high profile one 
would be Arklow where we're told the sewage scheme should be 
delivered this 2025, so we're looking at site that we have in Arklow, 
and we have three large site between Bray, Greystones and Kilcoole, 
where, there will be an affordable housing element as well because 
they're big site, too big to put all social housing on them, so, we're 
looking at the kind of model that will come up there, and we're 
waiting on the finalisation of the national affordable housing 
scheme.  Partnership with approved housing bodies, they're involved 
in a number of turnkeys but directly on our land the central garage 
site in Bray that Part 8, has been granted for that, and they're at 
tender stage and shortly be advertising a Part 8 for the other two 
site, Upper Dargle Road in Bray, and Killarney Road Kilbride Lodge 
site.  We're also looking at incorporating into the Rehills, a supported 

housing proposal in conjunction with approved housing body.  That's 
part of proposal for that site.  On affordable housing I mentioned 
we're waiting on the finalisation of the scheme and it is considered 
on a number of our sites, the main provisions of the bill recently 
published were a supposition there's three main options, first is that 
we would deliver affordable housing on our sites but as I said, we 
don't know what fund something available for that yet or how it 
would work.  The second part of it then would-be affordable 
purchase shared equity scheme where, purchasers would be assisted 
in buying private housing on a shared equity basis, and then the 
third one is cost rental, which is something we have used in the past 
as well.  Acquisitions, there was 45 housing acquired in 2020, and 
that included 23 in Blessington purchased by Cluid, the development 
near Dunnes Stores in Blessington, remainder one-off purchases and 
allocation we're expecting it to be limited in 2021, targeted for 
particular need, especially need houses or that.  But we're not 
expecting to get a large allocation.  Leasing then, it is one of the 
social housing delivery options in rebuilding Ireland, and there is a 
fair billet of interest in it, the different types are long-term lease, 
short-term, there's repair and lease which hasn't been as successful 
as initially thought, mortgage to rent and enhanced lease, enhanced 
lease is for the larger scale development.  We've one under 
construction now in Adelaide Road in Bray where there's 71 units 
and due for delivery later this year, that depends on how much the 
delays are due to COVID-19 will cause there. 
And enhanced leases then I suppose the way it works it targets 
property develop E on a kind of reasonable scale, bigger, more than 

20 units is the way it is defined and it is administered by the housing 
agency so the application from the developer goes initially to the 
housing agency, it is off billion sheets so it doesn't have to come out 
of capital expenditure because the payments are made annually and 
made for 20 years and up to 95% of market rents have paid and that 
reflect the fact that the developer or the owner of the property looks 
after the maintenance of the property.  And again, the housing 
agency are due to advertise again on that shortly, so, it could result 
in units being offered in areas where we wouldn't have got turnkeys 
in the past, particularly I suppose in the higher cost areas around 
Bray and Greystones and that. 
The way the tenant management works then in these properties is 
that they will be allocated in accordance with the scheme of letting 
priorities so the allocations by Wicklow County Council in accordance 
with our scheme, once allocated then, the tenant is taken off the 
housing waiting list but as in with other schemes they can apply for a 
transfer, subsequently.  Then, the council collects disks rent in the 
normal way and the maintenance of the unit is looked after the 
owner of the property, but state management is looked after and 
held by Wicklow County Council, by the local authority. 
So that's just a brief run through our Capital schemes, I'll hand over 
to David to talk to you about Part V. 
  
DAVID:  Thank you Declan, I just want to give a short presentation, to 
the members.  So, they understand how the Part V is operating in 
the county at the moment.  And we'll start with the legislation, 
section 96 of the planning and development act introduced a 

provision that a sped percentage of land zoned solely for residential 
use can be made available for social and affordable housing and the 
initial provision was 20% and agreement could take the form of land, 
units or financial settlement and exemptions were initially for four 
units or less 
This is just a photograph of one of the minister V units we bought, 
Carrig Beag in Wicklow, we bought five turnkeys and they're 
Bungalow units, very flexible and useful. 
Now, in relation to the biggest changes made in the Part V legislation 
you are began regeneration housing act made very large and 
sweeping changes, the most significant of which were reduction in 
the requirement from 20% to 10% and increase in the number of 
units from 4 to 9 for exemption purposes under section 97 and 
changes how the Part V maybe agreed and that meant the financial 
settlement option was removed entirely.  The developer has a 
number of options in making a Part V agreement.  Transfer of land, 
transfer of units, transfer of units off site within the functional area 
and subject to the agreement with the council.  Lease of units on or 
off site again subject to agreement.  A combination of the transfer of 
land and one or more other option, or combination of two or more 
options not including land but it is important to note that the 
department's preference is always for units.  Now, the local 
authority considerations when making an agreement, whether the 
proposed agreement will contribute effectively and efficiently to the 
achievement of housing strategy, the agreement will contribute to 
the best use of resources available to ensure adequate housing and 
implications of agreement as functions of housing authority.  The 

need to counteract undue segregation in housing between persons 
of different social barrack Bach grounds in the area of authority.  
Whether the agreement is in accordance with the provisions of the 
development plan and the time within which the housing referred to 
in section 94: 4, is likely to be provided as consequence of the 
agreement.  Now, just to give you an idea of the agreement's prior to 
2015, it wasn't uncommon for land to be allowed for example 
Merrymeeting Rathnew, it was purchased to meet Part V role in 
terms requirement and has some houses in completion, financial 
agreements were permitted and affordable units sometimes 10 and 
10% of land were permitted, financial agreement, I'll give example, 
of sea green in Greystones, develop pace agreed set rate on 
completion and received compliance letter for the sped unit.  It 
should be noted if the developer cannot use the original planning 
permission the granted prior to 2015, a new Part V agreement has to 
be made.  The developer of sea green had revised planning for 42 
units after 2015, and therefore the financial settlement was not an 
option.  And four-Part V units were agreed and purchased into the 
local authority stock, two in 2019, and two in 2020. 
And these are three units that we purchased as Part Vs in View 
Mount in Rathdrum. 
Now, this is a case study for balance and to give members idea of the 
timescale involved.  The developer originally applied for 169 units in 
2015, in May, and valuation was carried out, developers submitted 
figures and QS reviewed and same and reverted, negotiations 
continued for 18 months, and 16-Part V units were eventually 
agreed.  The developer then indicated they wanted to proceed with 

an AHB, Wicklow County Council asked the AHB to secure extra units 
which we call Part V plus, and the AHB secured five extra turnkey 
units.  This was resulted in the provision of 21 units in total being 
made available for social housing under CAF.  Evaluation was 
requested on October 2018, negotiations were by emailed phone 
and face-to-face meetings for 18 months it was signed on 17th April 
2019, and units were then delivered as follows.  Nine units, three 
turnkey and six-Part V, in December 2019, eight Part V units in July 
2020 and two-Part V and turnkey this October 2020, from valuation 
to final completion of all the units it took over three years.  If you 
look at this little table to give you an idea, the original planning 
started in May 2015, and if you go to the very end the final units 
were delivered this October 2020, so it took over five years from the 
initial planning which was to see some of the steps along the way.  
The original planning was appealed to An Bord Plenala national, was 
granted in October 2016, and then between then and March 2017, 
the site was solid, and new owners came in and they started their 
Part V negotiation in to 17 and that took length of time because, if 
you know Ballinahinch in Ashford they had to redesign and rebuild 
the road and roundabout and there was an offset required from 
roads and that held up the Part V negotiations because the 
developers wanted to deal with everything in one go and 
subsequently also had an negotiation with Cluid about buying the 
units. 
Just some general points about Part V, local authority has no control 
over the pace of delivery of units and is completely reliant on the 
developer.  Developers are free to contact approved housing bodies 

but AHBs need local authority support when applying for CALF or 
CAS funding, Wicklow County Council ask all the approved bodies 
who have been approved by developers two wish to sell their Part V 
units to secure social units on turnkey basis, which we call Part V 
plus.  The number of units with live planning permission is no 
guarantee of units to be built, some developers apply the permission 
and sell quiet which is a new planning permission and some lands 
maybe de-zoned, it considers a work with valuation, north, 
negotiation, to department approval, part five agreement, snagging, 
legal, financial and payments allocations and claim or in some cases, 
approved housing bodies support and CALF application PMA 
agreement and monitoring plus applications it takes the same 
amount of time to do Part V regardless whether it goes to AHB or 
ourselves. 
In 2020 the department sought details on the number of Part V units 
on planning permission granted as basis to define the amount of Part 
V units in the system.  This massively overstated the numbers, as 
there was an assumption with all units with planning would be built 
during the lifetime of the permission, projecting by area or county 
presents difficulties as to local authorities entirely dependent on 
developers’ schedule, if he even develops or sell and any delay 
outside local authority control.  Developers are sensitive to the 
market and seem to match their delivery to the market so if, the 
market is a little slow they'll drip units on to the market in ones and 
twos, or if, the market is really, really active they will develop much 
faster. 
There are other issues like legal and contract issues, funding, 

landowner developer gone out of business and phasing of 
development. 
This is the Part V delivery of 2018 to 2020, broken down by 
Municipal District and we have 45 units in 2018, 46 in 2019 and 29 in 
2020, now it is important to bear in mind with the 45 and 46 in 2019, 
we had two large developments, Glenheron in Greystones supplied 
24 units over that period, and Hazel Brooke in Rathnew supplied 15 
units in that period.  So, 20 is the is not a bad baseline. 
These are the Waverly part five units in Rathdrum recently bought. 
And this is a breakdown of what was in the Chief Executive's Report 
by the actual area and whether they were delivered via CALF or 
Wicklow County Council. 
Now, Wicklow County Council currently has agreements in place for 
43 further Part V units in Delgany, Bray, Rathnew, Wicklow, 
Baltinglass, Dunlavin and Enniskerry with delivery range from 20201 
and 2023, and currently in negotiations with further 32 units, it is 
expected 20 Part Vs will be delivered in 2021. 
Part V does deliver units, in private developments but relatively low 
rate.  Wicklow County Council doesn't take apartment with common 
areas or without their own entrances and AHBs are particularly 
useful in this regard, also the CALF funding model provides 
mechanism for maintenance and includes management fees. 
There is also value for money considerations including specifications, 
EG, the size, governed by the quality housing for sustainability 
communities’ guidelines.  COVID-19 is having an effect on delivery in 
this, any unit scheduled for delivery in 201, will be pushed back in 
2022, depending how quickly developers get onsite.  Strategic 

housing developments, there's a number at different stages.  In the 
planning process, and they take a considerable period of time to 
develop right through the construction, but it is seen in the coming 
years will make a considerable part in the Part V numbers if granted. 
That's just a barley field unit.  OK. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks David. 
Thanks for that, and thanks Declan, before I take the questions I'm 
going to go to Jackie for the update on the homeless and take them 
at the end. 
Jackie:  Say that you've seen the figures in ... 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We've lost you Jackie, have we?  hello Jackie, can 
you hear me, we seem to have lost her. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank you Declan and 
David for that report.  It is a complicated area; I work at it in the 
moment and know how hard it is to get these units through.  My 
question is in relation to the Adelaide road development in 71 units 
and David you made a reference in your own presentation there to 
some of the difficulties around apartment complexes.  And the 
management of the apartment complexes, I hugely welcome the 
long-term leasing of that development in Bray, we've a serious 
shortage of land in this area and it is extremely difficult to get people 
a home be it for 25 years stability but a home none the less.  I'm 
wondering is there a plan for owner management company for that 
development, OMC and whether or not the local authority will play a 
role in that? 

I'm also wondering how you made references of the fact the 
landlord will be responsible for the maintenance, but the local 
authority will remain responsible for the estate management.  And 
whether or not there will be additional resources put in to develop a 
sense of community there and set up a resident’s association or 
residents forum, within the site.  Or whether or not any 
consideration has been given to an AHB managing the unit itself as 
opposed to the local authority.  Because they will be requirement for 
a lot of time and effort to be put in place to make sure it becomes a 
place people want to live in.  And doesn't have any impact on the 
residents there, or the wider community.  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If I could ask the members to be direct with the 
questions, so Cllr Gerry Walsh. 
  
CLLR WALSH: Yes, sorry and thanks Cathaoirleach.  Just on Declan's 
AHB turnkeys, for 2021, delivery of 1 a 4 but 2022 no references to 
turnkeys on that and Part V the complex arrangements around that, 
if the developer can negotiate with transfer of land in lieu of set up 
units so that's its thanks. 
 
CLLR BOURKE:  Just want to pay tribute to the housing staff on the 
wonderful job they've done over four years. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Have you a question we're under pressure for time.   
CLLR BOURKE:  Question is if we get upgrade of the sewage 
treatment in Aughrim, how quickly will the team bring forward 
housing development for us in Aughrim there's a lot of people 
looking for housing in Aughrim and as you know we had to pull four 

units there two years ago. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Have you a question? 
This was the Municipal District meeting, you're playing for the 
papers now, please have you a question. 
CLLR BOURKE:  I'd like to see that it is a priority for them to bring 
housing to Aughrim when the infrastructure is upgraded. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Grace McManus. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  Can I just ask about the Rehills land in Bray, there's 
some concerns from the community about I know there's flood 
defence works there, but the building will be at risk of flooding if you 
give us the rationale and some response to that, so we can get back 
to the community on it. 
 
DECLAN:  Yes, Adelaide Road the plan is the estate management 
would be carried out by Wicklow County Council ourselves, we don't 
have any plans to involve approved housing body and we'll look at 
what extra measures for estate management on that estate when it 
is finished.  On the turnkeys we don't have any definite 
commitments for 2022 from AHBs there are negotiations being 
undertaken on a number of schemes and new proposals, but we 
don't count them until they're definite and signed up.  Aughrim, 
certainly we will move on anywhere that infrastructure is developed 
we'll move on it straightaway but at the moment the only land we 
have in Aughrim is infill land in some of the estates, I think it is 
maybe ten or fifteen units we don't have any large area of land 
there, but certainly, you know, land is an issue, we are going to need 
additional land in the coming years.  But certainly, anywhere that 

infrastructure is approved we will move on to Read Hills that's as 
part of our planning for it, the reason the site is available now is 
because of the flood scheme, it has opened it up for development.  
So, obviously, we will only be developing on the part of the site that 
is free of flooding, there will be like a repairing zone along the edge 
of the river that will be allowed to flood.  But the upper part of the 
site is suitable for development. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks. 
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, I know you're under time 
constraint, my question is about affordable housing I'm a bit 
concerned how we're going to get land for affordable houses 
because, in our area in Wicklow and Rathnew we used up a lot of 
land for social housing as you know Chairman we're doing the local 
area plans after the council development plans and all we're doing is 
reducing the numbers within the areas, in our area reducing housing 
from 2,800 which will put a premium on land left in.  So, what I'm 
worried about is how are we going to get land - for affordable 
houses thank you. 
  
CLLR LEONARD:  Yeah, I'm going to repeat his question there, and 
also, climate hat on, a lot of our own housing stock, we need to start 
incorporating more green infrastructure in these places or we'll all 
be flooding, you know. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Paul O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Yes, curious about the why do developers go to AHBs, 
if they're already working away with the Wicklow County Council 

and they switch, is that a negotiation scenario? 
And second part is, it feels and sounds like this is a huge number of 
resources required for these Part Vs processes do you have the 
resources to pursue them and are they worth the time and effort 
that goes into them? 
 
CLLR ERIKA DOYLE:  Thanks choir.  Just following on from Cllr Pat 
Kennedy's comments about the add laid road in Bray, even for the 
Bray district general information about that lease arrangement and 
how exactly it is going to work.  We haven't received very much 
information and I for one is getting questions that I can't answer.  So 
just a general update on how it will operate would be great.  Thank 
you, Declan can you answer those questions. 
Declan:  On the land issue - look I mean, certainly we will be trying to 
make use of any zoned land that we can.  Land that is our ownership 
at the moment and we are looking to purchase land where we can as 
well.  On the affordable scheme I suppose there's a couple of factors, 
one is how much subvention comes from Government to make 
houses affordable? 
And then housing we can only make housing affordable in certain 
part of the county where the market price is high enough.  
Otherwise, what we can build the houses for, I know this is a 
problem in parts of the country in particular and probably part of the 
county as well, where you can't build houses for less than what 
they're selling for at the moment on the open market.  So, it is not 
possible to make them affordable in that case, so it really applies to 
the more expensive parts of the county.  The green infrastructure 

side of it, I suppose that's a big issue and in all of the development 
we're looking at all of our houses are A rated at this stage, generally 
have heat pumps, they comply with all of the standards in the 
building regulation a the sites themselves are looked at if there is 
any risk of flooding or any close to a stream or river, we would get a 
flood study done and we would be taking cognisance of the sea 
maps as well so that's something that we're very aware of and 
biodiversity issues on all of the sites we're looking at.  As regard to 
the root housing bodies, generally if a development is being brought 
to us with approved housing body, some developers will 
automatically go to an approved housing body and some cases they 
might have worked with them before or have a relationship with 
them.  So, you know, that's something they will decide themselves 
and if they come to us with an approved housing body then 
obviously, we have to go with that.  Yes, Part V there's a lot of work, 
I'm sure David would agree with that, it is something that we're 
working through at the moment, is it worth? 
Yes, I think so.  It might be small numbers, but it is still adding to our 
supply and house that is we wouldn't otherwise have, and it is 
adding, also more sustainable I suppose because it brings local 
authority housing into private estates as well. 
On Adelaide road I suppose the details of the lease, maybe that's we 
can deal with directly with the Bray members at one of the meetings 
and get details rather than going into it now. 
That's it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Declan and David for that.  There's a lot of 
information in all of that.  I'm going to Jackie now, Jackie can you 

hear us? 
Jackie:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, sorry for that, some IT issues.  So, I 
kicked Joe out of his seat. 
CHAIR:  I'm going to suspension of orders at 5. is a. 
Jackie:  You read the figures in the report and there's a steady 
stream of presentations in 2021, as usual which were dealing with all 
the initiatives we have.  So just update since we last spoke, we had 
the alert where we assisted one rough sleeper looked for assistance, 
but we made provision of extra beds and I advised the members of 
that, and in April we will be presenting the homeless Action Plan for 
your approval.  So that's really what we're currently working on, 
housing first, was mentioned earlier at the meeting, I just advised we 
reached target for five for 2020, target for 2021 is flee and we 
exceeded that by March we would hope to double that or more 
given the actually presenting in public, we feel there's a need to 
focus on that this year and due to availability on one-bed units, so 
that's the update at the minute. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Grace McManus. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, look we've had a really 
good discussion on housing throughout the meeting and last one as 
well, so I won't keep the meeting so thank you for the update and I 
look forward to seeing that draft plan and I'm sure we'll feed into T 
and thanks for giving the space to this. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you did anyone else want to come in on 
that.  Everybody happy? 
Well thanks Declan and David and Jackie for that.  And for giving us 

all those figures over the last flee months there's a huge amount of 
information so I want to thank you for all of that, and in relation to 
the construction programme, it is great to see so many houses 
coming on stream and the amount of work that's going in, so again 
thank you very much to both of you.  I'm going to go to if I go into 
the Cllr John Mullen for suspension of standing orders.  John has a 
suspension of standing orders in relation to Bank of Ireland's 
announcement today of the closure of three banks.  John, do you 
want to come in. 
 
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks colleagues for taking this, I know it is not 
agenda item, today was such a lot of positive presentations and 
positive attitude out there toed it is a pity we have to mark this, but 
on a day when Bank of Ireland decided to abandon rural Ireland and 
rural Wicklow it is important this council discuss this, and to mark it. 
The decision today to close ten Healey Rathdrum and Carnew Bank 
of Ireland brings to an Eindhoven 100 years of banking services, of 
people of rural Wicklow.  I have cause to work on this issue over a 
number of years, Cllr Vincent Blake will know back in 2010, when 
Bank of Ireland was one of the building of Bank of Ireland was 
basically destroyed by a botched bank robbery, we lost our bank for 
a year.  And we as a community and as councillors, we met with 
Bank of Ireland management because we were worried at the time 
of the financial crash that the bank would use that as an opportunity 
to close.  They didn't, they poured money into refurbishing it and 
bring it back, over the year with we had the experience of not having 
a bank and basically what happened is a lot of ancillary business 

didn't happen in the town we lost that to other towns and 
particularly the parking issues that would have happened in places 
like Tinahely went to Carnew, and when people went so we 
experienced what it was like to lose our bank over a year, and we 
were delighted when it returned.  A number of years ago then, Bank 
of Ireland again in an act of cynical corporate policy decided to 
remove the cash facilities in other facilities from Rathdrum, Carnew 
and Tinahely and again we met with the Bank of Ireland 
management two took us through the reasoning and why they were 
definitely not going to close the branches this was just a part to their 
modernisation process and we took them with their word and 
Ex-pressed the concerns these services were needed particularly for 
the businesses and now we have a year where we've had a COVID 
lockdown where businesses are at the pin of their collar, a lot of 
businesses are closed and rural villages are wondering what their 
economic future is, and in the middle of a level five lockdown, Bank 
of Ireland come out this morning and say, to their staff, and to their 
customers, of which I am a customer, my own bank account is in 
Bank of Ireland since I was 17, that they're closing those branches, 
they've given us no information on the ATMs, that are at those 
locations, they've given us no location what is happening to the 
buildings, they're promising us some partnership with An Post but no 
specifics and they've treated the people of rural Wicklow with just 
nothing but contempt in my view and I think it is an appalling 
decision.  And I'm asking them they reconsider.  In an era where 
we're trying to, we're going to be rebuilding building society in a lot 
of ways after COVID-19, people will work from home and there's 

positive developments like rural tourism and to lose the branches in 
the way and manner that's done today by Bank of Ireland is a 
disgrace and I thank my colleagues for allowing this discussion to 
happen.  At such short notice, and I'd like to open it up.  Thanks. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr John Mullen and putting this down, 
Cllr Miriam Murphy. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Yeah, thank you Cathaoirleach and Cllr John Mullen 
for bringing this up.  This morning when I got my breakfast, I was 
listening a very same situation, in Rathdrum where a businessman 
who has been there for many years with Bank of Ireland, and he is 
just distraught and as he pointed out about just for Rathdrum alone, 
I'm listening to a programme where the Bank of Ireland was saying 
that some of the transfers will go to An Post, now the An Post in 
Rathdrum has only one counter and one staff.  And as this man 
pointed out that, most days now with COVID there's a queue going 
into Rathdrum Post Office so how in God's name can a one-counter 
Post Office cope with business being transferred to the likes of An 
Post, and rebuilding I think that's a joke, they don't want to rebuild 
Ireland, certainly don't want to rebuild rural Ireland, and as Cllr John 
Mullen said, now in the COVID year, that's happening and in other 
probably a year ahead of us, there is small businesses, they do their 
banking locally and everybody as we pointed out on many occasions 
do not know or do not want to do their banking online, there's a lot 
of people who are don't want to use it for reasons.  And they're 
being again excluded from society.  I think it is a very sad day when 
today we hear of this movement and also, before our meeting we all 
get an e-mail from the general Bank of Ireland manager two e-mails 

it is just so sad and I hope that there is a lobby put towards this, 
thank you. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Cathaoirleach a lot has been said by Cllr John Mullen 
and Murphy and I commend Cllr John Mullen on this, it is something 
he's brought on several occasions now, this is not just attack on rural 
Ireland but on the elderly population who mightn't use online 
banking and they'll have to travel further in their branches now.  
Also, the time when Ulster Banks had a pulled out of the country, we 
should be investing not taking out branches so, I want to say this is 
not a political issue, I believe it is a moral issue and can I say as 
member of the smaller party I'll call on the bigger party maybe to 
indulge us in the future withstanding orders and to speak to us in a 
respectful manner thank you very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Erika Doyle. 
 
CLLR ERIKA DOYLE:  Thanks Chair, the other councillors have 
described the situation so I won't repeat any of that but in terms of 
actions I know very often we look to the five TD toss act on behalf of 
our county and our constituencies, so just to give a quick update that 
Deputy Steven Matthews, a member of the Oireachtas finance 
committee and wrote to the chair this morning immediately to ask 
for a urgent meeting take place and that representatives from Bank 
of Ireland appear and take questions and explain what is going on.  I 
can circulate to the members when the meet something confirmed 
he's expecting it will take place before the end of the month and as 
soon as possible. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks. 

CLLR DUNNE:  Very quickly, listen, first of all I think Cllr Paul O'Brien 
it is an attack on democracy as far as I'm concerned, especially the 
older people within the county and I have to add this, I think this is 
also a problem the fact that we've no rural TD within the county, all 
of our TDs are from the north of the county and this is an attack on 
Rathdrum, Carnew and Tinahely and people should think about this 
when they're voting, thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Avril Cronin. 
CLLR CRONIN:  Thank you very much Cathaoirleach and thanks Cllr 
John Mullen for bringing this issue to the floor today.  The 
announcement will present itself as a huge obstacle for many 
individuals that really are not technical, technologically savvy and it 
will also be a problem for businesses that provide localised service 
they've availed of over the past couple of years in the branch, rural  
customers and villages will feel totally isolated, while planned 
partnership with An Post is in the pipeline so far we've no details of a 
I hope the services that are going to be brought to An Post will be 
you know, will be appropriate services to support rural businesses 
and this is a huge blow to the communities.  Thank you.  
CLLR LEONARD:  I think there's an opportunity ... 
Here for the buildings to be preserved in these small villages and I 
think it is a good idea for to merge with An Post but I think it is so 
important and to keep the staff working in these places and not have 
them on the road to Dublin again on the N11, we need working hubs 
and that's exactly what these buildings are.  And there's loads of 
opportunities for Bank of Ireland to come up with a different 
solution than just closing them down. 

 
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks Cathaoirleach, look, it is very unfortunate not 
just for rural Ireland, rural Wicklow, for the country as a whole but 
the reality is Cathaoirleach, members are talking about you know it is 
not political and it is political and the reality is that while Bank of 
Ireland are now talking about filling the void with on post, politics 
played a huge part in eradicating rural Ireland by closing down Post 
Offices and it is amazing now that the An Post is seen as going to fill 
a void here when a lot of Post Offices were closed down to 
throughout our district and throughout our county.  So, I would urge 
the five TDs to get involved in this, but the reality is this a done deal.  
I think the e-mail we all received has outlined that, they will be open 
for the next six months but there after I'd ask the question 
Cathaoirleach what is going to happen these buildings because most 
of them are significant buildings in these small rural towns and 
villages. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'd like to, I have to get to back after 17. 
I did call you out Cllr Edward Timmins, but you weren't there. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS:  Just two points, I support this motion by Cllr John 
Mullen and commend him but a couple of things, Bank of Ireland 
was helped in a bailout twelve years ago and we should have 
attached strings to that to serve the community.  Second thick is 
there's huge lack of competition with Ulster Bank leaving the 
country, and I think it is time now we, look in the savings model, 
German savings bank Hoddle which is community, closer to the 

people and lower interest rates and where you can pick up the 
phone and talk to them, competition is getting less and less which 
means mortgage rates will go up, so we need to bring more 
competition in the market. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Thanks Chairman I don't want to go everything that's 
been said all the members there, but look we know the banks have 
short memories it is only a few years ago we had to bail them out.  
This is not unexpected, we had for quite a number of years, ever 
since the time the bank discontinued with the cash service in these 
branches.  So, look I think as great opportunity here for not alone the 
Post Offices but credit unions as well, the credit union was a 
standalone here in tin heel yea for a lot of years but now as linked 
from Castledermot to Baltinglass to Tinahely so there's a huge 
catchment area and organisation within the credit union system so I 
think, I know it is a disappointment and everything else and 
likelihood of any changes toss banks is going to make in terms of 
keeping the branches open, I think are very unlikely so I think, look it 
is a case of take what we have got unfortunately, and but I think it is 
a missed opportunity as well with the Post Offices and credit unions 
to replace what the banks are not willing to do. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  This has got a good turning, I would like to finish 
on myself as do come from Rathdrum when one of the banks is 
closing and biggest town outside of the main town of Arklow, I have 
to say I'm bitterly disappointed, disappointed for the elderly people 
who don't use online banking it beggars belief to think we're looking 
at the master plan of Glendalough which will bring thousands of 
visitors, and the redevelopment of Avondale which will bring tens of 

thousands of visitors I would imagine but over 400 homes granted 
planning permission, this is a commercial decision, and I think Bank 
of Ireland has forgot the people who helped them ten or twelve 
years ago.  And they've turned their bank on rural Ireland and I 
dread to think next week we'll see press releases from five TDs and 
telling us what they're going to do and not going to do, I would like 
them to come together and see what they'll do for the areas where 
the Cloughs ewers will take place.  I met with the Chief Executive and 
asked him to pen a letter to Chief Executive of Bank of Ireland and 
hope that would be acceptable to the members, Cllr John Mullen 
would you accept that, because yours is note of motion, I've asked 
the Chief Executive to write a letter. 
>>:  I was hoping the motion would, that we'd be writing officially to 
the Bank of Ireland. 
CHATHAOIRLEACH:  I've asked him this morning.  I want to move on 
to item 17 to consider the county Wicklow County Council three-
year Capital programme 21 to 24 and bring in director Brian Gleeson 
here. 
BRIAN:  Thank you I will be brief.  The Capital plan it covers a three-
year plan, 2021, to 23, inner respect itself 51 million expenditure, 
bulk relate to housing schemes, 445, and approximately 64 million in 
respect of road, programmes which would include the recently 
announced 7.5 million NTA schemes.  How the funding break down is 
being proposed is grant aid 51 million, development levies 26.  Loans 
38 and other income, 74 by would cover income arising from 
disposal of assets, private sector investment, and also revenue 
budget provisions.  It should be noted that the plan is not a 

guarantee and will commence with projects but based on available 
sources of funding, existing sources of funding and possible future 
funding lines of income via UDRF schemes or RDF schemes and also 
is a rolling plan, a live plan, so, projects can be added to it at any 
stage, depending on how successful we are in relation to these 
ongoing funding schemes. 
It is increase of 69 million on last year's three-year plan.  The 
increase is mainly to do with planned housing units and the schemes 
and also new applications that we'd submitted in respect of the 
URDF and RDF projects.  So that's basically a synopsis of the plan 
going forward. 
Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian for that, and thanks the copy was 
circulated.  Cllr Derek Mitchell you wanted to come in. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Yes, I've a question, I sent e-mail earlier to ask what 
the chap there will - scheme was listed under other non-grant 
funded projects, if that's the one in Delgany, I think that would be 
good.  Just to say I have complained in the past that not much is 
spent in the Greystones area when we're getting a huge amount of 
housing.  And this would seem to be somewhat more balanced this 
year, there still is a need, something like 4,500 people coming to the 
housing units approved in Greystones and it will be the same 
population as Bray when that's done, OK Bray is going to expand in 
Nasser row but still other things to be done in the area.  But, if that's 
in Greystones, that particular road, that's a good thing thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Does anybody want to come in there? 

CLLR TIMMINS:  Just briefly, do we have anything on the Irish Water 
Capital budget? 
I'm conscious of the very small villages that we don't have any plan 
as regards water and sewage for small villages.  I know earlier we 
had stuff on the smaller towns, earlier on the meeting but small 
villages have been neglected.  Is there any progress on Capital plan 
for that?  Obviously, you have Irish Water is a separate organisation 
to Wicklow County Council but the figures there are blank, I wonder 
do we have update from Irish Water? 
Also, I welcome this commencement of the 2N81, 4N81 schemes 
looked at and I hope there's progress made on them, I know they're 
in infancy, and I welcome the money allocated for feasibility study 
for the swimming pool, which the management alluded to the 
report.  I hope we can learn from the previous unsuccessful 
application that was made a year or so ago.  And we take those 
reasons on board and try and get be more successful next time. 
Bryan does you want to come back in there. 
  
BRIAN:  I might bag the book to Colm to clarify the Chapel Road. the 
Irish Water programme as Cllr Edward Timmins said that's a separate 
capital plan separate organisation so we can only put forward what 
we're planning on spending.  But we can check out and see what 
current situation is in relation to their own capital plan and we can 
revert with that information at a later date. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Brian, Colm are you with us. 
COLM:  Yes, it is Cllr Derek Mitchell chapel road scheme in 

Greystones, yeah.  That we discussed earlier. 
And just in relation to Irish Water, the programme that I spoke about 
earlier is the small town and description programme that Irish Water 
have promoted this year.  Like it's a continuation, continuing 
programme so that we will be asked on a continuous basis for our 
priorities in relation to water and wastewater treatment facility in 
small towns and villages throughout the county.  As I said they're 
looking at top four in terms of one this year, but we have provided a 
longer list which we can update every year going forward. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, nobody else showing, so can I thank Brian 
and Colm. 
CLLR WALSH:  Mill Road Greystones, 340,000, 2021, can I take it 
towards a development of master plan to the twelve acres opposite 
to the AIB park the land bank on the road. 
>>:  Sorry, if I come in there, there's work to be done in terms of 
cleaning it up, there's illegal dumping, so we have to finish that out 
before the master plan. 
  
:>> Thank you very much.  I emailed Frank this morning.  We're not 
getting a fair share out west, there's 15 million spent on N1S 
compared to less than 1.5 on the N81. 
I just don't think it is a fair crack of the whip, I accept Frank's 
response the new road is Sheffield by and authorities higher than the 
council, but I think even take that into account it is not equitable 
distribution, they're two main routes that run through the county, 
we're left, we're very much neglected out this side, but I think it is 

most unfair and I think it needs to be addressed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks.  Frank, have you responded? 
Frank:  Look I suppose the Accra events and have been finished, land 
acquisition was up around 1.6 million.  Other schemes that run from 
bends into Baltinglass and we'll progress those but the big scheme as 
the councillor mention asked from Tallaght out to Blessington which 
has been Sheffield, we've made a submission into the National 
Development Plan and we have avenue included that as one of our 
priorities and recent meetings with NPA as well that's a priority and 
comes back into the table in terms of design and land acquisition and 
we'll keep doing that as much as we can, yeah. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, Chief Executive and thanks Brian and 
Colm for that.  Item 18 is correspondence, Lorraine, do we have any 
correspondence. 
LORRAINE:  Yes, just to say that Irish Water will be holding clinics 
now on Monday 12th of April and elected members have been 
advised of that.  So just to note same again.  Just in terms of the 
ethics declaration yesterday was closing down to put in both ethics 
declarations as you are required to by law so I'm sure that you all 
have done so.  And then, just to mention you will have received 
correspondence in relation to the consultation process for the cod 
link wind park scheme. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Lorraine, I have two minutes left, Cllr 
Peir Leonard I can take your notice of motion, in the name of Cllr 
Peir Leonard S2. 
>>:  Sorry Pat I was wondering could I switch it with the last motion. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  No, I have taken them in order, if you wanted it 
heard, I'll hear it, in not. 
>>:  There's a lot of people: 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I have to take them in order, do you want it heard 
today or not. 
>>:  OK. 
>>:  Care notice of motion in Cllr Peir Leonard 25th of November 
2020, deferred from special meeting on the 25th of January 2021, 
and meeting of the first of February 2021, Lorraine for the response. 
LORAINE:  This is a matter for the lend members and I think you men 
Cllr Peir Leonard had raised it at the policing committee meeting at 
the last one.  Yeah. 
CLLR LEONARD:  Self-explanatory, just go for a vote. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I want to support that motion. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Proposed by Cllr Peir Leonard, and seconded by 
Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  Is everybody in agreement? Is there anybody 
against it? 
 
CLLR SNELL:  Just to say that I think everyone's in agreement 
Cathaoirleach. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  I think that has brings us 5.30 on the 
dot thank you each and every one of you for your time and effort to 
go here to be with us and it was a long meeting today and long 
agenda and to thank and hopefully we'll get to the other motions 
next month. 
LORRAINE:  Can we ask the protocol members to stay on for that 

meeting. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Yeah. 
 
