 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
ONLINE VIA ZOOM 
 
 
 ON  
 
 
MONDAY 1st FEBRUARY 2021 AT 2:00 P.M.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a non-verbatim transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for communication 
support.   
 
 
 
J Sinnamon 
E McCarthy 
 
 
 

 
TRANSCRIPT OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON MONDAY, 
FEBRUARY 1st 2021:  
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon, members, can you hear me?  Good afternoon, 
members. You are very welcome to our meeting and thank you all for being here. I 
will go straight to Lorraine, maybe you would do the etiquette.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Yes, this is the first meeting that we have members of the public 
joining us and what we were trying to develop a system where we could separate 
members of the public from elected members, it's trial and error today, so if we could 
ask all elected members if you want to contribute you need to unmute yourselves. So 
I would ask you to be very conscious of your background noise, please. Thank you, 
Cathaoirleach. I will just go on, so mobile phones should be switched to silent. 
Please do not leave the online meeting without informing the Cathaoirleach to 
ensure a quorum remains. The chat function isn't working for this meeting, so please 
use the hand function. If speakers could keep their camera and microphone on when 
speaking and when you are not speaking, for now keep your microphones on. So, 
Cathaoirleach, that is the etiquette, so if we go for a roll call, first. Cllr Tommy 
Annesley, just a second. Cllr Tommy Annesley?  Are you present, Cllr Annesley?   
CLLR ANNESLEY: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Joe Behan.  
>>: Present.  
 
[ Roll call was taken]  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Anne Ferris. I know you are there, Cllr Anne Ferris.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: I think she is having issues with her microphone and camera.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Thank you, Cllr O'Brien.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Tom Fortune.  
>>: Present.  

ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Pat Kennedy.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Peir Leonard.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Grace McManus.  
>>: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Derek Mitchell.  
>>: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr John Mullen.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Miriam Murphy. Cllr Jodie Neary.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR:  Cllr Paul O'Brien.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr R O'Connor.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Gerry O'Neill.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Lourda Scott.  
>>: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: John Snell. Cllr Edward Timmins.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Gerry Walsh.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Irene winters?   
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Anne Ferris?  Paul O'Brien she should be in shortly. She just 
text me, she has had to shut down her laptop.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, Cllr Miriam Murphy?   
>>: I don't see her.  
ADMINISTRATOR: And Cllr John Snell. Okay, Cathaoirleach, we will move on.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Lorraine. Anyone any votes of sympathy.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Can I offer our condolences to Patsy Glennon on the death of his 
aunt, Eileen Cashman, to the entire Glennon family, may she rest in peace.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I just want to pay my respects to James O'Reilly of Griffith 
Street in Arklow who died over the weekend. James and his family is well-known in 
Arklow and was a member of the council staff for many years. A valued member of 
the council staff and died at a young age.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Pat Fitzgerald. Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: I would like to be associated with the vote of sympathy for Patsy.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Can I come in quickly?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I think we should remember anyone who has died in the county in 
the last month, particularly families who have been hit by Covid, I think we should 
remember them today.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Tom Fortune.  
CLLR BEHAN: Just a suspension of standing orders.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Come to that in a minute.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Yes, for members of staff, for Michael Walsh, father of our 
colleague, Gail Walsh. For Maureen Quinn, mother of Patricia Devlin and for Ursula 
Drew mother of Ursula Drew in Bray Municipal District.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Winters.  
CLLR WINTERS: Also to Barbara Doolan, her sister died and a vote of sympathy to 
her.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I don't want to leave... Cllr Cronin did you want to come in?   
CLLR CRONIN: I like to extend my sympathy to the family and also to Barbara 
Dolan.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR DUNNE: I want to be associated with Barbara Dooley's sister who died 
recently.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We will just take a minute to remember all the people who have 
passed away as the members have said and indeed as Cllr Fortune has said in the 
last month.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Eternal light grant unto them oh Lord.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Joe Behan, you want to come?   
CLLR BEHAN: I want to propose a suspension of standing orders for 4.30 for the 
following motion. That Wicklow County Council calls on the Government to allow a 

full open and democratic vote on SITA before it is ratified. I know, members have 
been contacted by very concerned people around the county and beyond. Cllr 
Kavanagh is seconding it and I know it has the support of Cllr Crean and others, so 
rather than going into the detail of it I am proposing that we suspend standing orders 
at 4.30 to discuss it for five or ten minutes, please.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Everyone in agreement with that?  Cllr Pat Fitzgerald you have 
your hand up.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I want clarity on this motion. We are discussing, or trying to 
discuss here a motion which deals with national Government. This will be looking for 
it to be debated in the local Government and I am not in favour of this motion, we 
have enough local issues to deal with, without trying to deal with national issues.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Irene Winters.  
CLLR WINTERS: Similar to Cllr Fitzgerald we had to have a special meeting to get 
through the motions some of which are for a long time. The SETA was in 2017 and 
my understanding of the suspension of standing orders was they were going to be 
reserved formatters that were of urgency to the County Council and I don't think this 
qualifies for a topic that can come up for suspension of standing orders. It can 
certainly come in as a motion in next month's agenda, but it cannot come up as a 
suspension of standing orders and I move that we don't take the suspension.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There is number of hands up. There is a proposer. Sorry, there 
is a number of hands up to come in. We have someone wanting... wanting to note 
the suspension of orders to go ahead and someone who wants the suspension of 
standing orders no to the go ahead. Just so I am clear, Cllr Winters you are 
proposing it doesn't go ahead.  
CLLR BEHAN: A point of order.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I am trying to work my way through this.  
CLLR BEHAN: Hold on a minute now, I made a proposal that we suspend standing 
orders to discuss the issue. Now if we are going to discuss the merits of the issue 
now, that is fine, let's discuss it, but for anyone to say that we can't discuss national 
issues under a suspension of standing orders that is hilarious because we have 
done it many times in the past. There is an urgency about this because there is a 
chance that this will be voted on or discussed in the Dail in the next two weeks. We 
won't have an opportunity to talk about it in February, Cathaoirleach, as I have 
already submitted the motion to suspend standing orders in advance. I submitted it 

last night. I ask that that be voted on. That is the motion we vote on now, whether we 
suspend or not.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I am going bring in Lorraine here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Well the request for suspension of stand orders is contained in 
standing orders, so request for the suspension of standing orders should be 
submitted to the Cathaoirleach or administrator in writing. That has been done. It 
should outline the nature of request for standing orders and contain the name of the 
elected member proposing and seconding. That has been done. It has been read to 
the meeting. If clarity is required the proposer will be invited to provide clarity to the 
request. The request will be put to a vote without discussion. So, Cathaoirleach, 
under standing orders, if there is any dissent it takes, it's a two third of the member's 
present who vote in favour, for suspension of standing orders, so if there is any 
dissent or agreement we need to go to a vote.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, thank you, Lorraine. There is a dissent. So I am going to 
go for a vote. So, Lorraine, I will ask you to call that vote now.  
ADMINISTRATOR: This is a vote whether to defer standing orders for hearing at 
4.30pm or not.  
 
[ VOTE TAKEN ] 
 
ADMINISTRATOR: So we have 16 for and 14 against and two not present. So the 
motion is defeated.  
CLLR BEHAN: Cathaoirleach, could I just make a comment here. I think it's a great 
pity that what has happened here is that Fianna Fail and Fine Gael And Green Party 
have come together to prevent us in Wicklow County Council debating an issue 
which could result in the removal of the power was our courts in future to hear issues 
that are raised by multinational companies, based in Canada.  
CLLR SCOTT: Not all of it...  
CLLR WINTERS: I thought the suspension of standing orders was so you couldn't 
talk.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Excuse me please, I am moving on with item number one on the 
agenda. To confirm and sign the minutes of the ordinary meeting held at Wicklow 
County Council on Monday.... proposed.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?   

CATHAOIRLEACH: Agreed. Any matters arising? . No. To consider the Chief 
Executive Monthly Management Report and a copy was attached. I would ask in 
relation to the housing presentation here, in the Chief Executive's report that will be 
covered in item number, the next item. All right. So maybe we would hold our 
questions. Because it is important. I am going to bring in the Chief Executive.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I will mention one or two issues and I will take the rest as read. 
Just on Covid, the update is pretty much the same as last month. We are still in 
Level 5. So again the offices here we are taking appointments. A lot of staff now, up 
to 75% are working from home. A lot of services are still open, housing, general 
services are open. Housing construction is closed. We are allowed to finish schemes 
that were due for completion by the end of February. I think today that is extending to 
the end of April, so that is something. We will be hoping in March to be back up and 
running. Roads, again we are dealing with schemes that were deemed to be critical 
infrastructure, also emergency repairs and that is it really. Otherwise the outdoor 
staff are stood down. Water and emergency services are running as normal. Plan 
environment, as in the civic amenity sites are open. Libraries, home deliveries are 
taking place. On the community side, the Community Call activity is down. We still 
had 60 calls last month. 16 for collection and delivery. Four for social isolation, 
engagement and support, medical needs 6 and information was 34. The reason they 
are down is a lot of people who are isolated looking for shopping are going directly to 
the volunteer. It's still open and available to people.  
 
The Keep Well Campaign is the focus of the Community Call. That is looking at 
keeping active and being outdoors. Keeping contact, staying in touch with people, 
minding your mood, switching off and eating well. There is three subgroups. A small 
amount of grant funding is available to us. On the Staying Connected and the 
Minding Your Mood there is information and Christmas cards were distributed. 
Winter care packages distributed to older people throughout the county with 500 
delivered in December through the Meals on Wheels group. Tablets to nursing 
homes to enable residents to keep in touch. Family Carers Ireland. Tablets to use 
with those they are caring for and network and get support from other carers. The 
Wellbeing Webinar which is responding to Covid-19 challenges. There is support 
through the community alert group other community organisations to develop local 
registers through local knowledge with the guards. They have a [INAUDIBLE] 

dissemination of an agreed key messages through text alert systems and sending 
out messages in relation to mental health, etc. In terms of keeping active, there is 
three exercise booklets, a new batch of activities for all.  
 
Older exercise plan and Be Active at Home booklets have been printed. There is a 
lot of engagement with different groups and targets requiring copies. It's been 
advertised on all social media platforms and the Wicklow People. There is six runs 
running at the moment. Students in Bray are taking part in this. Transition class and 
other classes are participating. There is a 5K and a 10K on the 1st of February, 
creating a lot of interest. Virtual classes, five-week intermediate class and a six-week 
men's only fitness class taking place and there is online classes for children and 
teens with physical and intellectual disabilities. Being creative, Switching Off Jenni is 
business in a group for 55 plus. Nature is Good for You an advertising campaign on 
East Coast Radio. Including planting of native trees, garden and biodiversity. My 
Place, My Heritage, ukulele lessons and Bray area partnership, storytelling and local 
folklore, six weeks on Friday from 10.00am, from January 29th to 5th of March.  
 
So that group will continue to meet on a fortnightly basis. It's rolling out those softer 
supports at the moment, but also the call centre is still open.  
 
Second one I might just mention is the visitor experience and management master 
plan for Glendalough and the Wicklow Mountains National Park. We had a 
presentation of that in Druid's Glen at the last full meeting. It's proposed to run a 
public consultation from the 22nd of February to 12th of March with press releases 
carried in the local papers the week before. So it will include Zoom drop-in sessions 
from 4-8 on the 23rd of February and the 11th and 12th of March. There will be an 
email questions option. A website consultation on Wicklow.ie and again it's as much 
a consultation that can be done with Covid and all of that information will come back 
to the consultants and the Council in due course.  
 
One last one on the NTA sustainable transport measures grants. Those grants will 
be increased this year. They will be up to 7.5 million and we typically got around 2.5 
last year. A lot of schemes coming through. Now it's been agreed at the moment, but 
a lot will be familiar to you, Arklow, Woodenbridge Shillelagh, Bray Dart interchange 

consultancy for the new footbridge. I am not going to go through them all. The 
Arklow and Greystones Traffic Studies are in there. There is Putland Row, River 
Dargle Cycleway. In Baltinglass the footbridge... sorry, Blessington. But there is a 
whole range of them. 7.5 million. What we will do, I think, is make a protects to each 
of the Municipal Districts in relation to the schemes that are going ahead in those 
districts and we can take feedback etc then. They have also given us approval to 
take on a significant number of technical staff which can stay in place for five years 
because as you will have noticed, the focus on walk and cycling, particularly in town 
centres. So those staff will start a recruitment process now as soon as we get the 
normal approval. So I will take the rest as read, Cathaoirleach, if that is okay.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Chief Executive. Cllr Joe Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just have a couple of questions in relation 
to the parallel road at Kilmacanogue. I welcome the fact that the next stage of the 
work has started. Traffic on the inner lane is going close to the entranceways of the 
few houses that live there. A few signs warning people that they are passing by 
residential houses would be in order.  
 
Can I bring your attention to the fact that when people are coming towards 
Kilmacanogue from Wicklow, so northbound, there is a sign indicating that the 
junction at the old Post Office at Kilmacanogue Village it's a triangular junction, it's 
not, it's a roundabout. And it can be confusing for people who don't know the lay out, 
I am asking that sign be changed. I have also been told that people who are diverted 
on to the bridge over the N11 at Kilmacanogue, in some cases are not aware, that in 
fact it's a single lane carriageway rather than the continuation of a dual carriageway 
and there have been a few near misses and I am asking if signage can be put on 
that bridge, the actual road bridge at Kilmacanogue to indicate it's a two-way rather 
than a one way.  
 
Last point is in relation to the proposed greenway from Kilmacanogue to Bray, I 
raised this at a recent meeting of Bray Municipal District to be told that in fact Bray 
Municipal District as a body doesn't really know very much about it, even though it's 
in our district. I asked on that occasion for a presentation to be made by the people 
who were drawing up this particular plan to come to Bray Municipal District at an 
early stage so that we can have an input into this, rather than be given a fait 

accompli at the end to vote on. So I am asking that that presentation take place as 
soon as possible to the members of Bray Municipal District. Thank you, chairman.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr Mags Crean.  
 
CLLR CREAN:I have some brief questions. One in relation to the Creative Ireland 
strategy and the heritage section of the report. I know at the moment, given the 
decade of commemorations that there is a programme for 2021 still being prepared. I 
know in 2016 there was allocations made to the Municipal Districts and I wonder if 
the funding could be ear marked for each area to commemorate and mark 2021, but 
also other commemorative events over the next few years rather than it being a 
last-minute decision that could be ear marked and put into funding. Also in relation to 
tree grants, the environment section, I am wondering in Greystones there has been a 
lot of mature trees cut down and a lot of development. If there is an opportunity with 
these grants for mature trees to be brought particularly for the Greystones area and 
planted?  Is this in relation to public lighting faults, I have been doing a lot of reps in 
this particular area, particularly for older people and I find it frustrating that Airtricity, 
each call gets logged and there is no priority given to a housing area that might have 
older people. I know it's about transparency and fairness, but one case is all older 
people I am dealing with on one road and they have no light and he they don't know 
when it will be done. One in relation to the green and social procurement. I asked at 
the last meeting, I was looking for details on number of tenders where we have put in 
sustainable procurement, because this is in our sustainable procurement plan for the 
KPIs.  
 
I had particular questions I sent in looking for the number of tenders where we had 
social clauses. I still wanted to get that report, because I think it's important and it 
ties into the SITA, the impact we will have an local initiatives at a national level. 
Then, finally, that is it, actually. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Chief Executive, I will bring you in, because there is a fair bit in 
what they have both said.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Can I get clarification, my system dropped down, are we 
discussing the CEO's report now or what are we discussing.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We are discussing the Chief Executive's report.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I want to see what we are discussing I missed the start of it.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: I will bring you back in because there is a fair bit in what Cllr 
Behan and Cllr Crean have said.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: The parallel road at Kilmac that sounds reasonable we can 
deal with that quickly. If Colm wants to bring in, he can, but I have taken note of that. 
The greenway from Kilmacanogue to Bray, I don't see an issue with that. Cllr Crean, 
again the allocations in the Creative Ireland strategy, we will flag those with the MD 
as soon as we know what they are. The tree grants for the mature trees. They are 
more effective needs to say in terms of carbon defenestration, so that is a good 
suggestion there. The public light, we will take notice of the issues. Certainly I agree 
with you, if there is older people involved, we should try and get it off as quickly as 
possible. Certainly if you send in your details in relation to that. The green social 
procurement, we will prepare that and get it out to you, Brian Gleeson is looking at 
that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Chief Executive. Director Colm, did you want to 
come in to clarify anything on what Cllr Behan had said in relation to signage at the 
junction in Kilmacanogue.  
COLM: Yes, the works are currently undergoing and on the parallel service roadside 
of Kilmac. Look, our senior engineer drove the route this morning to check, to make 
sure there was no issues in relation to it, so I will bring the issue about the signage to 
his attention. Indeed they are continuing to meet the RE, they are continuing to meet 
with the land owners and the petrol station in relation to issues they have in relation 
to the temporary measures that are put in place for the roadworks which I think is 
just up in the last week or so as they moved over into the parallel service lane. I will 
bring to his attention the issues with the signage, Cllr Behan. Just to say in relation to 
the Kilmacanogue to Southern Cross greenway. As you know we went out to public 
consultation in December on the various route options so, we can get a presentation 
to yourselves in Bray Municipal District in relation to the route options and obviously 
that will feed into decisions taken on the preferred route for that, Cllr Behan, so we 
will arrange for that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. So, the next one is Paul O'Brien.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I want to thank the Chief Executive for 
his comprehensive report. As Cllr Fortune alluded to, we have had a difficult month 
with Covid-19 and I believe we need to be giving hope to some people. I have seen 
that Pfizer or going to announce another 40 million vaccines for Europe, but it's in 

quarter two. I have already contacted the Chief Executive about vaccine centres, is 
there any further update in terms of vaccine centres for county Wicklow?  Things are 
coming to the fore. I was wondering is management making any directions or 
appealing to people in power to make sure that the council staff are vaccinated not 
ahead of health service or vulnerable peoples but I believe that for continuity of local 
Government council officials should be vaccinated as soon as possible.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Gail Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: Quick question. Just in Rathnew where the new Aldi store has 
opened up previously, just the traffic lights and the lighting in the area is dark. I have 
had a good few constituents on to me saying it's a dangerous area, it's a junction 
there. It's an accident waiting to happen and before that happens maybe the council 
could get on to whoever the SB or Airtricity to get that area lit up.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Melanie Corrigan.  
CLLR CORRIGAN: Thank you, a very comprehensive report. I want to raise under 
public lighting we have a stretch in road in Enniskerry, the Monastery Road there is 
nine lights. I have raised this and I have been told that the trees keep knock them out 
when they are replaced. I think something needs to be done there, there are a lot of 
older people using that road, a lot of young people would be walking it at night, so I 
would like to see that looked into. I welcome if Bray Municipal District gets the 
preparation on the greenway. This is something that is really badly needed. The 
people of Kilmacanogue are very isolated they have no way of walking from Bray to 
Kilmacanogue at the moment. Whilst during lockdown it's not an issue, I think when 
the schools are back and people are back at work it will become an issue and it's 
something that has to addressed and the greenway would go a long way into is that.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: In relation to vaccination centres we are in contact with the 
HSE on the basis we are going to be as helpful as we can in terms of making were 
premises available, or if they are using their own premises we will assist in traffic 
management, whatever they need. So there is a number of sites they are looking at. 
As soon as I know what is the preferred site I will send out a message and let people 
know where that is going, but that is the basis on which we are going.  
 
The vaccination of council staff, it's being dealt with at national level and they have a 
priority list firefighters is one, that is there. The next one, another one that is included 
there I think will be frontline council staff that are dealing with homeless people and 

the bulk of council staff then will be at a level below that. But they are prioritising 
those two cohorts at the moment.  
 
Cllr Dunne, I will come back to you on when the traffic works will be complete. I 
agree with you, the traffic lights are there a long time now, they need to be up and 
running. The Monastery Road in Enniskerry, again we will look at that. There is a 
problem with the trees but also in terms of getting lights back on. I will come back to 
you with a date.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Erika Doyle.  
CLLR DOYLE: Thank you my apologies to are not appearing on the camera, I am 
feeling unwell. I was great to see the works on the Strand Road Plaza kicking off. I 
would like something clarified if that is okay. The newer images that were circulated 
show the plaza at the front of the aquarium on Strand Road with no marked clear 
cycle past. Now the original plans, the Part 8 that was voted on showed a linked 
cycle track and that is what my folio councillors have been telling people would be 
coming.  
 
I am keen to know, I presume there has been an oversight there and plans haven't 
changed. I would be very disappointed and really need some kind of an explanation 
if they have changed as to how they have changed, considering it was a Part 8 voted 
on and on whose authority it was changed, I am hoping that these images were just 
artistic impressions rather than the finished product, because it's, I think a recipe for 
disaster and not what was voted on if it goes ahead as was represented in those 
newer images. So just some clarification on the cycle track would be welcome.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Tom Fortune. You need to unmute, Tom. You are on mute.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I hit the wrong button and I went into some other entity. So.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You are grand.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I have to get my spoke in or I will be very upset. Thank you, chair 
and thank you, Chief Executive, as usual the report is excellent. I just have a few 
questions and comments. I know you are going to touch on, you are going to do 
homeless later, so I won't get into that, but could I get, can we get, I would like to get 
some kind of make up or status on where we are with HAP and some of the 
challenges we face with it. And can I get an idea of how many houses we would be 
projecting around the approved housing bodies?  I note in the report that the part 5 is 

saying we will get 25 houses in 2021. I am taken aback by that when I see the 
massive amount of houses that is being built in north Wicklow. The adaption grants I 
would like to get an idea where that is going. Can I say also well done to the 
Community Call group, I think they have been doing great work and I wish them well 
with everything going forward. Can we also, I like to get some more info on the good 
work that the Bray partnership are doing. So we might get a broader outline on that. 
Can I also say well done to Cllr Dermot O'Brien, on the great work he is doing with 
Comhairle na nÓg. I think he does a super job and that needs to be acknowledged.  
 
Also, I asked this before, is it possible get a couple of one-pagers on available funds. 
Bit of a ready reckoner, I would certainly like it and I am sure the members would 
feel the same. In regards to CCTV, the data that is collected, am I right in saying that 
Wicklow County Council hold the data but if it ever needs to be reviewed the guards 
come and look at what they want to look at, but basically am I right in saying that 
Wicklow County Council hold the data?   
 
Can I also then just say a special word of thanks to the fire service. We had a very 
serious situation developing in Kilcoole over the weekend with flooding and the fire 
service were absolutely brilliant and I would like to pass on comments, maybe, Chief 
Executive, you would make contact with them on my behalf to say well done to Chief 
Hayden and his staff. They were super backed up by the civil defence and they got 
great assistance from Irish Rail and the National Parks and Wildlife. There was a 
very serious situation averted and I would like us to write and thank them for the 
great job they done for us.  
 
One last comment, Chair, if I may. I think we need to, some members might not 
agree. I think we need to revisit our stand orders in relation to voting. I think the two 
thirds majority is anti-democratic and is too controlling. Because the vote in actual 
fact that we took was won 16/14 and then because of the two third rule it loses. I 
think it needs to be revisited and I would be proposing that we visit that and I hope 
someone will support me to do that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Just before I go, bring in Cllr Leonard and Cllr Fortune. I know 
you blipped out, but the HAP presentation and the adaptation grant is going to be 
dealt with in the presentation.  

CLLR FORTUNE: Sorry, I didn't mean to do that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You are fine. Cllr Peir Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: I just wanted to thank the Chief Executive as usual for his report. I 
have two marine and water related items. First of all it's in relation to the dredging at 
Arklow Harbour and port. I want to ask if the Chief Executive is satisfied we have 
enough water depth for foreseeable activity, in particular SSE and the works that will 
be going on for the windfarm. We need to look at dredging the mouth of the harbour 
and ensuring there is enough water depth for the ports for Arklow and for Wicklow 
going forward. Then in relation to the Arklow Flood Relief scheme. I want to ask is 
the council sure it has fulfilled its obligations in relation to the Aarhus Convention. I 
know with Covid it's difficult and the engineers have working hard and it's a massive 
project and undertaking and I am appreciative of the work with myself and other 
councillors. I do think we were promised a public information day that never 
happened and I think there is a lack of public consultation with the stakeholders and 
the people of Arklow for such a huge project that will impact not just our generation, 
but the generations to come, because they will be left with the legacy of it. In 
particular I would like these problems to be ironed out before, prior to the project 
going to planning, I think because of the nature of the project itself, it's flood relief 
and a flood protection scheme that we can't afford for any objections. So I would 
appreciate if the people of Arklow were listened to what they want for the project 
prior to planning permission so the whole project can proceed as fast as possible 
and construction can commence.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Leonard. I will bring the Chief Executive back in 
now.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just in relation to the Strapped 
Road Plaza, I might ask Colm to come in to see if there is any design changes. I am 
not aware.  
COLM: I am not aware of any changes to design myself. I don't believe there is. I will 
look at the images you have mentioned, but the whole purpose of the Strand Road 
Scheme was to insert a bicycle lane in front of the plaza. So I will collect it out, but 
it's probably just, as you said yourself, just artists' images that have been used to 
portray what work has gone on and hasn't delineated the cycle track, but I will check 
it out and get back to you.  

CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Okay, just in relation to Cllr Fortune as I said, the HAP, we will 
have a presentation on that in the next item. They will also be looking at the 
adaptation grants and housing supports in general. Next month we will have a full 
report on the housing delivery, so that will look at exactly what is coming through 
over the next five years on the affordable and the approved housing bodies and their 
own construction programme and on part 5. I can assure the councillor, that every 
housing scheme that going ahead at the moment there is 10% part 5 coming 
through. That is condition of the planning. In relation to the Bray partnership, they 
gave a presentation last Wednesday, Michael Nicholson is there, he might give a 
summary or else we can get back to him. It's a big programme.  
MICHAEL: I can, in relation to... [INAUDIBLE] the Bray resource development 
project, they delivered a lot of in the Bray and gropes areas in particular. So we have 
work to do with certified course [INAUDIBLE DUE TO NOT SPEAKING INTO MIC ] 
job market programmes, start your own business groups, health and wellbeing, 
online learning, English language proficiency and in relation to the Greystones area 
was the work in the pool area. Engagement with Ken mayor women's group to 
develop a story telling resource. To hold a creative personal development course. 
Arts and workshops [INAUDIBLE]... assist the Newcastle community care. Etc, so 
loads of work going on in the Bray/Greystones district.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: We will get that, as Cllr Fortune said, the one-pager on the 
available funds. They keep changing, but we will get something out on that. The 
CCTV, the County Council is the data controller in relation to the CCTV. So if a 
community CCTV is installed, on the Monday morning if the guards want it they have 
to come to the councillor and we will ensure GDPR. We have Mark on, just in 
relation to the flood relief scheme and the dredging.  
MARK: Two things. The first in relation to the conversation with the wind farm 
operator, we are meeting them, some of the harbours team are meeting the 
developers of the wind farm tomorrow to discuss their requirements and we will be 
looking into those questions with them and discussing the position with them, so if 
we can assist them or make sure that facilities are available, they have acquired a 
piece of land and they are hoping to develop it for the O&M facility and we will be 
meeting them tomorrow as it happens. So we will raise the issue we have raised with 
them to make sure we are aware of their requirements. I understand that the draft 

requirements they have for O&M are considerably lower than the freight vessels but 
we will talk to them and make sure we can assist them if we can.  
 
On the Arklow Flood Scheme we are aware we haven't been able to have a public 
information day. It was our plan over the last number of months to have a public 
information campaign. With Covid restrictions we haven't been able to do that. We 
are planning to launch a series of documents over the next week or two, with which 
will make available to the district members initially and then put them on our website. 
These will be broad descriptions of the scheme as we plan it at the moment. A list of 
the various changes we have made in the last number of months. The scheme has, 
if you like, design has come to a head and we are now ready to launch it, or present 
it to An Bord Pleanála. Before we do that we will have a digital event of some sort. 
We will give the documents to the members and we will publicise them, they will be 
descriptions similar to the descriptions we have used before with the members, but 
with visualisations as well. Photographs with super imposing on them what the 
scheme will look like. We will open up a short consultation period where people can 
email in or call in questions to us. We will have FAQs as well, trying to, if you like 
pre-empt what the questions people will have and describe as best we can the 
scheme as we plan it at the moment. That is before we go to An Bord Pleanála, but 
we are planning to have a virtual public information day, and it will probably take 
place over a week or so to allow people to comment and come back with questions 
and we will try and clarify the scheme as we have it developed, we are nearly there. 
But we do plan an event in the last couple of weeks. We are working on the 
technology to get the best method out there and we will go to members with 
information when we have it available.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Mark. I will bring in Cllr Anne Ferris now.  
CLLR FERRIS: Can I say at the outset, my apologies for coming on late. I was trying 
to get on in 1.50pm and I had technical problems and it resulted in me having to shut 
down the computer and restart again sorry about that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Not at an all.  
CLLR FERRIS: I like to thank the Chief Executive for the report. I don't know if it's 
been mentioned in my absence, but I would like to pay tribute to the Bray Municipal 
District for the increase in litter ratings. They have gone up to far it's fantastic to see. 
Bray is the fourth largest town population wise in the country. I think for a heavily 

populated town it's a great effort being carried out. I like to thank the Bray Municipal 
District's, or sorry the management team, all the workers in the council who have 
contributed to this, the Tidy Towns Association and every individual who helps to 
make Bray a litter-free place, I just wanted to mention that as Cathaoirleach of The 
Council.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr R O'Connor.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: Thank you, Chair, just two things I want to mention. One on 
lighting. In Cloverhill in Bray the lighting has gone out by the bus stop which is used 
by young and old people alike. Also I want to second what Cllr Corrigan was saying 
about Monastery Road. The lighting has been out for a long time. If that could be 
tackled that would be great.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr M Kavanagh.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just a couple of points. There is 
very bad flooding on the Murragh at the moment. It's very soft underfoot. I know we 
are having a presentation on coastal erosion and I know it's a long-term thing, but I 
am wondering if there is any short-term work that can be done, maybe some kind of 
a covering with shingle or grit to strengthen what is there, because it's disappearing 
by the day since that storm. I was up there earlier today and it's dreadful. The other 
thing I want to say is that Fitzwilliam Square is coming on very well and there has 
been a lot of complementary comment about it. People who were sceptical about it 
at the beginning are convinced it's going to be the centre piece of the town. There is 
one or two little areas, I know it's not quite finished, but are tending to look very steep 
and I have asked for it to be looked at and I really just hope that if it is proven to be 
steeper than it used to be and I believe it is, because I often walk down that part 
myself, that some kind of barrier will be put at the end, or it will be broken up with a 
bed or one or two trees because I know what is going to happen, people are going to 
start using it as a short cut and it really is very steep. Then, just on another point, I 
am just slightly confused about the start of the meeting, the suspension of standing 
orders. First of all I want to concur with what Cllr Fortune said about the two thirds 
majority. I would certainly second having that looked at. I think it's very unfair and 
undemocratic. The other point is I am now utterly confused as to whether we have 
set a precedent where we can never discuss a national issue under suspension of 
standing orders. I am on this council five years we have always discussed national 
issues. It doesn't matter whether it was the Children's Hospital or anything that was 

going on in the country. We represent Wicklow, but we are also part of a much larger 
group which is councillors nationwide. They regularly send in motions to the Dail, 
they circularise other councils such as ourselves and I want to know have we set a 
precedent now where we can never discuss anything at a national level again?  
Because that appears to be what happened.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Kavanagh. Before I bring the Chief Executive in 
I am going to bring Lorraine in on that point.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just in relation to standing orders, every elected member is 
circulated with a copy of the standing orders once, after they are adopted or after 
they are amended. We have amended ours at the request of elected members much 
the standing orders, each local authority back in 2002 would have received a set of 
guidelines in the preparation of standing orders and they are set out in the schedule 
10 of the Local Government Act. These are standing orders and they are made by 
you and fairly consistent across the local authorities.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Lorraine. Chief Executive, can I bring you in now.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I would agree with Cllr Ferris there, 
it was a great result for Bray to go from 19th to 7th this year. It's been assessed as 
clean to European norms, very significant. I put the comment into the report that An 
Taisce said that main street, Bray Head, Bray Harbour were all very much deserving 
of the top tier litter grade. Not only were they very good with regard to litter but 
well-presented and maintained. So deserved compliments to the staff and the MD 
and also the Tidy Towns group. We will certainly follow up on the SSB in relation to 
Monastery Road and Cloverhill. Cllr Kavanagh we will ask the engineer to look at 
those two areas in particular, short-term in relation to flooding in Murragh and 
long-term in relation to the proposals. We will get him to look at the gradient there at 
Fitzwilliam Square and if there is an issue, how can we put in something to prevent 
any slippage or anything happening there. Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Chief Executive. Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I was going to come in, I think you are putting it because I want 
to talk about the housing adoption grants.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I am putting it back, it's in the presentation.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Gail Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: I asked about Rathnew, I don't think I got an answer on it, 
Cathaoirleach.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Cllr Gerry O'Neill.  
 
Are you there, Gerry?   
CLLR O'NEILL: Sorry about that. I want to express my gratitude to the, our CEO, I 
am delighted with the news that the red lane, the foot path around there, it's an old 
walkway around from the village back around and it's used for many years, but we 
were always short of about 1800 yards of that foot path and it's also the way to the 
primary school on the Red Lane. It will mean a lot for the people, so I just want to 
say thanks, we are delighted with that news. I know in Hollywood there the foot path 
has been completed there, so that is good news here. But again I wanted to pay my 
gratitude for the news there that the Red Lane will be completed after all of these 
years.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sylvester Bourke.  
CLLR BOURKE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just on a point of information in relation 
to the Arklow Flood Protection Scheme. The members discussed this September 
and we felt it could be useful to Mark's team if we invited the OPW engineers to 
come down and visit us to discuss various enhancements that we felt could be put 
into the scheme, but we haven't heard back yet from them, to my knowledge.  
 
I have asked Minister Harris to put pressure on Minister O'Donovan to grant us that 
audience. It's just to realise we are conscious of what is happening and we are trying 
to help to make improvements to the scheme.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Chief Executive.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Can I ask Colm Lavery to come in on the lighting situation.  
COLM: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. We have provided and paid for the traffic 
application, we have provided this information to the ESB and on to the developer. 
So obviously it's a matter for ESB to actually connect the lights. Unfortunately it can 
take a period of time, which we have seen in other towns throughout the county. So 
look, we will check that the ESB have been provided with the relevant certification 
from the developer and we will try and get them to prioritise the connection. I can 
understand the difficulty it causes from people coming from the Aldi site trying to get 
back on to the main road in Rathnew, so we will check it with the ESB and try and 
push it on.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Director Lavery and Chief Executive.  

CHIEF EXECUTIVE: We will follow up with the OPW in relation to the Flood 
Protection Scheme.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, everyone. We will move on to item number 3. To 
receive a presentation...  
CLLR WALSH: I was trying to get in there. You may have missed me. Just two quick 
questions. Following on from the housing and rent arrears, the high figure on that. It's 
great to see there are alternative payment arrangements being facilitated for rent, 
housing and rental arrears. Just following on from that, our housing loans and our 
mortgage customers there, that through Covid measures have suffered financial 
difficulty in meeting their repayments. A loan restructuring in place, what advice 
would the CEO give to those customers?   
 
The second question I had was in relation to the Age Friendly Schemes. I had 
question in relation to the Mill Road and Castle Carrick sites. How is that going to 
work?  On the CCTV, Cllr Fortune raised the issues around GDPR, we did raise this 
with the Garda Commissioner we had with them in November. We are looking at 
ways to circumvent that, because ideally what is needed there is a live feed, a live 
stream into the Garda station for that to be effective. I think the Gardaí are in 
agreement with that. Hopefully there will be a situation around that and we will have 
a live feed directly into the Garda stations. I want to acknowledge the work being 
done by the LEO office around the Brexit issues, the trading online vouchers and the 
businesses, the online workshops and the clinics, that are being carried out. So 
fantastic work being done, much-need work being done there for our small 
businesses in the challenge that Brexit presents.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Walsh. Chief Executive, do you want to respond 
to that?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I agree with the councillor in relation to the LEO. They have 
done some fantastic work. 500 training sessions. Similarly with the business 
continuity grants 283 grants. Plus all the mentoring and they have been working a lot 
of overtime in relation to that. Community CCTV, we will have another look at that, 
but it's the GDPR regulations are there and we have to accept that. We will have a 
look at it. I might ask Joe Lane who is coming in now and Jackie in relation to the 
housing loans. If you could come in there. The Old Age Friendly Scheme.  
CLLR BLAKE: Can I come in there?   

CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  
CLLR BLAKE: I know you are going to discuss the homeless later on, I think it's fair 
to say that we have acknowledge the fact of the number of local authority houses 
and housing that generally come on stream from Blessington to Baltinglass and 
Carnew to Tinahely. A huge numbers of houses have come on stream and are in the 
process of doing so. That's had to be acknowledged. In regard to rural housing, they 
are like gold dust rural housing. We have two in the Tinahely area. One outside 
Tinahely has been boarded up and another outside of Carnew has been boarded up 
for quite some time. I would ask that Joe Lane take an active interest in bringing 
those house on stream.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I will ask Joe to come in there.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Are you there, Joe?   
JOE: Yes, Helena and myself will deal with the two boarded up the relets. One is a 
long-term one we are aware of and the Tinahely one I will have to check the list. As 
regards Gerry Walsh, the back garden units we, will be back to the Greystones area 
when we have those done, but they are infill units in addition to the programme. Our 
maintenance team... we pick off a few, like we had a couple of years ago in in 
Carrick Villas so there is a few scheduled, but when we have them finalised we will 
be going back to the elected members in the area for those particular ones. They 
wouldn't represent a major part of the project, but they would represent an additional 
units in bigger gardens, because there is a number of bigger gardens there. As 
regards in general and one of the questions came up in regard to Part 5 in general. 
Declan next month will deal with supply and we will be wiser then regarding when we 
will get back to the scheme at that stage. There was a fairly comprehensive report 
given at the SPC, if members want I will circulate it on Part 5s. It details the 
difficulties, particularly regarding the performance indicators regarding where to 
break them up by year. Sometimes when people can see stuff coming through it can 
take years before they could, they come to fruition. So I think we might circulate that, 
either Declan will synopsise it for the meeting or in the absence of that we will 
circulate it. Was there a building loan, not quite sure what the question was, do you 
want to repeat that question.  
BRIAN GLEESON: I can take that. Just on the housing loans, there was a mortgage 
break scheme that was in place in 2020. That was available, we had a number of 
borrowers who availed of that. To date we have been told by the department there 

will be no further scheme for 2021. But that could change as things progress. At the 
moment there isn't a mortgage breaks scheme for 2021. It finished at the end of 
2020. If there is any change on that, obviously we will be letting people know as 
soon as possible.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: All right, I am going to move on to item number three and it's a 
presentation from the Housing and Corporate Directorate. There is two parts to this. 
Jackie Farrell will take the first part and Helena will take the second part. Jackie if 
you are there.  
JACKIE: I am going to give you an overview of the housing scheme and I will hand 
you over to Helena you have had a chance to look at the presentation, I won't dwell 
too much on it, there is the policy context on which we operate. Obviously which 
have our national policy, Housing for All and we were work on the Rebuilding Ireland 
and the action plan for homelessness. It's to facilitate the provision of sustainability 
high equality social, affordable cost effective housing accommodation to meet the 
strategy in accordance with Government strategy. There is eight objectives there 
under which we operate. So, just, as you are all aware we operate a waiting list for 
social housing support. We have certain eligible criteria that people have to fulfil. We 
are receiving an average of 30 applications a week at the minute. We undertook a 
recent social housing assessment there which finalised in November. At that stage 
there was 4.487 people on the list for social housing support, that includes 280 RAS 
and 1,440 HAP need. The housing need not met is over 2,000. A common on the 
restrictions and how we are operating, there is only a small impact on our services. 
We are continuing to deliver up to and including Level 5. We have a protocol around 
short-term needs when we are assessing applications at the minute and rent 
supplement can be used as a temporary measure of support for these clients who 
are on that and it will be assessed in in the short-term. Obviously the members have 
adopted a scheme of letting priorities and that is how we allocate our properties. We 
are looking at a choice-based letting scheme nor hard to let properties. I have shown 
an allocation by years. You can see there has been an exponential growth there. In 
2016 we only had 31 allocations so it shows the increase in supply. We are 
continuing to allocate in the pandemic, obviously we have guidelines in place to 
protect staff and clients. This table says it all it shows the work that has been done 
and the deliver which has been happening. We are prioritising target groups, so we 
have put a huge focus on disability. You can see 66 clients were allocated under 

disability but also under the transfers. A lot of those would have been right sizing or 
moving people from unsuitable properties to properties that were more suitable for 
their needs. To disability, homeless travellers, resettlement and care leavers, so the 
total allocation for 2020 was 325. Our rental income, we have 4,530 houses 
occupied. Our weekly represent accrual is the guts of 300,000. It also had an effect 
on arrears which stand at 2.2 million. We are tackling that the whole time. This has 
been impacted on by people's income reduction now in the current climate. So a lot 
of work is ongoing in adjusting people's represent. There is no door-to-door 
collections at the minute so to find different ways of allowing clients to pay their rent. 
We have 4,500 clients. We have a tenant liaison officer who deals primarily with 
antisocial behaviour. There is a significant case load, there a high level of drug use, 
issues regarding mental health and family breakdown. They are the primary causes 
of the complaints. We have an antisocial behaviour strategy in place, it's outdated so 
we are reviewing that in terms the Joint Policing Commission. We have built a lot of 
relationships with the local Gardaí and the HSE in relation to mental health 
professionals, so we link in with them to ensure we can deliver on this. Rebuilding 
Ireland Home Loan, maximum 320,000. You can get 90% of the value of the 
property.  
 
To date we have received 383 applications. There is a significant approval rate, but 
also a significant decline rate. That is primarily where people don't have capacity to 
repay. The underwriter is with the housing agency. The underwriter is the housing 
agency, so they will determine it on the basis of credit ability and repayment 
capacity. So, it's quite successful scheme, there is big uptake on it, but as you say, 
the approval rate is 150 and 383. Then to homelessness, we address homelessness, 
we sit on The Mideast region. Kildare is the lead authority and Meath and Wicklow sit 
on it.  
 
The members adopted the last plan in 2018, which was the homes action plan. So 
we identify priority areas in addressing homelessness and I am always banging on 
about this, but the big thing is prevention. If we can help homelessness happening 
we have a better chance of dealing with the, or and addressing the issues that have 
caused it. So emergency accommodation, obviously we have a significant amount in 
that. The quality provision, we spend a lot of time on developing exit strategy fours 

clients and we ensure that the health and welfare supports don't work alone and that 
is where the multiagency approach comes in. I am hoping to have the draft updated 
plan for presentation for next month. So that will have been informed by, I suppose 
the learning from this plan, the current plan that is in if place. That is just a flavour of 
the expenditure in the Mideast Region of the current action plan. You can see for 
Wicklow our spend for 2020. Our draft figures at the moment are 1.3 million. A lot of 
that is spent on the bed and breakfast accommodation, but the bigger amount will be 
spent on the supported accommodation piece. And then the emerging trends. So I 
suppose you can't tackle homelessness until you figure out what is causing it in the 
first place. A lot of our work has been done on analysing the trends and the statistics 
that we are seeing. So we analysed the households placed in emergency 
accommodation for 2019/2020. The following contributing factors were highlighted. 
To failure to obtain accommodation following notice to commit was a big one for 
family homelessness. Substance misuse was another one. Mental health is a big 
deal, we are looking with the HSE to resolve or put in sustainment where there is 
mental health issues. It's certain one of the big flags in the region. Family 
breakdown. That is increasing with Covid. Release from prison, increasing with 
Covid and domestic violence, sadly increasing with Covid. So we are seeing a lot 
more presentations in the presenting public at the moment under these categories. 
So that is what, that is the number of families in emergency accommodation at the 
minute. We have the lowest in the region. We only have 14 households in 
emergency accommodation. People are put into emergency accommodation as a 
last resort. We look at open door accommodation for families if we can, but if all else 
fails we have emergency accommodation. That is 14 families who may be single 
individuals but also with children. Can you see the breakdown over the duration of 
three to six months, nine to 12 months and you have to understand that if families 
are in bed and breakfast for a long period of time there is usually a reason behind 
that. Here is the presentation for 2020. Number of new presentations 565, repeat 70. 
We do have some people who would be cyclically representing themselves. Number 
of families 270. Of which there is 361 adults and 500 children. Now, when I say 
presentations, these are people who contacted us because they were either at risk of 
homelessness or homeless. 565 people weren't put up in bed and breakfast and 
emergency accommodation in 2020. 500 children weren't homeless in 2020. You 
have to look at the figure, the presentings could be a call for advice or assistance. 

Our whole approach is on prevention and intervention. That key to how we work. 
You can see own door accommodation. Particularly where it's families we try and 
use council stock where people. This gives us an opportunity to for the family, how 
they sustain the tenancy. Do they need support with that, are there antisocial 
behaviour. This isn't their permanent accommodation normally, however some 
families have settled in and behaved very well and have kept their tenancy. We have 
created permanent tenancies in some cases. So it's own door accommodation.  
 
I should say that the emergency accommodation. It's not the picture you get in the 
media of ten people in one room. Generally emergency accommodation can be self-
contained units with their own kitchen and sitting room. They have access to laundry 
and dining room facilities. So they are not as bad as portrayed in the media. We 
work hard with the providers to ensure it's as close to a temporary home as possible. 
So homeless HAP has been a huge success in Wicklow. As you can see we only 
established it at the end of 2018. So it's only had two years in operation. We created 
306 homeless HAP tenancies of which 143 were homeless and the rest were 
tenancies. Two from direct provision. This is starting to take hold at the moment, 
clients leaving direct provision. I will go into that after. The prevention tenancies. If 
you look at them. That is 161 families prevented from becoming homeless. Then the 
143 who would have exited emergency accommodation. We work tirelessly 
establishing relationships with landlords to ensure they are comfortable with the 
scheme. We liaise with the household established needs, we establish relationships 
with property agent as well. We will have landlord whose ring us to see if they can 
work with us and then she supports the homeless households. So there is really 
good results there in homeless HAP.  
 
We can't, we are just administrators or house suppliers. We don't have the social 
care skills that are, the housing bodies bring to our collaborative approach. We work 
with the approved housing bodies to give a holistic approach. We provide the 
properties and the approved housing body provide the support and is targeted to the 
particular support needs of the clients. We always work towards putting in key 
support works to ensure that an exit strategy has been defined.  
 

The Homeless Family Facility has been progressed to Dublin Simon and should be 
kited out shortly. That is families who are at risk of homeless or are going to be 
temporarily homeless following notice to quit. We use the capital assistance scheme 
widely. We have committed to providing accommodation for care leavers. These are 
young adults leaving foster care whose relationship with the family has broken down 
and they need to be given supports for accommodation. There is a visual of our 
largest properties at the minute. So you can see at the start of the year, I suppose 
the very first one would have been this one. It originally operated as a hostel and 
then morphed into a supported accommodation facility. We have capacity for eleven 
people there. They have long-term licenses and they are supported into moving on 
into alternative accommodation. Either with supports or social housing or private 
rented. So we have a huge move on there, constant flow of progressions there. So it 
really works. The model really works.  
 
San Remo on the right hand side that is our latest success. 20 capacity at the 
moment and this is high support. 24/7 high support accommodation. This was the 
piece missing from Wicklow, so we are delighted to get us become on track. It's 
operating so well at the minute that the Neighbourhood Liaison Committee has now 
reduced its monthly meetings to every two months because there are no issues 
associated with this. Intensive management, intensive case management, a lot of 
key working with the clients to ensure they move on and it's complicated at the 
minute with Covid, because we can't just take people in off the streets we have to 
self-isolate them, maybe in association with the HSE before they can take up, so 
there is a little bit of a delay in the referral process at the minute, bird trying to tighten 
up on that. That is due to Covid. So the model works, you go from rough sleeping 
into possibly San Remo. Then go into one of our shared houses and into shared 
accommodation. So that model is really where we are pushing to be all the time with 
this cohort of individuals.  
 
You can see on the bottom left that is Carrig Eden in Greystones, again it's a 
supported accommodation for a particular cohort of people who have exited 
addiction, but now need to exit homelessness, because they may not have 
references or may have been in Mountjoy for ten years and may need to build up 

that portfolio with themselves. So this is supported accommodation. So the model 
really works.  
 
Housing First, again another string to our bow. We are rolling out the implementation 
plan on a regional basis. We reached our first target last year. It's targeted towards 
really chaotic rough sleepers who would have a dual diagnosis of mental health and 
addiction. It focuses on the fact that we are not saying to them we will give you a 
house if you get rid of your addiction, we are saying we will put the house first and 
work with you on getting you into accommodation that we can work on your needs. 
Peter McVerry Trust was appointed as the programme implementer. Identifying 
clients and sourcing of properties is very difficult. One beds are very scarce. So to 
date three of the five were social housing units and three were provided by AHB.  
 
I mentioned previously mental health issues.  We have to work closely with the 
Department of Health, because the mental health issues we are seeing arising in 
homelessness and people who are using their homes due to their mental health are 
huge.  
 
So we co-funded, we work with HALE, which is an AHB for mental health. We 
co-funded a sustainment officer last year, the first, they were in operation for about 
six months of last year and already we have shared client base of 11s who will be 
accessing mental health facilities in Newcastle, but our tenants are in HAP 
tenancies. So the supports have going in. We have had huge success with this, so 
we tend to keep with this for 2021 and beyond. So there is a few of the challenges 
for Covid and homelessness. Guidance was issued nationally for vulnerable groups 
which was homeless, traveller, Roma. We don't have Roma at the minute, Kildare 
and Dublin are primarily where you have Roma. We have to concentrate on 
homelessness and the travellers. They brought in new emergency measures to 
protect tenants as well and they are prohibited from issuing notice of eviction. So the 
members adopted traveller accommodation programme at the end of 201. One of 
the learning that came from this is that the majority of travellers are seeking standard 
accommodation. In 2020 we made 27 allocation locations. Even though it would be 
seen as a cultural priority for traveller, transient sites are not a priority and for 
instance they asked us to state that in the programme which we did. There is an 

increasing homelessness in travellers. A lot of them would have lost accommodation 
over the last number of years. At the minute we can't move on unauthorised 
encampments so we have had to put in welfare facilities. Again national guidelines to 
provide national welfare facilities for travellers on unauthorised sites. Our positive 
action that is where we allocate a minimum of one house in every 16 we allocate to 
travellers. That is actually, we far exceed that on our allocations that. That is there as 
a bare minimum. So the account, we underestimate, we do an annual account of 
traveller families every November. There is the breakdown of the families in the 
county. So we would be looking at, the ones we need to be looking at for social 
housing support are the ones that are chairing with families, unauthorised sites and 
possibly in private rental, depending on the list of time on the list. We have had 15 
families in group housing. We have AHB tenancies. So Helena will touch on that 
later. There is HAP and RAS and short and long-term leasing. You can see the total 
is 2,462. So their housing need would deemed to have been met, but that doesn't 
mean we don't look at them for social housing when they are coming up on 
allocations. Leasing is started to increase exponentially. HAP was very successful. 
144 availing of HAP. There is a corresponding decrease in RAS. So another area 
that house has been involved in is the Irish Refugee Protection Programme. We are 
dealing with Syrian families. Just to give you a flavour of what resettlement is and the 
images there are quite compelling I suppose.  
 
The allocation was 119 individuals which compiled, we thought it was 38 units but it's 
more like 45 units. It's a mixture of local authority and AHB properties and we 
ensured we would have a geographical spread throughout the Municipal District. The 
Refugee Resettlement Committee is led by the Community and Cultural and Social 
Development. It would be the HSE and account KWETB and the guards, all the 
people who need to be there to provide the supports for families coming in.  
 
I have to say it's been very successful to date. The partnership approach with the 
AHB, where they purchased extra properties, we identified areas where extra supply 
was available and so we are actually coming to the end of the programme. Which 
has been very positive for everyone involved, I have to say. It's not homelessness as 
such it's a humanitarian response to a huge tragedy for these families. So we are 
anticipating that we will complete the resettlement by March 2021. And I am going to 

finish off and leave you with a couple of images there from Aleppo and the families 
fleeing for their lives basically. I will hand you over now to Helena.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Jackie, for that in-depth preparation. So I will bring in 
Helena Fallon now.  
HELENA: I am just going to share my screen. Okay, that is okay. Let's try this now. 
Does that come up there?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: No. It's not up yet, Helena.  
HELENA: One second. Okay, I am going to talk about the maintenance and upgrade 
of stock. So the first one is reletting of vacant properties much we did 48 properties 
were worked on and were finished last year. Now we did 62 the previous year in 
2019, but there was a lot of delays due to Covid and also the requirement that some 
of our direct crew ended up working in county buildings and putting up perspex 
screens and working on, in Shoreline putting in measures. So there was a lot of extra 
work for them. It voids the option being looked at in the combination of contract and 
direct labour managed in the Municipal Districts.  
 
Just to say the Fabric Upgrade Scheme will be brought in for relets in 2021. Okay, 
housing grants. So this is for the DPGs. So the process and inspect 
works/adaptations undertaken for persons with disabilities and house adaptations for 
persons with disability.  
 
In 2020 we spent 1.1 million. The previous year we spent 1.7, so there was a 
reduction. The trouble is we have little reduction in these grants, so they have to get 
the work done. So there were delays in applications and getting the work done as a 
result of Covid. On the social side we spent 678,000. We spent over the allocation. 
So a small decrease on the previous year I think we did well on that one. Phase one 
is the cavity infill and the external wall insulation in general. We did 90 houses. All 
tenants have been contacted in that regard. They will be, once the contract offers are 
allowed back, it should be done soon.  
 
The phase 2, 15 houses started in Wolftone Square. It's started for the moment. We 
are inspecting properties, again it's a little bit of a problematic getting out to them in 
West Wicklow and Glenealy. We hope to get it out by Easter. Also last year the 
department told us we have replaced windows and doors of the units improved 

under Phase 16 I know this has come up with some of the councillors. A lot of them 
were done because they were single glazed. That was the only criteria. So 21 
houses were upgraded. It did cause a bit of unhappiness on people who didn't 
receive it and didn't understand it. So I know a few councillors approached me about 
that. It was only for properties that were single glazed.  
They're doing the detailed design works to project.  They're completed 
now and the procurement, they will be going out to a contractor, should 
take eight to ten weeks and hope to start in April, and it should take about 
nine weeks, so June/July they should be constructed and start producing 
power, it is never a 20-year period at fixed rate.  That's a photo montage 
what it will look like, it takes over the car ports over the front car park in. 
So, housing repairs and maintenance, the repair works were generally on 
budget.  Central heating provision, we had 150,000 we spent it all, which 
was good news, we got 32 properties done. 
So, boiler servicing, we had 490,000 budgets, we got 59% all oil and gas 
boilers were serviced, and safety checked in 2020, including boiler 
replacement and underspend was due to COVID-19.  And housing 
condition survey we're awaiting an initial scheme on that. 
So just to say with the HAP, environmental health officer and RAS and 
targeted inspections, targeted 1326 set by the department and we 
achieved 700 we couldn't do inspections throughout the year and again, 
we can't do them at the moment. 
Target of 1600 for 2021. 
Traveller accommodation, Ballinteskin.  Three houses, detailed design 
stage and tendered documents completed.  Stage three department, 
awaiting approval to go to tender, Avondale Heights, approval received for 
funding from the department, ongoing discussions with proposed tenants 
on draft design.  Barndarrig, revised Stage 1 submitted in department for 
funding approval.  DPG in Ashford completed an extension, and 
Silverbridge Bay, four days refurbished and allocated and bay five 
awaiting.  Age-friendly schemes this is a new initiative of ours and the 
idea is to provide initiative for people to move on to downsize so we've 
three age friendly schemes in Greystones, front and back garden and site 
of the side of Carraig Eden, this is designed for older tenant and offered to 

residents to over 60 wishing to downsize the local area.  The tenant will 
remain in their community in age friendly designed home with high 
comfort and low utility costs and a family home back and the incentives 
are that especially in Carraig Eden you have magnificent site overlooking 
the sea so they will be in effect giving up their three-bedroomed house for 
one bedroomed and a lot of people obviously wouldn't do that, but, this is 
the incentive they will have a sea view and it will be incredibly comfortable 
for them and suitable for them as they get older. 
So just the three schemes are Mill Road stage one approval received 
November at the site survey carried out in December, and the preliminary 
design is under way.  In Castle Vilas Stage One approved received site 
survey carried preliminary design underway and Carraig Eden is age-
friendly friendly apartments, procurement for architect for the draft Part 8 
last week and it is going well hopeful we get the schemes done and could 
get 18 hopefully family homes back for the 18 different units. 
OK, I think that's it. 
 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thank you Helena.  I'll ask you to take that down now. 
HELENA:  It is my asthma, sorry, I haven't got COVID-19. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thanks Helena and Jackie and I'm sure there's lots of 
questions.  I will go to Cllr Grace McManus. 
 
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  And we were very 
government to get that presentation at the housing SPC during the week 
as well.  And my genuine thanks to Jackie and the team for the amount of 
effort and time that's gone into it.  It is very clear they've given us an 
absolutely comprehensive overuse of what is going on and the challenges 
to us now to give it equal time in terms of analysis and supporting and 
maybe taking some action what we've learnt. 
Something that I'm, my first reaction what I'm struck by is it seems there's 
a lot of work going on, but that it is almost like I can imagine our housing 
department swimming upstream against the tide, I'd be very concerned 
with that figure of 30 new applications a week for example, coming on to 
our social housing list.  And, so, when, and I know there was a debate 

around the motion that brought this on the agenda, but I actually 
appreciate where we've got to because we're take ago more wide-view of 
the situation and seeing the trends and I appreciate even some of the 
analysis there that Jackie provided in terms of in thing quick causing 
problems and mental illness as a problem.  I have a couple of yes that I 
would appreciate I'm not sure who would be best suitable to answer them.  
But I actually noted in the order reported we will be discussing later 
there's a rent debt policy mentioned, and I'm wondering if there's a role for 
members there to input into that or have a look at it or maybe the SPC, 
and where is that in draft form or where is that? 
In terms of the notices to quit, obviously in 2020, there was a suspension 
of evictions during pandemic at certain times and I'm wondering how did 
that impact the presentations of people at risk of homelessness, was 
there a concentrated amount when those bans were lifted, and did that 
cause additional pressures or how was that for the team? 
And then, in terms of the HAP, and the place finder that work is obviously 
phenomenal because as we know, it can be very difficult for certain 
people to access the rental market so would there be more data available 
in terms of has the HAP team noticed any problems with maybe 
discrimination for some of our clients? 
Or are there any problems in terms of certain areas in the county that is 
more difficult to secure HA., properties than others, that kind of 
information will be useful.  But just to say the intention with the motion and 
with this work is for us to try and support the work that's going on and we 
have national colleagues, some in Government some not that we can 
work with and it is our job to feed the Wicklow friends back out that way 
and especially support staff who maybe, I imagine in very stressful 
situations given some of the numbers and stories we're seeing but I really 
do appreciate all the work that went into it, thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  I will take them in threes and Jackie and Helena would 
decide which to take them in answers.  Cllr Avril Cronin. 
CLLR CRONIN:  Thank you very much and thank you very much to 
Jackie and Helena for those presentations.  My query is I was going to 
bring it up at the manager's report, but I'd say I'd wait until this 

presentation.  My query is in relation to the circle housing development we 
have here in Dunlavin the tenants were told they were given their letter of 
approval over a year ago now and they were told originally in March they 
were moving on and then because of COVID-19 obviously that was 
moved to the end of May, then moved to August, then November, and it is 
February now and we still don't know when those tenants will be moved 
in.  Any time I raise it at the council meeting I'm told I will get update; I still 
haven't got one.  I have contacted Irish Water about it because I was told 
that it was an issue with Irish Water connection, they have told me no, it is 
actually an issue with the developer.  There seems to be a lot of back and 
forth with finding out what the actual status of the estate is, but in the 
meantime, we have a number of tenants left in limbo, they don't know 
whether they will be moving this year or not.  We have a number of 
landlords not knowing are the tenant moving out of their houses should 
they renew contracts and to be honest there's a lack of communication 
here between the people that have been offered houses and I think if we 
could improve communication and just give them an update, let them 
know what the situation is, because they contacted me, I'm sure they're 
contacting my other colleagues as well looking for information.  And you 
know, it would do no harm to let them know what their position is, it is 
really not fair the way they're led on this long to believe they're going to be 
in their houses.  And Municipal District back in December we were told 
they would be in at the end of January now we're into February and we 
are still in the same position we don't even know what stage the houses 
are at.  Another issue I have come across over the number of months is in 
relation to older men who are living on their own, they're in rented 
accommodation at the moment, they're on the housing list for a number of 
years but unfortunately, they can't get a council property as they're not 
entitled to a two-bedroomed house and not enough one-bedroom houses 
available to them.  This is a huge issue across the whole of west Wicklow 
and I'm wondering, where do we plan on going with this? 
Like what are we meant to say to these men left in accommodation that's 
not suitable, there's nowhere to go, some are living with their sons and 
daughters and family members who have their own families to rear and it 

is really is a very ditch situation for them to be in.  Thank you very much. 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  Can I say to members it was a great presentation 
there was detail in it but rather than each and every member thanking to 
Helen and Jackie for presentations, go to the questions, we will be getting 
to the end of meeting and saying we didn't get to this, I've thanked 
numbered on behalf of everybody present so if you would work with me 
on that one, Cllr Paul O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
I was going to say thanks for the presentation, but thank for the staff for 
their hard work, as someone on the housing, SPC I sat through the 
presentation last week and it was superb, I would like to thank you Cllr 
John Snell who is the chair of SPC, he is always in command of his brief 
and fair in the presentation.  I didn't get to speak on the motion as Sinn 
Fein last week because my internet went but I'll take it in good faith it was 
put forward in that regard.  But I want to know off the housing department 
as elected representatives is there anything, we can do to help the 
housing department because I know we are in difficult times.  I also want 
to know is the housing department staffed sufficiently, I know in other 
counties there is more people involved in housing.  My last question is, is 
there anything the homeless team would have done differently had this 
motion not been submitted? Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Jackie do you wanted to come in or 
share it with Helena there between you. 
  
JACKIE:  I'll start with Cllr Grace McManus's query and references the 
notice of motion, I tried to browser it in the presentation in that the charge 
homelessness motion in notion, that was discussed at length at the last 
meeting, you can't discuss homeless any unless you discuss family 
homelessness, we have to take them as a whole, I want to make the 
distinct very clear.  If children are homeless it is as a result of something 
that has happened to their family, that's why we looked at the emerging 
trends, notice to quit and family brackens and mental health so child 
homelessness is a factor that something that happens because 

something has happened to the family.  All we can do, to say we want to 
achieve keeps on the agenda, we achieve zero homelessness, is kind of 
that's never going to happen, let face it, that is never going to happen 
because there are always issues contributing to family homelessness.  
So, what we had to look at is how we will address it and how we're going 
to resolve it and that's why we have put all these initiatives in place, and I 
think we're doing a very fine job of it at the minute.  The rented policy I will 
ask maybe Brian to take that afterwards in the role for the members.  The 
notice to quit, if you look at our figures for last year in families presenting 
there wasn't a significant difference in the numbers from this year, so, 
while we did in the region, we were very concerned about the lifting of the 
moratorium on notices to quit having direct impact on the number of 
families happening it didn't happen on the ground at the time.  Having 
said that we have in place, nearly in place the former building in William's 
Road which was identified dealing with families who were at risk of 
becoming homeless following notice to quit.  The only notice to quit we 
can actually be giving during level five restriction sincere extremely 
antisocial behaviour and we don't have any of those happening at the 
minute.  So, and we're not seeing a huge number of evictions or notices 
to quilt at the moment.  I know there was the RTB has enacted new 
legislation on that following the guidelines that came out through 
COVID-19.  HAP and place finder have asked about data on problems 
with discrimination or areas which are more difficult.  If I can HAP 
landlords in North Wicklow, I would being extremely helpful, it is like hens’ 
teeth in Bray and that's having impact in families who are homeless, they 
have to move out of the area, a lot refuse to, it is difficult with north 
Wicklow because there aren't the properties there, we will put out a plea 
for properties very shortly and see can I work with and create more 
relationships there. 
Problems with discrimination - we had it was raised at the SPC about 
possible travellers’ group in Wicklow raise are raised there's 
discrimination amongst travellers or against travellers in the private rented 
market. 
So that's seems to be a difficulty they are experiencing, landlords aren't 

allow today discriminate whether people are going to be HAP or not, but 
on the ground, it does transpire that landlords don't want people with HAP 
and some cases, and they're entitled to not take the people we send to 
them for viewings. 
So, but we can't determine what exactly was the cause of them not 
getting the tenancy. 
The feeling in the Wicklow trends, rental basis we do all that data analysis 
and feed it up to the national networks, so it does go up the line, we report 
weekly to the department and give them our quarterly statistics also, so 
the department is very well informed of the regional statistics. 
Cllr Avril Cronin I'm going to, Joe is going to answer that one, just to say 
that we wouldn't be communicating with the clients there anyway because 
denominations, we nominate through SICCO, they do the offer letters. 
Issues around the development Joe will come in on that, and then, you 
mentioned older men living on their own, yes, it is an issue and not just in 
west Wicklow.  They're not entitle today two bed house they only get the 
private rented figure for one bed house and where do you plan on going 
with this, from this allocations on social housing we are looking at kind of 
a 1.5, two bed property for older people because we need to be future 
proofing their accommodation, they may need care or family member 
staying with them, so we're looking at that overall but definitely in private 
rental sector, relying on homeless HAP support they're not going to get 
the funding to do the two beds so really they're I suppose, their endgame 
will be with social housing and we will look at two bed units where 
required. 
Cllr Paul O'Brien - can we do anything help the housing department? 
I can think of loads but won't go into it. 
No, there's not much, we're managing, we're welcome the support of the 
councillors, we work closely with all of you and it is very much two-way 
street, information you can give us when required and the way we work, 
we work closely with all the members, we've always found you hugely 
supportive so no you're doing fine, there's nothing more can you do to 
help at the minute.  I think that's all the questions?   
HELENA:  There's one thing is disability grants in the private homes, just 

that we are very generous allocation, 1.9 million and sometimes it is you 
know people have to apply for it and we're not getting the level of 
applications so that can be an issue for us, we've gone to GPs in the past 
and asked them to put up a notice on that but we're still sometimes finding 
it difficult to get all the money spent.  And I mean, there are three different 
types of grants, in one of them, HOP housing for old person grant you 
don't even need medical grounds, that's for anything structural 
improvements, leaky roof, electrical wiring you can get up to £8,000 and it 
is people over 66, so, you know, and in fact it even says people under 66 
for extreme hardship.  So, there's an awful lot out there, and maybe I 
should send more information bi-out about that, and so, if you know of 
people who are struggling in that way or need repairs on their homes.  
And just to say they're privately owned but also, it does include provided 
by approved housing body and rented from the landlord obviously with 
their permission, but there are other categories in there as well so 
perhaps I can send on information and you could help out in that regard, it 
would be fantastic. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Jo do you want to come in there. 
  
JOANNA:  In the regarding in the absence of that, it is still contractual 
issues between SIC CO and developers, but the contract is between 
Circle and developers, and there's, more than we would normally 
handhold, we would hope we would finish fairly soon but there's no point, 
it has been a marathon it wouldn't be learning too much good ones from 
this one, but anyhow.  As regard, Cllr Paul O'Brien and the councillors, 
first of all, a year ago or something like that we said regarding 
homelessness to get people to present everybody worst case scenario 
was people presented at the last minute and became an issue.  You have 
done that and continue to do that, so it is one thing.  Yes, another thing, 
pre-Part 8 you but once we come in and talk to you and get a feel for a 
part. 
It then nearly becomes not set in stone, and I know it is very difficult for 
members because they haven't got the feedback from the local 

councillors but once we share our thinking at that pre-part 8 meeting we 
then talk to the department, they're kind of, they set a ceiling or floor 
where we're going and on top of that, we put resources in there, so, if 
people can feed in early pre-part 8 at the meetings and know where the 
deal breakers are, it makes life easier for us, about us it creates a 
problem afterwards because it builds up its own impetus at this stage.  
And the second a drinks links this together, Declan will be with us next 
month to do the programme going forward.  Jackie pointed out earlier on, 
their allocations is over. 
300, from now on let's assume our supply will be in excess of 300 units.  
We will land, if elected members, particularly in north Wicklow area we 
have a dirt of planned there, we need to go back in the market. 
We're looking for turnkeys and particularly looking for land, so, councillors 
want to link in with us there, any ideas at all we would be very keen to 
look at areas there. 
Some turnkeys and lands we've looked at has come from the elected 
members either at local, when we did the trawl in 2015, local areas, some 
we can't progress and there's a reason why, we'll go through land, and we 
will quite keen on that at the moment but again, a lot of that is north 
Wicklow, it is where the problems there again.  OK.  They're there, I think 
that's them. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Erika Doyle. 
CLLR ERIKA DOYLE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Just a couple of a couple 
things there, the figures that the numbers of presentations and particularly 
when you see the child presentations and I know it was mentioned the 
don't turn up on their own, but I suppose that's what brought this about, 
Cllr Grace McManus’ motion.  So, am I right in thinking then they're not 
unique presentations and that there is possibly quite a bit of duplication 
there, and if that's the case and that's the way the numbers are presented 
is it possible to get any clearer breakdown of unique presentations to 
maybe give a more accurate picture? 
Just something else there, on the energy upgrades, I know we're early 
days with micro-generation schemes but has there been any thought 
given to that? 

If there has, would that be something where the benefits of that, where 
the energy is sold back to the grid or the tenants is that too early to speak 
on that, and Jackie mentioned this as well and something that I was going 
to suggest in terms of HAP for landlords - I think we really could do with 
selling it to them with some kind of a little advertising campaign or 
something going out, to let the landlords know of the benefits of the HAP 
scheme because HAP seems to be where it is at at the moment and 
they're like hens teeth and there still is misinformation out there.  As well 
as discrimination, discrimination-based ethnicity or skin colour or marital 
status so I think it would be great if we find a way to break through to any 
landlords that are out there, thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy. 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  My background is working in housing and local 
authority so that's probably I get a lot and many I can deal with the 
queries come in straightaway.  But for those I can't, I'm just wondering if 
there have been changes to the requirement signed data consent form 
submitted in or whether or not the use of PPS number is enough to make 
representation so I can get clarity on that.  The second query is around 
Silverbridge and my thanks to Helena and her team of the work that's 
done there, it is fantastic, I wonder if there's future plans from exit and 
entrance of that site. Last question is the housing condition survey.  There 
are queries coming in around people wanting to look at upgrades done on 
their home and I know Frank mention it had a couple of times and I'm 
wondering have you any idea where guidance will come in for you around 
that and how you're going to manage it, and what areas you're going to 
look in first, thank you very much Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Tom Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
As Jackie says, you're doing a fine job. 
Just a few questions - on the adaptation grants, like if we've only spent X 
amount because of environment and all that kind of situation, are we 
allowed to carry that money over, can we keep that money and add it to 
whatever budget we've subsequently get, it gives us a bigger on going 
spend? 

Also, I think a councillor touched it from information perspective, I as you 
said I think you do a fine job in housing I really do but the information 
could be better that comes out to ourselves because we get a lot of the 
queries you get directly, we get them maybe before they go to you or after 
they've gone to you.  So, it is very important that we're on the same page.  
Now on the HAP, yeah you talk about the targeted of 1326 and 700 
achieved, I know Erika said about misinformation and that's a reasonable 
point is there also a challenge in the amount of money available where 
you're competing in a market where you're although a disadvantage from 
the word go because of the amount of money is not up to what it needs to 
be? 
On the age-friendly schemes, that's very interesting that programme I 
must say but how is that going to be done? How are the 18 or 20 or 30 
clients how is that going to happen? 
And on the adult one the 361 adults, I have to be careful how do that, 
because I was a asked a question two meetings ago and I was told I'm 
very narrow about it - there's 361, I'd like to get the breakdown, Cllr Avril 
Cronin covered it well, get a breakdown of that because within that adult 
area there are specific problems and because of the very nature of the 
way housing needs to be done there's an element within that 361 who 
don't get any look in at all or crack of the whip so I'd like to get a 
breakdown of that.  And also, in when we're putting people into 
emergency homes and I know we have to do our best, but is the quality of 
homes always better than basic, in other words are we, through no fault of 
our own, are we being fair to clients? 
I'd like to get an understanding; someone mention about the PPS number 
maybe talk to us on that as well.  Fundamentally is couched around, I 
think it is really information.  I find in the current climate I'm busier than 
ever which is great, and I love it, because I love to be busy.  But I think 
information is very, very important to us and if we have the information we 
can talk to people, we can explain to people that as well.  So, they would 
be my thoughts but thanks again for your presentation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Jackie back to you. 
JACKIE: Tanks, Cathaoirleach ... 

The number of child presentations, the duplication, we started putting in 
the presentations there so we can see clearly the second line was repeat 
presentations of the 70 households. So that's where we tried to analyse 
the data better for you, but we'll keep improving for you… 
I've lost my train of thought, we tried to improve the statistical information 
that's given to you, so you can see number of new presentations and 
we've put in the line of new PP presentations of 70, again, don't the figure 
of 500 children, that's 500 children of the 270 families, so it is 270 families 
we're talking about, it is emotive and queues the information a bit.  But it 
is 270 families we're talking about that contacted the council to assist 
them with addressing potential homelessness or assisting them with 
homeless any I don't know if that answers your question, Cllr Erika Doyle. 
The HAP, yes we're going to do a targeted campaign to try and entice 
landlord into the HAP regime and we're finding it successful, any 
landlords in the scheme are finding it very successful and are coming 
back to you with tenancy end by virtue of the client getting social housing 
or moving on to alternative accommodation and they want to work with 
the council again with this, a lot are fill tropic but getting the funding as 
well, so they're happy enough with t just moving on to Cllr Tom Fortune 
said about the amount of money available.  Yeah, if we push up the 
amount of money available, for HAP we're going to skew the market.  We 
can't be pushing up the private rental market our maximum of 1250, is 
sufficient for somebody to access accommodation in County Wicklow.  
North Wicklow would be higher than that, but, if we up the maximum, the 
rents will probably increase, obviously outside of the rent pressure zones. 
But, so far as at the minute one area of HAP where there is problems with 
the rental income available is the single individual where 600 is the 
maximum available to them per month and that's sufficient to get a house, 
maybe only in certain areas of county but not in the urban areas so we 
have made a presentation from the mid-east up the national route on this, 
and that's been looked at the minute, it is raised as something that is 
contributory to homelessness for single individuals so we're taking that 
part very seriously so we work to try and get increases where they're 
required.  Cllr Pat Kennedy, the data consent on Cllr Tom Fortune 

mentioned it also, we had agreed that we just required the., PS number 
and date of birth and happy to engage on the basis of that.  So, yes, that's 
fine, we don't need a form or scanning forms in, once you give us the date 
of birth and PPS, we're happy to engage.  So, Silverbridge and housing 
conditions survey I'll leave for Helena.  Cllr Tom Fortune information 
dissemination, I'm not quite sure, you mentioned, we were putting as 
much information as I can into Chief Executive report but if there's a 
specific area you wish covered let me know and how we can improve, you 
mentioned 361 adult’s breakdown, I'm not sure what you were looking for 
there, if you wouldn't mind ... 
 
CLLR FORTUNE:  What I'll do Jackie is I'll drop you a mail on it OK, and 
maybe, while I have the ear for a quick second, just on your comment on 
HAP and north Wicklow I understand exactly the were Dick amount you 
would find yourself in, and take your point about the rents but the problem 
is in north Wicklow where a person won't probably get a house for 1200, it 
means that they're faced with a situation of moving to some other district 
in the county which in lots of cases is totally impractical because they lose 
their family supports and everything else because while they're trying to 
get a house they still have to live and school and everything else so it 
tends to ignore that problem and I think that problem needs to be 
addressed. Thanks 
  
JOANNA:  With regards to the HAP rates are set nationally so unless 
there's an issue with them, that will be dealt with at national level.  We 
can't change them here. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  Thanks Jackie, as Helena to come in there?  
You all right Helena, is everything covered? 
HELENA:  Yes, Silverbridge, TII are obviously doing the N11 upgrade, 
and they're coming I believe this year, coming up with preferred route, 
they obviously own the whole route along there. we may look at other 
alternatives such as electric gates, but we will have a look and risk 
assessment on that and come back, housing condition survey, that's 

obviously the department is going to be bringing that and again, it should 
be this year, I imagine.  Again, I think it was supposed to be last year so I 
think it should be this year.  Adaptation grants, you were asking Cllr Tom 
Fortune about carrying the money over - I'm not sure if we can do that.  
But, we could certainly ask but, certainly I found the department in reality 
they let us spend more money on the social than the last two years 
they've given us more money, so, in effect some of that money does 
seem to be spent elsewhere, if it is completely spent, aim related 
schemes how are they allocated, I'm not certain, I imagine people over 66 
or 60 a and offered to people in the immediate area, perhaps everybody 
will be written in the area to ask if they're interested in the scheme and 
looking for three-bedroom family home to be right or down sized and 
would they be interested and if we don't get enough people I imagine we 
broaden out to Bray or Kilcoole, and then maybe down from a three-
bedroom to two-bedroom and fill them that way and get a house back for 
each of these, that's what I imagine what will happen but presumably this 
is for Jackie to decide ultimately. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I ask people to keep their questions prompt and 
to the point because there's 11 people waiting to come in so Cllr Gail 
Dunne. 
  
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  First of all, just like to 
compliment the staff in your area, a lot of work has been done and land 
we owned and supply of houses and all, so, it has been unbelievable.  To 
lead into the problem is affordable houses.  I'm concerned about we won't 
have land, we won't have any land in my area for any affordable houses 
and I'm wondering what will be the solution there, I read recently a couple 
in Dublin, nurse and a guard, couldn't afford a affordable housing, if you 
lead into that again, in the county development plan we're going to de-
zone houses and I'm just concerned that the lack of housing in my area 
we're going to create a property bubble and the people who are be 
looking for affordable housing are going to have problems getting on to 
buy a house.  So, it is going to be a problem because we won't have any, 

we've no land so I'll leave it at that because I know you're under pressure. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Pat Fitzgerald. 
Cllr Lourda Scott. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Just I rang the department this morning there 
because there was a list of housing estates or housing developments that 
were allowed to continue there, but obviously the two in Arklow were 
asked to stop, the one up at the lane and out the Bail Road this morning it 
look like some houses wouldn't need three or four months’ work on them 
so I'm asking the question and the thing is I think from the reply I got from 
one of the officials there could be a resumption of construction up in 
March, didn't give a date but there is going to be, as I understand it, it has 
been looked at and the question is has there been contact between 
Wicklow County Council in the meantime.  And just on the Helena has 
been talking about, I asked a question at council meeting it is in the 
minutes, could we not divert some of the money the 1.9 million for social 
housing, and I rang the department about that, and didn't get a great 
answer.  Now, I want to, I'm not getting into work there's massive work 
done on housing adoption grants, very difficult for them, everything was 
done that could be done, but at this stage we're told to spend 60% of what 
we got last year.  But the question is going to be difficult this year because 
as I understand it, a lot of people don't want tome going in their homes 
and that money possibly won't be spent.  So, I'm asking the question 
again can we ask the department to divert some of the money for social 
housing where there's a huge amount of issues.  And I go through a lot in 
Arklow here and in Aughrim and yourself chairman knows, that, we have 
approached the department, I know Helena alluded to it, there's not 
enough applications from people for housing adoption grants or for the 
mobility grant can it be diverted where it will be spent. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks. 
  
BRIAN:  From a financial point of view, it would normally be allowed 
interested year to year if we hadn't spent anything it is a new allocation 
the following year so that's normally the case it is a different expenditure 

line.  So, we can ask the department but, it would be very unlikely, 
normally it is you spend, you claim what you spend so while there is 
saving on the actual grant allocation, it means also we didn't actually 
spend the money so there's an underspend on expenditure and an 
underspend or under receipting on income as well. 
So, that's normally the case.  But as I said, we can officially ask the 
department, but I wouldn't expect a positive response because it is a 
separate funding programme all together. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  I was talking to the department in relation to what 
the councillor said there, that at the moment we can only work on 
schemes we expect to be finished by the end of ten, all I can do is extend 
that to the end of April so there's new legislation coming out today that will 
allow us to do that so, Bell Road and TASCA said construction and 
education are priorities to come back in March so they're only hoping.  If 
they're hopeful I think we should plan on that basis then that hopefully we 
will be back early in March.  They don't know because I asked them the 
same question as you do.  One other thing that came up today when I 
was talking to them, Cllr Gail Dunne raised the issue of affordable 
housing, there's a new affordable Housing Bill at the moment that that is 
three areas, one is affordable purchase, whereby local authorities will be 
able to build houses now on their own land for affordable.  So you get 
them a subsidy 50,000 for the likes of Wicklow so we sell them at 50,000 
below what it cost it is built effectively of the individual clients can do the 
charge of 50,000 goes on the property so they buy that out over a period 
of time and being a claw back, second part of the legislation is to shared 
equity where somebody buying a house that is in public category will be 
able to get a loan from a new company set up for up to 30% of the value 
but don't have to start repayments for that for a number of years down the 
line, just adds to the affordability.  And third one they're look forge is cost 
rental.  And just another question that came up today Cllr Pat Kennedy 
asked it in relation to the asset management surveys, that, there is, that 
survey database, that survey is prepared now so standard survey we use 
when we're surveying houses.  It is also ICT package procured that will all 

the data goes into, and what you will fund now, starting this year, is 
energy retrofitting to bring houses there B2, triple glazing, internal and 
external heat pumps and what they want is to start on the losing this 
survey, this asset management survey to get all the information on the 
house, so once start using that, and that will start and getting extra staff in 
relation to that, doing those surveys and also energy retrofitting 
programme so it is a start.  If they do what they're saying, they roll out the 
programme it will help the continue of our stock because everything 
comes up to B2, even houses done up to, whatever, so we come back to 
revisit those, that's update. 
CLLR SCOTT:  I will be quick some questions have been answered, and 
just on Government with the - and there's 100 ways to go back to housing 
stock.  I was wondering if Jackie could comment there on breakdown of 
those quotes for Municipal District.  The rental properties were well below 
target in 2020 I presume it is due to COVID-19 and the same issue this 
year and wondering how they plan to address that or need additional 
resource toss keep on top of that.  The final comment I would like more 
information on the emergency accommodation piece.  I know Jackie 
mentioned the presentation, you know that it is not what we see in the 
media you will at the time and if you elaborate a bit in terms of Wicklow's 
council's oversight on the matter, if there's staff and premises are being 
trained and also something that did come up is there an issue with people 
having low canning connection and allowed axe success for 
accommodation. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Jackie can you come back and answer any 
questions covered. 
JACKIE:  I will take Lourda’ s one about the emergency accommodation.  
For example, we sent out expression of interests two years ago to 
accommodation providers to see were they interested in working with us 
in providing emergency accommodation, part of that was that they had to 
sign up to having over and above a room, bed & breakfast, there had 
been to be facilities for the families to live as a family and outdoor space, 
there had been to be where possible their own access and laundry 

facilities.  Over and above what you normally see from bed & breakfast 
accommodation where you leave it in the day.  Our clients are allowed to 
leave the emergency accommodation during the day, which is hugely 
positive, that is built in with our emergency providers, one of our 
emergency accommodation providers in north Wicklow, actually had 
self-contained units within the property, so we utilised those for family and 
proved very successful and, are a small apartment within the bed & 
breakfast complex so we tried to be careful when we can, obviously for 
some individuals, they may only want the bed & breakfast and things link 
in with the family during the day but they are allow today stay on the 
premises, they can prepare food, they could do their laundry, and the 
family end of things especially in Arklow and Greystones particularly, so, 
yeah, we will put a piece of work in that, and will be looking, we're trying 
to maximise using our own stock to give their own front door and that's an 
initiative we tend to progress, it gives us ...  Is that OK. 
CLLR SCOTT:  In terms of access to the emergency accommodation, just 
is there any issue with refusing access to locals or anything like that. 
JOANNA:  Because we have a local connection piece in criteria, we 
would, every local authority would operate on that basis in relation to 
homeless presentations, however, because of COVID-19, the minister did 
announce before Christmas that people who presented as homeless were 
not be to sent back to Tipperary to present as homeless if they're 
presented at Wicklow.  Now, this kind of did present a problem for local 
authorities pause traditionally we would say if somebody arrived and 
spent 25 years in Dublin, and they've heard that Wicklow's opened up a 
new emergency accommodation piece, and they can access it by 
presenting because we can't have regard to their connection, it could 
present problems for us.  We haven't seen it as yet, but I know the local 
authorities would have the same opinion in that we would be facilitating 
people who have a connection to Wicklow primarily.  However, we haven't 
turned anyone away as yet.  If they're on the Dublin list, we would link in 
with the Dublin authorities and see if we get them accommodation in 
Dublin.  So, it's, we haven't seen a huge influx yesterday as such and 
hopeful we won't.  However, I suppose, this is the way the thinking is 

going because you can see in the new national strategy one of the 
objectives is for the housing passport, where people can be on one 
housing list and generally go into local authority area and use their years 
apparently to be on the list.  But again, that's just idealistic or an initiative 
in the new national strategy, it hasn't been rolled out as yet but for the 
moment we're managing the presentations on the basis primarily local 
connection but will help out somebody from outside the authority. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Helena are you coming in now? 
HELENA:  To talk about the HAP inspections, it was we were supposed to 
do 1300 last year and we did 700 and next year the department have 
increased our target to 1650 so it is another 30% increase, and you know 
it is ambitious considering we can't even do any HAP inspections at the 
moment and won't be starting until March or April, probably April, we only 
have one inspector, he would be doing the 1600 inspections in eight 
months which is 200 a month, I just, I just don't know how we'll meet 
those targets, even if we got new staff there's obviously a training of at 
least four weeks by the time they're up to speed.  It is an ambitious target 
that's always I had to say. Cllr Scott, I didn't hear you; it was about voids. 
CLLR SCOTT:  The Government announced there's 100 void returns of 
housing stock in Wicklow, if I have that information correctly and I was 
wondering if there was a breakdown of Municipal District as to where the 
voids are or if you've had thoughts on that, it was a press release about a 
week ago, if that rings ago. 
HELENA:  A hundred voids did you say? 
Yeah, sorry, I'm not sure about that, I will have to check that one. 
CLLR SCOTT:  I can send you an e-mail or I have OK, appreciate that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Gerry Walsh.  Are you there Cllr Gerry 
Walsh? 
CLLR WALSH:  Two questions partially addressed one first to HAP 
payments and rentals allowable and rent pressure zones I know some 
areas, in Dublin, in certain circumstances there's maybe a 50% above 
what the payment is allowed is in certain circumstances is payable and I 
think maybe 20% of the rest of the country so does that still - is that an 

issue in addressing the HAP issue sourcing properties there from 
landlords.  I know you addressed it, but is that still there, to raise that to a 
certain percentage, is still 20% or does that exist.  The other part is to do 
with inspection inspections and Helena spoke to that but drop off 
inspections due to COVID-19 that has had a knock-on effect on properties 
that's being delivered. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Shay Cullen. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks Chair, just a quick question there.  It is in 
connection with the rebuilding Ireland home loans that we had 383 
applications which is probably, and we had 115 approved which is in 
around 30% a couple of questions I have is do we have an allocated fund 
per year for the rebuilding Ireland home loan or is it down to individual 
applications? And if we did have a fund, did we meet our allocation on 
that? 
And I suppose, the other question is really around the information and the 
promotion of the rebuilding Ireland home loans to our council tenants to 
see if they want to avail of purchasing a property.  Because a lot of people 
that are in council properties, some people would like to purchase their 
property but aren't sure of the way to go about it.  So, I think there's 
certainly something in terms of the information that we can give to the 
tenants that may avail of them looking at the rebuilding Ireland home loan, 
but I think it is a fantastic facility and we should be promoting a lot more.  
CLLR O’BRIEN: Thanks, I will be very brief.  Something that emerged 
from the presentations in terms of concern around drug use and mental 
health presenting and how that must be a huge challenge in terms of 
allocation and maintenance and I just, again, thinking, to what extent is 
that an emerging issue because I'm saying as member of drugs and 
alcohol task force it is emerging issue in that space and I wonder if it is 
something again we can shine a light on and try and build some cohesion 
around we might respond to that in a way that kind of has a positive 
impact.  But how big is the dual diagnosis element, how concern 
something that as something that might grow over time? 
Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Paul O'Brien just before I bring Jackie 

back in there, members it is 23 minutes past four, I think we should 
possibly go for time extension and go to 5.30pm, there's still a number of 
people looking to come in on this particular item is that all right with 
everybody.  Everybody agreeable to that.  Thank you.  Search in 
agreement.  So, Jackie I bring you back in there. 
JACKIE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, Cllr Gerry Walsh was inquiring about the 
HAP, Dublin has uplift of 50% and we are 20% and employ that in north 
Wicklow area across the board because we have to.  So, we did put in 
submission from the region to for Kildare Meath and Wicklow we get the 
50% also because obviously our properly indicators to measure to Dublin 
impacts on our rents in north Wicklow.  So, we have done that but didn't 
get any comeback on that.  Cllr Shay Cullen rebuilding Ireland, certainly 
yeah.  We do have funding provided for but don't have to meet a target as 
such, Bryan might want to come in on that, we have funding allocated to 
cover our loans on building facilities, do you want to comment on that 
Brian. 
BRIAN:  It evolved over the last couple of years, the programme started in 
the middle of the year it had a rolling allocation, and has changed now in 
the last few months, the information that they've been giving us allocation 
for new loan approvals it is about 10 million for 2020, there's a previous 
allocation carried over of 7 million for loan approvals that have been 
improved on previous years that still have been drawn down so, every 
going forward, every allocation annual allocation will take into account I 
suppose, funding that still has to be drawn down from previous 
allocations, or approvals in earlier years and what we expect going 
forward into the future.  So, so far, our allocation has been sufficient and 
as I say, based on the information we have to hand for applications on 
hand and I suppose another point to make is I suppose in most cases 
people mentioned the number of applications that have been declined, as 
Jackie said earlier, that's coming from the underwriters and the housing 
agency rather than decisions being made by Wicklow County Council, it is 
based on information that's been provided by the underwriter and it is 
rejected by them for funding reasons, rather than Wicklow County 
Council.  The majority of the applications that are recommended by the 

housing agency underwriters would be approved by Wicklow County 
Council. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Brian. 
JACKIE:  You mentioned promoting the initiative, we would have it on our 
social implead platforms, on our website, we didn't do a targeted send out 
to each tenant but it would be included in our County Wise magazine 
goes to every household in the county so we will look if there's information 
on our tenant and look at. Cllr O’Brien, drug use and dual diagnosis with 
mental health it is a huge issue and task force you will be well aware on 
the different agencies we work with to address the issues.  Numerically I 
suppose we would see it primarily and presentations we would see it in a 
lot of the single individuals, so you have the numbers for single individuals 
presenting a lot of the causes for homelessness in single individuals is 
these drug use and mental health addiction. 
It is, something that we are prioritising to address through all our 
programmes, you'll see with the housing first you have intensive case 
management team which comprises of professionals and support workers 
so they would be targeting the mental health and drug use and making 
sure people are taking their methods and keeping appointments it is 
intensive management of the client.  I suppose it is something, I had 
asked could I had asked to sit on the drug task force so I'm hoping this 
will happen this year to bring the piece to the table I suppose, and, but it is 
a problem, we're also seeing it within families as well.  There's a lot of 
family dysfunction due to addiction, due to mental health issues and the 
problem is for somebody, it is all well when somebody has a diagnosis, at 
least they will be linked in with the medical professionals, the hidden 
problem is when someone has a hidden diagnosis and won't be given but 
still behaves chaotically and present chaotically  and all the issues, we 
can't do this without the Department of Health and HSE so it is ongoing 
problem and trying to tackle bit by bit but we would welcome any 
intervention or assistance and support in that area. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Jackie, I hope that's everybody covered 

there.  Cllr Peir Leonard. 
 
CLLR LEONARD:  Yeah, just I'm not going to repeat what Dermot and 
Jackie said there about dual diagnose and it is important to connect all the 
pieces of the jigsaw, that it is not simply putting a roof over somebody's 
head you have to have the services in place to support the person.  Just 
in relation to the new Customer Services hub, Jackie and the way it is 
working, is it creating more work from where I'm looking at, there's a lot of 
paperwork going on and I want to know how it is affecting staff and 
benefiting you to be efficient or is it working and is there going to be are 
there plans for councillors to get in the system and see the rep numbers 
or where a housing rep or any rep is journeying along, are there plans for 
that? 
And lastly just in relation to the single persons men and women and 
shortage of housing accommodation, I don't think we'll magic one-
bedroom units out of the sky so maybe look at alternatives or a shared 
housing system for people to opt into, I don't know whether that's 
something that might work, or you know for younger people that might 
want to share a house with somebody else and make use of a larger 
house with two people sharing it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Sylvestor Bourke. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Finally, thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Quickly - just want to ask the manager there about the affordable housing 
scheme he mentioned.  Why there are such discrimination against 
divorced people looking for affordable housing I have reps from the 
divorce couple who are being excluded, and they can't get help at all are 
hoping maybe as well as first time buyers included in this new scheme 
you will allow divorced people, previously divorced people to qualify as 
well because it is a big issue for, one particular couple that have been 
asking to represent them.  In relation to Joe Lane, I wish you luck for land 
question, you need to talk to Breege about the fact we're proposing to 
shrink development boundaries in most of the villages, and de-zone large 
amounts of land around the county.  That will severely impact what land 
will be available for land purchase so I just want to flag that, that is 

something we should talk about.  In relation to what was said about the 
grants for boilers and private people I want to caution there I had 
constituent who had to abandon his application there before Christmas, 
probably rightly so because he hadn't paid his property tax and that's 
something members need to be aware of, that there are people out there 
who haven't paid property tax and not eligible for that grant apparently.  
Final will I in relation to Airbnb and short-term letting has that impacted, I 
should think it positively impacted houses available for the HAP scheme.  
His a few more but, I want to put good word to repairs office.  Repairs 
office seems to be swamped, I think they in more help in there to catch up 
and get through the repairs that are ongoing.  It is unfair to load it on one 
or two individuals who are carrying the full burden to get a lot of repairs 
done thank you. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, I'll try to be as brief, great to see so many 
houses being built but with up to 30 families presenting a week, that 
doesn't really augur well for the future.  I want to mention a couple of 
problems that I come across regularly, one is that people who are in HAP 
accommodation often have living in substandard accommodation with 
mould and damp and heating not working and things like that.  They're 
afraid to complain.  They're afraid because they fear they will be evicted.  
I think, no house should be let under HAP until it passed inspection.  I 
realise there's a backlog of inspections but there should a policy going 
forward, at some stage no house will be let under HAP until it has been 
checked out.  The second problem I come across is people who have 
been on rental supplement for years and when they go to inquiry whether 
they are on the list they're told they're not on the list.  Through some way 
or other disappeared from it.  Now, it could be they didn't summit forms 
they should have or whatever, but as far as I'm concerned there has to be 
concrete way of dealing with people, keeping records straight that once a 
person goes on a housing list once they cannot come off it until they take 
themselves off it.  Not pulled off it by anybody else because it must be 
dreadful to hear you've lost seven years on a housing list, it is 
unforgivable.  Not saying it is always true, but I'm just saying in some 
cases.  I'm sure something has happened and then briefly, we've a 

situation here as Cllr Gail Dunne referred to, we have a property bubble in 
Wicklow Town, there's hardly a house for sale that will impact on HAP so 
that's a long-term problem coming down the line.  OK. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Jackie, back to you now. 
Jackie:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  Airbnb and impact on availability of houses, we 
anticipated and nationally we anticipated a huge flux of houses back into 
the rental market.  We haven't seen so much of it in County Wicklow or 
the region, but I suppose it is early days, yet we don't know how that will 
pan out.  Your other queries were for Helena a I'll hand you over in a 
minute.  Cllr Mary Kavanagh 30 families presenting, 30 applications from 
people and individuals to go on the housing list four-week, that doesn't 
mean they will be accepted on the list.  They may be people living in 
adequate accommodation, so we don't be accepting them so just to put 
that point in.  People in HAP, I'll hand that to Helena, and then rent 
supplement query, somebody is on a social housing list it is up to them to 
ensure their information is correct.  When we did the HNH social housing 
assessment towards the end of the year we wrote to everybody on the 
list, advised everyone on social media, and advised the members who put 
it on social media platforms also, we did a huge campaign and we 
advertised in the papers, also, we also gave them a time limit for 
responding, we then rang them and emailed them and rang them again 
and wrote to them again so we gave them every opportunity to remain on 
the list.  Now I do understand that some people don't alert us to the fact 
that they're address details have changed and circumstances have 
changed but, really with 4,500 people on the list, we're not going to be 
retaining on the list who don't respond to our correspondence.  As I say, 
the members of work closely with us on that, if you find somebody should 
be on the list that isn’t and came off it for example, we have policies 
around homelessness, if somebody is in homelessness, we don't take 
them off the list but they're the only policy areas we look at in that case.  
The rent supplement at some stage were given to people who weren't on 

the list as short-term housing support, so you didn't necessarily have to 
be, in sometime throughout the 80s, 90s, so that's where that historically 
lies, we do look at appeals compassionately so if you have a compliant 
taken off the list and is feeling we aggrieved about it, several come to with 
us the individual case and we'll review t. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks. 
 
HELENA:  One is the inspections if there's housing, if people are aware of 
houses, we mightn't not get to the inspections but HAP have a special 
time frame and we get out as soon as possible but we do risk based audit 
where we perceive, we move up the list immediately, if people are aware 
of housing that they feel inadequate we'll inspect them under private 
rented, especially mould that's not acceptable so if there's issues out 
there, tell us, we will look at the houses, trick in the Wicklow area, if 
there's issue afterwards as homelessness we'll deal with it under 
homelessness, but people shouldn't live in inadequate housing and we do 
risk based inspection on top of anything else, that might save Helena 
answering that, and second one is, Jackie hinted it there but housing 
need assessment is bigger than the need assessment, it feeds into the 
state's investment so if we don't know about this demand throughout 
we're not going to have it in our programme.  It might take us a few years 
to get to people, but if we're not aware of the demand and state doesn't 
see it the investment programme is affected by it and up to the last year, 
2015-2021 targets from based on the demand, so, we have to, I mean, 
Jackie and I have to know about, a lot of questions are coming in and 
department inspectors are pushing us towards one bedroom need 
because the information is fed into the housing need assessment and 
demand, if we don't have that information, it affects the investment from 
the state.  So, people have to keep us informed and it is only a matter of 
keeping that information up on a regular basis and checking with us. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Are you happy enough that's covered. 
HELENA:  Obviously if we inspected a property before, we can't do as 
Government scheme, we're required to do it after the HAP has been 

issued.  There is an issue on mould, most complaints are around mould 
and often there isn't mould, at the beginning and mould develops over 
time and sometimes it is how people live because they don't ventilate the 
property properly, they're drying clothe inside the property and number of 
issues that cause mould, I'm expert about this myself and you just got to 
keep it well vented late, and modern houses are even more of a problem 
with the amount of insulation, there isn't a ventilation there, there would 
be in an older house 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Now Lorraine would you take the one in Cllr Peir 
Leonard's one in relation to the customer care hub. 
LORRAINE:  By way of innovation, it and council chamber is looking 
absolutely smashing and under normal circumstances we would be 
welcoming the elected members in and introducing them to the systems 
et cetera, else, but look at we look forward to that in another day, about 
you just to say the team were down there they're in place and operating 
COVID-19 restrictions, call volumes are higher than normal but dealing 
with as much as possible, incoming post volumes are increasing because 
we're advising customers to make their postal applications where 
possible.  So the customer care team, servicing the motor tax, revenue 
counters by appointment only and advising customers with online and 
postal, if elected member want update on their representation or query, 
just e-mail the Customer Services address and that will be provided in 
terms with interaction on the portal system that's certainly where we want 
to reach to in terms of the whole management system and CRN system 
so maybe in a month or two, depending on the agenda we'll give elected 
members update on the Customer Services hub. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks.  Cllr Miriam Murphy. 
  
CLLR MURPHY:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
A lot of the issues have been raised but I wanted to highlight some just 
question to Helena, as you said there's one inspector, HAP inspector, 
would that be the norm in the other local authorities? 
Just to see comparison to other county councils and what way they're 

running that, and also, is the high rate of success from an inspection I 
know that if a tenant does make a complaint or whatever, that the 
recommendation goes back to the tenant, and not to the person who was 
in the house.  And are the landlords upgrading the recommendations in a 
quick manner because I know I recommended one or two issues and I 
don't think the landlord has actually to my knowledge updated the 
conditions? 
Also, on the disability adaptation grants and ability aids, I've always had 
against this.  I've always had major concerns about money not being 
spent over the previous years.  I can understand this year is different.  But 
the last year because of COVID-19.  But is the small aids and appliances 
grant, is the small jobs have they all been you know completed? Is there 
work assigned to that? 
And also, to Jackie I have concerns of people in disabilities and older 
people in congregated in settings, maybe a year or two years as cases 
has been and  what is the requirement of getting back into independent 
living as our motion was passed last week, that's a vital motion that I 
appreciate the people of Wicklow approving that, but as other councillors 
said, it is not just putting a roof over people's houses, it is combining the 
resources which maybe is not some of the county council's responsibility I 
would say either, but another link that we have failed on, probably around 
the country again is the relationship between the our local occupational 
therapists, these people are the people who are going in regularly to the 
clients service users, they know the requirements, they know what way 
they live, they know their daily living.  Not some OT occupational therapist 
who was employed by Wicklow County Council as an agent, who don't 
know these people, who don't know what way they live, in a system they 
live, and I have major concerns with that.  Major concerns and I'm sure 
that's again, not specific to Wicklow County Council, but we I know before 
local authorities, that the local OTs had three monthly meetings with their 
districts, and they built up a fantastic relationship with the housing officers 
and it really was successful.  It really, really was and I think that link has 
failed.  I also would have concerns about the Customer Service of which 
Cllr Peir Leonard spoke of, there is no feedback on our recommendations 

of when we sent in.  We're asked to send in the data or PPN number and 
date of birth, those are on the people's files we already sent in, so we 
shouldn't be asked that and no comeback to the person looking for the 
assistance or the councillors, thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Irene Winters. 
 
CLLR WINTERS: Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
I just, if Helena could send us out that information on those additional 
grants.  That would be brilliant, and the way people can qualify.  I do know 
for some of the grants some people have said to me look it is not a huge 
amount of money, I can ill afford it but don't want to ask for three separate 
quotes because I know all of the electricians or plumbers that's involved 
and I'm only going to be give the business to one of them and feel terrible 
to ask the others to make a quote when we know they're not going to do 
the business.  That's it.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Gerry O'Neill. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Just briefly, more or less on the 
affordable housing and I'd welcome the minister's announcement a 
fortnight ago, some light at the end of the tunnel for people caught 
between two stools where they don't qualify for social housing and 
income, they can't get the mortgage.  So, I'd absolutely welcome that.  
There's a quite a few people in West Wicklow that could assign to that, 
and I'd be anxious who had more calls who are excited about this 
announcement, but how quick we'll move on in west Wicklow with this 
affordable housing.  I'm not going to be - the county manager there, I 
understood they would be built on council land and then I thought Frank 
said they could be built on sites, one-off to people that would qualify you 
know.  So, I'd like to get a clear on that, and at the same time I wonder 
you know, we are seeing a move on building houses in west Wicklow, we 
have Dunard not Dunard, but Dunlavin, Baltinglass and investments 
where maybe there is up to three or four projects starting.  We believe 
that they could be maybe housing agency or council houses in the long 
run.  They're built by private developers, but it would be great if the local 
authority got a hold of them and at least some of these.  But what I would 

be asking is would there be any pocket I mean with the likes of housing 
agencies, they have a 25-year lease, they only lease out or is that across 
the board with every housing agency, if not there could be there might be 
room there for maybe X-amount of houses, in these estates that could go 
to the people who would qualify for affordable housing and section would 
be affordable housing. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Gerry.  Cllr Anne Ferris. 
  
CLLR FERRIS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
Yeah, I just want to take this opportunity briefly Cathaoirleach to 
commend Jackie Carroll and the housing team in relation to the San 
Remo facility in Bray.  I think Jackie from the very outset when we were 
talking about proposing this provision for the homeless was on top of her 
brief, she was always available to the members and always available to 
the people from the local area, to answer their questions and as she said 
earlier, very near the top of her presentation there, that the 
neighbourhood liaison committee we set up with the Bray east councillors 
and the local neighbours, has been very, very successful and so 
successful indeed that we are only meeting once every two months now 
insulin stead of once a month, but we couldn't have done this without 
Jackie and her team and I want to compliment her. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Jackie do you want to reply to those questions?   
JACKIE:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, going back to, I omitted to respond to 
Cllr Peir Leonard, had mentioned about single units and how hard they're 
to get.  Just to say the housing agencies is working with us on this also 
trying to source single units and hopefully we'll get something out of that 
this year that identified one or two in County Wicklow that we're able to 
hope to purchase by HPs and nominate people to.  Also, Cllr Miriam 
Murphy, and I'll speak about my end of things there, as you're aware we 
have housing disability steering group and work closely with the HSE and 
people representing the disability groups on that.  There's a lot of 
initiatives coming down the line in disability at the minute for example the 
application form for housing and disability there's a new form coming out 

and currently screened by the data commissioner and women' hope to 
have that in quarter one.  The national disability strategy for housing has 
been extended to our current strategy is extend today 2021, and we will 
do the consultation piece in May 2021, so online consultation beginning in 
February, and that will be advertised by the department, there's a study 
being completed by a student from Africanity how the housing Disability 
Steering Groups are working, and this will help inform the strategy.  But 
the successes we've had to date in housing people with a disability have 
been phenomenal they're highlight on the allocation piece but the work 
that goes on behind the scenes isn't efficient from though slides so it is 
useful tonlet when we're looking at allocation, if we, when we receive a 
particular unit the first thing we think of is whether it is suitable for people 
with disability or elderly or people with medical need so we've had huge 
success in identifying people right-sizing with disabilities or elderly and 
actually a lot of our part 5 unit, we've had eight Bungalows as part of that 
estate and went to disability, in fact one unit was two houses put together 
to ensure a family was accommodated there. 
So congregated settings we work closely with people in congregated 
settings to move them into alternative suitable accommodation, but it is 
difficult to access that accommodation, we work with people who are in 
hospital settings or nursing home settings will you because there isn't 
suitable accommodation for them.  We built the seven accommodations 
for Arklow for people with disability and elderly and they've been 
successful and there has been one or two available again for reletting so 
again, we look for people with profound disability for those properties. 
DOB, I suppose, from our point of view, when e-mail comes in with a 
reference rather than going back and taking out the until file it is easier, 
and it will be dealt quicker and less delay if the date of birth and PPS 
number is on that e-mail.  Cllr Gerry O'Neill was talking about affordable 
housing end of things and Cllr Anne Ferris thank you for your kind 
comments.  That project was hugely rewarding because it showed the 
work when we all work together on T there was a lot of different agencies 
involved to get that project across the line, it had huge support from Bray 
MD, there was adversarial comments I suppose, or movement towards it, 

but even the people who would have been afraid of going into their area 
are very happy to see how well it is managed and how well it is working to 
date.  As I say the presenting population were already in the area, so it 
wasn’t, we transported the people in the area so I'm glad it is doing well 
and certainly providing an essential service there at the minute, 
particularly with COVID-19. 
The affordable, I'll hand over to Jo or Chief Executive. 
  
FRANK:  Just on the aid affordable purchase what the minister wants to 
introduce is local authorities back building affordable houses basically.  
So, where we're having estate you could have a mix of social and 
affordable.  Legislation how long it will take I don't know butting it timely to 
build it in our designs and look to designs to the few a various stages, we 
raised the idea could it be flexible to turn to turnkeys and PHBs they 
weren't talking about one-off off houses in any point of the discussion but 
shared equity loan would be to shared houses to houses in a 
development but going back on a Cllr Sylvestor Bourke on divorced 
individuals, I would have thought and that they would be assessed 
individually based on their circumstances but I'll have a look at a am could 
back to him thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. Can I just thank Jackie and Helena, and 
Joe and all in the housing team for all the work going on, when you see a 
presentation like this today you realise the amount of work going on and I 
suppose, when you go through all of the questions, that has been offered 
here today, there was over 55 questions asked by the members today, I 
was taking a note here so that goes to show, we spent two hours on this 
item so I want to put that on the regard and thank everybody. 
 
CLLR SNELL:  Just before you go, very sorry for cutting across you there, 
I thought it would be unfair for me to come in today I wanted the members 
to express as many questions as they could of the housing section and 
I'm going to take your advice, I won't thank the housing section because 
they know how I feel about the amazing work that goes on.  But if I could 
just say house something a huge part of a public representative's 

workload. 
And hopefully, touch wood when things get better I have suggested that I 
do feel we should have workshops in regards to, housing there's such a 
vast variety, diversity of issues in regards to housing and not issues but 
topics and you see it with the amount of questions, so, hopefully when we 
get back to some normality I would love to see we could roll out 
workshops, a couple of hours workshops so that members can get their 
heads around the various aspect of the housing, I think it would be 
helpful, I don't think anyone is trying to hide anything away.  It is like any 
section, I'm probably not as familiar with some of the work that goes on in 
other SPCs, no more the members that are not on the housing SPC, but 
the staff are there at all times to, they will contact, they're available to take 
e-mails and phone calls when they can, but I would ask the Chief 
Executive to perhaps ask look at the role in regards to volume of work that 
goes on in the housing section.  And perhaps look at in regards to the 
management of that section and by that, I mean the amount of staff that is 
available to a director and senior executive officer, it is a huge volume of 
work, it is a very stressful situation that they find themselves, at all times 
and I would encourage you to maybe have a look at that regards to 
numbers I won't be thanked by some of the other directors, but I do 
believe that you know, we are a little bit under resourced and I know it is 
extraordinary times, but I would ask you to look at that, for example talent 
liaison officer, in other authorities they have four or five, Wexford, south 
county Dublin, in Wicklow we have one for 4,500 tenants.  We discussed 
it with you before, but I thought I'd say it here, so thank you Pat for 
chairing that meeting I found it fascinating thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr John Snell and for all the work you do 
as chair of the SPC and all members on SPC, and please pass on our 
gratitude to them for what they do. I'll move to item number four 
presentation on the east coast erosion study and Marc Devereux. 
 
MARC:  Trying to share this preparation. 
We have had news on this project which is very good news for the county.  

I've been working with this with Irish Rail for the last number of years, Irish 
Rail has been carrying out studies and doing works and rather than 
duplicate the work, they've been kind enough to let me sit in on meetings 
and discussions about this project to the point where it has come to a 
conclusion for the study phase and the Irish Rail is moving into a new 
phase now which is of very much use to Wicklow County Council.  They 
commissioned to review the ICPSS Study done in 20208 by IPW and 
reviewed the information development information on the coastline from 
rings end to Wicklow, Wicklow Town.  When I got involved, they kindly 
extended the study to Arklow because we pointed out that areas are 
concerned as well and them, as you see now have forwarded information 
and made it available to us as a result of the study.  ARUP proposed 
solutions and estimated costs and did risk assessments as per OPW 
guidelines, they studied the following coastal zones, you will see a map 
here now with areas they're coastal zone areas 1-10, and then 11 was 
extra one they added in which was Brittas Bay, so, one is from meon 
gates to Dun Laoghaire and all the way down coastline.  They went 
through a process, and I'll skip through these quickly because we get to 
the point.  They surveyed the existing coastal protection structures and 
identified information gaps and reviewed the information they had.  They 
did assessment of the existing coastal processes and coastline evolution 
and current and future scenario, coastal change maps based on that.  
And they did a risk assessment. 
Having done the risk assessment they identified the solutions to the risks 
and issues and then preliminary environmental assessment and 
consultation with national and wildlife services to inform that process and 
came up with options and feasibility assessment. 
So, resulting in a coastal erosion risk management plan document which 
covers the areas I showed you, and has come up with the following 
outputs. 
Obviously there's outputs in relation to the area around Merrion Gates but 
of interest to us, is that the first point they got to that were interest to 
Wicklow County Council was the former landfill just outside our boundary 
in Dun Laoghaire, Rathdown jurisdiction, just not of Bray Harbour, the 

solution that was suggested in their report was that a rock revetment 
structure extended the existing one that terminates at our jurisdiction 
boundary and to extend that to cover the former landfill north of Bray and 
to also carry out, this is done by Dun Laoghaire Rathdown with funding 
from environment climate action and communications, it is under the 
heading remediation of legacy landfill because it came under another 
funding stream so dealt with but Irish Rail have included it had in their 
study because the rail is quite lows there and it is interest of them.  The 
next cell is area from Bray Head down as far as almost as Greystones 
harbour.  And the solution they came up with was to upgrade the existing 
structures along Bray Head, those who travel there's concrete and rock 
revetments below the railway line that Irish Rail have maintained over the 
years, they will upgrade them, they're also proposing that they would do 
beach nourishment and detached break water system which I will 
describe in more detail further down. 
In the area, immediately south of Bray Head, the area where the railway 
line goes into a tunnel.  This is a proposal that's going to form a big, larger 
project which I'll get to in a minute.  Costs will be up to 10-20 million but 
benefit are significant because there's a high-volume railway track the 
DART which is at risk of erosion.  Which when you measure up the cost of 
the loss of that or reduction in use of that because of coastal erosion, it 
would validate funding considerable amount of funding, so they've 
progressed that.  The next cell they looked at was Greystones, actually it 
is two cells, but they carry them together, they call it 41 and 42, 
Greystones to Newcastle solutions that was discussed in this document, 
were detached break water system, I'll describe them in minute and 
beach nourishment, and/or management of the existing revetment where 
there is, north of Kilcoole.  There's an existing revetment which they 
would maintain. 
And they would carry out this breach nourishment and constrict detached 
break waters presuming this project get through to construction phase.  
The next cell, part of cell 6-2 is Newcastle to Wicklow harbour, again 
there's existing revetment around Newcastle station and north of 
Killoughter.  There are detached break waters.  To get an idea what they 

might look like and hopefully we will see these off the coast of Wicklow, 
these are example of break waters constructed off Norfolk in north east 
England the idea is you construct artificial island some distance off the 
coastline and this is in effect of breaking the energy of the waves as they 
come in on a storm and the long-term effect is you get deposition or 
increase in beach in a shape, behind the island, between the islands and 
coastline and this is effect of naturally increasing the beach and dune 
structure and it is sustainable and does less invasive on the coastline 
itself, we're hoping this type of solution will be proposed and indeed 
developed off Wicklow. 
For the section coastal areas 6, the coast here could be up to 125 million 
this, is a major project.  But the benefit is significant as well as the existing 
railway track which incidentally is mentioned in the NTA strategy for the 
region to be upgraded so hopefully it is a benefit and importance 
nationally so it will attract funding. 
And the benefit of the value of the existing railway track and Murrough 
and Broadlough and habitats that would be protected by the structures. 
And then the area of Wicklow harbour, they did study it and this particular 
project doesn't propose any additional works there, but as you know the 
OPW have done maintenance work of the north harbour so what we're 
hoping is OPW will assist us in maintaining that stretch of coastline. 
Now, they also studied the Brittas Bay area and that is subject to erosion 
and the proposed solution there was dune protection, that is protecting 
the dunes from the effect of access and overuse and that hopefully by 
doing that, and planting vegetation we can protect the beach long-term.  
And then she this he reviewed the area immediately north of Arklow and 
immediately south of Arklow, the solutions they suggested in here would 
be additional detached break waters, immediately off the beach and the 
rock arm your, beach nourishment and thermal growing a structure along 
the top of the existing revetment to prevent loss of the coastline along 
here and dune regeneration to the area of the north. 
But the area to the south of Arklow they are suggesting large scale beach 
nourishment and dune regeneration.  That's there, CCA10. 
For the sections we just mentioned, Brittas Bay and Arklow costs could be 

in the order of magnitude costs for this, of up to 30 million when we look 
at the benefits, unfortunately we don't have a railway line immediately 
behind that, because if we did, we would look at positive benefits.  But we 
were going to have to do work on this, and we're going to try and 
maximise the benefit, and Irish Water are proposing to carry out works on 
revetment immediately north of Arklow Harbour as part of their 
construction of the wastewater treatment works and we're hoping OPW 
will take an interest of remaining area of revetment and putting OPW a 
further project.  The next steps for us now, is all of this activity, mapping of 
the affected climate of climate change and likely outcome is part of our 
climate action team will map all this and take on board all of the 
information bus the Department of Transport has approved funding to 
Irish Rail to progress the project for CCA1 to CC A-6, as the work is going 
to be progress with CCA4, north of Bray they won't be carrying out works 
there but will be monitoring that section because it is interest of them, 
from Merrion Gates to Wicklow Town and Rosslare, they have a briefly 
coastal infrastructure protection programme, it is capital works project 
which is approved in principle by Department of Transport and Irish Rail 
will be taking it forward now, for the where it helps suss that awful the 
coast of County Wicklow which has a railway is part of the project and 
Irish Rail will now progress the project. 
The next step is to carry out a cost review under the public spending code 
to assess the costs and prepare public spending code documents which 
allow the project to go to the Department of Transport and Deeper to have 
approval, as the costs look from the reports I read and benefits are 
stacking up the way the report is set out, hopefully Deeper will approve 
the project and it will get the project to go further, Irish Rail will be look 
working on the public spend code process and invite Wicklow County 
Council to join a project steering committee so that means they'll keep us 
informed and Chief Executive will be kept informed on progress of the 
project. 
For Brittas Bay and Arklow, not included in the project for Irish Rail going 
forward so we'll bring the output from the study to OPW, and hopefully we 
will get the OPW to take an interest in that section of the coastal.  There's 

a national programme regional climate action office is addressing coastal 
erosion and we're hoping that having done this study and having got the 
study information from Irish Rail we will be able to bring this section of the 
coastline to that project and hopefully get some funding to continue to 
study and hopefully develop the project here. Thank you for that. I'll take 
questions. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Marc.  Cllr Irene Winters. 
 
CLLR WINTERS: Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  And Marc, and this is indeed 
great news.  I suppose I was excited when I read a funding has been 
approved but it says to progress the project.  Now does that mean a 
funding has been approved to works or has funding been approved to do 
more studies, if it is to do with more studies, when are we actually likely to 
see works that will actually protect the railway and protect the coast 
because there is very little land left in sections of that, between 
particularly north of Wicklow Town, between the coast and railway line 
and I also want to know can we look at the Greystones to Wicklow East 
Coast Greenway as part of that or will that be considered by the working 
group? 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Tom Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Yeah, thanks Cathaoirleach and thanks Marc, a good 
presentation. Irene has asked some extent what I had in my head. 
What's the timeline on this? I would be interested to see what the timeline 
is, and also, I would suggest that the cost will come in higher than what is 
currently projected.  You mention 10 million what you talked about 
between Bray and Greystones.  Based on the costs we've seen on things 
nowadays, I had he be surprised if that's going to happen.  My real 
interest is what is the timeline on this? Will it ever really happen? 
That's really my question. 
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank Marc for the 
presentation.  Just from Newcastle to Co Wicklow Town, the Murrough 
has been washed away and I see the projects figure is 125 million, now, 

I'm nearly positive I got that right.  Which is an awful lot of money and just 
wondering where that is going to come from that funding for that amount 
of money.  I know you mentioned Deeper if this is, carrying on what Cllr 
Tom Fortune of saying, if this is not done quickly you can forget about it, 
because there will nobody Murrough left, it is getting nearer and nearer 
the train track there. 
And we won't have any Murrough left there, so it is something that needs 
... 
To be done in Wicklow Town if the weather continues ... 
If the weather continues at the scale the way, it has been we're in trouble 
here, so this really needs to be brought forward very quickly and the 
money needs to be provided or the coastline is in trouble. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Director Breege Kilkenny. 
Breege:  I wanted to come in there because members are concerned 
about the beach area of Brittas Bay so we will be hoping to tap into the 
climate action fund there to try and progress that piece for the protection 
of that, our very important Blue Flag Beach. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, Breege. Marc, I'll bring you back in. 
MARC:  I think I can answer all three questions from Cllr Irene Winters 
and Cllr Tom Fortune and 
Cllr Dunne because they're essentially the same question, the concern 
what happens over the next couple of years, we press Irish Rail they 
won't be shy because they're very concerned themselves about the 
railway line particularly in Wicklow, as you know, three or four years ago 
we got together Irish Rail and ourselves got together to do emergency 
works at the Murrough and intention is we would do the same the team 
looking after this are aware that even Irish Rail are aware of the risks and 
they monitor that section of the railway line and Merrion a regular basis 
and we will hopefully not have to step in because, but we will be 
monitoring it.  There are figure environmental concerns particularly around 
Murrough if major works will be carried out, we have to climb 
environmental legislation, which is why this is difficult enough to progress, 

Irish Rail is committing amount of their own funds and looking for Deeper 
Funding and looking for transfer funding. They're progressing the whole 
project systematically, there will be a lot of investigations to be carried out 
next so I'm afraid I can't press them any harder than I have.  We will be 
bringing our concerns to them and they're aware because they're 
maintaining the railway in that area and way which are the concerns, they 
don't want to rush the boulders out to protect the Irish Rail they want the 
permanent solution in place, so they are aware of the concerns.  The next 
step is a step because of the size of the project it has to go through a 
process to get funding from Deeper but I'm reasonably confident we're 
looking at the figures, the funding will come from the Department of 
Transport because this is a rail infrastructure project, this is about 
protecting the rail infrastructure and indication from the Department of 
Transport are good I'm told for this project because, it is in strategy, as 
well as having a value to railway line at the moment, it is in various 
strategies, that section of railway is in various strategies NTA for 
improvement and increase in capacity and in number of trains and 
passengers so hopefully it will stay on the radar and funded by the 
national Department of Transport.  In relation to the Greenway - the 
colleague who Irish Rail is working on this is well aware of the Greenway 
project and his own line manager has been sitting on the Greenway 
working group with Christine Flood and they'll, they'll keep both projects 
will keep the other and there's symbolism between the two if the coastal 
erosion project, as they progress forward there's more for the Greenway 
project and we'll discuss hopefully share information with both projects.  
As we do surveys environmental surveys that was in the Greenway 
project, we'll share them with coastal erosion project to cut down on 
duplication of effort which has been done up to now so two will run in 
parallel and any information comes out from one party it will be shared 
with the other, my experience with Irish Rail that's how they progress 
business, so hopefully that will continue. 
Yeah thanks Cathaoirleach, sorry about that, my question was about the 
Greenway but to address it but in relation to the Greenway project and 
how this announcement which is very which will compliment that, the last 

comment about the sharing of the projects because I know the last 
element or the application from the Greenway project for further 
environmental assessment studies was held up really on wait in 
production of this report now that we have had obviously this is good 
news but Marc's point about shared projects, so is he saying actually, if 
Irish Rail are conducting specific environmental assessment studies that 
will mean the Greenway group study will not have to be undertaken or are 
they separate, in other words, you know, will this vast track the Greenway 
process. 
 
CLLR BOURKE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  I really welcome the report into 
the coastal erosion, I will be worried we will be sold out in Arklow, it has 
been on our agenda for 20 years, we made reps and applications for 
beach nourishment and groins, if they're back on the agenda as problems 
in Arklow where I'm afraid the banishment will be, we will be sacrificed for 
the Murrough and Bray.  Will the manager put Arklow with the equal 
footing with the same as the county? 
CLLR FERRIS:  Thank you I'd like to thank Marc for his presentation, just 
to bring you on slide 21, where you say the Department of Transport has 
approved funding for Irish Rail to progress projects for CCA1-6 except 
CCA4 - north beach can you clarify the situation there for me please? 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you, I very much welcome this report, I mean it 
has been a long time coming and very necessary. 
And the fact it is doing the whole coast is very useful.  I just have the next 
stages are important.  And I just I notice there's additional study or 
suggested for Greystones North Beach in particularly the cliffs there.  And 
it mentions there that there's issue of water of coming off Bray Head, I 
have anticipated been on ten years I reckoned half the erosion in that 
area is doing with the water coming off the land rather than the sea.  And I 
just want to know what the story about that particular part of the study is 
which needs to be done because you need to do this before you actually 
take some measures.  So, but very much welcome the whole thing and 
hope we can get on with it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Marc, I have a couple of pieces of housekeeping I 

need to sort out before we move on to your response because I only have 
eight minutes left, just to inform the members item five and six those 
presentations will take place in March. 
I would like to take item seven now to note the local government statutory 
Audrey port of the elected members for year-end 31st of January 2019 
and report was circulated, can I just, everybody in agreement with that, 
because it needs to be noted? 
Yeah, thank you members for that.  And in this correspondence, I think 
this is worth doing and getting out to see if there's any correspondence. 
LORRAINE: One piece of correspondence really and again I mentioned it 
at the special meeting last week is the elected members declarations 
under the ethics legislation, the political donations, were to be submitted 
by the 31st of January, this are a number of a number of outstanding ones 
look you get a lot of paper could you look into that and get it back to us 
the ethics officer as required to do.  And then, the annual ethics 
declarations again, they need to be in by the 24th of February, keep your 
eye on that members thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Lorraine for that.  Marc I will ask you to 
deal with many of the four questions as you can, if you don't get to them 
all perhaps replay to e-mail to the members that asked them, Cllr Gerry 
Walsh, Cllr Sylvestor Bourke, Cllr Anne Ferris and Cllr Derek Mitchell.  
But we do have enough time to answer them. 
MARC:  Cllr Gerry Walsh questions about the Greenway, my experience 
with Irish Rail as they carry out the background information, baseline 
information we need to collect to do the studies they've been sharing with 
us, so I'm hoping both studies we can share information with the other 
side, we do still both to do our due diligence so there's element of works 
and surveys carried out and are needed by the Greenway project.  It is 
just we try and keep the overlap, where there's overlap keep the 
information flowing between the two teams so we don't carry double up on 
the surveys, there will be some cost savings by doing that.  For both 
teams.  But unfortunately, we both have to do you are separate surveys 
because both will be presenting planning process at some point so they 

have to do the due diligence so it will be a case of co-operation I'm hoping 
which will help.  To went necessarily to away with the need of both 
schemes to have planning process, Arklow I take the point Cllr Sylvestor 
Bourke unfortunately, Arklow is no concern to Irish Rail so they haven't 
been able to push the right button for us, I will push the button for OPB I 
will take up Philip's correspondence and go back to OPW, but Arklow is 
on the radar OPW because the Arklow flood scheme and hope to have 
conversations with colleagues in the OPW about this.  So, we will put it on 
their radar again.  In relation to the area immediately north of Bray, Cllr 
Anne Ferris, the reason that Irish Rail won't be looking at areas CCA4 
initially is that Department of Environment, action and communications, 
are already funding works with Dun Laoghaire Rathdown are carrying out 
that which may sort out the issue, it is just they don't Irish Rail don't need 
to do anything in the future because Dun Laoghaire Rathdown are doing it 
DDECC but Irish Rail will keep an eye and Dun Laoghaire when they 
finish it will be reassessed by Irish Rail point of view and checked that it is 
not any further risk from coastal erosion so the works are going ahead it is 
not a case Irish Rail abandoning it because they don't need to do it 
because of Dun Laoghaire and Rathdown.  Cllr Derek Mitchell concerned 
about the North Beach; the whole project has to go through financial 
appraisal which is the next step for Irish Rail.  And but the further studies 
we will have to study both the water coming off the land into that soft soils 
of the top of the cliffs, and that will all be done by Irish Rail again as part 
of the project and we'll feed that information into Irish Rail, the information 
that is already available from the other studies and report by Sean Mason 
gave the district that will be fed up to Irish Rail so they will be aware and 
combined effort on our part to look at that issue of coastal erosion 
immediately north of Greystones.  We'll feed in information to them it is 
not having to redo work. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I have my hand up a while.  I just want to say that I'm 
absolutely delighted with the news, and as one of the members of the 
save the Murrough group that met five years ago, we honestly thought 
this day would never come, it is fantastic, I just hope that nothing stalls it, 
and we can move on as quickly as possible.  Is there a possible time 

frame for completion of the CC1-CC6, and just want to say thank you very 
much to Marc and all the team and really looking forward to seeing that 
work being done? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Well said.  Marc is there a time frame. 
MARC: Order of five years for the whole projects.  The first for the rest of 
this year effort will be on costings and designs, we don't see much activity 
on the ground and then it will be submission to an Bord Pleanála for the 
overall project for planning early next year but it will take five years, two to 
three years on the ground anyway. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Marc and the presentation, great to see that 
money coming.  Two minutes left, 
Cllr Kavanagh, if you're happy I will take your notice of motion, yourself 
and Cllr Peir Leonard it was on the deferred from the special meeting on 
the 25th and on the agenda since November and by monthly payslips.  
Lorraine if you have a response to that. 
LORRIANE:  Certainly. Payroll is around centrally for the sector by my 
PayPal based in Laois, there's two options for payslips, traditional 
payslips, online access portal, the core portal is online single systems with 
the council use here, which gives access, staff access to their daily clock-
ins, leave requests and pay details.  So, payslips can be downloaded by 
staff only should they choose to do so staff only.  The method of payslips 
is currently determined at a payroll group level so salaries for pay group 
pensioners pay group outdoor group councillors pay group not at 
individual level.  And e-mail version option for payslips is not currently 
available to either staff pensioners or councillors on the system, we will 
investigate with my PayPal, mypay to see if it is possible to transfer the 
pay group for the councillors on to core portal which would allow elected 
member down load a payslips it should be noted if this is not possible, if 
this is possible, then all councillors will be moved as a group, not 
individually as the method of receiving payslips can only be determined as 
a pay group level. 
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you 

CLLR KAVANAGH:  Do you want to respond to that. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I under the reasoning behind that it would be hard to 
separate it into a different some do and some don't it is impossible, it is 
either all or none but I really do hope that if the e-mail versions are and 
core portal version is available that councillors will avail of it, because it be 
honest the days of your payslips coming in twice a month, only to end up 
in with an envelope dumped in the bin or recycled or whatever, those 
days are gone we have to look to the future think of the planet and extra 
costs involved and all those kinds of things and I know most people today 
who are working receive their payslips via e-mail so I don't see why we 
shouldn't. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks that concludes our meeting and thank you 
each and every one for their time patience and dedication for being here, 
thanks everybody and I can't say safe home because I hope you are all 
home. 
LORRIANE:  Can a member of the protocol committee stay online please 
and everyone else, thank you very much, and we'll see you soon again, 
stay safe, thank you. 
 
 
 
