 
BUDGET MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY 
COUNCIL HELD AT SHORELINE LEISURE 
CENTRE, GREYSTONES,  
CO WICKLOW  
 
 
 
 ON  
 
MONDAY 23rd NOVEMBER, 2020 AT 2:00pm.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named 
action for communication support.   
 
 
 
Elaine McCarthy 
 
 

Welcome to Wicklow County Council's annual budget 
meeting on 23rd November 2020. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon members, can you 
hear me? Yeah. 
Good afternoon members and welcome to our meeting 
here today, our budget meeting.  Before I start, 
I’d, like to call for votes of sympathy if you will, 
any vote of sympathy? 
MS GALLAGHER:  For Mary O’Riordan, mother of 
Louise Fleming in the Leo office, and for our friend 
and colleague Professor Ernest Berksmith. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Has anybody else any? No, we'll 
stand for a minute. 
Item number one on our agenda, and that is to 
consider the disposal of 0.43 acres of land in the 
townland of Rathdrum, Co Wicklow, by way of an 18 
month lease for the period 9th January, 2020 to 
8thJuly 2021 and the right to pass and repass 
thereto, to Mr Noel Jacob and Ms Helen Jacob, 
Jacob's Well, Rathdrum Co Wicklow (as per notice 
previously circulated).  
Do we have a proposer, Cllr Gail Dunne and Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke seconded. 

MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed? 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Yeah. 
Item number two, To consider the disposal of 7m by 
13m and 2.3m an 19.5 metres, approximately 0.0149 
hectares in total of land situated at Oak Drive, 
Blessington, Co. Wicklow to Gas Networks Ireland 
T/A Aurora Telecom, Gasworks, Cork, T12 RX96 (as 
per notice previously circulated).  
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Propose and seconded by Cllr 
Timmins. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number three:  To consider the 
disposal of 0.0078 hectares comprised in Folio 
WW3873 Co. Wicklow, being a strip of land to the 
rear of Springfield Heights, Newtownmountkennedy, 
Co. Wicklow to Oisin Developement Co. Ltd., c/o 
Philip Flood, Los Arcos, Rocky Road, Co. Wicklow 
(as per notice previously circulated).  
MS GALLAGHER:  Proposed by Cllr Paul O'Brien and 
seconded by Cllr Shay Cullen. 
Is that agreed? 
Thank you, members. 
  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number four is to consider the 
disposal of 0.0265 hectares comprised in Folio 
WW4484 Co. Wicklow being land situated in the 
townland of Hollywood Lower, Hollywood, Co. 
Wicklow to Mr. Lorcan Kelly and Ms. Una Kelly, of 
The Grove, Hollywood Lower, Hollywood, Co. Wicklow 
(as per notice previously circulated).  
Cllr Patsy Glennon and Cllr Gerry O'Neill is that 
agreed.  Thank you. 
And number five, is to consider the disposal of 
0.0580 hectares comprised in Folio WW4484 Co. 
Wicklow being land situated in the townland of 
Hollywood Lower, Hollywood, Co. Wicklow to Mr. 
Thomas Tutty and Ms. Marle Tutty of Watery Lane 
Cottage, Hollywood, Co Wicklow (as per notice 
previously circulated).  
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed? Thank you, members. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number six is to consider the 
disposal of the property comprised in Folio WW3074L 
being the property known as 29 Kindlestown Park, 
Greystones, Co. Wicklow to Mr. John Whiston and Ms. 
Bridget Whiston, 29 Kindlestown Park, Greystones, 

Co. Wicklow (as per notice previously circulated).  
Proposed by Cllr Gerry Walsh. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Seconded by Cllr Tom Fortune.  Is 
that agreed? Thank you, members. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number seven. 
Is not going ahead today for disposal. 
MS GALLAGHER:  With the members permission we 
withdraw for further discussion on the lease term. 
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number eight is to consider the 
disposal of 0.226 hectares (0.559 Acres) or 
thereabouts of land known as the Courtyard and 
Farmyard at Clermont House, Wicklow County Campus, 
Rathnew, Co. Wicklow by a way of a 99 year lease 
commencing 23rd November, 2020, to Clermont 
Enterprise Hub Company, Rathnew, Co. Wicklow (as 
per notice previously circulated).  
Have a proposal for that? 
Cllr John Snell seconded by Cllr Shay Cullen. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed? Thank you, members. 
  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number nine is to, To consider the 
disposal of 0.0590 hectares (0.1457 Acres) or 
thereabouts of land situated in the townland of 
Glencap Commons North, Kilmacanoge, Co Wicklow to 
Mr. Kevin Cahill and Ms. Mary Cahill, Riverside, 
Kilmacanogue, Co. Wicklow (as per notice 
previously circulated).  
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Proposes by Cllr Anne Ferris, 
seconded by Cllr Melanie Corrigan. Is that agreed? 
Thank you, members. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That concludes the disposal 
notices so we're into our draft budget now, so I'll 
call on director of finance Brian Gleeson. 
BRIAN:   Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
I'll just summarise the areas that I'll be going 
through with the presentation now this afternoon. 
I'll be starting off with the outlining the 
budgetary process and planned expenditure of 
income for 2021 and highlight the budget challenges 
we face for next year and review the budget policy 
decisions that have taken place in order to balance 
the budget, discuss the Municipal District funding 

in 2021, and review the expenditure and income 
variation changes to the 2021, budget versus last 
year.  And then also discuss the two decisions we 
require to make under commercial rates the ARV, for 
next year and rates vacancy relief. 
The budget process as you're well aware is four 
maintaining, Local Property Tax variation decision 
which took place in September, Municipal District 
budgetary plan in October including the general 
municipal allocations, adoption of the statutory 
budget today, and then the schedule of Municipal 
District works next February/mesh when he get the 
roads allocations. 
In relation to today's meeting, the budgets that 
need to be made today by the members, including 
adoption of the statutory annual budget for 2021, 
and also two decisions in relation to commercial 
rates for 2021, we have to agree the annual rate 
of valuation and the percentage of relief to be 
applied to vacant premises for the coming year. 
Just outlined the planned expenditure this year, 
we have estimated approximately 118 million.6 for 
next year, increase of over two million on last 
year.  This is attributed to mainly increases in 

paying pensions, and also the proposed pre-letting 
increases of approximately a million in the area 
of housing. 
The main sources of income that are used to balance 
the budget, and match the expenditure are as 
follows:  Local Property Tax is 12 million, that's 
down from 13.7 million last year.  Commercial 
rates nearly 32.1 million, there's a slight 
increase of about 70,000 on this year's rates, due 
to the fact that there was a few global utility 
re-evaluations that took place this year, goods and 
services, 36.7 million that's up from 35.2 million 
this year, and mainly due to IPB paying out a 
dividend next year and we have increase in MPPR, 
estimated and also Pell property entry level that 
we expect next year.  The grants and subsidies have 
increased and 37.9 million, versus 35.4 this year.  
That's mainly as a result of additional homeless 
funding that we're expecting and also P and A 
funding from housing and pay agreement 
compensation that we get every year from the 
department. 
Now moving on to the budget challenges we face for 
the coming year, these from outlined at the LPT 

meeting and workshop we have the impact of 
Covid-19, and between additional expenditure on 
budgeted expenditure with he had this year up to 
a million and loss of income in relation to parking, 
planning, fees, road opening licenses, due to the 
lockdown, that's over 2 million of impact this 
year.  Obviously, we can't foresee into the future 
but there obviously will be significant impact next 
year as well. 
Year-on-year we have the situation of increased pay 
and pension costs, as you're well aware the 
department cover 80% of the pay agreement costs but 
we also have to pony up 20% ourselves, there's new 
staff costs and extra retirements that have to be 
factored into the budget.. 
The reduction of LPT income from 13.7 this year down 
to 12 million, increased demand on housing 
pre-letting expenditure, that provision is 
increasing from 2 million per annum-to-up to 3 
million to meet our existing demand.  We also have 
climate action commitments and energy targets we 
must meet.  We have a number of recommendations 
under the climate action adaptation plan and also 
there's national targets we must aspire to meet. 

  
The match funding commitments under the different 
National Development Plan schemes such as the RD 
, that's on going, we have been successful over the 
past few years in securing funding under these 
particular schemes and we want to continue this 
into the future.  Over all the challenges must be 
met within the legislation requirement to approve 
a balanced budget. 
Just on the next slide, I just want to suppose give 
a bit of background into the rationale into the 
decisions we've made this year - in relation to the 
local port tax as outlined the decision made back 
in September, resulted in reduction of 1.7 from the 
revenue budget for 2021. 
The decision that was made to increase the LPT in 
2020, resulted in specific funding lines being 
ring-fenced for the coming year, they were match 
funding community grant scheme, the discretionary 
fund for Municipal District, climate action, 
energy initiatives that came to 1.7 million so 
created a major challenge to us, in relation to the 
budget this year, when we didn't have that 1.7 
million, I suppose as a council and we did flag this 

with the CPG with he identified two areas that 
needed to be prioritised the match funding, element 
in order to draw down those significant capital 
funding, that's been provided for local project.  
And also, the climate action and energy initiatives 
due to the national targets and the commitments 
we've made under these particular areas. 
I suppose this slide, it just addresses at the 
budget workshop that we had earlier this year, one 
of the questions was that well why did we need 
increase in LPT to pay our discretionary funding 
in 2020, we never had to do it before. 
That was due to the additional costs that came in, 
in 2020, so the baseline had changed, we weren't 
comparing like with like.  We needed to fund these 
new items in 2020, and most of them were 
nondiscretionary so we didn't have a choice.  The 
housing maintenance costs went up by 1.6 million, 
included pre-letting of 1.1 million and half a 
million then on repairs and maintenance, boiling 
maintenance central heating so this was brought 
into this year's budget, we had pension increase 
of 400,000, the rating of Irish Water, you would 
be well aware that, that generated a loss of 

600,000, to the revenue budget.  And we also had 
the new items of expenditure coming in, such as the 
match funding and also the climate action. 
On top of this, we had the library service, had a 
number of new staff as part of the workforce plan 
that were brought in, and that was nearly half a 
million, so those items came to 3.8 million so 
that's why, we need today increase the Local 
Property Tax last year and also, we said at the time 
it was unique year, because there was restricted 
sources of funding in 2020, that were not expected 
to be repeated again in 2021. 
Unfortunately that hasn't transpired the 
legislation required to allow for additional new 
builds to be added to the LPT allocation, we have 
3,500 new builds to apply as you're well aware it 
has been outlined already, that, that legislation 
wasn't brought in, so, there's to additional 
funding there.  And the rates limitation order 
that was in place last year, in relation to the 
increase in commercial rates which prevented us 
from increasing rates a year after re-evaluation, 
that has gone for 2021, so technically we can 
increase our rates, as part of this budget but due 

to the impact Covid-19 has had on local businesses, 
that is strongly not recommended for obvious 
reasons.. 
So that just gives a background, so people 
understand I suppose the rationale why we increased 
the LP last year and the fact that we reduced it 
back down for 2021, the impact that, that has. 
Just in relation to the overall revenue budget, the 
majority or vast majority of the budget is covered 
by nondiscretionary costs as we payroll costs, 
salary wages, pensions, equate to approximately 4 
a% of the budget.  Then we also have - 45%, contra 
ins and outs as we like to refer them funding line 
such as RAS, and HAP, DPGs, Leo sports partnership, 
Irish Water and machinery yard, and homeless 
funding rote grants, which is 25% of the revenue 
budget.  We have nondiscretionary costs such as 
our utilities light and heat, insurance, costs loan 
interest, capital transfers, salutary 
contributions and victory rates write-offs so all 
those added together come to 90% of the budget so 
we're left to 10% what would be discretionary 
costs, within that, we have local roads 
maintenance, the owned resources element rather 

than grant funded element.  Public light, which is 
demand led, housing repairs and maintenance, 
demand led, a lot of people would say those three 
items are not discretionary.  But I suppose, we 
have a choice to cut back on those areas, if we wish 
but obviously there would be serious detrimental 
implications of doing that.  Community Grants 
scheme is discretionary item, environmental 
initiatives but we've already referred to national 
commitments we have, arts and festivals, our book 
fund for the library, economic supports, such as 
the GMA provision or rates incentive schemes.  
Match funding for capital programmes and 
discretionary spend in the Municipal Districts.  
So, they're the main items of discretionary 
expenditure that we have within the budget.  So, 
there's not a lot of scope and we have to try and 
find savings, there's not a huge amount of scope 
within the overall budget that we can take from. 
In relation to the legislation and the input of the 
members on this, the Government reform act, 2014, 
allows for the adoption of the budget, it states 
as a reserve function of the members of the local 
authority, and it also states the CPG should assist 

with the setting of the overall parameters and 
identification of issues and approaches to be taken 
in relation to the budget and as a result of this, 
the CPG met twice to agree budget proposals, on the 
2rd and 9th of November, and in between the two 
meetings, we did have a budget workshop for all the 
members of which the decisions that were taken were 
outlined and people were allowed to give feedback 
in relation to that. 
I'll just go through this would have been emailed 
out in advance after the meetings but to go through 
again and remind people of the decisions that were 
taken with the corporate policy group - the 
pre-letting capital transfer of one million in 
order to meet current demand the average costs 
between 30,000 and 40,000 per unit.  So, we hope 
to have about a hundred per year completed. 
Transfer of LED public lighting replacement cost 
toss a newly established capital account, 
resulted-in-saving of half a million, that capital 
account deficit that will be generated will be 
cleared by the 8 million loan taken out, for when 
the national replacement programme commences which 
will be hopefully the end of this year. 

The retention of the climate action funding 
increase of 260,000, that was allocated within the 
budget of 2020, we want to retain that.  And that 
covered two new positions to climate action officer 
and biodiversity support officer, and also allowed 
for 180,000 for climate reaction initiatives, rent 
bad debt provision, due to impact of Covid-19, 
200,000, it has seen rent arrears increase 
significantly, recently, door-to-door collections 
have now commenced and we should see a redirection 
in our arrears, but we still need to take a prudent 
approach to no in relation to this area.  And we 
have increased this by 200,000. 
The additional provision we kneel we require for 
extra vacant premises in relation to commercial 
rates we believe this will be covered within our 
existing budget provision of 2.8 million, we had 
to do a detailed review of all rate payers as part 
of a rents waiver scheme in eligibility for that 
particular scheme so we believe that the extra 
provision of approximately half a million will be 
catered for within the existing budget. 
Commercial rates to stay on that - we are proposing 
that there's no increase to the existing ARV rate 

of 0.217 to support businesses during this tough 
time. 
We also propose to retain the vacancy refund rate 
of 60% for 2021, and also, the two existing rates 
incentive schemes, small business scheme which is 
equates to 5% of the rates budget up to a maximum 
of 250 Euro and new business incentive scheme for 
say can't premises. 
Unfortunately, we have had to find savings in some 
areas and the proposal is there's no community 
grant scheme funding for 2021. 
This is based on the need to fund our 
nondiscretionary costs, first and foremost and the 
prioritisation as we said already of the match 
funding and climate action initiatives, so 
unfortunately, we've had to remove that from the 
proposed budget. 
We, intend to retain the mobile recycling funding 
of approximately 50 now thousand for the coming 
year and it was agreed that additional funding 
would be made available to the Coral leisure 
sisters in Wicklow and Arklow to continue their 
continuation, it has been badly hit by Covid-19 and 
the Government restriction so we need to provide 

additional support to get through the difficult 
period and stay open as is they are considered an 
important community facility. 
The Mermaid centre in Bray, no proposed reduction 
in relation to the 320,000 allocation they get each 
year.  Similar to the gyms, art centres, they are 
suffering and increasingly dependent on our 
support with no box office income coming in this 
year. 
The library book fund, we are estimating an 
underspend this year of approximately 100,000, it 
has been difficult to source books this year with 
one national supplier.  So, there will be an 
underspend, we intend to capitalise and carry 
forward the underspend of 100,000 and reduce, 2021 
budget by that same amount.  So, while we're making 
savings in the 2021, budget of 100,000, the amount 
of funding available for the book scheme will be 
unchanged. 
We also, got a Covid-19 credit in relation to our 
insurance from IPB and that is applied to our 2021 
insurance premium to bring it down by over 200,000. 
We've also proposed and agreed removal of the 
annual capital transfer of 100,000 in respect of 

the playground capital reserve and this is I 
suppose for 2021, only. 
We believe there's sufficient reserves funds 
within the capital reserve to cover any immediate 
demands, but this is one for one year only and needs 
to be reversed as part of budget 2022. 
I'm just I suppose in relation to the overall budget 
and the balancing of it, we have made an assumption 
the Government economic recovery contingency fund 
that was announced as part of the overall national 
budget will cover any reduction or majority of any 
reduction in income that we have next year and 
additional Covid-19 costs in 2021.  The minister 
has written to all local authorities recently 
confirming there will be support for the coming 
year, obviously at this stage there's no actual 
figures but, there has been a commitment to support 
local authorities as best we can. 
Just I suppose next part is in relation to the GMA, 
based on feedback we did receive from the budget 
workshop, we have reintroduced the general 
municipal allocation, which specifically covers 
the area of Tidy Towns, and festivals and economic 
development, so that's 208,500, that will be 

allocated to the Municipal Districts across the 
board as you can see from the table.  Outlined on 
the screen.  The time of the draft budgetary plans 
when they were issued we couldn't commit to the 
200,000 due to the fact we had to concentrate on 
our nondiscretionary expenditure and make sure we 
had enough funding for those first and foremost but 
we did say at the advertisement we would re-examine 
this whole area as part of the overall budget 
process and based on the feed a the importance the 
members placed on this area, especially in relation 
to the Tidy Towns and the work they do locally it 
is hugely important.  We brought that back in. 
You will note the civic representation there's a 
small reduction, there was 2,000 per Municipal 
District each year, that has been reduced slightly 
down to 1,000, given the impact of Covid-19, 
hopefully towards the latter half of the year. 
We might be in a position to spend some of that. 
Just in relation to the Municipal District 
discretionary expenditure, as we've said 
unfortunately due to the reduction in LPT we've had 
a remove this for 2021, and Municipal Districts do 
have the option however like Bray Municipal 

District did, to increase parking charges for area 
and retain the net increase for their discretionary 
expenditure so all MDs have the option of doing 
that, if they should wish. 
In addition the discretionary funding balances at 
the end of 2020, will be carried over into 2021, 
at the end of October we have 1.7 million across 
all five Municipal Districts so that will be, the 
funding will be available into 2021, there's a 
large balance to carry over, because as you're 
aware the concentration over the last few months 
in each district was to carry out and implement the 
NTA mobility schemes and works in relation to those 
as there was a deadline for draw down funding so 
there's a significant overspend but that will be 
available to Municipal Districts next year. 
And while we speak about the NTA schemes, this whole 
line of new funding we do expect that to continue 
into 2021, and we believe this will act as a 
substitute for the discretionary funding in the 
Municipal Districts.  Today date 4.8 million has 
been allocated as you can see, Arklow got 1.4, 
battle glass nearly 1.5 million, Bray over 500,000, 
Greystones over 800,000 and Wicklow half a million 

to that equates to 4.8 million, a huge amount of 
money, all the works have been completed orb will 
be over the coming weeks, and as I said, while this 
is a capital funding scheme, we believe this will 
continue into 2021, so there will be plenty of works 
especially in the area of footpaths across the 
Municipal Districts. 
Also in relation to the decisions taken by the CPG, 
it was decided that the IPP funding of half a 
million that was used to for footpath repairs would 
be ring-fenced for capital projects, we believed 
the bank for your buck you get from your RD 
and ORD 
and subsequent schemes was hugely important, and 
we had to prioritise that whole area. 
Obviously failure to make prevision for match 
funding means Wicklow County Council cannot do 
projects where development levies cannot be used, 
like the Blessington and Greystones CCCT schemes, 
both require 60 ,000 of match funding for those 
particular schemes, we can't use development 
levies for that, so, that's an area we need to 
provide the funding for. 
Of the 36 million, worth of projects that are been 

proved to date under the various schemes, we do 
require match funding of 2.3 million from sources 
other than developing levies.  Of planned project 
we've made applications for we could require up to 
9.7 million, obviously that will be depending on 
the outcome of the applications, we won't obviously 
get all of the applications will be successful but 
there will still be hopefully a large element of 
that.  So, there is ongoing requirement for that 
match funding provision. 
Just to go through the main expenditure variances 
in budget 2021. 
Under the area of housing, we have the pre-letting 
repairs provision, increase of one million, fabric 
upgrade works we've reduced that by 270,000, that's 
based on planned work and additional funding that 
has been provided in this area. 
So, we've been able to reduce our own resources 
element. 
Housing of the homeless, nearly 800,000 of 
additional expenditure, that's based on additional 
funding that we'll receive.  RAS, that is reduced 
a national trend whereby it is replaced by HAP. 
Payment and availability agreements, 1.1 million, 

1.2 million, that's based on a trend as well, and 
we'll be funding by the department. 
In roads, the IPB footpath repair scheme has been 
removed so 500,000 has been taken out of that 
particular area and moved to development, and 
economic development for the match funding. 
Local road improvements, over 600,000 of 
additional grant aid is expected and that's based 
on I suppose additional funding we got in 2020, over 
and above the budget. 
Under development, the town twinning for obvious 
reasons, we're eliminating that expenditure for 
this year, new business rates incentive scheme for 
say can't premises, that was set at 150,000, 
reducing that by 50,000 as we expect less of a 
take-up due to the obvious impact Covid-19 has had 
on businesses.  Capital project match funding, we 
had half a million in there for that, retaining 
that, and we're increasing about 200,000 to cover 
the Clare month content relation hub, there's a 
match funding requirement of 2 million, to cover 
our grant of approximately 1.5 million so we want 
to have that paid off over ten years.  Fire service 
operations up by 159,000, that's mainly payroll 

costs across all the stations.  The area of 
recreation and amenity, the leisure centres 
200,000 we referred to that already in relation to 
Coral.  Library service operations, 346,000, 
that's the last part of the workforce plan being 
implemented and also, we have additional costs in 
relation to new library in Wicklow Town. 
Library book fund as I said underspend of 100,000 
which we'll capitalise and carry forward and reduce 
the budget for next year.  And playground cap it 
will reserve, we've mentioned already. 
Community grant scheme we're reducing for this 
year, and we're increasing IT operations, that is 
in relation to additional licenses, implementation 
of a digital strategy and digital staff costs.  The 
discretionary expenditure, budget line reduces by 
1.264 million, 964 million, 964,000 of that is the 
public works and one-off allocation in relation to 
the Irish Water rating we got last year on Budget 
Day, that was a one-off item, it is no longer 
available that funding so the two combined givens 
1.264.  Payment Gratuity, 421 and IPB premium 
reduced by approximately 100,000 which is God news. 
The income variances, we have in housing, these are 

Contra items, grant aid has gone up in relation to 
homeless grants and will be spending that as well. 
RAS, obviously that's on interest as well, we've 
seen the expenditure going down so income will be 
also going down and P and A agreements.  Local 
roads improvement grants which we mentioned we 
expect increase on that, and IPP footpath scheme 
that's been reduced also. 
Creative Ireland we expect additional funding, 
next year of 80,000, and under environment, burial 
grounds, the income from there, we expect to 
increase by 38,000 based on our turn in 2020, 
similar to that the fire safety certificates we 
expect a small increase. 
Arts Council grants 2 
,000 of small increase is expected.  And the Irish 
Water as I've mentioned, that 300,000 was a one-off 
item in budget 20.  So, we'll no longer reoccur, 
in subsequent budgets.  MPPR, we've increased that 
by 150,000, the budget of reduced, there was a 
national trend whereby the MPPR was reducing 
year-on-year, and reduced it from 700,000 down to 
350,000, at 300,000 in 2020, based on income to date 
we have increased that again now up to 450,000.  

The IPP dividend we got no dividend in 20, so it's 
been confirmed by PBB we will have a dividend of 
487,000 and the Local Property Tax the 1.7, and 
also, there's an increase provision of property 
entry levy, that is where there's new builds, for 
businesses, and the valuations won't be finalised 
we expect until December, so, once it is passed our 
budget date it can't be included in our rates book 
for 2021 but it can be property entry levy and 
expect 200,000 to come in in relation to that. 
I suppose, ordinarily, when we're trying to balance 
a budget and we're looking at the ARV, for 
commercial rates for the coming year, we look at 
proposed expenditure for the year and calculate our 
income for the coming year and take one from the 
other, if there's a gap we look at possibly 
increasing the ARV to close that gap because the 
expenditure must equal the total income. 
However, as I've stated already, for obvious 
reasons, and the impact that Covid-19 has had on 
businesses this year, we are proposing that we 
retain the ARV for 2021, at the 0.217 rate. 
This is to support local businesses, and also to 
compliment the rates waiver scheme and restart 

grant scheme introduced this year and administered 
by Wicklow County Council to support the local 
businesses. 
The other decision that has to be made by the 
members today is vacancy relief rate and 
recommendation is that the rate of refund for 
eligible vacant properties would be retained at the 
60%, this compliments the rates incentive scheme 
for new businesses reoccupying say can't premises, 
it’s in line with the average relief that is applied 
across all our local authorities and also the new 
rates bill, there's a maximum level of vacancy 
relief and that's expected introduced in any event 
this year.  It is tough to balance the budget this 
year to the challenges and any increase to the 
vacancy rate would have cost to budget so if we did 
adjust that, we would have to find money elsewhere 
to pay for it. 
So, I suppose, to summarise budget 2021, I suppose, 
given the difficult circumstances we faced I think 
overall this has been a positive budget as it avoids 
cuts to front line services, and provides no 
additional charges toss local businesses and 
actually increases funding to the housing area, and 

it allows us to continued support for the funding 
of capital project across all the Municipal 
Districts. 
So, Cathaoirleach that concludes our presentation 
and I review the budget across the various 
divisions. 
To assist the members, I'll leave that last page 
up, as a reference, as you can refer to during the 
discussion. 
So, thank you Cathaoirleach. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian and first of all 
Brian can I thank yourself and breed the financial 
team for the work you've put in preparing this 
budget.  It wasn't an easy budget; it was a very 
difficult budget this year.  I also want to thank 
the members for their participation in the budget, 
as Brian outlined, we had two CPGs and workshop and 
I want to thank the members for their participation 
in that.  Also, for e-mailing in any concerns or 
questions they had or for contacting Brian by 
phone.  So, rather than bring up each director to 
go through their teams, because of Covid-19 I asked 
Brian to cover all the different sections in his 

presentation, so I'm going to open it up to the 
floor for questions. 
So, I'm going to throw it out there now, it is a 
detailed budget, and we all know the work that Brian 
had to put into this, so I want to thank you and 
all the team for everything awe he done on a budget, 
it is a difficult budget and year, but we know where 
we are, and so, I'm going to open up the floor.  
Cllr Gerry Walsh, table number two. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and thanks to 
the director for the presentation. 
You know, logging at the draft budget document 
presented to us all during the week and reading 
through it, it certainly gives a clear illustration 
of the works of the council, the services that the 
council deliver, the supports, the operations and 
the projects this for community facilities et 
cetera.  And you know, also illustrates the new 
implementations that have been developed in areas 
around climate action, environmental protection, 
IT, et cetera.  But by extension then when you read 
the sect portion of the document, green section, 
it also, you know, gives illustration of the vast 

of the costs involved and the budget expenditure 
figure of 118.7 million and the difficulty in 
bridging the funding gaps, the LPT, we've 
discussed, that's been well ventilated but again, 
looking at page two of the document, from 17.3 
million we're down with net figure of 12 million 
so that's a funding gap straightaway that has to 
be addressed.  So, I sincerely hope without going 
into detail on this issue, that the relevant 
departments address this outstanding issue once 
and for all this year and we're not in the same 
situation again this time next year.  Just on three 
specific items I'd like to refer to, refer from the 
presentation:  The which is one is CCTV, and I'm 
glad that there's been a references to match 
funding, there's provision made for that for 
Blessington and the Greystones schemes due to be 
approved shortly.  There will be an issue of 
maintenance of these schemes going forward that 
possibly an issue for next year, but I would like 
that to be considered also.  The issue around 
public conveniences, it is there on page 19 and 67 
of the document I want to make references to 
Greystones in particular, we have a toilet facility 

three at the harbour that has been out of use for 
ten years now and the members have looking to get 
this back into use, this year, we invested some of 
our discretionary funding to invest in that, it is 
ready to reopen now and I'm just wondering going 
forward is there a provision for maintenance costs 
in relation to this facility? 
The other issue I want to raise with the director 
and you did refer to it when you referred to the 
workforce plan in relation to the library services, 
and it is the issue around outdoor staffing levels 
particularly in the Greystones district, we looked 
at this during the year and we saw that there was 
a clear disparity between the numbers operating 
from the Greystones district and other districts, 
I understand that the workforce plan was to 
accommodate additional two members outdoor 
staffing for Greystones, which haven't yet 
materialised and I'm aware that is yet another 
member due to retire in January.  So, I'd like to 
get some comment in relation to that because, as 
I said earlier with the vast amount of services, 
and supports delivered by the council, the outdoor 
staffing levels need to be maintained, that need 

to be given priority.  Thanks. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Paul O'Brien. 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN:  We all sit here today in 
extraordinary times, even given the social 
distancing we're having to observe today and it 
would be easy for us to sit here today and be 
negative about a budget, but I believe we should 
be constructive about this budget in the terms of 
the times we're living in.  Families up and down 
the county have had to tighten their belts as 
incomes decreased and I believe the council have 
also had to manage their budget and balance it. 
We all made the decision back in September about 
the LPT and as councillors acknowledged it is a done 
deal at this stage and it is the past.  But we did 
step up and do our bit for the people of Wicklow 
in September and now it is time for us to be positive 
and be constructive about this budget. 
I want to welcome the commercial rates being 
maintained; I believe any increase would be 
detrimental to the already fragile economy around 
the county.  I also want to welcome the match 
funding that's been secured or will be secured 

because of the difficult decisions that have been 
made.  I also want to welcome the extra 100,000 for 
Wicklow and Arklow Coral Leisure Centres, this has 
been a difficult year for the entire country and 
entire world, we need something to look forward to 
and I'm delighted that 20,000 has been set aside 
for festivals next year.  And what might sound like 
a trivial manner in terms of festivals I honestly 
believe people need something to look forward to.  
Without trying to sound negative though if the 
festivals don't go ahead, where will the money end 
up, there's 208,000 and while I hope the festivals 
go ahead, what will happen the 208,000 if they 
don't, but I sincerely hope they do, thank you very 
much Cathaoirleach. 
  
CLLR WINTERS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  I want to 
thank Brian and all his team and in fact all of the 
department heads for the work that has gone into 
producing this budget.  It is very difficult with 
rising costs, reduced income, and very little 
leeway in terms of with a you can, and can't do to 
actually get a balance budget and tremendous work 
has gone into it. 

I suppose there are huge difficulties facing all 
of the businesses within the county.  With many of 
our residents as well, have reduced income and I 
think people have to I suppose expect that we are 
impacted in much the same way in that we have 
reduced income and trying to produce the same level 
of services with reduced income is very 
challenging. 
There are some elements of the budget in a I would 
like to see reinstated if possible and we can look 
at proposals for that.  That would be in terms of 
Community Grants.  I think for very shawl money we 
get a significant input from members of the 
community and their means of fundraising et cetera 
have been vastly reduced again because of the 
Covid-19 pandemic. 
And as we go through each of the categories, maybe 
that's something we can look at.  Overall, I want 
to say to Brian well done.  And we welcome this, 
and I think he's done an exceptional job given the 
circumstances that we face, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Brian do you want to 
take any questions in those three, most of them were 

in support, but there was a couple of questions here 
and there, so maybe you deal with those three 
please.  
BRIAN:   In relation to CCTV maintenance, as far 
as I'm aware the annual maintenance kicks in in year 
two, so for Blessington and Greystones that is the 
year after we'll make provision, we have a 
provision we put in this year for Arklow, we've put 
in CCTV, in year two, so we'll do the same forb 
Blessington and Greystones in the following year's 
budget.  Public conveniences, there's a I suppose 
a budget for Greystones, for the ongoing 
maintenance of public conveniences in the 
district. In relation to outdoor staff, I think 
there's provision within the budget for increases 
across all of the Municipal Districts.  Also, 
councillor O'Brien questioned the 208,000, if it 
isn't spent, well of the 208,000, and 80,000, is 
in respect of the Christmas lights so we'll assume 
that will be OK.  The Tidy Towns and economic 
development are 67,000, so that should be fine.  
There's another 560,000, within that allocation 
that goes towards other festivals that include 
Patrick's Day and other summer festivals.  If it 

isn't spent, I suppose, just like all the other 
deregulatory expenditure, we will allow that to be 
retained in the district and carried forward in the 
following year as we always do in relation to any 
underspends in discretionary expenditure within 
the district. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian.  Chief Executive 
would you like to come in.?  Chief Executive:  On 
the outdoor staff all the posts in the workplace 
force will be filled.  In addition we'll take on 
further six outdoor staff and three engineers 
because of the funding going in NTA, there's over 
5 million came in last year, which between active 
travel, intermobility and climb change we've been 
asked to summit funding proposals for further 
schemes this week and looks like it will continue 
next year, to we will be recruiting more in the 
workforce plan to get through the work. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Lourda Scott.  
Table three. 
 
CLLR SCOTT:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and I just want 
to echo thanks to Brian and his team for working 

so hard and producing I think overall is a welcomed 
budget despite the difficult circumstances we're 
in.  I want to make a brief comment as Co-Chair of 
climate and biodiversity, I particular welcome the 
ring-fencing of the money, it is important for the 
wider community to safeguard funds here and very 
strong indicator of Wicklow County Council's 
commitment to delivering climate and biodiversity 
action and hitting targets going forward so I want 
to welcome that, and say that is very much 
appreciated, by the members of the SPC, and look 
forward with the climate action team going forward 
over the next year. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Erika Doyle. No OK.  Cllr Joe 
Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN:  Thank you.  Just three questions 
please:  First of all. if I'm not mistaken the 
finance officer said there's reduction of a quarter 
of a million Euros next year on the energy 
efficiency fabric upgrade scheme.  Which I find to 
be incredible really given everything else we're 
talking about efficiency and energy efficiency and 
every other programme and as far as I'm aware, that 
is also a programme that is jointly funded with the 

Department of Housing. 
I'm very concerned that the slowdown of that 
particular work.  I mean it started in Bray, two 
years ago, but, as far as I can see, nothing has 
been happening in that regard in Bray for at least 
a year. 
So, I'd like to know, what is happening the fabric 
upgrade scheme in the areas in Bray where it was 
begun? 
And are we seriously going to pass up on money from 
the Department of Housing for energy efficiency 
work that is long past overdue, in all of our 
housing estates throughout the county?  Second 
question, is in relation to the N11, M11 and route 
selection process, we have been promised that the 
route, the preferred route would be given to us 
certainly in this part of the year, in the last 
quarter of the year, there's no mention of it at 
all in the statement, I accept it maybe doesn't have 
impact on the budget, but I would welcome if there 
is information that the officials have with regard 
to the final route or preferred route, if that 
information could be shared with us as councillors 
and the public of County Wicklow today, if it is 

available. 
And thirdly, we all received letters, a letter from 
solicitor's firm in Arklow at the end of September, 
regarding the practice by Wicklow County Council 
of demanding or looking for utility bills that 
maybe ten, eleven years old in order to provide 
exemption certificates for the non, NPPR tax, this 
is causing great difficulties for people who want 
to sell their house, who have genuinely been living 
this their house, and some local authorities, 
including Fingal and others, have now developed a 
system where a sworn affidavit will be accepted.  
This is money the council is not going to be able 
to keep. 
And it is causing a lot of difficulty for individual 
clients of solicitors, right across the county.  
Now the Finance Director did undertake to have more 
consideration of this particular issue and I was 
hoping that we would have heard a bit more about 
it by now so I want to ask you Brian, what is the 
position with regard, can we please change the 
policy, to ensure that people who have waiting for 
the certificate can get it as soon as possible? 
Thank you. 

  
CLLR LEONARD:  I just like to thank Brian and Breda 
and the whole team there, for all the work put into 
it, and I suppose we all know it was a great 
challenge to balance the budget this year.  But, 
I just there's a few questions, I would like to ask 
is there a provision in there, I know I'm harping 
all this for harbour attest taint officer, for the 
21 and why we don't have provision for conservation 
in Wicklow and also, as part of the committee of 
the climate action APC, I think one of our greatest 
challenges, going forward, even though I'm 
appreciative of the work allocated towards climate 
change but we're falling short on what we can't 
achieve, including some of the kind of alternatives 
to using chemicals for weeds and stuff like that 
in our municipals so I'm wondering can we look at 
maybe going forward, next year any access funding 
Google towards one of the greatest challenge, I 
know we've had a tough year with Covid-19, loss of 
income and economy, but none look important if we 
don't have a man net to have all these things on.  
Flooding, coastal erosion, loss of biodiversity, 
they're all such important things for your future 

generation, and I think that we need to keep that 
in mind with all of the budget at every meeting we 
have going forward, thanks. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, go back to Brian now, if 
you take those three if there's questions. 
  BRIAN:   Cllr Peir Leonard in relation to the 
chemicals, the climate officer is looking at that 
area at the moment, alternative chemicals so that's 
a positive, the harbour position that's factored 
into the budget.  The conservation, I'm not sure, 
exactly what the proposal was there? 
I don't think there's anything specific in the 
budget in relation to that. 
But the harbour position is included. 
Regarding Cllr Joe Behan's questions, the fabric 
upgrade, it is follow actually a reduction in 
expenditure, it is, that is, it is a capital 
transfer, all the money on the fabric upgrade is 
expended from the capital account, that's a capital 
transfer we make every year.  So sort of our own 
funding element our resources are sources, based 
on the funding amounts we're getting from the 
department, it has been calculated that our 
provision will be less, so it doesn't mean we're 

going to be losing out on funding, it just means 
our element that we have to provide will be less.  
So, that's the way that works. 
The N11, that would be included in the capital plan.  
So, it wouldn't be in the revenue account, I don't 
know whether the Colm wants to come in on progress 
on that, and NPPR, yes, we are looking at that, at 
the moment, unfortunately the area that looks at 
that is also trying to deal with the rates waiver 
scheme and restart grants, but, we've had an 
initial look on that and when the waiver scheme is 
out of the way we'll concentrate on that, and get 
back to you with an answer on that.  Thank you. 
  Chief Executive:  On the retrofitting there's a 
scheme for 8 
Unit with the department that our proposal waiting 
on approval.  But next year, the department have 
got very significant extra funding now for energy 
retrofitting, and 65 million for the entire country 
so they're looking at rolling this out and allowing 
for 45,000 per household, which will allow for 
external insulation, internal, windows and heat 
pumps so it is a significant move by the department, 
canning all local authorities so we can gear out 

to scary out the surveys and implement this, that 
is 100% funded.  On the N11 and M11, we haven't got 
a date yet for the final report, but they have set 
up a workshop and we are expecting it very shortly, 
possibly towards the end of the year.  And climate 
change - there's is a list of actions in there that 
are ongoing, the electric vehicle charging points 
in Greystones will go ahead, tree policy is going 
ahead, community woodlands is going ahead, 
submission has been head for research project by 
UCD and Trinity in relation to flood protection at 
the upper Avoca catchment, alternatives to 
phosphate we've been through that with the 
districts and they have come up with a form, 
products that can be used as alternative to that.  
In addition, we have the energy reduction work 
going on in terms of our own buildings, and 
libraries, et cetera, and indeed our public houses 
and we have the solar planning project coming 
through for the County Buildings. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Edward Timmins.  
Table six. 
 

CLLR TIMMINS: Thanks.  Brian for your 
presentation. Just a couple of points I brought 
these up before, during the workshop, I mean, I'm 
happy to support this budget today, but, I would 
qualify it by making a couple of points - firstly 
to this regulatory fund, ours has been wiped out 
100%, I know there's project done around the county 
but they're different to discretionary funding, I 
know when I was Chairman and also former Chairman 
and member councillor advance, did a lot of work 
to make sure that the councillors had sufficient 
discretionary funding to be able to do things in 
their local area and I really think you know, and 
I hope this is purely a blip and this discretionary 
funding returns to the level it was last year in 
the 2022, budget.  I appreciate there's funding 
unspent.  And you know, also, I welcome the 
commitment of that funding will be allowed to be 
spent in 2021, so we can bring it up-to-date.  But 
that's something we as councillors have to fight 
for, and we will fight for.  Second thing, 
disappointing about the Community Grants, you talk 
about match funding, that's probably the best match 
funding of all, the what you get back from what is 

paid in in the communities, and it means so much 
to communities and it is such an important part of 
county and the council works very well with 
communities so it is not something we should let 
slip away, we should commission and maintain.  On 
the NPPR, could I ask Brian a question, is the NPPR, 
going to, is that going to lapse at any stage? 
Remember at the beginning there was talk about 
maybe ten years after 2013, when it finished that 
it would fall away? 
Just wonder do have you have clarification. 
  
CLLR BLAKE:  I'd like to thank CPG and staff on the 
work they've done.  Budgets are never easy and even 
good times and certainly bad times they are 
difficult for anybody to adopt and one question is 
in regard to housing. 
We've had a difficulty over the last couple of years 
and this is seventh year now we have been talking 
about the equalisation, of the grants for housing 
repairs, between the districts, I know the 
Baltinglass district through the years we've had 
a small grant in terms of being able to improve our 
housing stock.  Maybe 150 Euro in comparison to 

some of the towns up to 800 Euro, there was a policy 
brought in there would be a equalisation of that 
money and have we reached that equalisation at this 
particular point in time. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH.  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
And thanks to Brian and the CPG for the amount of 
work they've done on the budget to date. 
Yeah, it isn't easy to balance figures, but I just 
went through the figures just to look for any 
notable discrepancies or we'll say huge 
differences between estimated outturn for last 
year and estimates for 2021, and just to see if 
there was anything that I was missing. 
For example, page 95, there's a huge increase of 
half a million on machinery and maintenance of 
machinery service from last year to next year, just 
wondering what the what is the cause of that. 
By the same token, the plant and machinery 
operations have gone down by half a million, and 
I'm just wondering if it is to do with revamping 
our upgrading machines, should that not been 
capitalised and not appear in a revenue budget in 
the first place? 

  
When we go down to purchase of materials for the 
stores, there's nothing in for 2021.  Yet there was 
120, nearly 125,000 last year, that seems to be a 
big discrepancy, and not purchasing anything for 
the material stores. 
This was one that it is not a massive amount of 
money, but it is on page 96, expenses for local 
authority members.  Now it has been pushed up by 
about 50,000 over the previous year, but given that 
there's far less travel with Covid-19 
restrictions, that a lot of our meetings are now 
going to be held via zoom, there will be to 
conferences being held, I just don't understand why 
that figure has been increased by 50,000 for next 
year? 
  
With regard to the NPPR, I'm assuming that the 
616,000 from last year, was as a result of interest 
and penalties, when people went to sell their 
houses, they obviously had a lean on their house 
and couldn't dispose of it, until they discharged 
their NPPR. 
So, there's been an estimate of 4 automatic,000 put 

in for next year. 
The tax itself was removed in 2013, it was only 200 
euros per property so what's is coming in, has to 
be old charges that have materialised as I said when 
people are trying to dispose of properties.  I'm 
wondering, given there's a substantial difference 
between what materialised for last year, or 2020, 
we'll deal with and the estimate for 2021, could 
any difference over and above that 450,000, be 
ring-fenced for something like the Community 
Grants? 
Because we're only putting in 450,000, therefore 
anything over that figure is a bonus and it could 
be, certainly used to build up the community grant 
fund again.  And I would also ask again could these 
50,000 increases on the expenses for local 
authority members be put to the Community Grants 
fund as well? 
I don't see why it has increased at all.  And can 
I say the 1.5 million difference between rent from 
last year and this year, was queried long before 
Covid-19 I remember even a year ago, councillors 
were bringing this up at council meetings, where 
suddenly were the rents, was there such a 

difference between the rent due and the rent 
collected? 
So, I think that if there was some kind of an effort 
made as in allowing people to pay at the Post Office 
or some kind of a facility like that, we really 
could see that figure come up.  Because it isn't 
just Covid-19 related and it is wrong to say that 
it is.  It was happening long before Covid-19. 
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'll hand back to you with Brian. 
  BRIAN:   I'll take that rents question, first of 
all, while there was arrears and the end of 2019 
there might be 1.19 million that gone up to 2.8 
million, so it has been impacted by Covid-19 
without question.  When there was arrears, every 
local authority has rent arrears and I suppose in 
comparison to other local authorities we were above 
the national average, when you look at the NOAC 
performance indicators, so on the face of it, we 
look like we have arrears, in comparison to the 
national average we are doing better than most 
local authorities but there has been impact without 
question by Covid-19, our collection team 

door-to-door, were stood down for a period of time, 
they're back open now and back operating with 
standard operation guidelines in place.  , so 
we're addressing that, and we have written out the 
housing section have written out to those 
particular customers, tenants who are availing of 
the door-to-door, giving them additional options 
to pay electronically and one of the main options 
we're trying to push is the household budget scheme 
paid through the Post Office for people who are 
availing of social welfare. 
Just in relation to the NPPR, and I'll I suppose 
I'll take the question that Cllr Edward Timmins 
did, and Cllr Mary Kavanagh together - the NPPR, 
it is expected to lapse on the 31st of March, 20205 
the acts will be repealed on that date.  The actual 
fees, as was pointed out was for a period, 200 per 
annum from 2009 to 2013, however as was pointed out 
correctly by Cllr Mary Kavanagh, anyone who looks 
to sell their house now, and they hadn't paid that 
200 Euro fee at the time, has to pay penalties, so, 
if they didn't pay anything, across that five-year 
period, they could have up to £7,230 of penalties 
to pay.  So that is where the income is coming in. 

The estimate or I suppose the outcome this year was 
greater than the estimate or income has dropped 
down and has been a trend nationally in relation 
to NPPR, 2018 we had 1.5 million receipts, 2019, 
229,000, so now we reduced it to 300 thousand, so 
it is a staying consistent this year, everyone 
would be aware the housing market has picked up 
considerably over the last few months, so, we have 
seen an increase of our NPPR this year.  But, as 
I say, that will run until 2025. 
In relation to some of the variances, that were 
highlighted and paid, 95, machine yard, that was 
to do with direct labour team that was kind of moved 
between though two areas, H101, and H102, so 
shifting of expenditure between the two, so the 
bottom line, there's not a huge amount of change 
within the machinery yard, it is just correcting 
where people are being charged too, so that's all 
that sex in relation to the stores, 120,000, we have 
closed the stores, so, that provision is no longer 
required. 
And also, the members strange, the increase there 
is there was a provision made of 2,000 per member 
for training for the coming year, I think that was 

agreed with the members, so, that hence the reason 
of the increase there. 
In relation to putting money into money grant 
scheme from NNNPPR and training, it is up to the 
members to put forward proposals in relation to 
this, as I said, we can listen to any proposals put 
forward.  And Cllr Vincent Blake regarding the 
housing, yeah, the budget is done, based on a cost 
per unit, so the average cost per unit and units 
within the district.  So that's the way the budget 
for the repairs and maintenance is calculated.  
So, in that case, yeah, that would be as far as I'm 
aware the equalisation that would have been 
implemented in that regard. 
Well it is the budget for the Municipal Districts 
for the repairs and maintenance individual budget 
is based on a cost per unit. 
So, it equal then, the cost per unit is applied 
across all Municipal Districts. 
So, it would be the same for each. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian.  Cllr Rory 
O'Connor. 
  
CLLR O'CONNOR:  I'm delighted to see that the 

climate SPC funding has been retained, because as 
a young SPC, it is important our budget isn't 
decreased at all.  I want to thank Brian excellent 
communication skills with me in answering any calls 
thank you very much. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks chair.  First of all, Brian, 
thanks for your report and thank the CEO as well, 
it can't have been easy because the circumstances 
we're all operating in. 
I'll have a couple of points and ask because 
obviously the budget at this stage has been by and 
large approved by the CPG. 
We were told in 2020, that it was a unique year and 
what we did for example with the LPT, was a 
once-off.  And but I would put it to do you that 
this particular year is probably way beyond unique.  
So, I think there's certain costs in there that 
really should be coming from national Government 
in my view, but I've expressed that before so I 
won't repeat t can I ask that the half a million 
that has been taken from the IPP footpath repair 
scheme, can that be got somewhere else? 
Can that be sourced from the NTA, or is there a way 
of doing that, so is that we can have a win-win in 

the situation there?  And when you look at table 
two on the intro part of the report, the 1.7 
million, that we're losing out on, and then, you 
said in your presentation Brian that there was 1.7 
million also being carried over from 20, to 21, so 
I'm wondering is that awash are am I misreading it? 
And the paragraph on the area it talks about the 
minimum match funding element of 25% was provided 
I wonder could that be explained a little bit better 
just so that we get a broader understanding of how 
that really works. 
And the other ask I would make is that I wrote to 
you in July, in connection with the LPT knowing the 
kind of ritual we have to go through every year. 
And then, subsequently I took part in the members 
workshop and I don't think what I asked for in July 
really happened from my perspective anyway.  So, 
what I would ask is the big problem we're having 
here every year is the baseline of our Local 
Property Tax is so low, so Wicklow is treated 
unfairly, and, it is becoming for me, anyway like 
a record every year, so I would ask from now that 
we work and get that baseline sorted.  Because the 
baseline of 8.5 million and ending up with a surplus 

of 5.2 million that we have to give most of it away 
for me is crazy and the request I would ask is going 
forward where starting in January, if we can have 
that as an agenda item, so that it is getting 
attention from the full membership on a monthly 
basis.  Because I think, it is essential we have 
to sort that out.  Because, I think the attitude 
towards our LPT this year, has not been fair as I 
said, we were told last year was unique, therefore, 
it should have been back to normal this year as it 
was A and still we're losing out seriously because 
of it. 
But I do understand, and I do appreciate that the 
job you have to do is nearly impossible and it is 
not our fault, you're basically have to do what 
comes down from the department.  But it is just 
grossly unfair on the residents of Wicklow, I would 
suggest. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, Cllr Anne Ferris. 
fer thank you.  I will be supporting the budget 
today.  I'd like to thank Brian and Breda, and all 
of the team and indeed the directors of services, 
and everyone else who had to put a lot of work in 

it.  I know Brian thought that you know, after the 
LPT meeting that it was going to be difficult, but 
I had every faith in you Brian that you would 
balance the budget. 
I want to put on record though that my appreciation 
that the budget to the Mermaid Arts Centre has not 
been cut.  I know that you had to look through all 
of the areas while doing the budget and there was 
a fear that the budget might be targeted.  I think 
it is very important like my colleague clear 
O'Brien said earlier about the festivals, that, 
things like the arts has to be protected. 
And more particularly during the Covid-19 period. 
It is not just the performances that take place in 
the Mermaid itself but it is all the Outreach work 
they've continue doing down the years and for all 
of the community in County Wicklow so I just want 
to say thank you for that, and I'm delighted to 
support the budget. 
Thanks. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian is there any 
questions in those three you want to take? 
. 

  BRIAN:   OK I'll answer Cllr Tom Fortune's 
comments in relation to the half million that's 
been moved from IPB, towards the match funding and 
you were saying can the footpath scheme be replaced 
by the NTA.  I suppose, mobility scheme, NTA 
mobility schemes covers footpaths, so, that will 
cover a good chunk of that.    Without question, 
it won't cover all of it but actually given the 
amount of funding as I said, 4.8 million already, 
we could end up getting more than half a million 
to address footpaths through the mobility scheme.  
So, as I said already, we hope that that fund, we 
expect thank that fund to continue well into 2021.  
And we will be doing our utmost across all the 
Municipal Districts to have funding from the NTA 
and eye know Col m's section is dealing with the 
NTA very much so.  And in close contact with them 
and we're doing our utmost to secure as much funding 
as possible in the area.  The match-funding I 
suppose explain how it works, both different 
schemes whether TRD 
or RD, Bord Failte, town and village et cetera, 
usually on average it is about 25% of our own 
funding we have to put forward in order to drawn 

down the grant.  So, ifs 100,000 of, or 100,000 of 
a project and we get 75,000 of a grant, we have to 
provide 25,000 and that's how it works, a lot of 
works, if it is road-related area, or say in 
relation to Wicklow library, we have just those two 
examples in my own town, Wicklow library and 
Fitzwilliam Square, match-funding element for 
those project can be provided by develop levies 
because within the scheme, those types of projects 
are listed, however there are a number of projects 
that wouldn't be listed within the development Levy 
scheme so we have to provide funding from our own 
resources for that, the revenue account.  I know 
other local authorities, that wouldn't have as 
positive I suppose cash flow as Wicklow, there have 
had to go out and take out loans to provide that 
match-funding.  We're the fortunate position that 
I suppose our cash flow is quite positive, and we 
don't need to take out bank loans but we do need 
to make a provision each year within the revenue 
budget to provide that 25%, otherwise we can't draw 
down the funding.  So, as I say we do feel this 
whole area is hugely important, to get 75% of a 
project is a huge allocation so I think that's why 

we feel we have to prioritise this particular area 
and make provision for it over the next few years, 
while these schemes are available. 
In relation to the baseline, 100% agree with Cllr 
Tom Fortune for this this matter it is a frustration 
for me as well, I have contacted the department, 
it was parked for a while, they planned to look at 
it earlier this year, but the impact of Covid-19 
and response that they've had to look at that whole 
area, it was keen of parked but I've been told they 
will be looking at this, this area again and 
obviously the minister of finance as well in 
relation to I pose, the legislation that needs to 
be brought in for the new bills that goes 
hand-in-hand with the issue of the equalisation and 
increased baseline, all those elements, mixed up 
together, has an impact on our funding, the 
minister for finance has stated he hopes to 
commence the introduction of that legislation next 
year. 
So, without doubt, our self and the Chief Executive 
will be pushing that topic continuously throughout 
2021. 
 

>>:  Thank you, Brian, and CPG, I know this year 
has been an extremely difficult year and we've had 
tough decision toss make.  I want to acknowledge 
the work of Brian and thank him for the workshop 
that he'd done recently with us.  I know one of the 
issues I raised myself was the local roads budget, 
so, I'm glad to see that that's untouched.  Just 
one more thing I'd like to mention is the Community 
Grants, in the grand scheme of things Community 
Grants may seem a small amount in the grand scheme 
of the budget but for the small community groups 
that benefit from them, they're huge.  Especially 
in our rural areas, there's many towns and villages 
across my own Municipal District of west Wicklow 
in the Baltinglass Municipal District that benefit 
hugely from the Community Grants and it is amazing 
how far their money will go, and the time and effort 
they put into maintaining our local area and the 
effort that is put in to ensure that they have the 
best possible communities to live in. 
So, look, thanks very much. 
A I just want to mention those two issues thank you. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Just want to thank Brian and the 
staff for the budget.  It is difficult to do a 

budget in good times, as far as, and far more 
difficult to do it in times like we have. 
The budget, to have a spend of 118.7 million, is 
absolutely great.  2.3% increase in last year.  
I'm very aware of the difficulties that we haven't 
got Community Grants in the budget this year. 
And I'm well aware as well that there has been 
substantial funding come into the county for sports 
grants and whatever. 
But still, I think it is eluded there to maybe some 
of the councillors from the west there are groups 
that get small funding and I will be supporting the 
budget but with two changes that we NPPR take that 
we increase that by 50,000.  And the other one was 
that we, there was a funding there for the new 
business rates incentive scheme and I understand 
the take on that as being negligible. 
So, I really think we should take 50,000 out of that 
fund, it won't cause any issues, accordingly, I'm 
saying then we should provide 100,000 for the 
community grant scheme with a limit of 500 on the 
grants, which will be through the help over 200 
clubs and organisations, so that's what I'm 
proposing for the budgets. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  Do you have a seconder for 
that Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  Cllr Irene Winters? 
Seconded by Cllr Irene Winters. 
OK.  Do you want to hand that up Pat, that proposal. 
>>:  My writing is very poor. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Lorraine already has it.  OK. 
So, we have a proposal for, and we have a seconder. 
Are there any other proposals for the budget?  OK. 
Cllr John Snell, table 28. 
  
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, it is not actually a proposal, 
I agree what is being proposed, it is just to a 
little bit of clarification, just in regard to the 
budget I want to thank Breda and Frank. I think it’s 
unusual to sit through because all the work is done 
before that and I commend the officials on that.    
I just want to clarification around a few things.  
See the playgrounds, there's a reduction of 100,000 
at a time when we have provided extra playgrounds 
throughout the county.  And indeed, in your own 
district we opened two recently in Roundwood and 
Lara.   I just wondering is that maintenance, the 

budget now is 100,000 on maintenance.  In regard 
to school wardens, it seems the Department of 
Education have a policy going forward where, they 
like to for their vision for the future seems to 
be they like to have educational hubs where they 
couple together a couple of schools on the one site, 
from different denominations, which is well and 
good, if you're in an urban area and restrict by 
the capacity for ground space.  But, in rural areas 
it is certainly in my opinion isn't a good policy. 
And an example of that is and my own community, on 
a kilometre stretch of roadway, we have in the next 
year or two we will be reaching over 2,000 pupils, 
2,000 pupils on this small stretch of road without 
a school warden to get the children into the schools 
is a disaster waiting to happen.  This regard to 
housing, I want to commend the officials and 
particularly our housing officials, who have been 
really working hard, not just this year, but year 
in year out, providing what the constituents of 
County Wicklow need.  I don't think there's a 
public representative here that wouldn't have 
housing front and centre of their daily workload. 
To see a budget produced with maintenance and 

improvements increasing on the homeless services, 
traveller accommodation, and certainly at a time 
when re-lets are more and more common-place, 
because we're now in a position where local 
authority homes are being provided, north-east, 
south and west of County Wicklow and indeed we 
couldn't always say that.  But we managed 4,500 
properties and where a budget where maintenance and 
the indeed previous speakers have eluded to it in 
relation to fabric upgrade works are essential 
going forward. 
I really wanted clarification around legal 
expenses. 
And I don't see anywhere in this referenced to the 
law section. 
And again, something that would have been in the 
past, many moons ago would be discussed with 
enforcement costs, legal proceedings, and I'm a 
firm believer that mediation and dialogue is the 
way forward in anything. 
And to see that, from enforcement, a hundred cases 
of enforcement that only 13 went to proceedings, 
is to be commended to our planning section. 
That comes from mediation and dialogue.  In the 

past I suppose will would be unlocked unfairly in 
my opinion, but I think that stands there and is 
testament to the great work going on behind the 
scenes. 
But I would like to see where in the budget to shows 
legal expenses, and the law section.  Thanks, 
Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, I have a proposer and 
seconder, so I'm going to move ahead with that.  
So, just on first I have to deal with the ARV, Brian 
do you want to say a word on that.  I'll call that 
vote now.  Do you want to explain to the members. 
BRIAN:   We'll retain it at the existing rate of 
0.217, which means there's no increase in rates 
bills for rate payers in Wicklow next year. 
 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  Proposer and seconder.  Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald Cllr Vincent Blake. 
  Lorraine:  That's 34 and two not present. 
It is passed. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Vacancy relief, Brian can you 
recap on that for the members.?  BRIAN:   Proposal 
would be to retain the vacancy relief rate at 60%, 

that unchanged from 2020. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Proposed and seconder, Cllr Gerry 
Walsh, and Cllr Pat Fitzgerald. 
LORRAINE: Again, that's 34 and two not present. 
Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  And the third vote is a vote and 
proposal for Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and Cllr Irene 
Winters for the budget to put 100,000 in two. 
Lorraine:  50,000 to reduce NPP and to reduce the 
new business rates incentive scheme to 50,000 to 
allocate community grant scream to assist 200 clubs 
across the county.  
>>:  That's to increase the NPPR. And reduce the… 
LORRAINE:  Again, that's 34, and two not present. 
Motion carried. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Lorraine, that 
concludes our budget meeting, members can I just 
thank each and every one of you, it was a difficult 
budget.  It was a difficult year.  And it come to 
you in a second.  Difficult budget and difficult 
year.  And I want to thank Brian and Breda and 
management team and chief executive, because this 
cut has been across the board for everybody, so I 

want to thank everybody, and I want to thank the 
members because this hasn't been an easy budget on 
you either because we have to go back to the members 
of public and explain all the decisions we take and 
make so thank you each and ever I one of you for 
doing that. Cllr Peir Leonard you wanted to come 
in. 
CLLR LEONARD:  I'm probably doing this all wrong, 
but I'd like to make a pro-efficiently if it is not 
too late and I have written it down here, can I read 
it out. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  What's it on? 
CLLR LEONARD:  In relation to the budget. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Budget has passed now.  We can't 
take it now.  Sorry, thank you. That concludes our 
meeting everybody, thank you very much. 
  
