 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 1  
Wicklow Country Council Meeting – Monday 05 October 2020 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon members, thank you for joining the meeting and before we start I 
am going to ask Lorraine if she'll do a role call.   
CLLR DOYLE:  It's Erika here.  I think you missed me.  
CLLR BEHAN:  Sorry, I muted myself sorry.  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I am just after logging on.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Have you got everyone there Lorraine? 
MS GALLAGHER:  And I sent that link on to Councillor Leonard.  Great stuff. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just while they are getting on we'll move on.  We have a number of presentations 
on the agenda here today.  So I am going to take item number two to consider the presentation of 
the national transport authority and Conor you will go through that one for us?  Yeah.  Thanks 
Conor. 
CONNOR: I am going to share the presentation on power point.  So just getting it now.  Can 
everybody see that?  That's okay?  That's great.  Just let me know if there is any problems or 
anything.  Thank you Cathaoirleach and members for allowing me to make this presentation today.  I 
suppose the purpose of it is to provide an update on the progress that's been made on the 
implementation of the scheme approved.  And the COVID interim mobility measures which was put 
in place in direct response to the COVID 19 pandemic.  The funding programmes for active travel 
measures and climate change adoption and Wicklow County Council received 37,000 under the 
climate change active measures.  The COVID 19 interim mobility measures.  The scheme was put in 
place in direct response to the COVID 19 pandemic. Its aim was to provide funding for works and 
travel patterns.  Wicklow County Council received 950,000 for schemes and the type of work 
involved in the schemes varied from placing of bollards to planters and cycle lanes and facilities and 
footpaths.  We are currently in discussion with the NTS in relation to the funding of an additional 
two schemes.  They are Newtown Main Street footpath works which is the estimate for that is 
31,700 and the Wicklow one way system, the project estimate for that is 90,000.  In relation to the 
progress to date, since receiving approval from NTS the districts completed ten of the schemes and 
three schemes commenced construction and three are at design and Herbert Road pedestrian and 
cycle works and the Aravon Court schemes.  They have, the Herbert Road scheme was to design to 
operate when the schools were closed and the Aravon Court scheme has not progressed following 
consultation with the residents.  This is just an example of a few of the schemes, this slide and the 
next one.  Just the top one is a scheme this was done in Enniskerry village where a section of the 
roadway was closed to vehicular traffic and tables and chairs were put out.  So the picture on the left 
hand side shows bollards installed to provide additional space on a narrow section of the footpath.  
The scheme on the bottom right shows bollards installed on the Fran O'Toole Bridge, so this provides 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 2  
extra protection for the pedestrians as they pass each other.  The next slide shows top two, pictures 
show works that are still ongoing on Greystones in the Main Street, but the top two show bollards 
and planters that have been put out on the street there where there used to be car parking and this 
provided additional space for social distancing and environment on the road for cyclists in the 
bottom picture.  Bollards were installed on Rathdown Road.  These stop vehicles from packing and 
blocking up the footpaths on that stretch.  So it provides a much safer environment for children and 
parents as they go to school.  The next two slides are just a list of all the schemes that were 
approved in the budgets, I won't go through them otherwise we'll be here all day.  This slide is just, 
that the additional    it would schemes that are under consideration, Newtown and the one way 
street and Wicklow Main Street.  Then in terms of the active travel measures, as part of the 2020 
stimulus package introduced by the government funding was set aside and these active travel 
projects are projects which are designed to support pedestrians and cycle movement and to 
enhance accessibility.  Wicklow County Council received funding of 3.34 million for 25 projects 
throughout the county.  They include the construction of cycle ways, footpaths, installation of 
pedestrian crossings and the works are to be completed by the end of November.  The progress to 
date, one scheme has been completed and a further five are under construction and ten schemes 
are at procurement stage and eight are at design stage.  The Aravon Court scheme is to be 
discontinued following on from consultation with the residents there, and we have applied for 
funding for a scheme, Bogmeadow car park in Enniskerry.  So again this is just a list of the schemes 
that we have approval for.  Under the climate change adoption, allocations, as part of the July 2020 
stimulus package the government set aside 10 million funding for local authorities to fund measures 
to address the impact of climate change on the road network.  And Wicklow County Council received 
funding allocation of 378,000 for five schemes.  These schemes include drainage works, protection 
measures to prevent damage roads and structures and remedial works and works are to be 
completed by end of November.  However, we have been advised that an allowance maybe given to 
transfer allocations into 2021.  We're currently in the process of making an application for that.  
Then just the progress on these, these five schemes, two of them have commenced construction, 
one of them is at procurement stage and the other two are at design stage, that is just the list of five 
schemes we received funding allocation for.  That's my update there just in relation to those.  I hope 
it was clear enough. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks very much, Connor for that presentation, I think it was very informative.  It 
goes to show the amount of work that's going on throughout the districts and the amount of work 
that's been done by the engineers.  Members I am going to throw it open.  If anyone would like to 
make any comment.  Could you raise your hand, Councillor Cullen. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks Chairman, it's great we're getting all this money to do different activities and 
works across the county but one of the concerns I have is the timelines that these jobs need to be 
completed by, 30th of November and particularly the adaptive travel measures which there is ten 
still at procurement stage and eight at design stage.  So there is probably little chance of getting 
them completed in the timeframe allocates.  So I am just making sure we have representations on all 
the different schemes that they can be put forward into 2022. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 3  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much for that Councillor Cullen,  Councillor Doyle.  
CLLR DOYLE:  One is the allocation for Aravon Lane and you said an application has been made for 
Bogmeadow.  I wonder has the funding gone to Bogmeadow and what is the criteria for extending 
the timeline into the new year?  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Councillor Scott. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Just a question really particularly in relation to the COVID interim mobility measures, 
what kind of feedback does the council have, just from the public council?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor Scott and Councillor Cronin. 
CLLR CRONIN:  Yeah, thank you very much chair, and thank you, Connor, for the presentation.  I also 
have concerns about the timeline for these projects.  I know particularly the ones that can't be done 
by the Council that have to be tendered out and are we under pressure with time constraints. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I think I will let Conor answer those questions now.  Are you all right there Conor? 
CONOR: Yeah, just I suppose obviously a number of people raised the issues of timelines, we have 
raised this on several occasions with the NTA.  As I mentioned there in the presentation in relation to 
the climate action measures, those schemes, we can transfer some of allocation into 2021, in theory 
we have to apply for it and get approval.  In relation to the active travel measure schemes, we have 
been advised there is at this stage in time we have not been told that we can't carry across into next 
year, what we have been told is basically if it's not spent we can't transfer to next year's allocation 
and we're still pursuing that.  In relation to the schemes, I am speaking regularly to the district 
engineers and while there are a few schemes we have concern over time scale they are really pulling 
out the stops to get them completed in the time and we will be confident we'll get the majority of 
the work done and obviously we'll still have to continue on.  And see if there is anyway of funding 
into next year but I suppose the important thing is to push on with these schemes and get as much 
on as we can.  In relation to Aravon Lane and Bogmeadow and the funding, they are separate, the 
Bogmeadow funding, we have made an application for that and are waiting on that but it's not 
necessarily contingent on Aravon Court.  In relation to, sorry the query on the feedback from how 
the schemes, how the works are received on the ground, that would be done at a local level in terms 
of the work have carried out by the district or managed at the district level and they will be doing 
their own consultation with yourselves and residents and businesses just to see how the temporary 
measures are fairing and if there are any changes.  I suppose it's worth noting that the COVID 
funding isn't ending as such and it's still open.  We have been advised by the NTA that's still open for 
applications, so if there is changes or additions it's something we could possible look at.  I think, does 
that answer everything there. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Conor, Councillor Corrigan you wanted to come in there. 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  You have answered most of my questions in your response there.  But I just want 
to add, communication is very important for what we're doing.  I think there is been a few mishaps 
where information hasn't come down the line straight and also just the bollards are not visually 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 4  
enhancing.  People need to know how long it's going to be there for and it's great what you did in 
Greystones and the flower pots really work and really enhanced and well done on that and thank 
you that's all.  You answered most of my questions previously.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  It's worth noting there is learning in this and we appreciate when money arrives that 
there's scramble to allocate it and spend it but there is learning from to process that we need to 
consider in terms of the proposal and impact assessment and I would say councillors will loose in 
there that want a procedure to engage and use the intelligences on the ground and connection with 
communities, So, there is merit in us looking at how we refine that consultation piece and how we 
work collaboratively.  I know and it's fair to say some communities were surprised, some of them 
resisted and it wasn't as smooth and I appreciate probably was because of the intensity of the 
money. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  All right. 
MS GALLAGHER:  I don't see anybody that raised the hand facility. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Walsh. 
CLLR WALSH:  I was going to come in, in relation to the stakeholder consultation.  Just to give you an 
example of Greystones, that first question I asked was, were businesses consulted and they were 
written to as a result but there was no feedback but as soon as the work starts there is plenty of 
feedback but that's the type of situation we want to avoid but the funding changes that can be 
addressed and that's good, so thank for that Conor.  Thank you very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I don't think there is anybody else showing, so thanks Conor for that presentation 
and well done to everybody involved in applying for all those schemes it's great to see that amount 
of money coming into the county.  Item number three on the agenda is to previous a presentation 
from Laura Gallagher.  Access and Inclusion Committee.  Hi Laura. 
MS GALLAGHER: Thank you very much for having me.  I have got the lovely job today of spreading a 
bit of good news on a day when I think we all need it.  So I might do the same here and share my 
screen and we can get going on this presentation.  Just making a few last minute changes.  So 
hopefully you can see it all.  I called the presentation Break The Mould because it's very much what 
you are doing here in Wicklow County Council and the Council remains the only one that has a 
commitment working on the issue of disability and hopefully will grow in the next couple of months 
and years.  So the background to this for anyone that's new, in 2016 there's bit of a budget for 
disability within the Council that would have been voted on and it was proposed by Miriam Murphy 
and approved by the Council and there was confusion about where to spend the money and it's so 
easy to spend money and you could spend 20 grand on a lift being into a library and it would just feel 
like it's disappeared.  So we were working the area at the time the Disability Federation of Ireland 
and we sat down with Wicklow County Council and laid out some of the benefits we thought of 
having a worker a couple of days a week to focus on the issue and bring it across the county.  So that 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 5  
was decided on and I was tasked with the lead on the implementation of the relevant policy both 
internally and externally working with all the disability services across the county and different 
stakeholders.  So I am an employee of Disability Federation of Ireland.  So we're an umbrella body 
for about 140 organisations based across the country.  The rehab cares and the smaller needs 
organisations for people with physical and sensory disabilities.  So we have a couple of different 
arms, there is the community work side of things which is my own area.  There is five of us working 
on that in different geographical areas of the country and that focuses on bringing stakeholders into 
thinking about disability in a different way and also trying to bring our own members into thinking 
about community.  For many years I suppose there was running institutions and they were getting a 
lump sum of grant funding from the HSE.  We're in a very different world where people with 
disabilities are hopefully being supported in the community.  So a lot of policy workers at a national 
level and with government.  So we're bringing the concerns from the disability community to NPHET 
and we're looking at after 140 disability organisations and provide training and development 
opportunities to them, particularly through a partnership we have with University of Limerick.  The 
facts then just to be aware of for your own county, 14% or almost 20,000 of constituents in Wicklow 
have a disability and when you consider how many people have a family member with a disability or 
work with a person with a disability, the number of people with disability is set to rise, we have got 
an aging population.  So at the other end of the spectrum we have babies living with more severe 
disabilities maybe than before because of medical advances.  Over 600,000 people in Ireland with 
disability nationally.  I think it's really important as well, in this context when we're looking at 
supporting people with disabilities in community that 26,000 are supported by day services but living 
at home.  So that means the very vast, vast majority of people with disabilities, that's over 608,000 
live in our communities, so they are not living in residential services, they are not accessing day 
services and they are at home.  So they are very much the people accessing day to day.  In Wicklow 
we see the breakdown of the age profile there, we won't go through it all.  It might be useful when 
we have this presentation to look back and just have a look at the types of disability as well.  So we 
see, intellectual disability which you might be familiar with, when it comes to difficulty with pain and 
breathing it's up at 8,800.  So interesting to considering the different types of disabilities and 
particularly know when we're planning for COVID in this changed environment and keeping those 
people safe.  I thought this was an interesting picture for yourselves from your own local 
constituents.  Just seeing the number of people with disabilities as the colours.  So interesting to 
note, 7.5% of your staff in Wicklow County Council have identified as having a disability in a survey.  
That's over 53 of your staff who have a disability as well.  So we're talking about making things 
accessible and physical environment accessible and the information we're giving people.  It's the 
people that are accessing services in Wicklow County Council but also staff in Wicklow County 
Council and many people on the call today, all sitting in our homes where there are people with 
disabilities.  So the progress, once we took on the role we wanted very much people with disabilities 
to be at the heart of what we're doing and focusing on the things that are the biggest issues to them.  
So we set up access groups and some were already established and it was a case of trying to 
strengthen them and get new blood in and change the focus a little bit.  So that's an access group 
running in Bray and there was one in Wicklow and Arklow and one running in Blessington.  Disability 
awareness training was delivered to the staff and we hope to continue that.  The coordinators within 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 6  
the partnerships as well so it was great for them to have that foundation.  We have been working 
with the Bray Area Partnership to deliver training to transition students.  So Wicklow County Council 
engineers received design training.  So it just doesn't look at making the environment accessible for 
people with disabilities, it's accessible to all.  The idea it's a universal design and available for 
everybody.  And we looked at videos with looked sign language and subtitles, so people could access 
information in lots of different formats, looking now at the current context.  The new landscape 
presented by COVID 19.  There are people that have a reduced access to services, like the link bus 
they were getting to go there now can't accommodation every day of the week.  So to look at it in 
the context of how the local authority and community responded.  So the response form and help 
line and the development of the interim mobility plans it's great example of how people can be 
consulted on things that the Wicklow County Council are doing.  So there is consultation with the 
community beforehand about how we can make sure that street furniture doesn't clutter up the 
street and make things inaccessible.  So the changes in government department's responsibilities, 
we're seeing that as a really big move forward.  They are also talking about removal of disability 
funding from Health and putting it into the cabinet Ministry of Disability.  The development then of 
the new Wicklow County Council development plan, for 2027 is a great opportunity to make sure we 
have everything included in that and we're not trying to retrofit and go back and include disability 
and access along the way.  Wicklow County Council's obligations and public sector duty, we usually 
go to New York to testify as to how we're getting on with that.  The national disability inclusion 
strategy and there is going to be an increase monitoring of all these plans as we go forward.  So it's a 
great time to be starting this and ahead of the game in terms of local authorities across the country.  
Wicklow County Council stands alone and DFI identify the significant opportunity that the current 
arrangement provides and it was acknowledged that a renewed effort was needed to provide 
further similarity in the position of the disability officer internally and ensure that the role becomes 
firmly embedded in the work of the local authority.  It's disability federation not just myself.  In 
terms of our research and policy staff at a national level with the HSE.  All of those kinds of expertise 
are available to the Council as well as myself.  So as part of that renewed energy towards the role 
that my days are extended to three days a week and hopefully to spread the word that I will prepare 
a monthly report and attend the SBC meetings as well with a report.  The role will be moved from 
Corporate Services to Community and Social Development under the leadership of Michael 
Nicholson and Michael will support the establishment.  This is the big one you heard of at the last 
meeting.  The Wicklow County Council Steering Committee and we'll report directly to the Chief 
Executive.  So a massive move not going any where else and we're really proud to be involved in.  So 
the rational, so just to drive how important they are.  There is four keys pieces.  The United Nation's 
Convention on Human Rights.  I will stress more successful implementation of these policies and a 
whole of County Council approach will make a massive difference to the citizens.  So those different 
policy and strategies are not separate to what you are already doing.  What we want do is make sure 
they are stitched into what you are already doing.  So that when that new development plan comes 
out that it's stitched into that development plan.  And it's not something new.  So just a quick 
example that I will give on housing policy, the conventional stresses that people with disability 
should have opportunity to live where and with whom they choose.  Community services and 
facilities need to be available for this.  The National Disability Inclusion Strategy says more or less the 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 7  
same thing.  They want to reduce the number of people in congregated settings and the public duty 
says there is a statutory obligation on public bodies to eliminate discrimination.  Right across you can 
see the thread in all of those.  So what that means I suppose on a very practical level is that we need 
to ensure the Wicklow County Council is meeting its national targets and there is communication 
between the groups.  I won't go through this again but it's just another example in terms of active 
citizenship and making sure polling stations are accessible and continuing to support local  groups to 
make sure they are consulting on things, ensuring the information produced around voting and 
active citizenship is fully accessible.  So finally the committee which hopefully will make all of that 
happen and bring that together.  The purpose of the committee will be to achieve a multi 
departmental approach.  It's right across the board.  I would love to see it become just a routine 
thing before an email is sent or document is sent with a Wicklow County Council logo on it it's 
checked for accessibility.  It's very easily done, if everybody could do something very simple like that 
it would mean the content you are sending out would be accessible to everybody receiving it.  The 
committee are responsible for ensuring the implementation of existing relevant policy at a local 
authority level are inclusive, also responsible for ensuring that the incorporated into.  So we want to 
make sure all of the other internal documents are mentioning how we're going to be inclusive.  That 
will include some of the LCD C work and the wider community and public sector and that's where 
you will see some other stakeholders on the list of people.  So the reporting whether it happens 
through the Chief Executive and will report to the SPCs and report to the public and the website 
about what we're doing.  The membership then will be Michael Nicholson, Director of Services, 
myself, access officer for the County Council and people with a lived experiences are really 
important, SEO and enterprise and corporate services to the disability officer within Wicklow Local 
Sports Partnership, one representative from each of the partnerships and PPN representative.  So I 
think it's going to be really powerful committee.  And again a new model that hasn't been tried.  I 
have also received a good bit of interest.  So the first meeting of the committee will be held online 
on 14th of October.  And yeah, if there is anything else you want to have a chat to me I would really 
welcome it or any questions you would have.  That's it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Laura, this was very informative.  Just before I throw it open to the 
members I would like to invite the Director of Services the director responsible this committee, 
Michael Nicholson if you would like to say a few words and come in and make a comment. 
Mr Nicholson: Thank you, I will, you can see why we went through the DFI and we got a gem in 
Laura.  I think she's put Wicklow top of the map in terms of provision of disability services and this 
dual committee is the start of something very special.  And I think it will feed into, for example, the 
works we do in the library.  There is great learning to be done particularly in this world we live in and 
the effect it's going to have on people restricted to their homes.  Any questions, Cathaoirleach 
myself and Laura will try and answer them and I would like to thank the members for their interest.  
I have been overwhelmed by the interest in this committee which is great to see so thank you to all 
the members for their participation and look for to the meeting on the 14th. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Members would anybody like to come in?  Councillor Murphy. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 8  
CLLR MURPHY:  Yeah, I could have a lot to say and I suppose I could go on for hours but I won't.  I 
want to thank Michael for I suppose listening to me for the last few years on this matter.  And the 
work that both Michael and Laura and Laura's senior management put into this.  We have worked 
really hard over these last three months and when you see it on paper, it's frightening to think of the 
numbers in our own county and these are the people we need to be addressing.  Including disability 
across the spectrum and every town and village in our county and we as local representatives need 
to be reaching out to those people and actually for those people who are restricted and in whatever 
form, know that we have their best interest, across the board in the housing and in everything we 
provide.  Everything that we print, all our services, and I am just so excited and I really would like to 
thank all the staff of Wicklow County Council for acknowledging that very important aspect, I 
suppose it's one of the reasons I am a councillor.  So I can retire now, so thanks everybody. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We would miss you Councillor Murphy.  Anybody else want to come in? 
MS GALLAGHER: Just to say this was listed on the September meeting for discussion and we didn't 
get to it so we're only getting to it today.  So it will come back to the elected members for formal 
ratification as well as the members when they are all chosen Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Lorraine.  Councillor Flynn. 
CLLR FLYNN Kennedy:  Just to reiterate what Councillor Murphy said, we have it opportunities to 
work on access issues and just to thank Michael for I suppose supporting the establishment of this 
committee.  This is going to have a huge impact on a lot of people's lives in Wicklow and it's long 
overdue and I am really thrilled we have someone like Laura and I know the interest from the 
municipal districts have been huge.  So regardless of whether we sit on the committee or not we'll 
all be supporting the work that the committee does. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Councillor Kavanagh. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I just wants to add my support and congratulations to Laura and delighted it's 
been set up and there is a lot of issues coming up over months and years and it will help to highlight 
the issues that people with disabilities face everyday and hopefully down the line.  I will be sitting on 
the committee myself. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor Kavanagh.  That's everybody I think is it?  Councillor 
Corrigan. 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  I just wanted to say congratulations to Laura and well done to the Council on this 
new committee.  It's long overdue and particularly after COVID and all the difficulties, with seen and 
unseen disabilities have had to endure over the last couple of months.  So really done to everybody 
concerned.  So well done. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Laura, you are certainly pushing an open door here, you have 32 councillors all 
supporting and the management team, and excellent presentation, so thank you very much for all 
the work you do for people with disabilities in this county.  Thank you very much Laura.  Thank you.  
Item number four in to receive a presentation on the Codling Bank Wind Park and just by way of 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 9  
background to that, the Codling Bank Wind Park has been included in a short list of relevant projects 
which means they can now commence work and engagement so you will be a position to apply for 
planning.  And the team presenting the Codling Bank Wind Park are Arno Verbeek,  Paul Concannon.  
The person who is going to present this presentation is Paul Concannon.  So Paul if you are there and 
you can hear me you are very welcome.  Do we have Paul?  I think Christine Flood might come in, 
Christine are you there?  
MS FLOOD: Yeah, apologies I am expecting the Codling Bank Wind Park joining us.  Here they are 
now. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Hello. 
ARNO: Good afternoon, we have you there now.  I think here we go.  (Comfort Break)  We're in close 
contact with air grid to identify the correct connection options for such a large offshore wind farm.  
Thanks, I think Paul are going to talk about this a bit further. 
>>Hello folks.  So nice to see you.  So this slide reflects our approach to the stakeholder engagement 
and our development plan really.  The stakeholder engagement is ramping up as the project 
progresses, right now we're engaging with government departments.  So engaging with Department 
of Housing, Department of Communications et cetera on that.  Like regarding the overall stakeholder 
engagement for Codling, I think it's fair to say there it will be extensive and this involves seeing 
stakeholders and loyal communities along with the general public we intend to engage.  These will 
be important stakeholders and we tend to engage throughout the project's development.  Not just 
from planning or scoping but throughout the operation of the project.  So yeah, we will be arranging 
dedicated stakeholder meetings, we're already carrying out a lot of engagements with the statutory 
and some nonstatutory bodies on the back of a full shore investigation licenses.  So down the line 
when COVID gets better we'll have physical meetings and we have a dedicated website and we'll 
have communication information events and public exhibitions and meetings and newsletters and 
this is being led by a stakeholder manager, so this engagement, ensures that stakeholders in the 
community can provide feedback and we can discuss any concerns there might be and we ensure all 
the stakeholders to keep up to date with the project.  So regarding policy we're engaging with the 
government and the departments on that, we have a foreshore investigation license that's currently 
being processed within the Department of Housing.  So we recently finished a public and prescribed 
body consultation in July and August.  So there is a range of stakeholders as part of that 
consultation.  Scoping is in relation to our EIE and we completed an off shore scoping report on the 
back of this we have a list of 50 or 60 statutory and nonstatutory stakeholders.  I think Paul are you 
ready?  
PAUL: Just going through the initial timeline for the project for everybody's benefit.  So currently 
we're at a stage where as you have heard Arno alluded to we're waiting for the government to 
finalise the Marine Planning Bill.  So it's going to be fit for purpose and allow for, not only for 
development of offshore wind but other policy as well.  We're hoping that's going to be brought and 
enacted by government in 2021 subject to government timelines, so that will allow us to submit our 
planning application towards the end of 2021.  Currently we have ongoing surveys around the site.  

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 10  
So we have ongoing land form and bird surveys and mainly just guys with binoculars sitting around 
counting birds.  We have offshore bird surveys and once we get our foreshore license application 
approved by the department we hope to commence site investigation works towards the end of this 
year and early next year and hopefully towards the end of this year we will have met ocean 
equipment which is a buoy that's put in the water with equipment on it to measure waves and we'll 
have more surveys offshore.  So we're already talking to Eirgrid in terms of our grid application.  We 
have a provisional application with Eirgrid.  We have commenced the final works for the 
environmental impact assessment report.  So that will include additional surveys offshore and 
additional surveys onshore as well.  Substation location.  And also as part of EIE we'll be doing a 
community engagement process and the engineer and procurement on the project, it's advanced to 
an early stage and that will be a process that will continue on 2021 and 22 and set of planning in 22, 
23 and hopefully we'll be in a competition in 22 or 23 and planning starts with construction in 2024.  
So going to the next slide.  So plenty of challenges still ahead, it's a long road ahead as you just saw 
on the slides and some positive signs as well, with the programme for government which committed 
to increase from 3 and a half gig watt to five gigawatt by 2030 and for that to occur a number of 
elements needs to be finalised and the bill needs to go through and looking for a good connection 
and all the developers are work withing government and with Eirgrid and ESB networks to ensure all 
that power can make its way through to shore without altering stress on the existing network and 
the options.  The next RES option will have very much an offshore in focus, the planning of that is 
still unclear and the terms we haven't seen yet.  So the targets by the Irish government are 
ambitious and it might seem ten years is a long time but for developing an offshore wind farm it's 
not that long.  The opportunities especially for Wicklow, we are able to provide low cost energy 
which is clean without CO2 emissions and how can we involve the local supplier chain.  This will have 
high priority within the project team, we want to involve the local supply teams as much as possible.  
Obviously choices are also looking at ports for construction and also for the maintenance of 
operational wind farm, the operational wind farm will be there for at least 25 years and will need to 
be maintained and we'll be looking to employ as many people as we can.  So jobs will be during the 
construction phase and related to the operational phase and also the ancillary jobs, talking about the 
provision of accommodation and when the wind farms are being conducted there is be thousands of 
people involved over the 16 months.  All these people need to be fed and need accommodation et 
cetera, so we'll do our best to work again with the local supplier chain to ensure that.  Although can 
COVID 19 there is very little disruption and there is always an increase in birds that want to come to 
the beautiful coast line of Wicklow.  In our countries I noticed that as well, an increase in birds and 
this is also going offshore and taking boat rides into the wind farm which will be allowed.  We look at 
these wind turbines and what is very relevant is this will be quite bit of activity over the coming year 
and Wicklow captures all that knowledge that will be generated and used for future.  So we're 
talking about beyond 2030 and further offshore off the Wicklow coast and using the knowledge you 
have built up and make the most of it.  In summary, we feel there is a very excited time for offshore 
wind in Ireland.  It's a great challenge as always but also very excited new opportunities, we feel it 
will be a success story for Ireland and especially for Wicklow and the team that's gearing up to 
ensure that we as a project team but all together with Wicklow County Council will be a part of that 
success story.  As I alluded to earlier, how to get in touch with us we have a website and for email 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 11  
questions please use the email address that's on this slide and also on the website.  Thank you very 
much for your attention. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Can I just say there is 47 participants at the meeting, if you want to ask a question 
use the hand facility and if that fails call out your name.  Thanks Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Lorraine thank you for that presentation so a lot of work done and a 
lot of work in the background to bring the project to fruition.  I will ask the member if they want to 
come in and ask questions.  Councillor Doyle. 
CLLR DOYLE:  I just wonder if there will be any community gain from the project, I know you are 
speaking about the knock on effects to the local economy but just in terms of a gain or contribution 
that would be coming from it to the local community. 
PAUL: Yeah, I can are very clear about that, we'll be looking to introduce a community benefit fund.  
The exact details will be worked out in the coming months but that will be introduced for the 
communities that have clear sight of the wind farm yeah. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just before we do, maybe we'll take three of four questions and you can answer 
them on at that stage.  I have Councillor Behan coming up next. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Could you take the presentation off the screen at this stage. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Just a few questions, if I could, first of all, how many turbines do you anticipate being 
constructed and what will the distance between them be?  And what is the distance between the 
turbine and the coast line and how is project financed?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor O'Connor. 
CLLR O'CONNOR:  It would be great if we had climate SBC as one of the key stakeholder. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If you wouldn't mind answering those ones. 
ARNO:  So the first question was regards the number of turbines and follow up questions as well.  At 
the moment, we are awaiting as we mentioned to start doing the survey on site and survey on the 
site is critical to determining the layouts and the number of turbines et cetera and also the cabling in 
between them.  I have to say, at this moment we don't have the final details, we'll be in a much 
better position come this time next year once we have completed all the site surveys.  However, if 
you consider we mentioned 1500 megawatts and 15 megawatt turbine, so around 80 to 100 wind 
turbines in total, they are spaced in a way that they don't create much influence on each other.  So 
we allow for spacing which takes the diameter of the rotor and it's about 200 meters and multiply by 
four or five.  So space within the turbines will be around 800 to a thousand meters.  That will be the 
spacing.  You asked a question about how far from shore?  Again, that will be driven by the site 
when we have a better idea of the soil conditions we're dealing with but given them placed in rows 
and it will be 13, 15 kilometers, all of this to be determined once we have done the site surveys. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 12  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay, Councillor Mitchell. 
ARNO:  This project is as you would have imagined, it's a multibillion investment for the 
shareholders.  The project finance is the answer to your question.  It will be, I don't have the 
stakeholder list in front of me, if not it will be added on to it but they will be. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Mitchell you wanted to come in there?  You are on mute. 
CLLR WALSH:  If you can come in, just a quick one around the survey, carried out to date in relation 
to maintenance base and construction base in the general area, bear in mind we have already had a 
presentation earlier in relation to the Arklow wind bank and it's roughly in the same area and they 
maybe as an advanced stage.  So just again the maintenance and ancillary operation around it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Annesley. 
CLLR ANNESLEY:  I was just asking the same question about the Arklow wind farm, how close is this 
project going to be to the Arklow wind farm because the other company, SSE is well in progress with 
this site project.  So thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Councillor Timmins. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Just two short questions, you said I think there is going to be about a hundred 
turbines on this project, it sounds quite a lot.  How does that compare density wise with the rest of 
the country?  Is there anything else in Ireland that has that number of turbines and secondly will 
there be rates payable to Wicklow County Council as a result of this if this planning goes ahead?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Mitchell there? 
CLLR MITCHELL:  I would just like to welcome this because I think this is the biggest contribution 
Wicklow will make to the environment.  Wicklow contributing to reduce global warming.  The wind 
farm is off the coast of Greystones to Newcastle and I am key to see new jobs and benefits to the 
area which it's off because we'll be looking at it and while I think it's an excellent thing to do I think it 
needs to happen.  Just to say I ask meet with the Codling Wind Farm and to encourage them to have 
some bolt use of Greystones harbour which would help creates jobs in the area for maintenance 
base and there is also a community gain and I am keen to see that's directly related to the coast 
which it's off.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor Mitchell and hand you back to Arno please. 
ARNO: Yeah, so let me see, there was a question regarding the location and Codling bank is located a 
couple of kilometers north of Arklow and we're aware of the activities both to the south and the 
north of us.  Community benefit front.  I think I have already addressed.  We'll work closely with the 
local stakeholders to ensure that the community benefit fund reaches those involved to the 
activities.  With regards to Codling Wind Park and maybe you can remind me of the other questions. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  I asked about the density, is there any similar quantity any where else around 
Ireland and secondly are there rates payable. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 13  
ARNO:  On the rates I will ask my colleagues, on the density I don't have knowledge of a similar sided 
wind farm in Ireland.  Offshore there are a number of wind farms that have a higher number of 
turbines, certainly in the UK waters and similarly in Dutch waters as well.  On the rates maybe Paul 
you can answer the question on the rates. 
PAUL: I am not sure there is a clear answer.  Codling Bank Wind Park will be paying a fee to the 
government through the marine planning and we don't get the area for free.  There is a fax on the 
project and there is more importantly potential there will be the community benefit fund which will 
be dealt with through the Res scheme as well. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  There is no rates payable to Wicklow County Council. 
PAUL: I can't give you a straight answer but at the moment I am not aware they are. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Crean is next. 
CLLR CREAN:  I just want to say I welcome the consultation that's going to happen and the focus on 
the local supply team.  One question is in relation to the distance from the shore, from I am reading 
have concerns on the impact on marine biodiversity and the average in Europe is 40K.  So just 
wondering is there not a best practice and is 13 not too short a distance for something that size and 
second question is whether there are plans to export any of the energy or is it all going to be for the 
Irish market. 
ARNO:  Second part of the question is, it's all going to Ireland.  The question with regards to the 
distance to shore, it varies from country to country.  Certain country you will see wind farms being 
built at the same distance in Ireland and others they have been able to go further.  The Irish see 
given the closeness or the closeness of the international border between Ireland and the UK, there is 
limited space.  It's very much from country to country and there is quite a range, I have to leave it at 
that I think. 
PAUL: The original act didn't allow us to act out of the EEZ and as well you probably find within other 
Europe countries are far ahead of us in development of offshore wind.  Ireland's coastal situation is 
our depth increases significantly as we go from shore.  We're probably one of the countries that are 
further away from shore as well.  Just in relation to the rates, the offshore activity wouldn't be 
ratable but perhaps if there is offices on lined that would perhaps be ratable but we can check that 
out with the valuation office but regards to the offshore activity my understanding is isn't ratable. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Leonard. 
CLLR LEONARD:  I am not sure what property they will be operating from and in relation to similar 
projects do you have the names of the projects in the United Kingdom similar scale sized projects 
that we can have a look at and what has the negative impact been on the fishing sector and the 
environment within those communities if we do get feedback on that and also are there any plans to 
roll out apprenticeship schemes or training schemes prior to the operation being rolled. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Dunne. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 14  
CLLR DUNNE:  Just want to welcome the presentation here today.  I think when we're talking about 
stakeholders, I think Wicklow port, SSE, we ended up going to Arklow and I had a meeting with SSE 
after the decision was made and while there was some problems with the port it probably couldn't 
be worked out.  So just ask the company that maybe to engage with the stakeholders and Wicklow 
port and the maritime group and the town team in Wicklow, we would be open to meeting and I 
know with COVID things are difficult.  Hopefully we can meet up at some stage and sit down and just 
to give the benefits of Wicklow port and I know the people that use the port for the buildings around 
the port would be very keen to meet stakeholders with the company.  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Councillor Cullen. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Just two questions, two questions probably for Arno there.  The grid connections 
could be elaborate more than those and the impact they will have on Wicklow Greystones area and 
my second question is Wicklow to Greystones in particular has major problems with coastal erosion, 
is there any positive or negative impact on coastal erosion. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Come back to you. 
ARNO:   The wind farm, what we have seen so far with wind farms that are much closer to shore is 
they have very little impact on coastal erosion.  The grid connection we're looking at multiple routes 
into the Eirgrid network.  The impact, you will obviously notice once the wind farm is constructed 
we'll have to build a number of onshore substations, these locations need to be included in the EIA 
and with regard to grid routes all of that is under review and no decision made on that.  On the 
Wicklow port yeah we would very much like to continue the meeting and discussions with Wicklow 
port, they are ongoing at the moment.  So my colleagues were there or have been there recently 
and yes, my answer would be we will continue to meet you with and look at other ports as well in 
Wicklow County.  Question about apprenticeships, will definitely be reviewed and we'll see what we 
can do there we need to work with the main contractors and we'll be coming into the Irish sea to 
build the wind farm but definitely something that we will review and something that we'll promote 
as well with contractors.  Asking about negative impacts, depending on how you define negative 
impacts we're building wind farms to lessen the impact of global warming, however they will be a 
temporary impact when you start constructing the large foundations and we'll do everything we can 
to reduce that negative impact as low as possible.  More importantly what we have seen is once the 
wind farms are constructed we'll have a definite positive impact on the wild life and marine life in 
and around the wind farm, we're looking forward to having that discussion with the fishermen of 
Wicklow and how we can involve them and ensure they benefit from that perform impact of the 
offshore wind farm.  Your question around scale.  There are certainly increasing number of offshore 
wind farms, operational at the moment, most of them in the UK.  I think they are looking to expand 
that and it's similar to what we're planning to Codling and other wind farms, very large scale and 
Murray East in Scotland, that's also a hundred wind turbines.  Nearly a thousand megawatts of 
power that's currently being constructed.  You have a question around ports, construction ports 
we're still reviewing the suitable.  So what is available in Ireland and in Wicklow and it's still ongoing 
and once we start the detailed discussions with the major contractors. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 15  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Kavanagh. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I am concerned about the visual impact of a hundred turbines located not very 
fair offshore.  The recommended distance is 40 kilometers, we're talking about 13 to 15, that's okay 
if you are in a remote part of the country.  We have very, very busy ports and oceans and seas and 
we have huge participants and rowers and I don't know what the impact of those people would be 
given the proximity of those wind turbines, the other thing I would be concerned about would be 
sea bird.  I know you say you have commissioned environmental impact statements and things, but 
historically I don't think sea birds faired very well with wind turbines with flocks often been killed by 
the actual propellors and things like that.  Is it not a bit premature to have so many plans in place 
until these assessments have been carried out. 
ARNO: At this point in time the impacts haven't been assessed.  So the impacts of the construction 
and the operational phase of Codling Bank Wind Park has not been assessed.  So this is a big piece of 
activity that the project is going to be starting to do.  So the impact of the operational phase hadn't 
started that.  So we have started an offshore scoping report and this sets out the scope of work for 
the environmental impact assessment report.  Part of that, the birds is a key activity.  So the surveys 
are needed to inform that EIAR and we have been conducting bird surveys for a number of years to 
gather data to determine the impact of that data but these surveys about be ongoing for a year and 
a half so until then we can't complete the EIAR and fair enough.  We acknowledge your concerns 
with the size of the proposed wind farm.  We're undertaking a redesign exercise to refine the 
project, taking into account latest technology.  So the redesign, this design it's still being refined and 
it will be consulted upon throughout the EIAR as well.  So we carried out a visual impact assessment 
study.  So we look at different sizes of turbines and different lay outs and different locations.  So, this 
final design has been completed and it's something we'll be consulting with stakeholders and that's 
will be done throughout. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I have two more speakers.  Councillor Bourke. 
CLLR BOURKE:  I was just wondering there Cathaoirleach if the connection to the grid could come 
through the SSE Airtricity Arklow wind farm project, has that been investigated. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Councillor.  Councillor Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I had a couple of general questions, some of the contributors I couldn't hear them 
and the presentation was very noisy as well and maybe this question has been asked already but 
considering we're going to have one of the projects based in Arklow, where is this project being 
based along Wicklow coast and if so where is that going to be.  That's kind of     and obviously from 
that then I would have a number of other questions but I would appreciate an answer to that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, follow up from a question by Councillor Behan in terms of 
financing, we can congratulate ourselves for the potential of a positive environmental impact in 
terms of this project, would it be a fair question to wonder where the finance comes from in terms 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 16  
of is it coming from ethical sources I know the parent company made its money in the oil industry.  Is 
it a fair question to ask that the finance are come from ethical sources and I hate to think we're 
getting the benefit of a positive environment project on the back of someone who is getting harm by 
drilling or unethical practice in terms of work across the globe, down know if it's a fair question. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Pass it back over to you there. 
ARNO:  It's still early days and by the time we start looking at who is going to finance the project 
we're a couple of years down the line.  It's a fair question, are we going to have anybody there 
looking to finance the project what is a particularly bad track record when it comes to financing 
activities that have a negative or detrimental impact on the environment and for me I would ask that 
question and I am sure the team will be looking to communicate will also ask that question.  It's 
simply way too early to commit to that at this stage.  But the question about the location of Codling 
regards to Arklow.  Like I mentioned earlier, it's a number of kilometers is it five or six north of 
Arklow?  There was another question regards to the grid connection, that's something that we're not 
considering, no. 
PAUL:  Question about the ports from Councillor Bourke and maybe, I will just take it quickly because 
I have been to see all the ports in Wicklow so the project has looked at three main ports in Wicklow 
in terms of their suitability for a base and we're working on the technical requirements of the basin 
and I think nobody would give out to me for saying we're trying to work with Wicklow in this regard 
to get a technical solution, so we have been to Arklow and Wicklow town and Greystones and we'll 
be continuing discussions through Wicklow County Council and other sources as well with regards to 
suitability and potential development of these ports. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  Thank you.  Councillor Glennon. 
CLLR GLENNON:  Just listening to the presentation themselves very much like an opening shot.  I 
think a hundred turbines off the coast of Wicklow, Leinster the most highly populated area of the 
country is not likely to happen and I think it's simply an opening shot and I think it needs to be called 
out for what it is.  When people talk about environmental improvements I think a hundred turbines 
is not going into the right direction.  I think your figure is considerably less. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor Glennon.  Thank you for the presentation, thank you for 
taking the time to be with us here today and I am sure we'll be working with you closely into the 
future. 
ARNO:  Thank you for the opportunity to present Codling Bank Wind Park.    
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you for being with us.  Item five on the agenda is to consider proposal and 
submission from the transportation water and emergency services SPC and DART line Maynooth and 
public consultation.  So Councillor Mitchell I am going to go to you for your presentation. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  It's not in slide form but I sent a document which was a summary of detail.  But the 
DART plus plan is a major plan to put the DART to Maynooth in 2024 and then go to Celbridge and 
Drogheda.  So the consultation plan for Maynooth is out and it closes on Wednesday and it's very 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 17  
detailed and a lot of it is about closing level crossings in 2018 I wrote a plan about providing a 
computer service in Greystones and express buses and I updated that.  Now, this plan for Maynooth 
is the first public expression behind the DART plan which is to cut off the southeast trains and 
Greystones so everybody has to get off and change for the DART.  This was half there but it's in this 
document.  It's not the central part of the document which is how to put the DART to Maynooth.  
But there will be two darts and there will be one diesel in the peak hour and everybody will have to 
get off there.  So the NTA has written, I sent this into the council maybe two weeks ago and the NTA 
has written to say since then, that it doesn't mean exactly what it says.  It says there will be three 
which is one part of the plan which I wrote in 2018.  It's difficult to do on a single track, maybe more 
experts if they studied it could come up with something that shows it can be done.  I doubt it.  It 
increases the journey time to Arklow by 11 minutes.  So my view will discourage people from using it 
and clog up with more cars which is really what I would like not to see.  My original paper suggested 
is the second half that there would be an extra to give three trains in the morning from South 
Wicklow or Wexford.  They would have to make appropriate gaps in the DART from Bray in order to 
allow this so this is what they don't want to do.  So they prefer to make people change in 
Greystones, we had a shuttle in Greystones that didn't work before 30 years ago and people stopped 
using it.  The rail line was originally built as the Dublin and South eastern railway.  This whole plan for 
the Dublin railways allows trains from Sligo and Belfast and cork to go through to Dublin.  I think the 
people from Wicklow should make their views known, we should make submissions and later on 
take it up politically.  I am told they will do a study but they haven't done it now and I think it would 
be quite difficult achieve.  So I think we send in what I did and what was talked about at some length 
at the transport SBC and has been amended slightly since and we sent it in and make sure Wicklow's 
voice is heard, that we do not want these trains cut off at Greystones. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you for the work you have done on this, would there be any probability the 
NTA would come down and make a presentation to the members on what their plans are for 
Wicklow.  Or even Irish rail. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  My understanding was that Irish rail from in a few weeks to send down some 
experts to see how they would provide what they say is a more frequent service. 
CLLR WALSH:  Just again to concur with Councillor Mitchell because those two existing two trains 
with also packed to capacity, so to off load those passengers and try and get them to board darts 
which are already full just wouldn't work, so we're been asked to facilitate improvements and I don't 
think it's satisfactory. 
CLLR DOYLE:  Related to it we're having communication with the NTA I am just wondering if we can 
get update on the Bray capacity proposal and self specifically the double track and that would 
require a CPO and has there been any discussion between the NTA specifically about land 
requirements that may involve a CPO.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Winters. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 18  
CLLR WINTERS:  Thanks Cathaoirleach and thanks for the work you have done on this and I read the 
document and I would ask we do send it in as a submission, I find it unbelievable when you point out 
something that the trains are going to stop and they go we don't mean what we say.  It would be a 
disaster for everybody south of Greystones if those trains have to stop at Greystones and every has 
to get off and Councillor Mitchell is right it will just force more and more traffic on to the N11.  When 
COVID is over we're going to be in a serious place in terms of traffic management and we'll need this 
rail programme done in such a way to benefit people in Wicklow and not to benefit people in 
Maynooth.  They have already motor ways, N11 is at capacity and we need not to be used as a 
scapegoat for other counties.  Thank you.    
CLLR MITCHELL:  Councillor Fitzgerald wanted to speak you but he is muted. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Can you hear me?  Can you hear me now?  Just I want to compliment Councillor 
Mitchell for the work he has done and much of what he said I wouldn't have been aware of but the 
information he gave us there to justify why the service from the South east should be improved and 
not decreased.  If you arrive into Wicklow the train could be leaving and people are standing on it 
and here we have a company looking to increase the time by 11 minutes and there is not too many 
vacancies on the DART going to Dublin.  To be honest about it, this needs to facilitate the works and 
on Maynooth lines and other lines and really the service in the South east is poor enough at the 
moment without having to get off and on a DART and an extra 11 minutes travel time and the fact 
that the train from Arklow to Connolly will be the same as Dublin to Belfast is beyond belief.  So the 
matter will have to be looked at and I know it's a bit down the road but I think what we're hearing is 
not the truth to be quite honest about it, from others and it needs to be fought tooth and nail.  
Okay. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Director Colm Lavery. 
MR LAVERY: I just want to clarify a couple of points in relation to this.  The consultation that's 
happening at the moment is in relation to the DART west project, so that's from Maynooth into 
Dublin.  And electrifying that line for the DART services to run to Maynooth.  I suppose what 
happened in the interim and as Councillor Mitchell said in response to his paper we contacted the 
NTA and Hugh Cregan the Deputy Chief Executive responded and just for clarity I might read into 
what he said.  So what he said is that it's incorrect to state that the details planned to electrify the 
railway to Maynooth and Meath and cancels directly to Dublin, he is saying that nothing is being 
proposed on the Maynooth line is causing any reduction to the services on the South east line and 
what he indicated and what will impact on diesel services is the increasing of the frequency of the 
DART service on the line.  As you know the DART operates at ten minute intervals from Bray and the 
intention is to provide services at 5 minute intervals and stepping that down to nine darts an hour 
between Dun Laoghaire and Bray and a further three darts an hour between Bray and Greystones.  
At the moment there is two DART service every half hour and as we requested an increase in 
services in Greystones.  The intention is to move to three darts per hour.  What he is saying is at this 
level of service that's the nine darts per hour from Bray and three from Greystones, it's very difficult 
to accommodate the true running of diesel services from south of Greystones and it's the view of 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 19  
the NTA that the interchange at Bray is the approach.  It's actually the increasing of the services on 
the south east line and obviously the intention is to increase the level of service running through 
Wicklow and from north Wexford to Greystones in time.  The interchange at Greystones is the only 
way of allowing the increased frequency of the DART and allowing increased service from Wexford 
and through to Greystones.  In relation to the other point that Councillor Mitchell indicated.  We're 
trying to arrange the initial getting to know you welcome meeting in the next week or so and just to 
say from the discussion at the SPC, not withstanding what Hugh Cregan has written it's no harm for 
the SBC and the Council to agree to submit a proposal into the DART west consultation and we have 
agreed on a wording for the SBC to go forward.  So that's just to clarify the matters that have been 
raised so far in the discussion. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank yous Colm.  Councillor Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  We had a long discussion and personally I would take the word of Derek Mitchell to 
Hugh Cregan in relation to this issue because Derek has been around this issue and before he was 
involved in politics.  It's a very big issue for the rest of the county I think that's why we should get 
behind what Derek Mitchell is proposing and we should ensure we do more than we have been 
doing to ensure we get a Luas connection into this county and that would allow a park and ride 
facility to take people into Dublin by light rail but on this issue I fully explore Councillor Mitchell. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Murphy. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Can I also support Councillor Mitchell and the passion you have for it and to educate 
us ourselves and I would like to have a serious discussion with the company due to access for people 
with disabilities travelling, I have travelled the country around the trains, north, South east and west 
and the one fear is every time I get on a train is will I be left behind.  And I had an experience in 
Clare, I was left, I won't tell you where I was left but it wasn't a nice experience and it's stared with 
me.  I think this is the reason exactly for the likes of access and inclusion committee is where we 
need to put, policies into place and I would like to see an access, I suppose, what would you say, 
comment in on that as well Derek that there is people with visual impairment who use the trains and 
people with disabilities and wheelchair users and people who go to work or services on their own 
and that would be a major fear some we have to be included in any submission going forward. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor Murphy, Councillor Scott  
CLLR SCOTT:  Scott thanks Cathaoirleach, I think it's really critical we're all in the one voice in the 
sense that we need to be minding the services on the rail already and with the COVID restrictions we 
can see how easy the travel is travelling on the N11 and one of the ways to do that is keep the 
people off the road on and to the trains, Colm I would appreciate if you could send a copy of that 
email to the councillors.  We need an update on that would, I haven't heard anything as to the 
process on that since we had presentation from Irish Rail last year and that's critical going forward.  
We need to be maintaining our trains and if there is an interchange when there isn't an increase in 
frequency, the darts are already jammed and people will go back on to the N11 so we really need to 
keep on top of that. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 20  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Leonard. 
CLLR LEONARD:  I just want to thank Derek and I have been very impressed with that.  I think we 
need to keep an open mind.  I would like to properly review of the whole thing and we should be 
looking a consulting with Wexford County Council.  So we need to be talking with the whole line up 
along.  The pros and cons for me listening to what Colm said there, I would like to see an increased 
service, is that sort of, I would like to see a proper review being done before I make up my mind on 
what is best for worse for us going forward.  I know in an ideal world it's lovely to have the one train 
service going up to Dublin but is that the way we live.  We're restricted by a service in Arklow that 
you are going up in day light into Dublin and coming back late at night so that needs to be looked at 
as well. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Councillor Leonard.  I think Councillor Mitchell, the support for the work 
you have done on this commission is right across the board and this is the submission we'll make.  So 
thank you for that.  All right. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you.  Could I just say one or two things, the point about Wexford is certainly 
right but the issue is to try and get it done quickly before the submission deadline and I hadn't got 
the time or the energy to get Wexford involved but it's very relevant.  There was a point there about 
the track from Greystones, the plan at the moment is in detail for Maynooth and then they are going 
to do Hazel hatch and the third leg is the Drogheda to grey stones election.  The other things for the 
third section and I presume they won't know what land take they will need.  They may not need any 
to do the double tracking but it's at a later stage we'll probably know that and a very good point that 
somebody else made.  Kildare has two to three motor ways and we have one single track rail line 
and one not quite motor way and that's so crowded.  And it is possible that that can be dealt with, 
there will have to be gaps made in the DART to allow these trains through but it's possible that the 
Maynooth trains displaced can go to docklands which the Irish academy of engineers suggested.  So 
there is a feasible way they can deal with it but it's a bit different and if they produce a wonderful 
scheme of a shuttle from Greystones to Wexford that might be fine but they haven't done that and 
they started the process of canceling the trains from Bray.  So they are going to have to do an across 
bridge transfer in Greystones which is going to be particularly awkward.  So I am glad that people 
back the idea of complaining about this.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just going to bring in Lorraine before I move on. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Sorry, can I just ask when is the submission to be in for.  Two days time. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Chair, I have been trying to get in there for a few minutes. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I won't say because it's been discussed but can I make a couple of observations.  
First of all, Derek obviously has done excellent work on this.  I think Peir makes a very good 
observation as well.  I think it would be very important but again, this is something I spoke about 
before, this is such a serious issue for the infrastructure going forward of our county that this is 
where our TDs should be really called to task and asked to come in behind the work that's been 
done here at council level by Councillor Mitchell and this is what they should be doing for us, we can 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 21  
do a limited amount and Derek has done an awful lotted but they are sitting in Dail Eireann and they 
should be making this happen for us and making sure Wicklow is not left behind that's really what 
should be happening. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Councillor Fortune. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Just to be clear I am just conscious we're not meeting in a physical space.  I think 
send it on to the five TDs too. 
CLLR LEONARD:  Will we send it on?  Just to let them know.  Make them aware. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Where the accessibility, how would that go in by two days time. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  I could amend some part of the details to say something about disability.  It would 
be very short.  It would point out the problem of going across the bridge in Greystones. 
CLLR MURPHY:  I would appreciate that.  It has to be highlighted. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  You can do that and send to Lorraine. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number one is to consider the Chief Executive's monthly management 
report.  Just going to bring in the Chief Executive. 
MR CURRAN: Just in relation to COVID, if we're into level five we have serious     
CLLR WINTERS:  They said it's not level five, they are going to go for level three. 
MR CURRAN: I will send out a note in relation to level three.  Just one or two other items we have 
been granted 140,000 under accelerated measures for six projects in relation to Ballinaclash and 
community centre up grade and Tinahely, the men's shed will be improved and that is an 
accelerated measure town and village, Wicklow, 173,000 in the accounts fund for local and ten 
thousand for disability programme and 8,000 for youth leadership and 40,000 for a project in Arklow 
and library 100,000 and bike lockers in Bray and we're allocated 810,000 funding.  So standard, there 
cost about 11,500 and homeless on average 7,300.  3 million Euro scheme which has a co working 
space and conference centre and ties into Ashford where the commencement notice has now been 
submitted.  And the Greystones media centre is out on further information.  So might leave it at that 
and take any questions. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  Thank you Chief Executive.  Councillor Mullen, you are own mute. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're not getting you Councillor Timmins. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks and thank to the Chief Executive, just a few small points, one on the 
planning applications, I don't feel that information captures what is really going on in planning and in 
particular it doesn't capture the number of withdrawals.  I think it might be useful in the report going 
forward if we separated out rural one off houses because quite a number end up being withdrawn.  
It's a little bit misleading in terms of what is happening on the ground.  So like to see the one off rule 
houses separated out and if an application is withdrawn that's reflected as well so that will give a 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 22  
truer picture as well.  Two other things, under recruitment, we're still, just want to know if you have 
the up to date situation in relation to the traffic warden in Baltinglass, there is no traffic warden 
there since end of August and lastly just at the end of the report, you give the figures on spending, a 
lot of money doesn't get spent but I'm very anxious any money brought forward is maintained and 
not lost to expenditure.  So for example if you want lights put up.  They may not happen for two or 
three years so that money that's allocated two years ago needs to be carried forward and 
maintained so it's important we keep track of that funding. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I am going to back to Councillor Mullen. 
CLLR MULLEN:  Can you hear me there. just on public lighting, I noticed there our district has twice 
the amount of lights that went out and I am getting a few issues in Carnew and Tinahely on that.  If 
you can give us an update on that and on the Whitestown remediation up dates, who is meeting the 
cost and is there an agreement reached with the department on who might meet the costs thank 
you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Leonard. 
CLLR LEONARD:  Just three brief things, just in relation to housing and the housing first 
accommodation, what capacity do we have for that and is it meeting the demand that's there for it 
and the maritime area, at the moment, I just want to know have we any presence on the ground in 
Arklow or Wicklow harbour, we have no assistant harbour officer that we have been requesting for 
the last year and the funding was supposed to be there are so in relation to that the importance of it 
from a health and safety point of view with an active harbour what presence do we have on a day to 
day basis and relay information to the Pontoon line and a lot of the users of the pontoon contacted 
me.  In relation to planning and the buildings register, we have at least three fires in the last year, 
with asbestos in the buildings and this is a major health and safety issue now going forward and I am 
looking at the dust of the asbestos all over the town.  And there is been reports of windows have 
been fire damaged falling out on people on the street.  So this is an area we're going to have a look 
at before a serious injury is caused. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Go back to the Chief Executive? 
MR CURRAN:  On the public lighting we're running at 2% and if there is a peak we'll look into that 
and get them repaired.  The real solution will be replacement with LED lights.  They are paying all 
those bills at the moment.  Councillor Timmins we can include those and the interview for traffic 
wardens are happening today.  In previous years where we have the discretionary spend it's ring 
fenced for the following year but there is a problem next year, funding that was made available this 
year goes into next year and the harbour officer is out sick and we do have plans to recruit that 
position and it's slower because of COVID and similarly the point on the dangerous structures we'll 
follow up on all of those in terms of what needs to be done in terms of notices. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Councillor McManus.    

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 23  
CLLR MC MANUS:  Can I ask about the homeless figures, over the last two months there is been 12 
adults who have gone into emergency accommodation and do you know the main cause, are they 
repeat presence or people have had noticed to quit or what was the cause of their homelessness 
and there is been an increase of four people in emergency accommodation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I will bring in director Joe Lane. 
MR LANE: Our targets for the next three years, it's a mix between accommodation, having 
accommodation available and the particular client and the client base.  We have a partner in the 
form of Fr McVerry but it's a mix between both.  It's a difficult answer to make but we're working 
through a number of people and challenge situation with the partners and again, leases or 
accommodation wouldn't always be the major challenge in those situations.  Regarding the 
homeless, again, it's a mixture, I am not aware of particular issues regarding notice to quits or 
anything like that.  These can be short term as we deal with issues and moving them along when we 
get solutions.  We had a number going back two months, we had solutions to some of the issues that 
were on over the year.  Not quite sure whether the answer to that particular question, if there is a 
particular issue with it but the long term one us, we had moved some of them out two months ago. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Fortune. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks chair.  Franks thanks for the presentation, the report is excellent.  Just a few 
general things, the content creation enterprise hub in Rathnew, I will be interested to see how it's 
going to run and on the community monument's fund have we actually got a register of the 
monuments, overall Joe and the team are doing fantastic work but the housing arrears of 2.2 million 
just curious about what is happening around that and on the HAP, I had a number of people on to 
me over the last number of months where the gap between the allowance and HAP and the cost of 
getting a house is a big problem and I am wondering why that is, I raised something in on the last 
day again in the accommodation area is in the case of single men in some cases where they are 
separated where they have nowhere to live and in where they can meet their kids.  And I am 
wondering, also about the spread of isolation units in the current climate, where are we going to 
have those and where are they going to be spread about and what are we getting from the 
development group with all the development they are doing in north Wicklow, what is the gain for 
the local authority and just on the Glinding, the thing to see what the total cost is and how it's been 
funding.  On the house purchases loans we received 144 and approved only 98 and I am wondering 
is this a particular reason for that in the current climate where we have so many application.  On the 
homelessnesses repeat presentations I would be interested in getting a better understanding on 
that and we have still have about 51 children involved in homelessness.  It's really a serious issue and 
how does the digital poverty work?  If you just get a list of all the different funding schemes can it be 
done on one page, so it would be nice for everyone to have the same page.  On the climate action, 
again, how are we tying this to the planning decisions what we're making now from the local 
authority.  I would just be curious about that and on the mobility measures I am just cue curious 
how we selected them. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Fitzgerald. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 24  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I raised this question at the budget meeting and I did speak to the director this 
week that we have 1.4 million unspent out of the allocation for this year.  I fully understand it's been 
a difficult time for everyone going to houses and whatever else and I understand we have to give 
matched funding but the funding we received is 1.9 million and we have spent to date 526 and I 
understand there is a stuff in the pipeline but in the last week I had several people on to me and 
they don't know what is going to happen with their applications but if we don't spend that money, 
that money is gone, I was told that last year where there was 350,000 mentioned at the budget 
meeting, what will be the situation if we don't spend a million of that, is it gone, we can't get it back I 
understand, doesn't carry forward which I think it's is serious situation for the number of people 
looking for assistance if this county at the moment.It a difficult time and I understand people 
couldn't go out but there has to be some way we can spend the money because that's a figure of 
1.899 million, spend to date 526,000.  Obviously I would like to see most of that money to be spent 
to be honest about it because there is a serious issue and particularly I only know about the Arklow 
area, where people are making applications and possibly won't get them through the system. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor Fitzgerald, Councillor Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Just councillors from the Bray why will be a way of the heritage monument on 
privately owned land in Bray which is currently being accessed by a lot of young people and 
valdalised and I would just ask if the heritage officer or the planning section or whatever section has 
responsibility for that get us an up to date report on what is happening there because I have had 
complaints from people involved in the heritage world who are very concerned about that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just hand over to the Chief Executive for those.  I will come back to you. MR 
CURRAN:  The content creation hub, part of the grant is to employ a manager.  So the manager will 
start six months and he is funded or a year and a half beyond that.  The register of monuments, I will 
check how it's updated and come back to you on that.  The housing arrears there was a rent review 
last year that's been addressed and I know the finance section and housing section are meeting to 
get backs those arrears.  The approved housing bodies we have a very good relationship we meet 
them on a regular basis and they come to us with various proposals and in terms of managing 
apartments and there is particular areas they are good at.  We have the homeless HAP working on 
the difficult cases where there is more discretion but I will ask Joe to come back, the single men I will 
definitely take it on board and we're going to start building in the one bed as part of that. The 
isolation units, we have had them since the start of COVID and we're well set up for anyone that 
needs them.  We have starting to bring some of them back into stock.  In terms of the Cairn 
development, part five is obviously one area that they are going to contribute.  They also before 
they complete 50% of phase three they have to build and enterprise hub in one of the schemes in 
Greystones.  The homeless repeat presence I will ask Joe to come back on that.  The loan, are 
generally on refusal to pay.  So where people should spend no more than 35% of the income, the 
digital poverty was something that came through community call.  Everybody felt there was a need 
to do something about the digital poverty and there was grants available and local authorities a lot 
of the volunteers network worked it people and contacted IT companies if they had spare 
equipment and we got a lot of credit for it actually if terms of other counties looking to see what was 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 25  
happening.  The list of the funding schemes yeah, we will send that out.  There is a number of them 
there.  The climate action planning, again it will be part of the county development plan process.  
We signed up to the climate charter and that will follow through into plannings decisions and into 
relation to mobility measures, there's short timeframe so they are asked for seems schemes to do 
quickly.  Welcome a short timeframe, I know they would have done consultation can councillors and 
local business groups and that's where that came from.  The home improvement schemes, depends 
on demand, if there is no demand, if people don't send in applications we can't process the grants, 
sometimes there is a delay with builders and that's out of our hands, if the application doesn't come 
in there is nothing we can do and the money remains on sent.  So I might ask Joe if you wouldn't 
mind. 
MR LANE: Okay, on the HAP, the HAP has a national limit on allowance, in there is individual cases 
people can come in regarding the homeless HAP but there is particular criteria and particular cases 
there but if there is issues people should contact the local authority quickly.  Rachel would be the 
one if it's homeless HAP but there is criteria there but north Wicklow is subject to certain 
allowances.  That would lead into the second question regarding repeat presentations, some cases 
it's good that people repeat that we know about the early, the worse case scenario in the housing is 
immediate or people arrive at the last second and it creates a problem.  So sometimes repeat 
presentations are at the start and as it gets through     as the issue that becomes the homeless issue 
people are engaging with us more often.  That's good, rather than the worse case scenario is 
peopling coming at the last second.  As the Chief Executive said, there is a number of steps in the 
DPG.  A lot of the delays have been reported contractors and a lot of this is condensed into the last 
three months and that's causing a problem.  The private we'll get to two thirds, we're progressing as 
quickly as we can, there is nothing specific there, we have haven't got the applications complete and 
ready to go.  We'll progress them as quickly as we can. 
MR CURRAN: And we'll follow up that and make sure it's up to date. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Glennon. 
CLLR GLENNON:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, like to thank Chief Executive for his report.  I see one 
house came on the social housing in Blessington during the period of 12 months, I think it's 
scandalous, I listened to Councillor Mitchell discuss transportation in east Wicklow but west Wicklow 
is totally forgotten about and I know it relates to your constituency, but if the Luas is going any 
where in Wicklow it should be heading to Blessington.  In east Wicklow you have both DART and 
train service with bus service.  Blessington is approximately the same distance from the centre of 
Dublin as is Greystones and yet we're totally forgotten about when it comes to Wicklow.  I 
acknowledge that frank and Breege are making efforts to get things done in west Wicklow.  One of 
my councillors text me and we still haven't got a bus stop and as a council we should be more 
inclusive and consider all aspects of the county and I welcome Councillor Winters mentioning the 
N81 and she's the only one of the people that spoke that even mentioned west Wicklow and I really 
think our, you talk about only having one motor way and train services and darts versus Kildare 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 26  
having two motor ways and we have a bad road and the plans to build the new roads were just 
scrubbed off and it it needs to be put back on the agenda. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor Murphy. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Yeah, I have a few things there and on the grants Joe, and also I know somebody 
who applied for a DPG grant and who was in a very serious way and lot a letter back saying she 
needed an OT report.  I just think it's confusing because local OTs don't have involvement in that 
area.  So why did that person get that letter and also there is some houses, in the rural when the 
grants were going for heating and not nothing back and I think this is just poor form.  And with the 
applications that are not completed, is there communication by phone?  With the applicant because 
that's what is needed, these are very vulnerable people and we could be assisting these people to 
complete form also.  Regarding the hub I would hope a huge consultation would happen with the 
access and inclusion group in the design of that because I have some ideas behind that and also on 
the one bedroom, I think one bedroom is not good enough any more, especially for separating 
people, especially men, they need a second bedroom to facilitate their children.  I think the one 
bedroom should be looked at seriously, I think people are entitled to a two bedroomed house, for 
loads of reasons and I would appreciate that to be considered. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor O'Brien? 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Just a quick one.  Thanks Chief Executive.  For the next report to give us an update on 
the energy efficiency situation in terms of fabric up grades and SECs and we have a lot of 
commitments in the council that we're going to improve energy efficiency but it would be great to 
get a paragraph in next month. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Councillor O'Brien, I think a good few of them are for you Joe. 
MR LANE: Yeah, Patsy, there is 40 available and Baltinglass, 32 in Carnew will be finished early this 
year.  So we haven't forgotten west Wicklow.  So that's probably any of the other areas would be 
envious of that.  Just to make sure you might have missed those four.  Yeah, some. 
CLLR GLENNON:  I didn't miss it.  Dublin with Greystones.  Thank you. 
MR LANE: Miriam would be better off dealing with them individually and the OT issue is a particular 
issue at the moment.  So we'll talk to but those individually, might be the best way to deal with 
those. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Sorry, director said he will come back to you, need to move the meeting on.  
Councillor O'Brien had a question on energy up grades. 
MR LANE:  One we're working through and we put in a blocks application and we're on our second 
or third contract of those, we'll have a report next time just detailing exactly those.  So we can get 
them in and phase two is a deep retrofit but it's a very slow process and we're only doing about ten 
every year because of the sheer price of it.  The phase one is the quicker one but it's not as 
comprehensive as of first one so we'll give a report in the Chief Executive's report next month. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 27  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Did anyone else want to come in.  Councillor Cullen. 
CLLR CULLEN:  I am getting more concerned about peopling contacting me about the slow 
movement of applications, the lady I was dealing with this in the council may have left.  So maybe 
that's the issue but I would like an update on that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Okay.  We'll go back to you Joe. 
MR LANE: We have someone filling in but a lot of cases the problem is at the moment is the income 
side of the equation so, it might be individual cases rather than systemic.  The problem is a lot of the 
income cannot be guaranteed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I think if there is any more questions if you can email them in and there is 
correspondence I do need to go to Lorraine.  Sorry, I didn't see your hand up.  I didn't see the 
message coming in.  So sorry but I am watching the time and I am moving to item number six and 
bringing in Lorraine now.  Councillor Cronin if you bring you in will you be quick. 
CLLR CRONIN:  First one is about the grants, I did have somebody contact me during the week.  
Because they were concerned engineers wouldn't be able to go out and do an assessment, it that 
true or are assessments going ahead with home visits and also concerns regarding single house 
occupancy, so I have a number of men contact me and really there is a huge shortage of places for 
them to go although there are vacant two bed houses in the area a lot of them are not being given 
to single men because they are on their own but they have children to cater for. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Joe, maybe you take those two questions. 
MR LANE: I would, nationally a lot of our inspections were done to progress stuff.  So no, the 
application shouldn't be delayed, get it in because until we know when the application is complete 
we can't progress it.  We will deal it but, complete the application and at least we know where we 
are and we have to see what priority it is and bear in mind there is a number of priorities so.  
Complete the application and we'll know where the problem is then.  And perhaps maybe if 
Councillor Cronin says there is a particular area regarding the one beds, that maybe, there maybe a 
solution in a few areas there. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Chief Executive is going to come in there now. 
MR CURRAN: The solution for the men is single bed houses, so the real solution is to have a supply of 
one bed units, if you want to do something for those single men we need to supply of one bed units. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I am going to bring in Lorraine now. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Just to bring members up to date on the Wicklow County Council refurbishment 
project.  So the customer service innovation hub has been completed.  So we look forward to 
welcoming the public back under whatever restrictions are in place.  That's good news and we'll 
keep the members up to date on that.  Just in relation to the council chamber and the elected 
members rooms they are going to fly along with that so the extension of the walls and the council 
chamber is complete and the ceiling has been fitting and the floor has been erected and you layout 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 28  
of the toilet is complete and the new clinic rooms are completed and ready to be fitted out if 
furniture so the completed date for the full project is end of November.  So we look forward to 
welcoming the members back to the chamber, we may not be able to hold full council meetings with 
restrictions but we will hold SPG meeting, so that's all good news and we'll keep the members 
updated in relation to that.  The protocol committee met before the council meeting and the 
members were all circulated with the standard operating guidance and they are the most recent 
ones and they are the endorsed by the AILG and Local Authority Members Association and they very 
much mirror what we circulated as a Council back in July to the elected members in terms of best 
practice and restriction and health and safety at council meetings and everything that's include in 
them has been acted out in shoreline in the last couple of meetings.  We are very much in a moving 
space, we're moving into restriction three, but we could have been moving into level five.  Our next 
schedule meeting are scheduling to be Monday 2 of November and we're facing into a budget 
meeting on 23 November.  So kept to a minimum of 1 hour 55 minute and the sector is very much 
adhering to those.  In relation to the November meeting we're meeting here on zoom because we 
didn't have any statutory business.  We're monitoring the business of the council meetings closely 
with the management team so we may not have statutory business to be able to perform at the 
November meeting.  Just in relation to disposal notices where we may have notices and these are 
affect members of the public in selling houses and holding up legal contracts and just in relation to 
these items, we might hold a statutory meeting by quorum to consider those and that's in 
consultation with the Cathaoirleach, elected members get ten days notice of disposal of resolutions 
and it's just to put to the members, Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Lorraine just in relation to the customer care services it's great the 
builders caught up on time and November is the end that's to be very much welcomed and the fact 
we can get back in there to use the chamber.  Just in relation to the disposal notice and meeting by 
quorum, how do the members feel about that.  Councillor Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  We welcome the developments on the customer service, I am not in favour of having 
meetings, normal meetings were the press are able to attend and public able to attend once they 
are done with the guidelines, just because there isn't statutory business doesn't mean it's not 
relevant to the county.  I think it's a dangerous road to go down where you start approving that and I 
think we should continue to have our meetings in public as normal and the meeting at the beginning 
of November should go ahead unless restrictions specifically tell us we can't but as I understand in 
level three, going with the protocol we should have other meeting. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Does anybody else want to come in there.  Councillor Kennedy yeah. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  I just say I totally agree with Councillor Behan, it's extremely important we try and 
meet in person and the question is just in relation to how they are going to cope if we're not 
meeting face to face. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Murphy. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Sorry I was just going to ask the same as Councillor Kennedy. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 29  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I might bring in the Chief Executive there. 
MR CURRAN: There is ministerial order coming down and looking at a standing ordering for bringing 
in the press and public. 
CLLR FERRIS: I think that safety whether it's the staff of the council and members of the council and 
wider community is paramount.  We have to show leadership, we're now going into level three 
which states organised meetings should not being held during level three but I honestly believe and 
as a person in the vulnerable category.  If there is no statutory business we should meet by zoom, if 
we're attending meetings and as it was discussed early this morning at the protocol meeting, we can 
only meet for one hour and 55 minutes and it's not a huge amount of time to get our business done, 
we started here at 2 and we're now at 5.  If we're attending meetings and we're saying to people in 
the community it's not recognised that you should have meeting, I think we're living ourselves open 
to be attacked for it and I think we have to show leadership okay.  Thanks. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Any other thoughts? 
CLLR MULLEN:  I know we discussed this at protocol.  I know we would love to have meetings face to 
face and I would rather a situation where at least we could meet on a zoom meeting and not have a 
meeting at all.  So I think we have to try and adapt our living and adopt our politics to this.  So if we 
have to have meetings on zoom we have to.  I do think we have to adapt to the new reality because 
we have a job to serve citizens and while zoom meetings are not the same, I find this meeting useful 
and interesting at the same time. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, I am going to bring Lorraine back in here. 
MS GALLAGHER:  I will be guided by the members, we discussed it at protocol to morning and 
somebody described this pandemic as a marathon, we're only one third of our way through it, so we 
have a long way to go yet and there is going to be guidance in relation to zoom meetings but we're 
going to be facing statutory meetings on zoom.  Meeting on the second of November.  If members 
want a face to face meeting we can arrange it, we have shore line there, it's costing us around 6,000 
Euro a meeting.  We just have to be mindful of the cost, it's so mention it and we'll be guided by the 
sector and what happens. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Lorraine, I have two more speakers Councillor Kavanagh and then 
Councillor Fortune. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I just want to say we're living in unprecedented times and we're going to be 
meeting in November anyway.  I think these zoom meetings achieve a lot, there is an order coming 
down the line but I think it's wonderful that we can even do this.  It may not be perfect but neither is 
going to the shoreline centre where some people have problems hearing what is going on and some 
people have to travel long distances for a two hour meeting, I think these zoom meetings are fine 
just in the short term.  I would certainly think there are a good idea anyway. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Councillor Fortune. 

 
 
 
This is a draft transcript produced live at the event and corrected for spelling and basic errors.  It is not 
a commercial transcript and will need to be checked if you wish to publish it. 
 
Page | 30  
CLLR FORTUNE:  Yeah, I think we have to air on the side of caution.  We do need to lead by example 
and that's very, very important and I also, make this point, when we are having meetings face to face 
or in gathering whether it's shoreline I think we should be everyone one of us wearing a mask but I 
have a strong view and it's taken far too long, Councillor Behan was talking about the press and 
being able to attend and the public, it's bonkers that we don't do that right now and the length of 
time it's taking, whoever is signing off this order, where they don't do this and deal with very 
important business is beyond me and we shouldn't accept if and if we can write to somebody we 
should do that because it makes no sense that you can't vote and can't have the press and the 
public, it just doesn't add up at all. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're just out of time, my own view is we should have the meeting on November 
2 buy zoom, we're meeting two weeks later for the budget meeting, it's not about money but the 
fact we can only meet for 1 hour 55 minutes we have to move with the times and I think we should 
have that meeting by zoom. 
MS GALLAGHER:  We do have MyClearText on with us today and the text of this meeting is going live 
on to the web so any member of the public can tune in and read what is going on and as well as that 
the transcript of this meeting will be up on the website tomorrow. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Lorraine, any other correspondence Lorraine. 
CLLR MURPHY:  How is the budget meeting going to work if it's only an hour and 55 minutes. 
MS GALLAGHER:  We'll be guided by the sector and there is a couple of weeks to go, but I imagine 
you meet for one hour and 55 minutes and then you have a break of a lunch time with sanatising of 
the mics. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Is it possible for me to attend it at zoom, do you know what I mean? 
MS GALLAGHER:  The only thing is that vulnerable are those, the H SE categorise at very high risk 
maybe facilitated remotely but they will not have any voting rights, so to vote for the budget you 
need to be in a physical space. 
MR CURRAN: Unless a ministerial order comes through. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much and we have come to the end of our time.  Thank you very 
much for being with us.   
