 
SPECIAL MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY 
COUNCIL HELD ONLINE VIA ZOOM 
 
 
 ON  
 
 
MONDAY 25TH JANUARY 2021 AT 2:00 P.M.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a non-verbatim 
transcript of the stenographic notes in the 
above-named action for communication 
support.   
 
 
 
J Sinnamon 
 
 
 
 

TRANSCRIPT OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 
MONDAY, JANUARY 25TH 2021:  
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon, member, can you hear me?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Yes.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon. You are very welcome to our special 
meeting to deal with our Notice of Motion and just before I start, I just 
want to say thank you to each and every one of you for making the time 
to be here with us to go through the Notice of Motions. Some of them are 
here a very long time, so before we start, I think I will go to Lorraine and 
ask her to take a roll call, please.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Okay, Cathaoirleach, thank you. Welcome everyone to 
the statutory meeting which is open to the press and to the public. So, 
elected members, if you would keep your mobile phones switched to 
silent, please do not leave the online meeting without informing the 
Cathaoirleach to ensure that a quorum remains. You may send a chat to 
indicate you wish to speak or raise your hand. Speakers should keep their 
microphone on when they are speaking. While you are not speaking keep 
your microphone on mute. The microphones can be sensitive and will pick 
up sounds like pencils tapping and paper shuffling. If you a member does 
lose their connection please inform the meeting's administrator. Okay. 
Cathaoirleach, we will go for a roll call for attendance. Cllr Tommy 
Annesley.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Joe Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Vincent Blake, here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr M Kavanagh.  
>>: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Avril Cronin.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Shay Cullen.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Erika Doyle. Cllr Gail Dunne. Cllr Dunne, I know you 
are present.  
>>: Present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Anne Ferris.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Pat Fitzgerald.  
>>: Present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Tom Fortune.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Patsy Glennon.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr M Kavanagh. Pat Kennedy.  
>>: Present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Peir Leonard.  
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Grace McManus.  

>>: Here.  
>>: Cllr Derek Mitchell.  
>>: Present.  
>>: Cllr Miriam Murphy.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Jodie Neary, Cllr Dermot O'Brien.  
>>: Here.  
>>: Paul O'Brien.  
>>: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr R O'Connor. Gerry O'Neill?   
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Lourda Scott.  
>>: Present.  
CLLR SCOTT: Here.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Was that Cllr O'Connor?  Lourda Scott?   
>>: Here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: John Snell. Gerry Walsh?   
>>: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Irene Winters?  Okay.  Cllr R O'Connor, Cllr Miriam 
Murphy.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: Present.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr M Kavanagh. Cllr Erika Doyle. Okay. We will 
proceed at 2.00pm. So Cathaoirleach, we have a number of votes of 
sympathy.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  
ADMINISTRATOR: For Jim Carroll, father-in-law of June Carroll, staff 
members. For Trish Frost, sister of Barbara Doolan, staff member in 
housing. For Sally Cahill, who is a former local authority official. And for 
Theo English a former Tipperary hurler and grandfather to Laura 
O'Callaghan, our disability officer.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Have any of the members any votes of sympathy they 
want to express?   
CLLR O'NEILL: I would like to offer my sympathy to the many families in 
the locality, especially in the Baltinglass area, who I think it's up to 7 
people lost their lives in the last seven days and just to extent my 
sympathies to the families. It's been a very traumatic time in that part of 
the county and again, as I say, I offer my deepest sympathy to all of the 
families involved.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr O'Neill, anyone else want to come in?  
No. Okay. We will just take a moment to remember all of the people that 
have passed away and their families and their loved ones.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Eternal rest grant unto them and perpetual light shine 
on them.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: The first motion is in the name of Cllr Mags Crean and 
it's the 5th of January 2020. I will go to Lorraine for the response.  
ADMINISTRATOR: This motion asks us to explore the drafting of bye-laws 
and this has been done over the last period of time, so the law agent has 
both examined and explored if the objective of the motion could or has 
been translated into bye-laws elsewhere in this jurisdiction and this 
council could consider, for its own consideration or adaptation, or if there 
are grounds to create them uniquely for Wicklow County Council.  

 
So the objective of a proposed bye-law is to regulate enforcement of 
unspecified areas within the county regarding the sources of intimidation, 
harassment or nuisance occurring where in the county where women's 
health services are provided. We have established that in 2019, Louth 
County Council passed a motion in similar terms to the purpose of the 
bye-law suggested here, but took legal advice by way of counsel opinion, 
after the fact, which established that the purpose of this proposal is ultra 
vires the council's powers in any such motion to direct the process for the 
purpose of the investigation and preparation of bye-laws would be void. 
The law agent has examined and summarised the legal advice with the 
benefit of Louth County Council's experience, which confirms the position, 
that the objective of such bye-laws is outside the remit of the power of 
the council and would therefore be ultra vires and void. The relevant law 
is set out in the law agent's advice and the key points are as follows: 
 
The Law and the creation of bye-laws is governed by the Local 
Government Act 2001. It clearly sets out the provisions that apply. The 
council, as a creature of statute has only the powers identified in that 
legislation. Section 199 sets out those powers and limitations. The 
objective of a bye-law must relate to an area within the control of the 
council. Therefore, it excludes lands, or services not under the control or 
management of the local authority. A gathering adjacent to a facility while 
possibly on the public road is protected by the enforcement powers of the 
Gardaí in relation to public order matters and road safety.  
 
Under Section 199, a local authority may make a bye-law for or in 
relation to the use, operation, or protection, or regulation of management 
or services, in relation to any connected matter. While Wicklow County 
Council is the road authority for Wicklow and therefore in charge of all 
public roads, including footpaths in the county. It has no jurisdiction in 
relation to the provision of health services which is a matter for the 
Minister for Health and the HSE.  
 
If there is existing legislation to enable the powers mooted then they 
cannot be reimagined for the local authority to lawfully acquire. The 
Council has no jurisdiction in relation to the maintenance of public order 
which is a matter for the Garda which criminalises some of the things 
alluded to in the motion. A section of those are set out, which entail the 
Criminal Justice Public Order Act, the Criminal Justice and Non-Fatal 
Offences Against the Person Act 1977 or Section 10 of the Roads Act 
which creates a potential hazard to road users. There is also specification 
involving the provision of service in relation to the Termination of 
Pregnancy Act 2018. In conclusion the law agent is saying that the intent 
to make bye-laws for the purposes identified in the motion are ultra vires.  
 
The Council as the council is not allowed to make legally binding for those 
and such legislation is more properly a matter for the Oireachtas. There 
are a significant number of criminal sanctions viable to the Gardaí within 
their powers that cannot be duplicated by a local authority. Furthermore 

the council involves a duty of care to employees and the enforcement 
would require the support and authority that clearly fall within the remit 
of the Gardaí powers. So, for completeness of advice there are also 
constitutional issues that could arise in the suggestion of limiting the right 
to free speech and peaceful protest.  
 
The key point however is that the council, as a creature of statute does 
not have the powers as defined in the Local Government Act to create the 
bye-law objective put forward in this motion and while the members have 
it within their own function to explore and decide on matters for 
discussion, it is pertinent that the objectives of those discussions should 
have a legal standing. Section 199(2)(b) says that it may not be used for 
a purpose that is governed by another enact. In this case the criminal 
order act and control is specifically within the remit of the Gardaí. Thank 
you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Crean, do you want to?   
CLLR CREAN:  I have my timer here set for three minutes. I hear the 
response and thank you for the law agent for looking into that. In 
response to that, I hear that for practicality, if the motion should be 
reworded in some way so it's not about protecting individuals and we can 
make it broader in the sense that I would still like to think we could 
support this motion, fellow councillors could and bring it further. I don't 
want to have to go to vote because I know this is not a for or against 
issue, it's a nuanced area for moral and historical reasons. I get that, I 
know that everyone here believes in women's rights to safety and dignity 
and liberty, obviously when enforcement comes in, it gets more nuanced 
for people.  
 
I purposely worded the motion so it was about wording the bye-laws and 
it wasn't committing the council to do anything about them. I have liaised 
with national organisations like Lawyers for Choice who have their own 
legal experts and some of the rationale put forward by the law agent 
would be disputed by their legal interpretation. So it's quite a nuanced 
area. I know that the Gardaí have spoken about the fact that it's covered 
by the Public Order Act but the expertise of other legal experts they would 
say that that doesn't, it doesn't satisfy this type of protest, particularly if 
people are standing and they are not using anything particularly 
intimidatory except for photos and pictures... so that can cover another 
range of conduct and are more proactive than reactive, than it being left 
to healthcare staff to ring the Gardaí every time.  
 
I know this motion was delayed, but it's timely that it's this month that 
we are dealing with it, because we just had the Mother and Baby Report 
and that reminder of that whole legacy of shame that controlled women in 
this country. Although where he have had state apology and the 
Government have engaged meaningfully, I think the attitudes are still 
exist here and they are practiced in anti-abortion practice, they are using 
shame to control women. At the end of the day I would ask fellow 
councillors to support this at least to explore it further and employ other 
engagement of legal advice and also the protection of children, if it's 

other causes causing it to the council. There is [INAUDIBLE], there is 
other spaces where we control individuals behaviours, so the Gardaí can 
also control.  
 
This is really a motion about addressing that legacy of shame, taking 
action on a local level to progress it and ensuring that women in our 
county can access legal healthcare, whether you agree with abortion or 
not, just legal and needed healthcare. It's about their right to safety, 
dignity and privacy. I hear about the dignity of staff, well what about the 
safety of these women?  We have concerns about even addressing 
protesters for staff and obviously the Gardaí can be involved as well in 
terms of other bye-laws. In terms of free speech, because I am absolutely 
for freedom of assembly, organisations like the ICL have addressed this, 
doing an analysis of access zones. We have those expert organisations for 
that reason and this type of process punches down, not up. It's behaviour 
that is about controlling women and their choices, the intention to control 
and shun them. It's not like similar protests that would necessarily be 
punching up the weight. At the end of the day it's about controlling 
individual choice and people still protest outside the designated zone and 
others that aren't. So that is.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Crean. Cllr Anne Ferris, did you want to 
come in?   
CLLR FERRIS: Yes, I just want to first of all commend Cllr Crean for 
tabling this motion. I note it's on the agenda for a year. Members will 
remember when that motion was tabled there were a lot of reports of 
protests outside the National Maternity Hospital and I think this is where 
it stemmed from. Because it is a difficult decision and it's very important 
that we separate, as Cllr Crean, the topic of protests outside healthcare 
facilities that women will go to. We need to separate that in the motion 
from the issue of abortion, because I know that can divide people, but we 
have to remember that it could be our sisters our daughters, our mothers, 
whatever going to seek advice and information and to have to try and 
seek this information by passing by people who have, they may be saying 
the rosary, there is nothing wrong with that, but they have the graphic 
photos and posters outside which is very intimidating.  
 
I recognise what Lorraine has said and what the law agent has said that it 
would be ultra vires for us to try and introduce bye-laws and particularly 
it would be a waste of time and resources if they are not going to be 
valid, but I do think that we should all take on board what Cllr Mags 
Crean has tabled. It is an issue close to the heart of many women in this 
country, but not only women, but their partners, their husbands, the 
relatives. I think we should agree in the spirit of the way the motion was 
tabled that we should support it. Now, I think that it probably needs to 
be, as Cllr Crean has said, it probably needs to be reworded. I think this 
Council should be pushing and calling on Government to introduce the 
necessary legislation to that bye-laws will not be necessary.  
 
Again it's a national matter, but it is something that I think individual 
councils should be able to raise at their meetings and to push the 

Government to do it and particularly to put pressure on our five TDs and 
our Senator to bring this up in the Dail. I think we should do that, we 
should pass a motion like that and also that the motion would be 
distributed to all other local authorities in the country. Again I like to say I 
commend Cllr Crean on this, I think because of Covid shortly after that, 
we haven't seen such evidence of it, because of obviously the restrictions 
about crowds and thing, but I do fear for when the whole emergency of 
Covid is over that we will see a re-emergence of the protests outside 
these clinics and hospitals and, as I say, no matter how you feel or how 
you stand on the abortion issue, it is every woman's right to go and seek 
advice and seek whatever is necessary for her wellbeing and for her 
choice to be able to go into these clinics and hospitals without fear of 
intimidation. So I would suggest, I don't know, maybe Lorraine could 
advise us on this, whether it would be good to withdraw the motion and 
table another one, which should come up shortly because we are hoping 
to clear all the motions today. Again, at the end of the day, Mags, it is 
your decision, but I certainly support the spirit of your motion. And thank 
you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you Cllr Anne Ferris. I will bring you back in on 
that Lorraine. Lourda Scott, did you want to come in on that?   
CLLR SCOTT: Yes, thank you, chair and Cllr Crean for identifying that. As 
Cllr Anne Ferris identified this is an issue of intimidation and particularly 
around maternity hospitals which was seen before Covid. The necessity of 
this legislation to prevent, these sort of intimidation protests was raised 
when the Termination of Pregnancy Bill was being discussed in the Dail, 
so the necessity of laws around this has been well-known and 
well-signalled to the Government and is very important. It's important to 
point out that it's every person's right to attend maternity hospital, for 
whatever reason they are attending a maternity hospital, without being 
intimidated. I just want to state on the record here, I can personally 
attest to having lost several pregnancies, the absolute grotesqueness of 
the imagery used in those protests. I actually felt very personally upset 
myself just viewing those protests, let alone if I had to view them 
attending a hospital, to attend an appointment for pregnancy loss. I have 
friends who have lost babies almost full term and they have had to go 
through these people holding up this grotesque imagery intimidating the 
healthcare staff attending their own day job as W there is a place for 
protest, that is outside the Dail, not outside healthcare. Cllr Mags Crean, 
you made me flag, there is regulation for safe access to the Termination 
of Pregnancy Bill is on the table. While I support your motion, I think it 
needs to be reworded before we can do anything with it. I don't know if 
part of that would send a strong letter from the council to write to the 
Minister for Health to move the bill, but again, thank you for raising it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you Lourda Scott. I know there is three more 
looking to come in. I will come back to Mags. So, Cllr Aoife Flynn 
Kennedy, if you could come in.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I will be short. Again commending Cllr Mags 
Crean for bringing this motion forward. For me this isn't actually an 
abortion issue, it's a women's health issue. I want to be able to go and 
access women's health services and not have to be embarrassed or 

shamed. I want both my daughters to be able do that as well. I think it's 
timely as well that we are discussing this. One of the most harrowing 
comments, or not one of the most, I mean there was so many, one of the 
comments that really stood to me in the mother and baby report was 
someone who was a single parent was when the issue of lone parents 
came to the Dail for a vote, there wasn't a single comment on it, there 
wasn't a single comment for or against and that was representative of all 
of the parties and no parties. Nobody had a comment or a view on it. I 
think it's a real reflection of the number of female councillors and that is 
not taking way from a male councillors, but it is a real reflection of the 
fact that we have so many women as councillors now on Wicklow County 
Council that these types of issues are being brought to the forefront and 
being discussed. So I like to congratulations Cllr Crean on bringing this 
forward.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr R O'Connor.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: I want to come in quick and say well done to Cllr Crean. 
On the topic of the lawyer response, I kind of find it's kind of strange in 
the sense that the lawyer is saying this is why it can't happen, but rather 
than saying, okay, it's worded like this, if we changed the wording like 
this then it can happen. That kind of says quite a lot. Different wording 
can be found to (sound distortion)...  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I think you are gone, Rory. Cllr McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I just want to chime in with 
my own congratulations to Cllr Crean on this. Just say for all the speakers 
so far, I really appreciate the sharing of personal stories in this, with the 
aim of progressing and taking action on such a serious issue. It's not easy 
to share your personal experience and so I just really, I admire the 
speakers who have done this so far. I have had my own experience with 
covering graphic imagery, it wasn't outside a healthcare setting but I 
know how harmful it can be. In doing so I met a woman who had a 
miscarriage and she came over and gave me a hug and said thank you for 
covering these, you don't know how upsetting it is to walk past.  
 
I do agree with Cllr Anne Ferris, I appreciate that Lorraine has done 
research for us and started that exploratory process. If that could be 
circulated to the members to have a look at that would be great to so we 
can look at it ourselves and try and find the best which to make the call 
for these exclusionary zones. I agree with everything that people have 
said about protests and I love a good protest, but this is about protecting 
people in vulnerable scenarios, families in vulnerable scenarios to well 
done Cllr Crean and for the speaker so father in sharing their experiences.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: First of all I want to commend Cllr Crean on the motion and 
I want to commend the fair way she has put her case. As we all know the 
question of abortion rights has been a divisive issue in this country for 
many years. However, the people have spoken on the issue, the people 
have made their views clear and from my point of view, when people are 
wanting to access legally provided healthcare facilities they should be able 
to do so peacefully and without any opposition or any kind of harassment 
or intimidation of any kind trying to access those facilities. I fully agree 

with Cllr Crean on that and I am quite happy to second the motion if 
anyone else hasn't already seconded it?  I don't think it needs to be 
reworded at the moment. As I read it, it says, "That the Council explores 
the drafting the bye-laws." Which gives scope to look at the wording and 
see if it can be a little bit more suited to what is being said, but I would 
prefer to see it passed today rather than sent off for another day. If we 
agree to the motion, we are agreeing to explore the wording. On that 
basis I would be very happy to support it and congratulations Cllr Crean 
as well.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr M Kavanagh.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Just a couple of questions. Has any other council 
passed the motion and if they did, was the wording different to the 
wording in this motion?  Secondly, I agree with Cllr Behan, we are only 
voting to explore the issue, not to actually come up with the wording 
today. The other thing I would just like to say is that if you can park the 
issue around women accessing services in the maternity hospitals, if you 
can park the abortion issue and say is there another situation where a 
group accessing a service would be targeted?  What would the outcome 
be and I would say that there would be, it would be banned immediately. 
I just couldn't see it happening if a certain section of the community was 
trying to avail of a service somewhere and were being met with the 
violent and graphic type of imagery that and banners and taunts and 
effects that are used. So, as I said, just park the issue of abortion for the 
moment. It was a highly divisive issue and it's not the issue here today, 
it's the rights of people just to access something and if other councils are 
able to pass this motion then why couldn't we?  Thank you.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Thank you, Cllr M Kavanagh. Before I go back to Cllr 
Crean, I am going to ask Lorraine, do you know of other councils who 
have passed this motion.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Obviously this is a very emotive issue. The motion asks 
Wicklow County Council to explore the drafting of bye-laws. I have been 
in touch with Cllr Crean in this matter and we have explored extensively 
the drafting of bye-laws for this situation. So just to say that Louth 
County Council received a similar Notice of Motion back in 2019. They 
obtained senior counsel advice which advised that it was ultra vires and 
should be withdrawn. I reached out to the meeting's administrator's 
network sector and of the 28 local authorities 14 came back to say they 
hadn't received a motion like that. Dublin City Council did receive a 
similar motion which again they ruled on as being ultra vires. The motion 
is asking Wicklow County Council to regulate the control of public roads 
and foot paths adjacent to healthcare facilities. What the law agent is 
saying is if there is existing legislation to enable, then Wicklow County 
Council or no other local authority can reimagine those powers. So the 
council has no jurisdiction in relation to public order, this rests within 
other legal enactments such as the Criminal Justice Act, the Roads Act 
and the Gardaí have the powers. So the motion, the wording as it is is 
ultra vires and should be withdrawn.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Gerry Walsh, you have your hand up.  
CLLR WALSH: Just do come in there, I know just is a suggestion that we 
raise it at our joint police committee when we raise it. Obviously people 

have the right to protest, but when they step over the line that intimidate 
and harass people accessing health services that needs to be stopped and 
the message needs to get out loud and clear. So just for, in addition, I 
know we are looking at rewording this or whatever decision we come to, I 
think it's also a matter we should highlight with the chief Superintendent 
at next Monday's meeting.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Crean can I come back to you for final comment. 
Sorry.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I have gone back to Cllr Crean now. Cllr Mags Crean 
thank you, Cathaoirleach, I know that Wicklow County Council have done 
a lot of work so I genuinely appreciate that. I would ask it has happened 
in the UK, emailing and other Municipal Districts in the UK have done it. I 
know the laws are different, but I know a lot of advocacy organisations in 
Ireland have looked at the UK and looked at the legal situation in Ireland. 
I have been in touch with those over the last few weeks. I was looking 
here to reword the motion so it's about urging the progress of national 
legislation, but at an interim measure that a Wicklow County Council law 
agent could seek independent law experts or at some point, continue to 
explore this issue. I do think, even when national legislation comes it's 
going to take time and even when it comes there is probably going to be 
a role for local authorities. So, you know, we could be, it wouldn't be a 
waste of time to be ahead on this issue. I do thank people for sharing 
their personal stories here and for all the support. It's really progressive 
that the council has ha this dignified and fair discussion on a very 
sensitive issue. Thank you very much for chairing it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Crean, what would you like us to do in relation to 
moving forward with your motion?   
CLLR CREAN:  I will have it reworded. So I could put in a reworded 
motion or I could amend it now, if people want to read it out.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just to be helpful, Cathaoirleach, you would be better 
off to withdraw this motion. There are procedures in relation to amending 
motions, it talks about leaving out words and adding in words. The motion 
would have to be circulated to the floor to read and to come to agreement 
on. I think everyone is in support of the spirit of the motion and that 
certainly has support. Cllr Crean, if you want to work on a revised motion 
and we will hear it for the March meeting?  List it for the March meeting?   
CLLR CREAN: Okay.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Cathaoirleach, are we allowed in here?  I, want to express 
my concern at the right of assembly. I am on the police board and I 
haven't heard, I have heard no mention whatsoever of people being 
intimidated in this county and in actual fact I don't even think there is 
even an abortion clinic in the county. I would be totally against any 
intimidation of any type, especially of vulnerable people and I would 
condemn it outright, but I haven't been aware, I haven't heard of 
anything. But I would also be concerned of the right to assemble and 
protest. I wouldn't like to think we were going down the road of Donald 
Trump where blacks are not allowed protest and whites are. I would be 
cautious of that. The abortion issue was very decisive and if people have 
an agenda there, where they wish to express their concerns or whatever 

the case may be, that they are allowed do it in the proper fashion and I 
would give anyone any right to protest anywhere. But I definitely would 
not support any sort of intimidation by anyone, but I think on the outset, 
with what Lorraine has said, I think this motion is doomed to fail at the 
moment looking at it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr O'Neill. Thank you, Cllr Crean, Cllr 
Crean, can you confirm you are withdrawing that for now and you are 
going to work on the wording and bring it up in the march meeting.  
 
CLLR CREAN:I would be happy with that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Crean, I will be happy to speak with you and help 
you to word it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Notice number two in the number of Paul O'Brien and 
Cllr John Mullen, 2nd of March 2020. I will go to Lorraine for a response 
on that. Hello, Lorraine, can you hear me?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Sorry, Cathaoirleach. This relates to activity on social 
media. So just to say that the elected members have been circulated with 
a Code of Conduct for elected members in July 2019 which they are 
requested to sign up to and which covers social media use and use of 
council equipment. So a list of examples are set out on page 15 of that 
code. Councillors are also expected to comply with the LA computers 
acceptable use policy and should abide by the term and conditions 
outlined by the council on taking up office.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr O'Brien, do you want to come in.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Yes, thank you for having this meeting. We all 
understand there is a Code of Conduct, but we believe it's being ignored 
and we should go further. Cllr Mullen and I are proposing this motion in a 
chance to bring up some civility. We believe no colleague should promote 
their own career by running down their colleagues. Posing for a photo will 
not solve a problem, laying the blame will not solve any problem and 
inciting spores to target individuals will not solve any issues. By all means 
let's hold ourselves accountable and others accountable for their belief 
bus do so in a civilised manner. Politics should not be about warfare, but 
reaching a by partisan agreement for those who elect us. The politics of 
hatred should have no place in our society. We have witnessed that in the 
last few weeks and let no one say that can't come to our shores. We have 
a responsibility to act in a civilised manner that includes not inciting our 
spores or to attack our perceived opponents. We should respect the right 
to voice your opinion without fear of being attacked by others, therefore 
we are proposing that us as elected representatives should manage our 
own social media page, delete inappropriate comments and to show 
leadership in this regard. We believe myself and Cllr Mullen believe that if 
we need to act serious about that by showing leadership, so unless Cllr 
Mullen wants to come in after me on that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank, Cathaoirleach and thanks again Paul for putting 
together the motion and for my colleagues showing up to go through 
these motions. It's similarly related to the previous motion. Intimidation 
can't be allowed whether it's on the streets or online. It was in the 
context of that motion was put down on the 2nd of March, just after a 

General Election where there was a massive amount of very negative and 
organised online intimidation of candidates. I think we are the first rung 
of the ladder as democratically elected politicians. It's behove on us, not 
just for ourselves to follow basic standards of decency in communication 
with others, but our supporters. Because let's not pretend that this online 
activity is spontaneous and the anger and rage out there is happening 
overnight all by itself. We can be passionate about issues and very 
annoyed with government and with political parties, but when it's 
organised and targeted to intimidate candidates and to stifle public debate 
we have to say no. No matter who wins an election or a council seat, 
democracy has basic standards as Cllr Behan said, there was a 
referendum, the decision was made, we move on, that is what we do in a 
democracy. I think as councillors we have a duty to be the first line of 
defence of democracy and say I am not going to tolerate online 
intimidation, particularly when it's organised.  
 
I think there are studying being done into the organised intimidation that 
happened in the last election and no doubt it will be done in future 
election. We have to call it out and say we are not going to tolerate it 
anymore. That is why this motion is here and I hope colleagues can 
support it and see the intent behind it. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Mullen. Colleague, what do you, any 
views on Cllr Mullen and Cllr O'Brien's?  Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: Just to say I fully support the proposer and seconder of the 
motion. At recent meetings of the association Of Irish Local Government 
which we are represented, I have raised this issue on behalf all of us that 
it should be a nationwide matter of all public representatives that they 
treat each other properly and with respect and that they treat the public 
with respect and that they are entitled to expect respect from their 
colleagues. Unless we have a discussion like this, it's going to be very 
difficult to actually move that forward and I welcome the fact that we are 
talking about it here today. I can't see anything wrong with anything that 
has been said by the two councillors who have spoken on it and I would 
propose, or sorry, I would certainly like to see us unanimously supporting 
it, because social media abuse and bullying is a scourge in politics and in 
other walks of life, but particularly in politics and nobody who is brave 
enough to put their names forward to the people, whether they get 
elected or not, should be subjected to any kind of intimidation or bullying 
as a result of them being brave enough to put their names before the 
public. It's often the hurlers on the ditch, the people who have no courage 
are the ones who spew this poison on to social media and nobody can 
have any respect for them in my book. I do have full respect for every 
single person who is elected as a public representative in this county. I 
know we all respect each other, but we should also prove it on social 
media and other channels.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Well said. Cllr Gail Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: Totally agree with this motion. For someone who has been 
targeted on social media, it's not very nice and while I can take it, people 
have to realise that we have families and we have families who are 
listening and looking at this. It's not very fair on them to see a loved one 

being targeted like this. I think it's terrible to think that people would do 
this. I hate to think too that it's organised but I suppose it is organised. I 
know any of my supporters, if I, I have never seen any of my supporters 
putting anything up like that, but if I did I would be the first to tell them 
to take it down. I totally support this motion. Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. There is nobody else looking to come in. 
Can I take it everyone is in agreement with this?  Yeah.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cathaoirleach, the motion asks that the councillors sign 
declarations indicating agreement or non-agreement with the measure 
and this would be published and updated annually on the council's 
website. So are the elected members proposing that this motion be 
described on the website and we will just say all Wicklow County 
Councillors sign up for this?  Is that what we are saying?  Rather than 
sign declarations indicating agreement and how did the elected members 
want to move forward with it?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr O'Brien, do you want to come in and clarify that.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Thank you, watered for County Council came up with a 
similar initiative, it's basically just a one page and I can get it from you 
from Waterford City Council it might be, sorry. It's basically a one-pager, 
agreeing to abide by this motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, well we are in agreement with you, Cllr O'Brien, 
will you get that and forward it on to Lorraine.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed elected members?  Agreed. Okay.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Notice of Motion number three is in the name of Cllr 
Tommy Annesley. There is no response. Cllr Annesley, can I bring you in 
on this Notice of Motion.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: When this motion came forward to me it was Christmas 
before 2019. I said I would put it on the agenda. I had to read it again 
and again and I found it hard to understand. I contacted the people that 
gave it to me and they sent me a terrible lot of documentation. What this 
motion is saying parental alienation happens in all walks of life. It 
happens in male and female, the separated people use the children as 
weapons against their spouse or their partner and since this motion has 
been put down a year ago, people have contacted me about this and I 
didn't realise it was as serious in my constituency as it actually is. I have 
had four cases in the last six months about this, what is happening. So 
that is why I put it down, I put it down not really understanding it in 
March and I have learnt more, because every time I was supposed to be 
on a motion I was reading more and more on it. So it is, it's in all of our 
areas, this motion to solve this problem and it was only passed by two 
councils in the last 12 month, sorry not in the last 12 months, but before 
I brought to Wicklow, since I brought to Wicklow, it's been passed by 
every single council in the state, so we are probably the last council to 
pass this motion. It, I know the abortion clinic was very personal, but 
separation is very personal as well and the last people that should be 
upset in a separation is the children. I think we all agree on that one, but 
that is basically where this is coming from. Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Annesley, Cllr Annesley, you are 
proposing this Notice of Motion, do you have a seconder for it?   
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I would like to second it, Cathaoirleach, if I could.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: Seconded by Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy. Are the 
members in agreement on this motion?  Yeah.  
ADMINISTRATOR: I think, does Cllr Peir Leonard want to come in?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Peir Leonard, did you want to come in.  
CLLR LEONARD: I want to commend Tommy on putting this forward. I 
think that nobody wins when kids are alienating. Kids neat both their 
parent, mother and father and people need to sometimes put their 
differences aside and see the bigger picture and move forward. So I 
totally support this motion and well done, Tommy.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I just want to support the motion and I have been 
talking to Cllr Annesley about it. Unfortunately I am well aware of it on a 
personal level and how it is affecting children, psychological manipulation 
of children. We certainly need to look at civil and criminal legislation 
because the impact on children is horrendous. As I say, I am well aware, 
since Cllr Annesley spoke to me about this motion in, even in the Arklow 
area and further afield how children are being manipulated by one side or 
the other and certainly people get away lightly and we all know where 
things are being said about the husband or the mother or the father and 
certainly the incidence of it are substantially increasing and it gives me, at 
times when I listen to it, it really is heart-breaking to see the way the kid 
has been manipulated to make accusations against the mother or father. I 
think was it in the Seanad recently it was discussed and I think it needs to 
be looked at by our legislators and we need to get something done to 
stop it, because in some cases there are people who are suicidal because 
of it. I could say I know some people who are having huge mental issues 
because the child has been manipulated and it needs to be looked as it 
has been in other countries.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I think we are all in agreement with it anyway, it's 
passed. So thank you, Cllr Annesley.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry. Did someone want to, Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: It's the next motion, sorry.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, the next motion.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Motion number three involves writing to the 
Department. So the elected members are all in agreement with that?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yeah, I think all in agreement. Notice number four is in 
the Baltinglass Municipal District councillors, I am going to go to Dr Colm 
Lavery for a response on that.  
COLM: I suppose TII have informed us that the proposed N81 bypass 
scheme is currently suspended. What this means is that it's not envisaged 
that the scheme will progress during the life span of the current national 
development plan from 2018-2027. However the NVP is under review and 
the Department of public expenditure and reform are seeking submissions 
on the NPP open until this week, the 29th of January. I would is a say that 
we and the council continue to work closely with the Transport Ireland. 
Significant work has been done to upgrade the route, including 
north/south of Hollywood which has just been signed off and is 
substantially complete before Christmas of this year.  
 

Further safety improvement schemes are presently being progressed as 
are significant investments in road surface improvements and if you just 
bear with me for a minute, just to say that we are currently looking at 
and we have received approval from TII to progress four schemes on the 
N81 south of Hollywood. They are the N81 Tuckmill Lower. Hangman's 
Bend and the west project. So we are progressing those in accordance 
with phases 1-4 of the TII project management guidelines. Given the 
overlap in the four schemes we have got their agreement to assess that 
full corridor for phase one from north of Baltinglass to north of Irishtown 
West. So the overall length of that corridor under consideration is 12.8km 
to be exact.  
 
So we have a draft feasibility report. That is gone to TII once we get 
approval for that we will be looking at option, selecting for the various 
improvements that can be made to that section of the road. I would also 
point out that this year we have got a one million euro allocation from TII 
to carry out safety improvements on the road from Blessington to 
Russborough, plus capital maintenance schemes, so they are about 1km 
in length. So north of Hollywood and then just south of Knockroe as well. 
Those are the works that are being carried out on the N81. I suppose on 
the Tallaght to Hollywood scheme it is currently suspended in terms of 
TII's consideration and funding for that scheme and hopefully it will be 
considered further in the review of the NDP that is going to be going 
under way.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Dr Lavery. Because this is in the name of 
the Baltinglass Municipal District and there is another one later on in the 
Bray Municipal District, I am going to go to the chair of each Municipal 
District first or if they want to delegate someone to speak on it. So Patsy 
Glennon, you are the chair of the Baltinglass Municipal District, I know 
there is other members who want to come in. Do you want to speak on it 
as chair or delegate to that to someone to come in?   
CLLR GLENNON: I will speak on it first, but then perhaps the more senior 
colleagues who have been working on this for longer. Look, I like to thank 
Colm for his progress report, any improvements are welcome, but it 
doesn't really address the issue. The issue is (sound distortion)...  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You are gone, Patsy.  
CLLR GLENNON: The councils supported this matter, sorry, can you hear 
me.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We can't hear you, Patsy. There is interference there.  
CLLR GLENNON: Can you hear me now?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  
CLLR GLENNON: Okay, it's obviously signal, again... (sound distortion)  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, Patsy, you are coming and going, we can't hear 
you.  
CLLR GLENNON: Someone else might like to give it a bash.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, I am going to go to Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Thank you, chairman, I will be brief. Just a couple of 
things, Colm, thank you for that update and could the council, could we 
make a submission on the review of the NDP to ask for the Hollywood to 
Tallaght proposed route that funding be allocated for that route, which we 

have been fighting for many years. And also the extra works that you are 
proposing that, going from Baltinglass as far as Blessington or 12km 
north of Baltinglass. It's very welcome and I it would be great to see 
progress, because there is a few bad bends in that area. The Knockroe 
bends great to see them done, but that went on for 10, 15 years before 
we saw the light of day last year. Great to see the improvements further 
south you are referring to and that is very welcome.  
 
Briefly, the nature of this motion was something that I brought up about 
two years ago in that it struck me that the other County Councils that the 
N81 effects are not making any lobbying through the Parliament. It goes 
from South Dublin from Tallaght down to Brittas and lots of parts of 
Kildare as it weaves its way from north of Blessington down as far as 
south of Hollywood, it goes through parts of Kildare and a lot of people 
who live in county Kildare use the N81. Obviously we all know two miles 
out of Baltinglass it enters County Carlow.  
 
So I really feel that West Wicklow and South Wicklow councillors have 
been fighting a lone battle in this and the other three counties that have 
been affected by this haven't pulled their wait as regards lobbying. That 
was the purpose of the motion to write to the councils and try and bring 
them on board and get them to take a better interest in the upgrade of 
the N81 which does affect their counties. The N81, if it was upgraded, 
would take a lot of traffic off the N7. Every car going from Dublin to 
Galway going south uses the N7 by Naas. The N81 would relieve that and 
would be beneficial to those neighbouring counties. That is really the main 
purpose to bring those on board as regards lobbying to upgrade the N81.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Avril Cronin.  
CLLR CRONIN: Thank you for giving us the time to go through these 
motions. The issue with the N81 has been going on numerous years, long 
before I became a councillor. In 2007 I worked at the NRDO as a student 
and they were planning the route for the N81 and here we are now in 
2021 and I am a councillor and we still have had no progress on the 
upgrade of the N81. While all the developments are welcome, the work on 
Knockroe Bend and the work from south of Blessington to Russborough, 
while they are welcome, there is a big issue and the issue is the whole 
road needs to be upgraded. It is the main route for Dublin for people here 
in West Wicklow and as a commuter myself I use that road ever day 
going to work. I do think that we need to get our other councillor 
colleagues, sorry did you lose me there?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: No.  
CLLR CRONIN: We need to get our colleagues on side, if we can push it, it 
would be great, but sometimes we feel we are on our own in the 
Baltinglass Municipal District and if we could get the full council support to 
push this with our colleagues in South Dublin and Kildare I think we might 
be able to progress a little bit further. So thank you very much.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I am going to try and re-establish with Cllr Glennon. 
Are you there?   
CLLR GLENNON: I have knocked off my camera in the hope it might 
improve the sound. I like to join with my colleagues. It's the only route to 

Dublin that hasn't been... the land is frozen for this new road and it's a 
matter of trying to encourage the TII and Government to put it back on 
the agenda. It fell off the spatial strategy and it fell aside. There will be no 
progress outside this side of the county until the road is done. It's an 
essential part of the infrastructure that is essential to the uplifting of this 
area. We are really urging the rest of the council to support us in this 
motion to see can we get it reignited. I know that Cllr O'Neill is passionate 
about this issue so I will hand over to him to say a few words on it.  
He was involved on campaigning before I was elected as was Cllr Timmins 
and Blake as well. It's an issue we need to get support and hopefully 
progress made on.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Gerry O'Neill, do you want to say a word.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Again I want to thank my colleague, Patsy Glennon. And 
thank Colm for his presentation there. We welcome any improvement 
south of Blessington and it's great there are works taking place there and 
more intended for this year. The issue north of Blessington is the major 
one and as Cllr Glennon pointed out there, there is a 300 metre wide strip 
frozen from Blessington to Tallaght and that means that farmers are left 
in limbo, people are being denied planning permission to build, formers 
aren't allowed to put a shed up. That land is frozen. What we would seek 
is we have to make our mind up whether this project is going ahead some 
time or another. If it's not that they have to defreeze the land. It's not 
right that people have year in year out as Cllr Cronin pointed out we are 
talking about 15 years this is going on. It's not fair on people. Another 
important thing it looks like Roadstone will be getting the go ahead to 
landfill in Redbog, which means that the N81 will be used, there will be a 
truck every two-and-a-half minutes extra on the road. It means that the 
landfill is in Kildare, but it will be brought from Dublin. On the N81 
through Wicklow and then if there are any levies when it's dumped in 
Kildare, it will be Kildare County Council that will be, that will benefit.  
 
So that road, that section of the road from Dublin border to Blessington is 
absolutely vital. It's not fair to impose another couple of hundred lorries a 
day on the road without some sort of promise of an upgrade. I pointed 
out in the past that maybe now is the time to strike with Roadstone. The 
zone here against the backfilling of the old quarry. I mean there will be 
more space and more recreation area, so it's not a question of that. But 
what we are looking for is something out of it. We are providing the road 
and we are getting nothing from it.  
 
So I think now is the time maybe to talk to Roadstone, to get this moving 
that there will be, there can be huge improvements and there can be 
huge improvements even if the decision is not to go ahead with the new 
road, which we all want, we all want the new road in place, but if it's a 
case that it's not going ahead, there could be huge improvements to that. 
It's absolutely. The state of that road as such, the narrow parts of it, it's 
not fair, it's absolutely not fair to give planning, to give permission there 
for the use of that, as I say, where we have a truck every two-and-a-half 
minutes we have an extra truck on the road.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: Thanks, Cllr O'Neill. Just to be fair, Cllr Behan, did you 
want to come in?   
CLLR BEHAN: Just if the members in that area, in the Baltinglass area are 
finished I want to add my support. Maybe they are not finished.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I wanted to offer it to Cllr Mullen and Blake if they want 
to say something on there. There does seem to be agreement with the 
councillors from the west. If you want to come in and speak on it briefly.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, as my colleagues have said, 
Gerry and others who have been campaigning on this for years. It's 
unacceptable that the only main road into Dublin now, the N81 has been 
left unaccounted for with regards upgrades. The landowners in particular 
must, at this stage wonder what public planning is about, because this is 
ridiculous. To have land frozen for infrastructural development and that 
infrastructural development to take over 20 years. It's ridiculous. It can't 
stand. I am appreciative, of my colleagues making their views known.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Blake, do you want to say something?   
CLLR BLAKE: I am okay. No need.  
CLLR BEHAN: Just to say I support what the members in Baltinglass have 
seen. There is no count there is a strong feeling in west Wicklow, I have 
seen it at a General Election time and when I am over there. People feel 
very neglected in that part of the county. I think it's incumbent on the 
rest of us to support our colleagues in the west when they are looking for 
something that certainly would be demanded day in, day out on the other 
part of the county if we didn't have it. I mean people are just entitled to 
have a proper means of access to their homes and their businesses and a 
safe means of access. I think we should all support the councillors from 
the west in progressing that particular proposal.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: One point, going back to Cllr Timmins, the councillors 
can make a submission to the national development plan. We will be 
making one by can do a separate one on behalf of the councillors and 
circulate it to the Oireachtas members.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Chief Executive. I think we are all in 
agreement to support our colleagues in west Wicklow, is that fair to say?  
Is that all agreed.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Agreed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, thank you. Notice of Motion number five in the 
name of Cllr Peir Leonard, I will go to Lorraine for a response on this.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Yes, we can confirm that a study of the entire Wicklow 
coastline is being completed in partnership with Irish Rail. The purpose of 
the study is to identify the impacts of coastal erosion along the coastline 
and to identify suitable engineering solutions to prevent further 
deterioration at a number of areas including north Arklow. Once the 
report is complete, Wicklow County Council will continue to work with the 
office of public works with regard to implementing any solutions for North 
Arklow and other areas along the coastline.  A presentation will be given 
to the elected members at our February 1st meeting, that is next Monday.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Leonard, do you want to respond to that?   
CLLR LEONARD: I would like to respond to that. I appreciate that and I 
am aware of study that is being done. I am also very aware, there is a lot 

of funding for climate change and it's going to be available hopefully in 
the next few years. The importance of having shovel-ready plans ready to 
protect our east coast. As a child I spent many hours on the north beach 
in Arklow and we have lost that amenity and we have been very, lagging 
behind with our maritime, the economic and the social, the whole 
maritime has been put on the long finger I think.  One of the most 
important things we can do is protect our coast and protect our habitats 
on the coast and protect those amenities for people, especially now in 
times of pandemics and other things. I think that it's really important to 
have that funding in place, or like a feasibility study with a plan in place 
and a timeline on it to be able to go for funding when it comes. I just 
would wonder, would we be ready for that with the Iarnród Éireann, will 
that be enough to apply for coastal erosion, to complete the works?  
CLLR BOURKE: Can I come in there?  Just in support of Cllr Leonard, this 
is something that is really required. Beach nourishment of north beach is 
badly needed. There should be a body of work done on this, because over 
the last 20 years we have repeated, I am told we have repeatedly made 
applications to the OPW for funding for groynes and such like at north 
beach. So the council should have a fair body of work done on that which 
they need to dust down and have a look at again, if the OPW are 
compiling a fresh report, just for your information.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I am going to bring the Chief Executive in, but we are 
getting a presentation next Monday.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, yes, there is a lot of work 
done in terms of the report that was carried out by the consultants.  
Iarnród Éireann have confirmed they have been in contact with them, so 
that is a significant project. I mentioned the last day, 200 million, that 
sort of funding. So they have been approved to put a funding scheme in 
place. We hope to have that completed and into the OT and NTA in Q2 of 
21. That is significant in its own right. There is a project Steering Group, 
we will be representing on that group. That is the project as a whole. 
Now, bare funding will be in relation to the railway. As you go down to 
Arklow you are outside of that and you are into the OPW. But there is a 
lot of work to be done in what are their proposals and cost benefit 
analysis for each section. But at least that is done to engage with the 
OPW and send it in. So there is progress.  
CLLR MITCHELL: That is good news about progress, that the Chief 
Executive said. This report has been ongoing for a number of years. I 
understand the board of Iarnród Éireann have been holding it up for six 
months. We do need to have the report and work out the priorities and 
deal with the issues in a coherent way. It's not right that it's been delayed 
so long.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: In fairness they did the work with the Department of 
transport in the interim and they have them on board to support them to 
move it to the next face which requires significant funding. So progress 
has been made I would say.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We will leave that until next Monday and get the 
presentation, is that fair enough?   
CLLR LEONARD: Yes, I know I have another motion and I have my 
daughter's graduation to go to online, so if we can move things along.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: We wish your daughter well. The next motion is motion 
number 6, Cllr Peir Leonard and Cllr M Kavanagh, the 20th of April 
2020,ly go to Lorraine for a response.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just to say that a number of Wicklow MD elected 
members had to leave to attend their Wicklow Municipal District 
members. This motion is in two parts. One is in relation to the rent 
system, similar to used in Wexford County Council that would allow 
tenants to pay their rent in the Post Office and another that they support 
an awareness campaign to support the transfer of social welfare 
payments to the Post Office in the emergency period. They are set out 
there.  
 
In terms of the first part of the response, Wicklow County Council offers 
the following payment methods. Bank, credit unions, standing order and 
transfer. Household Budget Scheme, the Department of social protection, 
payment via bank card or telephone, payment in person at offices in 
Wicklow County Council, outside Covid-19 restriction levels postal and the 
rent collector. Wexford County Council offers the rent payment card 
system to tenants because unlike Wicklow County Council they do not 
have rent collectors. Moreover, like Wicklow County Council, their 
preferred payment options are the Household Budget Scheme which is 
also operated by An Post or a standing order as they make sure that 
payments are regular and on time, thereby avoiding arrears. These 
happen to be more cost effective and efficient. The rent payment system 
is similar to the Household Budget Scheme, however the latter scheme is 
considered to be a guaranteed payment method, as the client cannot 
cancel the deduction themselves. To this end Wicklow County Council 
would be prioritising the expansion of the household budget option and 
the development of an online payment facility, rather than introducing the 
proposed Rent Repayment Card at this time. Wicklow County Council will 
however continue to review all the rent payment options on an ongoing 
basis to improve the collection of rates.  
 
Just before it goes out to the floor, just in terms of the second part of the 
motion. In line with the latest HSE and World Health Organisation advice 
around social distancing and in order to fight the spread of Covid-19 
virus, the Department of Social Protection took the decision to facilitate 
social welfare recipients getting payment into their bank account, this will 
mean no longer having to pick up payments in the Post Office. In addition 
An Post always allows an agent to collect their payment.  
 
At this moment in time, Wicklow County Council does not believe it would 
be advisable to object to a temporary procedure brought in to combat the 
spread of Covid, this can be revisited again following the pandemic, if it's 
considered to be an issue.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Peir Leonard, are you happy with that response?   
CLLR LEONARD: Yes, I understand the response and I had got the 
response from Brian as well, but I would like to proceed with my, with the 
first part of my motion, if that is possible and put it to the vote. Because I 
have spoken to many, like the Post Offices in, all around the country, but 

in Wicklow, we have many little Post Offices and they are really truly the 
heart of every town centre. I think that there is a lot more to this than 
just a payment. This is providing people a social outlet, while providing 
jobs in the town centre and the spin-off to local businesses on the main 
street are equally as important as having a facility.  
 
Most of the Post Offices that I have spoken to are in favour of the rent 
card, if the members would like to go on to and research later on to bill 
pay on an post website, there is many other payments that can be paid 
through the system and the rent card also. A lot of County Councils right 
across Ireland are all listed on the An Post website as having signed up. I 
like to put it to the members to vote on it. I think it's a good thing.  
 
The second part I am willing to postpone that until post Covid or when 
things get back to normal, but I do think we need to support our Post 
Offices and prevent the Council from getting into any more arrears at the 
moment. At the moment, as it stands the social housing and the 
Household Budget Scheme is surrendered. It's not working because the 
banks don't use it, so anyone who has signed up to the Household Budget 
Scheme, they have a lot of people I have been speaking to are in 
substantial arrears because they didn't realise this and because the 
payment is going directly to their bank, they have become in debt now 
and the council have over two million arrears at the moment, so that has 
increased from 2019. So I think introducing this rent card would be a 
good thing.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: I want to support the motion, I think it's excellent. The 
Government do a lot of talking about supporting the postal service and 
the Post Office. I think it's a huge social enterprise and it's benefiting now 
from a new momentum because of Parcel Post because of Covid-19. I 
really agree with everything that Cllr Leonard has just said, I am sure 
that Cllr Kavanagh would have put in point, but unfortunately she has 
gone off to the Municipal District, which is a clash, so it's a pity that that 
happened. I would agree with Cllr Peir Leonard and I would be the 
seconder if it needs one.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Just to support the motion and Cllr Leonard referred to the 
arrears at the last meeting, I think the figure was in and around 2.5 
million. Any proposal to address that and the fact of people getting into 
arrears. Obviously there is a two-pronged approach and the knock-on 
effect in supporting the Post Office at the same time, so certainly I would 
support measures such as this.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE: I would like to support the first part of the motion as well, I 
think it's very appropriate. I had a number of queries from people as well. 
People from outside the county they are also able to use it, so it's a very 
worthwhile service to have out there. I too would commend Cllr Peir 
Leonard on putting forward the motion. Certainly the first part she has 
alluded to I would support as well.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Fitzgerald.  

CLLR FITZGERALD: Can you hear me?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Go ahead.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I support the motion. I think it's a very good motion, 
it gives the option to people to go to the Post Office and pay their rent. 
The difficulty I see at the moment here is that I have had two people last 
week who normally pay in the council offices, but the woman had €1300 
up one had 1050. There is a difficulty with people holding money in their 
times at this time, and people are aware that they are because people 
talk. I think that the motion of Cllr Peir Leonard and Cllr M Kavanagh is a 
very good motion, I am aware of the situation in Wexford, but I know that 
some of the smaller Post Offices it would be of benefit to them as well. I 
am well aware, obviously because of the Covid restrictions, the Post 
Offices at the moment, there are queues outside the Post Offices, but 
when we are over the Covid, the situation with Covid, I certainly think it 
should be looked at. I think it will be a help to the people who maybe are 
in difficulty. I think it should be looked at and hopefully when we are back 
to normal, Wicklow County Council would consider it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR McMANUS: I am also happy to support the second part of this 
motion. Maybe it's something that the housing SPC should look at as well. 
We look at all of the ways that we in non-Covid times can collect rent and 
if we can support our tenants in any problems they are facing so that we 
can deal with the rent arrears, maybe that is something the housing SPC 
could look at.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, thank you. So, Cllr Leonard, I think you have 
broad support here. Cllr McManus is saying send it to the SPC. Are you in 
agreement with that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: This is an operational issue and the head of finance has 
said in his response, while we are prioritising the expansion of household 
budget option which is also administered via the Post Office, that Wicklow 
County Council will continue to review all payment options on an ongoing 
basis to improve collection, so I think the response is there.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Leonard, I are you happy with that.  
CLLR LEONARD: I would still like to put it...  
ADMINISTRATOR: There is no dissent, I think your motion has support.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, we will move on.  
CLLR BEHAN: On a point of order. If there is no dissent it should be 
declared carried.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Yeah, but Cathaoirleach, it is an operational issue for 
Wicklow County Council, I mean the views and the spirit of the motion is 
accepted and Wicklow County Council will continue to review all rent 
payment options on an ongoing base tone of voice improve collection 
rates.  
CLLR BEHAN: We are entitled to put down a motion and entitled to vote 
on it. The meeting's administrator has already pointed out it's 
unanimously agreed, that should be noted in the minutes that it is agreed 
by the councillors.  
ADMINISTRATOR: That would of course be.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: It will be, it would have to be. Is that agreed then?  
Yeah, okay. We will move on to item number 7. Notice of Motion in the 

names of Cllr Anne Ferris, Paul O'Brien, Lourda Scott, Cllr Erika Doyle and 
Cllr Jodie Neary. I will go to Cllr Nicholls on this.  
 
 
(Short break during presentation).  
 
 
ADMINISTRATOR: This is in relation to opening the stillbirth register to 
the public.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, thank you. Members, does anyone want to come 
in on this?  Cllr Grace McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: Just to give members a very quick rationale for this, so 
this came from campaigners in Wicklow and there is campaigners across 
the State looking for this change. At the moment if a family has a 
stillbirth the register is closed save in very specific circumstances and the 
fear is in future generations, if someone is looking up their family history, 
certain members may be excluded if they are on a closed register, that is 
only accessible to the mother and father. I have to say, I met the 
campaigners and they were so compassionate and mindful, which is why 
they have put in the opt out clause. They recognise this is not a universal 
want for everyone who may experience a stillbirth, so they are trying to 
find a balance between opening it up and dealing with the wants of other 
parents. I think it's, the minister, in fairness is working on it, I know it's a 
national issue, but because it came to me from people in Wicklow who 
were very courageous in sharing their stories and I am asking members 
to take a stand and ask that that be addressed nationally. If anyone has 
any questions I will answer them if I can.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Does anyone want to come in on that?  Nobody is 
looking to come in.  
CLLR FERRIS: Just to say that I fully support that motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Crean.  
CLLR CREAN: I am conscious of time, I am coming in to support.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposed by Grace McManus. A seconder?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr O'Brien and we are all in agreement. Thank you. 
Notice number ten is in the names of Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy, Cllr 
Dermot O'Brien, Cllr Melanie Corrigan, Cllr Grace McManus, Cllr Joe 
Behan, Cllr Erika Doyle, Cllr Anne Ferris and Cllr Rory O'Connor. So I will 
go to Colm Lavery for a response.  
COLM: Just on the issue, the issue of a full-time fire services is under 
consideration by the transportation, water and emergency services SPC. 
Indeed it was discussed recently at our SPC of the 12th of January. The 
motion itself refers to the chief fire officer's report he produced back in 
2014. That report, the chief fire officer has prepared a new report which is 
updated with 2016 census and most up to date available statistics. We 
have asked the National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management 
in the Department of Housing and Local Government to peer review the 
report and to update with any, the statistics, both regionally and 
nationally that they may have available to them, which is not, which are 
obviously not available to us.  
 

I suppose the Directorate is currently finalising a capacity review of all 25, 
27 fire authorities throughout the country, which obviously includes 
ourselves here in Wicklow County Council and it is agreed that it will get 
the experts that were deployed on that capacity review to undertake a 
review of the chief fire officer's report into the full-time fire service in 
Bray. Just to say that the National Directorate have retained an 
independent advisor to it, his name is Dr Brian Sweeney, a former chief 
fire officer of Strathclyde fire and rescue service in Scotland and 
Dr Sweeney has a PhD in fire studies so he will review the report and the 
outcome of that review will be brought back to the SPC in the first 
instance. Just while I have the floor, I might just indicate some of the 
progress that has been made in relation to fire services in the county.  
 
First of all, to say that with have ran a very successful recruitment 
campaign in terms of fire officers in 2020. We have recruited, we had 
sought to recruit 16 officers and 12 have been recruited. This would allow 
us in terms of Bray to have a second pump fully manned when those 
officers have completed their training. We have also been very successful 
in terms of capital allocations to the fire services in county Wicklow, as 
you will be aware. We have recently been approved funding for two new 
fire stations in had Dunlavin and Baltinglass at a million euro each. We 
have also received funding for a new fire engine and also funding for two 
water tankers on the capital side.  
 
Just as well maybe to add that the report on the service indicators in local 
authorities has recently been published and it indicates for mobilisation 
times in terms of our fire service that we are currently, in 2019, the 
mobilisation time, the average time that is taken in minutes to mobilise 
fire brigades in part-time stations in respect of fire instances is 5.25 
minutes in Wicklow. So this has come down from a figure in 2013 and a 
significant improvement and it's higher than the national average and 
would be considered an excellence response time. Also then just to say 
that the average time taken in, sorry, that was another point.  
 
So we are just achieving about 40% of our first-time attendance at 
scenes within ten minutes as well, which again is considered excellent 
when it's compared to other fire services across the country. Thank you, 
Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Director. I am going to do as I did in the 
Baltinglass one, I am going to Cllr Anne Ferris first or are if she wants to 
nominate someone to speak on her behalf.  
CLLR FERRIS: I would like to nominate Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy to speak 
and then also Cllr Dermot O'Brien and Cllr Grace McManus, because, just 
for your information, there were two separate motions down at the Bray 
Municipal District for discussion by the councillors, so I nominate Cllr Aoife 
Flynn Kennedy to speak first.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Thank you, Anne, thank you, Cathaoirleach. 
Thank you, Colm for the information you provided there. Obviously the 
Bray town councillors have been actively watching changes and 
improvement in the fire service.  That has been an issue, which has been 

going on in Bray for a long time. It's an issue I would have been aware of 
when I was school and that wasn't today or yesterday! We are not the 
first group of councillors to bring this forward, many have walked in our 
shoes beforehand and have raised this issue time and time again.  
 
Bray is significantly changing and our population is growing rapidly. The 
types of buildings that we have in the town is changing. We have a new 
town centre, a primary healthcare centre, four star apartment blocks 
going on the southern cross. The landscape is changing and not only that 
we have had historically heart-breaking situations in the town, involving 
part-time fire services and the fire services themselves. It was a motion 
that was brought by a number of us to this council grouping and it was 
one that, of all of the issues that come to our table, we all stood together, 
unanimously. There was a really strong sense that it wasn't a political 
issue, this was very much a community issue and that nothing less than a 
full independent review of the fire service in the town would do. That is 
acknowledging the work of your department, Colm and the work of all the 
fire service staff. But it really has to be fully independent, looking at the 
whole service and looking at the wellbeing of the staff there, who have 
had to deal with some really horrific things over the last number of years. 
We think of the fire service, we think of just fires, I mean recently they 
were called out to support my own family in an attempted suicide  
situation and they are doing much more than dealing with fires. They are 
taking those issues themselves and they are taking them home. That is 
why the inclusion of the wellbeing of the fire service staff, which Grace 
put forward is so important. They are having to deal with people in their 
own community and servicing us in our own community. That is why I 
feel really passionate about this and really strongly about it. As I am sure 
my other councillors do. It has to be a full, independent of the local 
authority review of the fire service in Bray that is serving Bray, Enniskerry 
and Kilmacanogue. I would urge councillors to support the Bray 
councillors in this motion, it's something we are passionate about.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Sorry, councillor, I don't know who you 
said wanted to come in secondly on that?  You mentioned two.  
CLLR FERRIS: Cllr Dermot and Grace McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: I will let Dermot speak because he was the second name 
on it.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: I won't repeat what Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy said, as 
she said we are aligned in this. The things that jump out at me, I know 
that the Chief Executive is required to produce reports, that is part of his 
job and I am sure he does it to the highest standard. But the terms of 
reference of a piece of work like this are critically important because that 
is how we set out the vision for the future of Bray alongside what it needs 
in order to ensure the safety of its people. We do health checks and 
feasibility studies for our harbours and Glendalough master plans and we 
pay lots of money for outside experts to do that stuff, so I think the 
investment in doing an independent review is, will only serve us well. It's 
not to create antagonism between the work of the Chief and anything 
else, I think it's really to honour what is needed for the future of Bray.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Grace McManus.  

CLLR McMANUS: I won't go over what the two other councillors have said, 
other than I agree. When we talk about the fire service, recruitment and 
retention has been brought to us as an issue. I wonder even the stress 
and pressure they must be under to try and respond while in traffic, 
things you wouldn't think of but that came back to us when speaking with 
them. The stress that they must be under. So we really and Dermot is 
right, we want that to be included in the terms of reference and Aoife too, 
so just to hammer that point, that we have really considered every word 
in this motion and it means something and so I am happy to support it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Joe Behan. Sorry, Joe, you need to unmute.  
CLLR BEHAN: Sorry. Thanks, Cathaoirleach, just to support my 
colleagues. In fact, at the SPC as we worked on what our programme was 
going to be when we started this term of office, I proposed a review of 
the full-time fire proposal should be undertaken by the SPC. I want to 
thank the Director and the fire officer for the work they have done on 
that. I look forward to seeing the report coming back to the SPC where 
we can have a detailed look at it and bring it, I would hope, to the 
Municipal District and also to the County Council to have further detailed 
discussion. All of the arguments have been very well-made by my 
colleagues.  
 
I just would reiterate where a lot of this campaign started was 31 years 
ago, when almost the entire family, the Cassidy family lost their lives in a 
fire in Old Court Estate on St Stephen's night. That happened within a few 
hundred metres of the fire station. That is where many people saw that 
there was a mismatch between having a beautiful building and people 
working in it certain times of the day and people lost their lives on that 
occasion and we have had many tragedies since then. I want to pay 
tribute to the member of the reserve fire service at the moment. I think 
they do an excellent job and I also welcome the fact there has been an 
improvement and increased employment opportunities and increased 
recruitment, particularly in the Bray area.  
 
I note that Cllr Fortune has put a message in the chat that he wants 
Greystones to be included in this review. There is no doubt that 
Greystones' population is also hugely increasing. There is an argument for 
looking at the entire north Wicklow area, I know the Greystones brigade 
come in to support the Bray brigade at the moment, and there is a lot of 
co-operation between both. I think it's an issue, as a Council we are going 
to have to come down to because the population is increasing so much. 
But I want to acknowledge and thank all of members in the Bray for their 
unity on this issue.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Derek Mitchell.  
CLLR MITCHELL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I hear what is being said and 
there’s a been significant problems getting retained firefighters in Bray 
and with the time to get to the station. At one stage there was a plan to 
provide a full-time fire service in Bray which involved closing Greystones 
station and I wouldn't be in favour of that. I am very satisfied with the 
service that is provided by the retained fire service in Greystones. They 
have managed to recruit a full complement of people I understand and I 

would be happy with that. Certainly I have no harm seeing it reviewed, 
but I believe we get a worse service if there was a full-time service in 
Bray and Greystones station was closed, I think the times would be more. 
And I think that I am very pleased with the service provided by the 
current retained service in Greystones. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Mitchell. Just wondering when is the 
review due?  Colm?   
COLM: No specific date on it, Cathaoirleach, it's, we were pushing that the 
chief fire officer, retired chief fire officer in Strathclyde would do it as 
quickly as possible, now that we are coming to the end of the review of 
the 27 fire authorities throughout the country. I suppose by asking the 
national directorate and asking the expert from Strathclyde Fire Service to 
carry out the report, we felt that this was a quicker way of maybe getting 
a report back to the council on the full-time service fire in Bray, but also 
given his expertise in that he is retained by the National Directorate to 
advise on fire matters throughout the country and here in Ireland and 
obviously his expertise from abroad and in Scotland.  The fact he is a 
doctor, he is holding a doctorate in fire services, we felt that his expertise 
would bring the independence that is required to the actual report, so I 
suppose there was two aspects to it.  
 
He is, I suppose the renowned fire expert that is used by the Department 
in all of their studies. He has carried out a capacity review of the 27 fire 
authorities throughout the country, which is presently, which we have a 
report on and he is presently finalising the actions to come out of that, 
plus the fact that having the report updated by our chief fire officer and 
provided to the national directorate and to the doctor, we felt this was a 
quicker way of getting a study, a comprehensive study on a full-time fire 
services back to the council.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Gerry. Quickly.  
CLLR WALSH: I fully support the motion, but I want to request that it 
takes consideration of the impact on Greystones, Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy 
in her opening speech referred to the increased development in Bray in 
recent years, that also applies to the Greystones area in relation to the 
significant development that has taken place particularly since 2016 and 
future planned developments. So, again, I welcome the review, but I 
would like to ensure that any review includes the impacts of the 
Greystones. We have a great service there at present and we wouldn't 
like to see anything undermine that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Walsh. Cllr Anne Ferris, I will close with 
you on this, are you happy with the responses?   
CLLR FERRIS: There is a couple of things, Cathaoirleach, I like to thank 
Colm for his reply there, except that I don't know if I missed it, but I 
certainly still have no idea as to when you might expect the review back?  
Is it in the next 12 months or two years or two months or whatever?  
And, secondly, I would and I would be glad and I think other members 
would be glad and pleased to see that report. I see Cllr Aoife Flynn 
Kennedy indicating there, so I would, I will pass over to her, if you don't 
mind.  

CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Sorry, Cathaoirleach, I will be quiet, I won't be 
quiet, I will just be short! There is two issues. Cllr O'Brien raised them. 
Bray councillors haven't had an opportunity to see the terms of reference 
calling for this report. So we haven't had the opportunity to put into it 
what we believe needs to be in the report. There is a question over the 
independent nature of the report. In relation to the comments on 
Greystones, I am sure that will be taken into consideration, but this is 
really about as Cllr Behan said a 30-year-old issue for Bray and it's really 
a big issue in our community and I would urge that we take a vote on it, I 
would urge you to support us and that we have an independent review 
nor a full-time fire service in Bray as the motion states.  
 
Whatever that ends up encompassing when the terms of reference are 
looked at by the councillors in Bray Municipal District, that will be 
included, but that is really what we are looking for here. We are all 
coming together on this issue. It's, I can't stress how important it is to 
the community that this gets looked at. So I would urge you to support us 
on that and give us...  
CLLR FORTUNE: My mic has come back. Chair. My mic has been acting 
up.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We can hear you.  
CLLR FORTUNE: For most of the meeting. I am sure a lot of you might be 
glad to hear that. I put a note up on this discussion, I just wanted to say 
that I, obviously I fully support the motion, I think it's an excellent motion 
and I understand fully the logic and the background to it. My comment 
then was that the Greystones district has a population now of 30,000 
people or thereabouts and I think if there is going to be review, maybe 
that could be looked at as well. Or maybe a separate review, I note what 
Cllr Mitchell said earlier, my comment is not in any way to replace it, my 
comment is to look at the Greystones District on a more full-time basis 
than we currently experience. Our area is expanding at a fast rate as well 
and I think Cllr Behan made the comment about North Wicklow, that 
needs to be looked at, but Greystones need as strong review as well to 
improve it as well.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you Cllr Tom Fortune. Lorraine did you want to 
come in.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just to say in relation to Cllr Fortune and Cllr Walsh the 
motion before us is that Wicklow County Council should examine a report 
for a full-time fire service for Bray. That is what it asks us to do, it doesn't 
mention Greystones. I note the comment, unless the motion needs to be 
amended, other than that it's about Bray. The Director of Services has 
said that it's agreed that the experts deployed to the capacity review, that 
we undertake a review into a full-time service for Bray. That is what it 
says and that the outcome of the report will be brought back to the SPC 
in the first instance.  
CLLR FERRIS: Can I come back in?  Again, I can understand that and I 
can see the point where maybe some people might think there is a review 
going on already, so there is no point in having an independent review. As 
I said earlier, there is no sight or sound of when this review will be made 
available to the members and as Cllr O'Brien said, we haven't seen the 

terms of reference. I agree that all members of the Bray Municipal District 
signed this motion, okay the Greystones members have their own issues 
in relation to their own service and perhaps they put down a Notice of 
Motion as well, but I think we should go ahead with this vote. Maybe if we 
could get clarification on when we would get the report back from Colm or 
from Frank. But I think we should go ahead with this vote because, as Cllr 
Behan said this is going on 31 years since that family were tragically 
killed and council after council after council in Bray it's always been a 
priority, so I think we should go ahead with this because we are all 
agreed on it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I am going to bring in the Chief Executive first.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: The review is independent, there is no question about 
that. Dr Brian Sweeney, I have met him previously working in another 
local authority, but it is a fully independent review. He has a PhD in the 
area, he is a chief fire officer from outside the jurisdiction, he can come in 
and look at it independently. I think we have that. We can come back to 
you with a date, unless you have one.  
COLM: We are hoping it will be back with us in the first quarter. Obviously 
the capacity review was taking up his time, up until now, but we are 
hoping he will be able to concentrate on the report going forward, so we 
would hope to have it back in the first quarter, but we can check and see 
if there is a more definitive date than that.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank, I welcome that, Colm and that won't be too long for 
us to wait. In the meantime, I still believe that we should pass this 
motion and if there is, as the Chief Executive is saying, an independent 
review going on, because the person conducting it is independent, that is 
well and good but I think for a start the members in Bray like to see the 
terms of reference, would like to see some kind of provisional report as to 
the works that are going on, but I still think that we should vote on this 
motion today. I think it should be recorded as to how serious the situation 
is, Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy outlined how big Bray has gotten over the 
past good many years and I think it's long time now since we had our 
full-time service in Bray.  
 
I would like to just mention as well there have been people campaigning 
outside the Bray Town Hall offices for many years, calling for our own fire 
service there and unfortunately some of those people who have been 
campaigning have actually died since then and didn't see their dream 
come through. They were relatives of people who died. I think as a mark 
of respect we should pass the motion here and we can explore it, we can 
explore it further from then.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Thank you, Cllr Anne Ferris. Can I take that as a 
proposal?   
CLLR FERRIS: Yes, I propose it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposed by Cllr Anne Ferris.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I will second it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: By Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy. So we will take a vote on 
it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just to clarify the situation in relation to votes because 
this came up earlier at the meeting. It's in your standing orders votes and 

divisions. Every question should be determined by a show of hands unless 
three members request a division, in which case the names for and 
against the motion should be taken down in writing and recorded in the 
minutes. So as meeting's administrator, when I ask is there no dissent, if 
there is no dissent, I assume that all members present and participating 
in this meeting in time are for the motion.  
CLLR FERRIS: I am happy with that, Cathaoirleach. Unless there are any 
dissenters.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Any dissent?  Three members.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There is no dissent, is there?  No.  
CLLR FERRIS: The motion has been passed?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes. Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Notice of Motion 
number 11 in the names of Cllr Miriam Murphy and Cllr Aoife Flynn 
Kennedy, December 2020. I will go to Lorraine for a response.  
ADMINISTRATOR: This relates to the issue of supporting a right to a 
personal assistance service to have freedom and control over all aspects 
of their lives to enable them to fully participate in an inclusive society as 
equals. It's set out on the agenda. The response is that this is a matter 
for the elected members.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Excuse me, Cllr Miriam Murphy, I don't think is with us.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I can speak on this. I spoke with Cllr Miriam 
Murphy today, she is unable to come to today's meeting. Really what Cllr 
Miriam Murphy and I were looking for is a statement of support from our 
fellow councillors. There is no action required by the local authority or 
yourselves individually, the responsibility for supporting PAs, lies with a 
different department. However the Independent Living Movement are 
looking for local authority councillors to make a statement of support. So 
this motion is basically asking for ourselves here today to state that we 
support this motion, that individuals who wish to live independently and 
have additional needs, as Cllr Murphy would say herself if she was able to 
be present. She spoke to me this morning. She would not be able to live 
independently without the support she is getting. She feels lucky to have 
those supports but it's actually not look, it's an entitlement, so it's really 
looking for the motion to be passed and for the statement of support by 
ourselves. That is what is being sought.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy, I think we all 
would be in agreement with that.  
CLLR NEARY: Can I just come in there?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Jodie Neary. Yes.  
CLLR NEARY: I very much support this motion. I wrote that motion that is 
referenced there in it by Thomas Pringle and it was accepted cross-party 
in the Dail. Unfortunately it hasn't been acted on by those in Government, 
which is disappointing, so I do think that showing our support today 
would add that little bit of pressure and awareness of the need to have 
this. Because it's very important that everyone is given the opportunity to 
live with full autonomy as possible, including people with disabilities, but 
they need the resources and it needs to be equal access to those 
resources, so, thank you, to Miriam for bringing this forward and for 
everyone's support on it.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Can I take this is being proposed by 
yourself, Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy and Cllr Miriam Murphy and there is no 
dissent here?  I think we are all in agreement are we.  
ADMINISTRATOR: We have a seconder, Cathaoirleach, who is present.  
CLLR McMANUS: I can second it.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Are you able to, Grace.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Grace McManus. We are all in agreement?  No dissent?   
ADMINISTRATOR: No dissent.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Notice number 12 is in the name of Cllr R O'Connor, 
the 11th of November 2020. I will go to Lorraine for a response.  
ADMINISTRATOR: The motion is set out there, that the council in advance 
of the Enniskerry town plan review and make it a priority to establish the 
creation of a greenway from Dublin to Enniskerry within the plan. Wicklow 
County Council will liaise with Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council to 
examine the feasibility of the proposal. Also with the Bray MD plan of 
which Enniskerry is a part of. Submissions and applications can be made 
at that time.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: I just want to say that I welcome that. The whole aim 
of this is as many of you know, Enniskerry has a big cyclist economy, a 
lot of our local shops depend on them for their income and I am very 
much happy to hear that and I look forward to the plan ahead. Thank 
you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you Cllr O'Connor. I will go on to item number 
13 then. Notice of Motion in the names of Cllr M Kavanagh, Cllr Peir 
Leonard, the 24th of November 2020. I will go to Lorraine for a response.  
ADMINISTRATOR: As both of these elected members aren't present, one 
having to leave and the other for the MD meeting, it suggests that we 
move it to the next meeting unless an lighted member present, want me 
to move forward it with it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Do you want to leave it to the next meeting or deal 
with it now.  
CLLR BEHAN: I propose we defer it until the next meeting.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We will defer it, proposed by Joe Behan and seconded 
by Gerry Walsh. Notice 15 is in the name of Cllr Peir Leonard, that is the 
same she is not present.  
CLLR BEHAN: I propose that be deferred to the next meeting.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If can I have a seconder for that?   
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I can second that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Number 15 is in the name of, Cllr Edward Timmins, the 
30th of November 2020. Lorraine, I will go to you again.  
ADMINISTRATOR: The motion there is set out asking the council to call on 
and request the presence of President Michael D Higgins to advance Irish 
soldiers of the 35th infantry battalion who served in the Siege of 
Jadotville in the DRC. Again, Cathaoirleach, this is a matter for the elected 
members to consider.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Edward Timmins, are you there?   
CLLR TIMMINS: I am. Thank you for facilitating this Notice of Motion. This 
has been circulated in other councils successfully around the country and 
I have spoken to a number of people, retired people from the defence 
forces about the situation. The people who were involved in this siege 

were very brave and they were put up a fight and they were vastly 
outnumbered by the other side by mercenaries and others.  
 
Some haven't ever had their bravery recognised. This is really a blight on 
the defence forces that this matter is still outstanding, there was a book 
written about it a few years ago by Declan Power, who is an expert, in 
this area, about the siege of Jadotville. Anyone I have spoken to who 
knows the history of it, agrees they should be recognised and they 
haven't been to date. That is why I like to bring this motion to the council 
today.  
CLLR BOURKE: I would like to second it, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, thank you Cllr Edward Timmins for bringing that 
and thank you, Cllr Bourke for seconding that. Is everyone in agreement 
with that notice?  No sis sent, take it as being carried?  Yes. Thank you.  
CLLR FERRIS: Well done, Edward.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: The next is notice number 16, again it's in the name of 
Cllr Edward Timmins, the 2nd of December 2020. I will go to you, 
Lorraine, for a response.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Again the motion is set out there on the agenda and 
the response is that this is a worthwhile proposal and it also might be 
appropriate to copy the Chief Executive of Tourism Ireland in this 
correspondence. As they have a role in promoting the island of Ireland.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Thank you, again, I will be brief. This motion is self-
explanatory, I am wandering slightly outside what the council does, but 
we are in the business of tourism and promoting tourism and this is, to 
me is an area that is crying out to be dealt with and has been neglected. I 
mean I think if something like the wild Atlantic way, a simple idea which 
has reaped huge rewards to the west coast of this country in terms of 
tourism and profile. Similarly we have a massive heritage link with US 
Presidents and needless to say many tourists from America come to this 
country and are not aware of a lot of it. Especially there is quite a strong 
link to Northern Ireland, a lot of former Presidents have family links to 
Northern Ireland. So I would propose that this area is explored and is 
developed and I believe it could reap rewards. People are more interested 
in heritage and history, that whole area is a huge area of tourism and it's 
a fantastic way, if you ever go to another country, if you investigate and 
follow up on person or people, it's a great way of discovering people and 
countryside and discovering history and meeting new people and, I think 
it is the way that tourism is going to go in terms of people looking at 
culture and history and I think this could take off in future.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr Edward Timmins, I think it's a good 
notice. Gerry O'Neill.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I would second that motion in a 
big way there. I think there is a huge market to be tapped there in 
America. We are here at the moment in Blessington which twinned up 
with the city of Nebraska, the amount of people throughout America, 
whether they took part in the civil war or this, that or the other, there is a 
huge interest from America in Ireland, apart from the President end of it, 
you know. So I think if we can do anything there to open the gets to 

encourage that type of business, we are actually here, we are at the 
moment in Blessington we are looking for if we can see if we can find a 
relation of Joe Biden around and we would be on the map. I fully support 
Cllr Timmins, fully support his motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Cllr O'Neill. The Notice of Motion is 
proposed by Cllr Edward Timmins and seconded by Gerry O'Neill. Are we 
all in favour?  Yeah. No dissents. Agreed. That is carried.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Thank you, members.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Notice of Motion number 17 in the names of Melanie 
Corrigan and Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy. I will go to Lorraine.  
ADMINISTRATOR: That motion is set out on the agenda and the response 
is that this matter can be referred to the newly established Disability and 
Inclusion Steering Committee for inclusion in their action plan which is 
being developed at present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Melanie Corrigan.  
CLLR CORRIGAN: I want to say that one in six people have problems 
understanding basic text and one in in four basic maths. They don't 
believe this has political process and this needs to be addressed for 
families, communities and the economy. This became prevalent to me 
and we had a Part 8 in Enniskerry and the amount who came to me 
looking for understanding of it. It's not the way it's written, it's the way 
that it's presented, I think NALA accessed local authority staff and public 
service workers and you as councillors, if we understood some sort of 
NALA training which gives editing and presenting training services it 
would be much more easier way of getting the information, the correct 
informed out to people in the community. It's not just people with low 
literacy, it's people who are dyslexic, dyspraxic and visual issues. It's 
something we should all be looking at and through work that is going out 
in the community to make it more accessible for everyone to be able to 
understand. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy. Did you look to 
come in?   
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I will be quick. Thank 
you, Lorraine for that response. We have raised it at the new Wicklow 
Disability Committee, they are supportive of it. I suppose what we are 
calling for here is a statement of support from owl the council Ayres to 
say that they have the full backing of the councillors, so when they go to 
put it in their work plan they've can go ahead. If that would be possible 
that would be great.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Can I come in briefly on that. I think this is a really good 
motion and it hits to heart of general communication between state 
bodies and members of the public. I include Wicklow County Council, with 
all due respect in that list as well. I often see communication from the 
Council and other state bodies and I can't understand what they are 
saying. If you look at often planning reports, the jargon that is used, so I 
think that when state body, including the Council, I suppose we can speak 
more for the council, when they are communicating with members of the 
public, I think it would be helpful to simplify what the message is and not 
to speak in jargon type terms, thank you.  

CATHAOIRLEACH: Does anyone else want to come in?   
CLLR CRONIN: I want to offer my support to that motion. It's an 
important motion that Cllr Corrigan and Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy have 
brought forward. It's a huge issue that everyone is facing every day, so I 
want to offer my support to both of them on their motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can I take that, Cllr Corrigan as a proposal and from 
Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy, is that seconded from yourself?   
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Yeah.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Are we all in agreement with this?  There is no dissent?  
Motion is carried. That concludes the agenda, so it does. We had 17 
notices of motion, I want to thank everyone for taking the time to be 
there. There is two notices that we are going to carry forward that we 
didn't get to because people had to leave the meeting. I want to thank 
you for coming here today to get us through the notices of motion, some 
of these have been here since 2019 and I want to thank everyone from 
the executive and the members for facilitating the meeting and coming 
along and giving your time to go through them. Thank you, everyone, I 
appreciate it.  
CLLR FERRIS: Well done, Cathaoirleach.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Thank you, members.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
