 
1
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT WICKLOW 
COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 7TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2019 AT 2:00PM. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the stenographic 
notes in the above-named action for communication support.  
 
J SINNAMON 
J SINNAMON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-VERBATIM TRANSCRIPT OF COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 
MONDAY, OCTOBER 7TH 2019:  
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon. Members, before we start the meeting 
proper, if anyone has any votes of sympathy.  
ADMINISTRATOR: For Patricia Kavanagh, sister of a former colleague, Joan, 
who passed away recently.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: And Cllr Fitzgerald, sorry, the name on this is wrong.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Cathaoirleach, I like to offer sympathies to the former parish 
priest in Blessington, he was there for many a year, and also to the family of 
the national, another... [INAUDIBLE DUE TO NOT SPEAKING INTO MIC) first 
to confirm and sign the minutes of the ordinary meeting on Monday the 2nd 
of September.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Voted by John Snell, seconded by Cllr Matthews.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To credit the disposal of land shown on the map in 
Kilcoole, for a period of 30 years by way of a sporting lease.  
To consider the disposal of 0.03462 hectares of land shown on the map, 
situated at Seaview Arklow, to the South East Cycling Club for a period of 30 
years, can I have a proposer.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and seconded by Sylvester Bourke. 
Agreed?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, to consider the Chief Executive's Monthly 
Management Report.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I will just mention one or two 
highlights. The new mobile library was officially launched today, so that will 
be starting shortly, very welcome addition to our library service. We had the 
town awards last week, so on the 30th of September, in orbed for and 
Rathdrum and people generally agreed it went very well, we applied for 
funding last month, one was 500,000, comprehensive funding application for 
the restoration of the Victorian sea front provisions and also signage around 
the town. It also applied to the regional development fund for the content 
creation hub in Wicklow County Council so, hopefully we will have success on 
that. The ecotrail took place on Saturday, 28th of September, starting and 
finishing on Bray sea front, 1100 participants went up to the bray Head and 
other places. It went very well. Again it's going to get bigger, I would say, 
next year. A very successful culture night also, theatre right around the 
county. So I will take any questions on the rest of that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: In relation to the Chief Executive's comment on the 
national enterprise awards I would ask for the neighbouring community, the 
very best of luck in the competition and I would like to say thank you to 

 
3
everyone, from the Rathdrum point of view, especially the community that 
came together and worked together to make it happen, there was 
community representatives, Tidy Towns and business people and indeed 
representatives from Wicklow County Council as well. I think we did 
ourselves proud and the Rathdrum people did themselves proud and put 
their best foot forward and we are hoping we will get something, I think we 
are winners already, I want to thank everyone for all the work.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Aoife Flynn Kennedy.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Just to thank you for the support in the area of 
housing for the comparison figures. Just in relation to BV accommodation 
and the fact that 32 children are BV application, I would wonder if we could 
get right now, the information in relation to them and what efforts are being 
made. Obviously the impact it has on those children and just in relation to 
housing first, the service provider was to be appointed in October and I am 
looking for an update to see whether or not it has happened and then in 
relation to the Sonas facility to check if the legal issues, regarding the 
handover there have been finalised.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Vincent Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I thank the Chief Executive for the 
report. Just in relation to the public lighting, I believe there has been put up 
there a number of occasion, people who might come particularly coming into 
the winter months. Over the last few years we were unable to provide the 
additional lighting because of financial resource, a problem with it. But, 
briefly we did put up the number of lights in Blessington road, so it was 
there for the last number of months now.  
 
The big issue is there were estates that were probably built ten years ago 
and have no lights ever since. So they are sitting there, we are contacting 
the ESB and various different organisations within the council as well, all 
frustrated residents in the area, with regards to it. Now we looking to put a 
bit of pressure on the ESB with the fact that we are heading into the winter 
months now and that will need to be rectified. The second was in regard to a 
very small estate in Shillelagh with only a half a dozen houses in it. Again 
there is three or four lights in it, sitting there for quite a number of years 
that need to be taken in charge by the council. I filled in the forms recently 
with regard to taking it in charge, the lights are still there, unavailable for 
the people to be able to use them and again coming into the winter months I 
think we made to address those concerns.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you Cathaoirleach, and thank you to the Chief 
Executive for a report that is most comprehensive and informative. Just a 
comment on the section on the housing there, looking at the social housing 
list, in the comparisons there, with the last year, same period, there was 
actually an increase from 3.180 to 4,348. But it's to be welcomed to the see 
the schemes there, we have the pipeline schemes and the schemes on site. 
Hopefully that activity will help to address, but again the homeless figures, 
the comparisons for August 2015 and 2019 we have an increase in the 
number of presentations by ten from 51 to 61 and again we are increasing 
the number of children, so again that is a concern. We still seem to be, in 
spite of the schemes that are on site and on the pipeline, we are still overly 

 
4
reliant on our private sector and our HAP scheme to provide our housing. 
That is the situation at the minute, but I also want to just look at the 
homeless HAP and acknowledge the great work which has been done in that 
section. 131 households there, that said, there is 74 families there, 74 cases 
and 57 prevention cases that they dealt with, which is a great addition to 
that. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Joe Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, first of all thank you for your vote 
of sympathy on the death of my father-in-law last week and to all of the 
members for your good wishes. One question on the report and it's in 
relation to the roads programme. Specifically the proposal to put a third line 
on the N11 near Kilmacanogue, the off lane to service the garage and take 
some of the pressure off some of the other carriageways and hopefully 
increase the speed limit at that occasion. The first question is what 
happened to that project, it's not referred to in the report, I would have 
thought at this stage the work would have commenced on that and many 
hard-pressed motorists will be disappointed that it doesn't give any 
indication of progress on it.  
 
Apart from that, I am sure a number of members from Bray Municipal 
District were contacted recently by a res dent who lives close to the garage 
there who is concerned about what he saw in e-tender documents that were 
put in by the council here, which he maintains and I don't know, the answer 
to this question, I want to ask the Chief Executive this, he maintains there 
have been changes made to what was agreed in the procedure that 
happened at the last council in relation to that particular design. He 
maintains if it is now built in accordance with the tender documents it's 
going to result in extreme danger for the four or five sets of residents who 
live just before you come to the garage. So, I would like clarification on 
those two points, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Cullen.  
CLLR S CULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I just want to pay tribute to the 
Ashford community on the Bank of Ireland Town Awards that were held 
recently. A wonderful effort by everyone involved, particularly the 
community of Ashford and the businesses, I have to give a mention to be 
Ashford Studios in Mount Usher for their hospitality, but a great effort by 
everyone involved and obviously to thank the staff that put such an evident 
in, particularly Susan and Joan from the Municipal District, so well done to 
everyone.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gerry O'Neill.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Again, I like to thank the Chief Executive for the report. We, I 
have been asking for a while now and I have had no answers as regards the 
situation and why we have, again we have 336,000 being built there, the 
works are starting two or three months and they are in Kildare, the part of 
the town. I have been asking for some sort of discussion to take place 
between Wicklow County Council officials and Kildare officials about the 10% 
allocation in that area. At the moment we have 10% that go to Kildare, we 
have 280 people on the housing list in Blessington. We haven't had a house 
built there in 12 years patient from one bungalow. I would like and the 
people of Blessington want to know what is the situation and are we going to 

 
5
be left?  Although these 336 houses will all be built in the village of 
Blessington, but as the border shows it it's in Kildare, they avail of our 
services, whether it be and they pay the levies to Kildare County Council, so 
we feel we are being hard done by here, so I would ask the Chief Executive 
to had, what moves are being made to help Kildare County Council, with 
regard that allocation. Also another one extra, you might have a look at, 
there is a group in the town there, most of these people live in apartments 
and whatever, but there is up to 40 of them there and for over 12 months 
now, they are looking for a piece of land for allotments and we are obliged, 
as a local authority, to supply land for allotments, whether it be the 
[INAUDIBLE] 1926 Act or the 2000 Act. It's in our development plan, but 
there is a ferocious struggle going on, in 18 months, where this part are 
looking for an area, we do have the land there, it's lying there 15 years, we 
do have the area and maybe by the next, by this time next month's report, 
there will be something there, something sorted out.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Paul O'Brien.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I also want to thank the CO for 
his report. Just two items, can I also commend the staff of Wicklow County 
Council on their handling of Storm Lorenzo even though it didn't hit as bad 
as which thought I want to commend the staff. Just before that storm, there 
were five boats lost in Bray and two in Wicklow Town and there was very 
little about it, so I am wondering is there anything going to be done in the 
future, a system for the harbour board or the harbour users and also I want 
to echo what Cllr Cullen said in Ashford, in all of the efforts going on there is 
two eye sores in Ashford, the garage on the main street right beside the 
apartments and the houses and is there anything the council can do about 
these two eye sores? .  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Dermot O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: I just echo, follow up on the same as Cllr Kennedy, it's 
been on the agenda for month after month and we haven't seen any 
progress, so a timeline would be right on that. I can complement the PPN on 
the training fare and Grace got to visit it on the day and I am excited what 
they will do next year. A huge amount of planning goes into that, also the 
LCDC, I see the review in the report. That is my soundtrack... again, I have 
just joined the LCDC and the potential for the impact that comes out of that 
is really, I think going to be realised over the next five years and it's doing 
huge work. I had some questions in the planning section, with the regional 
spatial economic strategy, are we done or does the minister have any more 
provisional opinions he is going to send back to us and a question mark 
around autonomy. Also, I wonder about the, in the planning applications on 
page 30 there is, I notice in the, in the section other has the highest volume 
and I wonder is there so much variety in the other that it can't, it can't be 
broken down into other heading, because when you look at something and 
the highest volume is other and you don't know what other is, I wonder 
what other is. Also, finally in the ICT report, just an update on the customer 
relations management system and how that will roll out into the Municipal 
District and this idea of ticketing system and how that will have a positive 
impact on the MDs.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Grace McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Thank you to the Chief Executive 

 
6
for the report. I have two questions. The first relates to the Housing First 
policy, I am just wondering did we have targeting for 2018 and 2019 and if 
so what were they and did we meet them?  My second question relates to, I 
want to ask about asylum seeker that we have in Wicklow. I now we have 
two centres, I believe in the county and while, if you got me started on how 
unjust direct provision is, we would be here all day and I know that is a 
national policy. I am wondering what role we have as a County Council in 
supporting asylum seeker here in our county in welcoming them and making 
sure they can access the supports they need and deserve and that might be 
useful for if it is part of our remit and our responsibility to have it, so if you 
could give me some feedback on where we are at with that. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Matthews.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. In relation to the Public 
Lighting Report I note there is a downward trend in the number of open 
faults which is a good thing, but as we are approaching winter public lighting 
is going to become an issue again. A number of problems come to the ESB 
not attending so it's not electricity, it's out of the hands of the County 
Council, is there anything the Chief Executive can do to liaise with the ESB 
to try and get a more timely approach to deal with ESB and network faults.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
 
Cllr Kavanagh.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Before I make my point I want to thank the council for 
the glasses they have today instead of the plastic mugs. Also, I want to say 
well done to the Tidy Towns Arklow doing so well and winning gold medals. 
My point also is the cumulative figures asked for in the last report have now 
been put in for housing, so thank you very much to that, so we can do 
comparative figures for 2018 and 2019, it's much easier to know where you 
stand. My point is in relation to the Municipal District spend on page 47, I 
just notice that there is a lot of money being carried over and there is an 
awful lot of money left to be spent and we are in October and we are still 
sitting down to discuss the next Municipal District spent and I just want to 
know is this really because of a shortage of staff or what?  Because it just 
seems that we get one year to make a difference and the money isn't being 
spent and it's still there at the end of the year and we are ending up with a 
backlog which means the following year we are going to have more to do 
and I want to know what is the reason for that?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Whitmore.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you, Chair. I would like to echo Cllr McManus' 
question about the DP centre and the emergency centre. I would also like to 
say congratulations to Wicklow Welcomes who won an award for the work 
they have done in the area. This really set an example and an example that 
applies across the country. Other areas are looking to Wicklow to see how 
we facilitate it and work to integrate people into the community so, that was 
a really big success.  
 
Just in relation to, I see that Dublin City Council have at the moment, they 
are looking to redevelop their market in Capel Street and to provide a retail 
and market centre. I am wondering is there an opportunity for Wicklow 
County Council to feed into that as part of our food strategy. We have 

 
7
absolutely fantastic food producers in this county and those people, if they 
had a market in Dublin that they could access, I think that would be a huge 
advantage to them, whether the Chief Executive would even have 
discussions with DCC to see if there was some way we could not partner, 
that might be a bit formal but play a part in that process. Thank you very 
much.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you, first of all I would like to congratulate Arklow Town 
Team, great achievement to get the gold medal. I would like to congratulate 
the director of services who gave them that boost to get over the line. That 
decision has been dated. To get the gold medal is fantastic. Just an public 
lighting, we are coming into the dark season, the clock will be going back 
shortly and definitely in Wicklow Town there seems to be a lot of lights out. 
Last night I drove across high street and new street and the place is like the 
black hole of Calcutta, there is that many lights out. I would like to thank 
Declan O'Brien his help when we tell him about these problems with the 
lighting, about you we need to put a big effort in at this time of year to 
make sure the lights are working in the areas because it's the most 
dangerous time of the year.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and the Chief Executive for his 
report. I would like to say to the Tidy Towns well done for the fantastic work 
and achievements that we have recently achieved and just to acknowledge 
the amount of money in real terms that they save our local authority. And a 
more specific item in my own town, Kilcoole, there is two derelict sites 
sitting there for the last 7, 8, 9, 10 years and it is destroying Trojan work 
which is done by Tidy Towns in Kilcoole. They enter the competition every 
year, but they have no chance because of stuff like this, so I would like to 
see more focus on getting these particular sites sorted. And, on the lighting, 
again there was a good survey done in the Kilcoole area a number of months 
ago, in regards to lights that were out, but there are about four or five, I 
think it's about four or five at this stage, where the ESB need to come in and 
physically carry out important work, they have been communicated with, but 
it seems to have gone into a black hole and nothing is happening, so again 
maybe whoever in the local authority could liaise with them, I have been 
doing it, obviously in my capacity as a rep, but it's like talking to a wall, 
nothing is happening, so I think it should be, this year, basically they need 
to come and lift a pole, put in some wiring and replace it and they seem to 
be ignoring it, it's just not on and someone needs to explain what is going 
on.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Rory O'Connor.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: Thank you, just about the bi literacy plan of action, in 
future, if the RSPCC get emails about the result of these actions like the 
survey and all of that so we could inform everyone around our area about 
what happens and what the results were, that would be great.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Again, thank you to the Chief 
Executive for his report. Just on the waste management and the 
environmental services, there has been an increase in fly-tipping and illegal 
dumping in the south west and rural Wicklow and I am wondering on how 

 
8
many cameras we have to use to combat this illegal dumping and closely 
work with Pure Project on excellent project that does great work, at the 
same time, the amount of fly-tipping or illegal dumping in rural Wicklow is 
increasing by the week and we need to be extra diligent and the one thing 
that does work is cameras that pick up license plates.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, just two things for the Chief 
Executive. One is following on from Grace McManus's comment a moment 
ago. In relation to the direct provision, does the Department be in touch 
with the council about the direct provision centre and if so when was the last 
time they were in touch with the centre and the other time was last year we 
had this conversation about the public lighting as well and there was, I think 
the Chief Executive was going to talk to electricity or ESB in relation to all of 
the outages we had coming into the winter. I am wondering what was the 
outcome of those talks and are we facing the same thing again this year 
right across the county, because there were hundreds of lights out last 
winter.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: I can't let the occasion go without mentioning the N81, one 
person killed yesterday near Hollywood Cross. Recently 1.1 million was spent 
on the N81 north of Blessington and doing resurfacing and no one in the 
area, including my fellow councillors thought was necessary and no 
consultation necessary was taken place with the councillors in relation to the 
expenditure.  
 
There is much more needy spots, widening the N81, making that safer, that 
1.1 million could be spent. We feel we are being treated with contempt as 
councillors. A year ago we met with one of the TD,s who isn't inform us he 
was going to come and look at it. Extraordinary at the meeting in May it was 
voted 11-10 by one vote not to include it, by colleagues here who attended 
were, voted in favour of it, but they were outvoted. Like what are people 
thinking and just another tragedy, you can't put money on it, and it's, we 
just feel we are being ignored and treated with contempt in West Wicklow 
and Carlow and a bit of Kildare that nothing is being done, shelved again 
and just to highlight it to the Chief Executive. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Just before I go back to the Chief Executive, I probably 
should have told you this before you got to ask him his questions. It is his 
birthday today, so we should be nice to him.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you. Just in relation to the HAP and the 
accommodation, we have a detailed presentation come up on that shortly, 
so if you could wait for that and all of those issues will be dealt with there. A 
public lighting, we certainly follow it up in Carnew and Shillelagh with the 
ESB and Airtricity, they have taken on some work in public lighting and in 
terms of percentages, our numbers are what they always were and 
comparable to the rest of the country. We will have a scheme, the full 
replacement of the LED lights will be done again, which will help, but we can 
contact the ESB in relation to the issues there. In relation to the unlevel 
parallel road on the N11. My understanding is, but the temporary 
assessment was done, there was only one tender, there was a lot of tooing 
and froing with the tender and all of the information is back now and they 

 
9
are ready to appoint, in terms of the changes, there is always changes, 
obviously when you do detailed design and accommodation works in 
changes, my understanding is there an a meeting taking place with that 
resident to explain the accommodation works and to go through that in 
detail. I don't know if you want to add anything to that, Colm?  Okay. Just 
in relation to Blessington, I will take that up with my counterpart with 
houses and what we can do in relation to the percentage of houses. The 
allotments, again, it's probably a question of funding but I will look into that 
and get back to Cllr O'Neill. In relation to the boats and the severe weather 
events, it's something we will take up with harbour master, maybe they 
could be comparative with the co-ordination centre with the is he veer 
weather team so it's getting the information straight out. It's a good point. 
The RSAS is complete, we are now proceeding and that will follow the local 
area plan so that process kicks off, so unless planning want to make a 
comment on that?  
 
Again, Cllr McManus, Housing First we will come back to that. In relation to 
direct provision Cllr Kennedy asked us, the last contact we had with the 
Department of Justice was when the decision was made, but the asylum 
seeker, the people in direct provision and seeking protection are generally 
the responsibility of the Department of Justice. Now we had the Wicklow 
Welcomes got an award over the weekend and they are certainly doing a lot 
to help them and I know they are involved in Tidy Towns, the schools are 
involved, health services and we will help in any way we can, but they are 
definitely the responsibility of the Department Of Justice. Just in relation to 
the money that is spent, generally with the Municipal Districts, during the 
summer, it's the roadworks programme that takes precedence, as the big 
money has to be spent and it's this time of the year that the discretionary 
work gets done. I suppose it's a matter for the Municipal District and you 
can bring it up with the Municipal District, but I will certainly highlight that, 
but it's this time of the year that we will take the focus on those projects. In 
relation to Kilcoole, derelicts sites that register is kept in planning and there 
is a role for Municipal District, but we will follow up on the two of those. The 
biodiversity and the results of the surveys we will certainly get that 
information out, as soon as it comes in. Now, remember in relation to the 
cameras and the fly-tipping we will have a detailed presentation on that 
later, so you will have the details on the cameras and the progress we are 
making. In relation to the N81, we will pass all of that information on to the 
II it's their responsibility in reality, but we certainly pass it on.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Just before I go to the next agenda item, I had 
received a suspension of standing orders, so I will just, do you want to read 
it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cathaoirleach, there was a request for suspension of 
standing orders so in accordance with standing orders we get a proposer and 
a seconder to hear it at 4.30, it's submitted by Cllr Mullen that Wicklow 
County Council knows the increasing level of personal abuse and threats 
being made on social media against public representatives, Wicklow County 
Council ask that all public representatives assure that bullying language is 
not used on line and ask their supporters to engage in a respectful manner, 
Wicklow County Council will provide support to any representative being 

 
10
targeted on line and engage with the guards to ensure that any illegal 
behaviour is investigated. Can we have an agreement to discuss that, I have 
a seconder?  Cllr O'Brien. Agreed.  
CLLR BEHAN: Before we go off the Chief Executive's report, Mr. Flynn was 
going to answer the question on that parallel road. He was in the public 
gallery, I would like to hear the answer, but particularly because Chief 
Executive you said there is always changes between a part aid and a tender?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: No, when the part A is done it gives the indicative design 
and it then goes into detail design of the accommodation works.  
>>: Just to outline the concerns, I think they are being raised by a 
particular landowner, we are meeting that landowner, the meeting has been 
rescheduled until Friday, but what was presented here and what went to 
tender are largely the same scheme. With the presentation we sat down with 
each of the landlords and came up with specific arrangements for each 
landlord in accordance with accommodation works and that came to the 
detail of the issue that has arisen, one landlord has an issue and we will join 
landlords, but we will sit down with them and sort it out. In terms of the 
overall scheme, we do have a project liaison officer and her role is to engage 
ongoing with landowners, or anyone who has an issue with the scheme and 
also in terms of the probe of the scheme we would have approached the site 
before now, the scheme has encountered no delays but finally we have an 
agreement with the contractor, we are waiting on final sanction from TI. To 
progress the scheme and we would hope to have that in the next week or 
so.  
CLLR BEHAN: Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Just to follow up on what the Chief Executive said in 
relation to the Department of Justice. My question is quite clear, is there any 
correspondence from the Department of Justice to Wicklow County Council in 
relation to any direct provision in Wicklow, are they looking at any direct 
provision that the council knows of?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: No.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Paul O'Brien.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Looking for an answer on Ashford as well the garage and 
the apartments and houses.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I will get a report on that and come back to you, if that 
is okay.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, item 5 on the agenda to receive a general update 
on the work of the Town Teams with a short presentation, I would like to 
welcome here the chairs of both the Blessington Town Team and the 
Wicklow Town Team, John Horan and David Shannon and also Christine 
Flood.  
CHRISTINE: Thank you very much, Cathaoirleach. I am going to be very 
brief and just give a quick overview of the Town Teams and then, as the 
Cathaoirleach said, we have the Chairs of the Wicklow Town Team and the 
Blessington Town Team. So the Town Teams were established in, across the 
county and the guidelines, I suppose the impetus us for this came from the 
Department of Jobs Enterprise and Innovation, a framework For Town 
Centre Renewal. The objective of this document was to look at regeneration 
of towns and we are looking at regeneration of towns in a sustainable 

 
11
manner. The action was first initiated as part of the action plan for jobs in 
2014. 
 
The framework proposes three steps. The document is available online for 
councillors, or, if you want a copy I can email it to you. A town centre health 
check and engagement with the wider community, the formation of a Town 
Team, or management partnership and I have to stress partnership is the 
key word in the Town Teams. It's a partnership between the business 
community, the local authority and the wider community. The third action 
proposed under the framework is development of the Town Centre Action 
Plan.  
 
The whole idea behind the Town Teams, it's one vision and one voice, it's a 
collaboration and unity of message, because we have many different 
organisations working within the towns and doing amazing work, but it's 
really just to share that knowledge and to develop the synergy between the 
Town Teams.  
 
Now, this slide is probably difficult to read, but you are talking about, these 
are the elements of a health check and it includes diversity of uses, a 
competitive offering, representation, commercial rents, accessibility, vacant 
property, environmental quality, public realm, customer feedback, 
perception of safety, commercial yields on property and pedestrian flows. 
These are just some of the things that are, the ingredients of a health check. 
I have to say the Town Teams were formed in an organic way in Wicklow 
and we didn't go about them step by step as indicated in this framework, but 
we are getting there.  
 
Also, relevant to Town Teams and I am not going to go through all 13 
criteria here, but this is a list from Failte Ireland destination towns and they 
are similar criteria, attractiveness of the town, public realm, things to see 
and do, accommodation, food and drink, retail, etc. Safety and security, etc.  
 
So we have Town Teams established in Bray, Greystones, Arklow, Wicklow 
and Blessington and as I mentioned, they grew in a fairly organic way. Bray 
Town Team was established initially in conjunction with the Chamber of 
Commerce and arising out of the success of the Purple Flag in Bray. It was 
established in 2014, or probably early 2015 and it built on the success of the 
Purple Flag. Greystones is probably not a full Town Team, it's kind of a 
hybrid in that it was established initially by the business community, they 
established Greystones 2020, but we generally treat it as a Town Team. 
Arklow Town Team was set up, we did a video for Arklow to promote 
business in Arklow and arising out of the successful engagement of the 
business community a Town Team was formed in Arklow.  
 
In Wicklow, there was an initiative and Dave will talk about it a little bit 
more, there Was Kick-start Wicklow initiative developed by Wicklow 
Chamber of Commerce and the Wicklow Town Team emerged out of the 
need to implement that plan. Then Blessington Town Team built on the 
success, Blessington had a number of organisation, including the Blessington 

 
12
Forum. And they were successful in the enterprising towns, so the next step 
on winning the Leinster, Best Town in Leinster in the enterprising town was 
to form a Town Team to build on that success. I will briefly go through the 
stakeholders in the Town Teams, as mentioned, it's fairly organic and it's not 
a case of one size fits all, but generally speaking, these categories of 
representative, these are the stakeholders on the Town Teams.  
 
Business and retailer, landlords, employers, Chambers of Commerce, 
tourism, hospitality, An Garda Síochána, tidy towns and schools and 
educators and of course council members and council officials are 
represented on the Town Teams also.  
 
The action plans, again they generally cover things like public realm Tidy 
Towns business and retail, culture and heritage, greenways and tourism, 
marketing and promotion, festivals and events, transport, safety and 
security, finance and funding. So, I would just briefly mention Bray Town 
Team was established following the Purple Flag and they, a number of 
projects, now Bray Town Team needs to be really invigorated. It doesn't 
meet, due to the changes in the chamber and the council you need to get 
that going again and also, oddly enough when times were slow and Biggs 
wasn't great and we had more retailers and businesses engaging and I think 
it's a sign of the healthy economy that it's harder to, businesses are busy 
which is a good sign, and it's hard to get them to engage. But Bray has, it 
had achieved the Purple Flag status, it has produced a guide to doing 
business in Bray, which is, and it's currently working on developing a town 
centre health check.  
 
Greystones, as mentioned, was established by the business leaders. We 
have various initiatives such as Christmas lights. The Greystones train 
station, I don't know how clearly you can see the illustration on that, but the 
plan is to develop artwork in Greystones train station showing famous 
people with Greystones connections and to generally relandscape and design 
the area around Greystones Station that both outside the station and inside 
on the platforms and, at the same time, celebrating some of the Greystones 
famous residents. Greystones are currently engaged in developing a public 
realm plan, again 2020 applied for funding for funding and Wicklow County 
Council is matching that funding as is Greystones Tidy Towns, so the 
consultants doing the work for Greystones and it should be complete 
towards the end of November. Greystones 2020 have also developed a new 
website in Greystones. Again, part-funded by the council and in partnership 
with Wicklow County Council. Arklow Town Team have done an enormous 
amount of work and quite a large Town Team, so they have done all sorts of 
things from flower baskets, was one of the first projects, town centre health 
check, they have done the destination town audit, design and development 
of the parade ground and business hub.  
 
They have been awarded leader funding to build, to put a Ronnie Delaney 
commemorative statue in place. They have a Hallowe'en spectacular in its 
third year, they have CCTV going in at the moment, they have a shop front 
painting scheme and they are applying for a charitable status and looking at 

 
13
Purple Flag status for Arklow.  
 
That is the garden, the dementia friendly garden that again through the 
Town Team and the Municipal District this garden was made available 
through following bloom in 2018 and Arklow successfully put in a bid for it. 
So, Wicklow Town Team, and, again, I am not going to go into too much 
detail because Dave is here, and we will talk you through it, but these are 
some of the initiatives of the Wicklow Town Team before you, from the 
health check to the survey.  
 
Then, similarly, Blessington Town Team and they have a health check under 
way, or they have completed a health check and they are on Phase 2 of the 
health check and they have various other initiatives, including the hugely 
successful Blessington greenway. Funding and finance and this is again one 
of the strengths of the Town Teams, through working with the local authority 
in partnership they have access to a fairly wide range of funding, some 
funding Wicklow County Council doesn't have access to, but we have 
partnered them in relation to leader funding.  
 
Also, some of the Town Teams have submitted applications under town and 
village renewal and the Department is very keen, that some of these 
initiatives that are funded are proposed and supported by the community, so 
that is one of the strengths of the Town Team behind it, the CCTV scheme, 
again it's important to have the community support for these schemes. They 
have also been successful in getting sponsorship and the donations in kind, 
the expertise around the tables in these Town Teams is quite impressive and 
in you looked into the CVs of some of the participants, so people give freely 
of their advice and time and that is greatly valued and I have to 
acknowledge, partly because they are here, Dave Shannon is the chair of the 
Wicklow County Council Town Team and the Cathaoirleach is the chair of the 
Blessington Town Team and indeed all of the other Chairpersons of the Town 
Team, because it can be a bit of a thankless job at times.  
 
We have already mentioned the Bank of Ireland Enterprise and Town Awards 
and again the Town Teams have played an important role in participating in 
these awards.  
 
So, as mentioned earlier, these are some of the key attributes of a 
successful town centre and I think that is the objective of the Town Team. 
So, without further ado, I will now hand over to Dave Shannon, chair of the 
Wicklow Town Team.  
DAVE: Cathaoirleach, elected members, good afternoon. My name is Dave 
Shannon, I chair Wicklow County Council Town Team and how did we get 
started?   
 
In about September 2016 Wicklow Chamber approached a group of people 
to have a look at the town, just to, a different view, I suppose the chamber 
felt they were too close to it and we would get a number of people who 
would come and take a different view, or not a different view, but to put 
together some ideas. Out of that came Kick Start Wicklow which we 

 
14
identified a number of projects we needed to do and we presented that 
report to Wicklow Chamber and Wicklow Municipal District Council. The most 
important thing we felt that the time was, apart from the project we felt 
were worthwhile, the most important thing was an implementation 
committee. Because, without an implementation committee, it would be lots 
of other reports that I have had through my desk when I was in the private, 
is that they go into a bottom drawer and they are taken out if someone asks 
you about them or they gather dust.  
 
So, true to that, Christine came back and said, you are dead right, we do 
need an implementation committee and the best way to have the works that 
have you identified implemented is the formation of a Town Team. So with 
that the Town Team was formed, pretty much from the nucleus of the 
people who put the Kick Start document together. We had our first meeting 
in August 2017. Basically the aim of the Wicklow Town Team and we try to 
keep it as simple as we can is to make Wicklow a better place to live, work 
and play. Any ideas that come through the Steering Committee, if it doesn't 
pass that criteria, we move on, because we are trying to improve the town 
as best we can. Our structure is probably slightly different than what 
Christine has spoken about, in that we have A Steering Committee which 
consists of a chair, a vice chair, the chair and outgoing chair of the Wicklow 
Municipal District, a secretary, a finance officer, Wicklow Municipal District 
town administrator sits on our committee and all the team leaders of the 
different groups, of the different working groups which are greenway, park 
and ride, retail, public realm and commercial. Christine Flood attends our 
meetings and she keep us on the straight and narrow and advises us as to 
where we should and shouldn't be going.  
 
Just recently in about the last nine or twelve months, Wicklow Town Team is 
a company limited by guarantee, so that is a good move for the Town Team. 
I am rushing through this because I think you have a lot of work to do, I just 
want to say at the outset if there is anyone who wants further clarification of 
the things we are doing or how the Town Team works I am happy to meet, 
thankfully I am retired so I have a loads of time on my hands. The ongoing 
project, the big stuff we are doing is the east coast greenway, which is the 
greenway from Wicklow to Greystones, we see it as our flagship project, 
with the help of Wicklow County Council, we got funding to do a fusibility 
study. That draft report is now just been made available and that is being 
begun through at the moment. On top of that we have a coastal protection 
report, from ARUP for Wicklow County Council and Irish Rail, hopefully that 
will be due around now.  
 
The plan is, I think, that the Task Force will meet early in 2020 and discuss 
what the next steps are. Just on the east coast greenway, I did a report 
reading, I am not an expert but I thought it was in general positive. It's not 
without its challenges, there are difficulties, the main one being the 
environment and the protection of the environment, but I don't believe it's 
beyond the will of man that both the environment and the greenway, I don't 
think they are mutually exclusive, I think they can work hand in hand if we 
have the right approach and do the right thing.  

 
15
 
The other thing is park and ride. That helps people living in the town to get 
in and out of the place easier, it makes it easier for visitors to come and visit 
us. Are piloting a park and ride with Wexford bus out of the Beehive, but a 
park and ride without a bus corridor is problematic and I am pleased to see 
that the NTA have responded to Deputy Donnelly that they are happy to 
meet with Wicklow to discuss the bus corridor so we are hoping that Wicklow 
County Council will arrange that meeting. I am not saying there is a 
solution, we, or our park and ride team have a picture or a clear view as to 
how they think they can manage it in the short-term, while the third line is 
being put on and all we want to do is get that message across.  
 
The public realm is the public realm and Wicklow Tidy Towns will work hand 
in glove. It's a good collaboration. We have done a geophysical survey of 
both of those places and we are about in the next couple of months to put 
storyboards with pictures and illustration showing what those places looked 
like. I think those will be completely by the end of the year or early next 
year is the lighting of historical sites and the illumination of our historical 
sites. Basically that is brims, the abbey grounds, the churches, Billy Byrne, 
the black castle and so on, so hopefully that will be ready to switch on 
towards the end of the year, early next year.  
 
The retail team, basically they carry out an extensive survey for consumers 
and retailers and we have got that report back, there are five pillars within 
that, we as a retail team will be working to implement those, the one we 
have started with, we have just put an 18-page parking proposal to 
members of the Wicklow Municipal District Council and how we think we can 
improve the parking and make it easier for people to come in and hopefully 
not affect their income too much. That proposes Wicklow Municipal District 
Council and they will get back to us.  
 
Tourism, we hope by next week and by the way public realm, the lighting for 
that, we got it through funding with the help of Wicklow County Council, 
great work and we got great assistance done to help us get that. With 
regard to the heritage walk, hopefully by next year we will have a detailed 
and exciting heritage walk of the town and that is being funded by Leader. 
The other work we have to do at the time is the online promotion of the 
festival in Wicklow and we were launching a festival, which is the promotion 
of Wicklow town through the medium of Irish. It was a fantastic success and 
hopefully we can build on that over the next couple of years.  
 
On the commercial, basically what we are doing is focus on the port area to 
see if we can bring a bit of life to that. The first step will be the new hotel 
which will hopefully get off the ground shortly. Wicklow County Council 
secured funding for pontoons and we are looking at putting that on the river 
and seeing how it works. And I think, we are basically, the commercial team 
is just trying to look at opportunities to bring business, commercial business 
into the town and that is what they are spending their time on at the 
moment. The digital group are going to launch their own website next week, 
again funding from that came from Leader, and one of the big projects 

 
16
facing them is a digital hub or an e-hub and the research is being carried out 
on that by our working group, apprentices have been identified and we are 
working closely with the County Council to see where that goes, if anything.  
 
I think on the future, I think what is the next 12 or 18 months for the Town 
Team, it's to bring all of the projects to fruition and make sure they are 
completed and then we move on. I think one of the things we have to do as 
a Town Team, I am 65, I chair Wicklow Town Team, there is a lot on the 
Town Team of the same ilk as me. We need to be engaging with our 20 and 
30-year-olds to get their view, it's their town, they are the next generation, 
there may be areas they want done that we are not thinking of. With that in 
mind we will be doing some focus groups, some brainstorming with the 
20-year-olds, 20 somethings and 30 somethings to get their views and 
hopefully get them more involved and engaged with what we are trying to 
do in the town.  
 
This one is an pet of mine, we really need to look at Wicklow Town and how 
it fits with the retailing and so on and so forth and I am sure we will be 
going cap in hand to Wicklow County Council or Wicklow Municipal District 
looking for a few bob to do a survey on how effective pedestrianisation of 
the main street in Wicklow to see is it feasible, first of all, how would it work 
and with the environmental climate going on, in 15-20 years’ time, long 
after I am gone it will be the norm, so if we can get a step ahead and have a 
look and see if we can do that. It obviously has to be done in conjunction 
with all of the business and so on. Our tourist team are working on 
developing a brand for St Patrick, that associates the town with it, we all 
know he came to Wicklow Town first, he didn't stay very long, but at least 
he came here first. We have to try and build that story.    
 
Now, I think the other thing we are looking at is to develop three short-term 
projects we can develop in the next six to nine months so this by this time 
next year, they are thought of, implemented and completed. The Steering 
Committee is looking at those at the moment also. The other thing is we will 
try and do what we can to get the Wicklow Courthouse reopened. There 
have been a number of occasions when we have asked the question of the 
Department of Justice. I got two letters and I might be slightly exaggerating 
on them, the only thing different on them was the date was changed on the 
letter. So we need to work as a council, as elected to members to get the 
courthouse back into Wicklow Town. The other thing was Christine was 
talking about a public realm plan for Greystones. One was developed in 2008 
for Wicklow Town. It's as relevant now as it was today. Our Steering 
Committee are going to look at that public realm plan and trying to take two 
or three items out of it where we can get it to fruition.  
 
Now, that is what the Wicklow Town Team is doing, but I want to make it 
absolutely crystal clear, without Wicklow County Council, without members 
of the Wicklow Municipal District Council we wouldn't get anything. Most of 
what we are trying to do wouldn't be done. As well as having a chairman and 
the outgoing chairman of Wicklow Municipal District, each of the town 
councillors are also a member of each working group, so it's a partnership, 

 
17
all we are trying to do, everyone, Wicklow County Council, elected members 
is to make Wicklow Town a better place to live, work and play. Don't get me 
wrong, I would say Wicklow Town Team is no different than elected 
members. We do have our moments with Wicklow County Council, we don't 
always agree with how they do the job, but nonetheless without their 
support and help, a lot of the things I have just mentioned wouldn't be done, 
so I think while we do have our differences and we don't always agree, we 
are all on the one page and that is trying to make Wicklow Town better. 
Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, David and now we have John Horan from the 
Blessington Town Team to give us an update on their areas.  
JOHN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Councillors, Chief Executive and the staff 
of Wicklow County Council. We do have a video, which, like all good chefs, 
here is one I prepared earlier. It happens to be one we had prepared for the 
private place judging which happened in the middle of the summer. It is two 
minutes long a but it will set the scene a little bit. A picture speaks a 
thousand words. If we can play that now if possible?   
VIDEO: Blessington is a town in West Wicklow of over 5,000 souls. Built over 
the largest manmade lake in Ireland and bounded by the peak was Wicklow 
Mountains.  
>>: It's a vibrant town and such a small town. There are so many people 
around walking the dog.  
>>: There are so many GAA clubs. Rowing clubs, running clubs.  
>>: We were basically looking for somewhere nice for our kids to grow up 
and Blessington seems like a really good choice. It's a decent sized town, it's 
got good schools and it's nice and green and close to the mountains, so it 
seemed perfect.  
>>: These people have found a home in the town and have joined in with 
the general spirit of co-operation, whether they are individuals or new 
business.  
>>: When I moved to Blessington first I moved into a small town where 
everyone seemed to know each other and I knew no one. Volunteering for 
Blessington first responders seemed to me to be a perfect way of getting 
involved and meeting and making new friends.  
>>: We ran charities, so, over the last five years we have raised 5,000 euro 
for charity.  
>>: Charity is a big part of the agenda. It complicates your relationship with 
your customers and your staff. It's essential.  
>>: This spirit of community can be even all around the town, kept up by 
the tireless work of a Tidy Towns group in co-ordination with all of the 
businesses of the town, who also believe in doing the part around their area.  
>>: People will be passing through the town and there is volunteers out, 
could be from 8.00am in the morning.  
>>: But what Blessington does that is rare in these fractured times is they 
have planned together. For almost 20 years business and volunteer 
education and individual all meet together in the Blessington Forum. What 
they do run for volunteer groups, theatres and playgrounds, from parades, 
festivals, to smart town planning and everything in between. A shining 
example of their work was the creation of the 6km Blessington greenway, a 
public walkway along the lakeshore that links the buzzing town from the 

 
18
ancient estate of Russborough House.  
>>: That has been a wonderful addition, someone went for a walk to there 
and back.  
>>: Now there is the Town Team, which brings together the forum and the 
local authority, allowing for even larger projects to become possible, such as 
the dream of the Blessington e greenway, a 40Km walk around the whole 
lake. Such projects can only be contemplated because much joined up 
thinking between local government and community which makes it possible 
to plan for real and long-lasting change to the world of Blessington Town.  
JOHN: Thank you and I think looking at that there and listening to, there 
was a difficulty with the sound, not everyone was able to hear it as clearly as 
I would have preferred. It brought to mind the saying you should never 
perform with children and adults, in the modern world I say you should 
never perform with technology. Never rely on it. I want to give you a flavour 
of what we are at in Blessington, one of the last sentences in the video, if 
you could hear it, he said that the dream of Blessington greenway all the 
way around the lakes is close to becoming a reality, but it is very close to 
becoming a reality. This greenway idea started ten years ago, the 
community, with prompting from Wicklow County Council, some talk about 
reports that sit on the shelf, well the Wicklow outdoor strategy had a small 
paragraph that talked about opening up the reservoir in Blessington to more 
activities and that sentence was picked up by the forum, in Blessington and 
they said let's see what we can do, so they got a consultant in and they 
worked with the idea of building out a, he called it a walking and cycle path 
around the lakes. That was in 2010 and then the forum started to look at 
how they can do this and as a community body, he ended up doing what 
they call phase 1, they built 6.5km from the town to Russborough House.  
 
Again, if not immediate active support, certainly there was a strong element 
of support from Wicklow County Council in that they granted us planning 
permission, or exempt planning status for it. That got going and that 
demonstrated that it could be done, that this special area of conservation, 
that is the Blessington lakes, you could overcome ecological problems, do 
the impact assessments and so on. That was opened in February 2014 and 
we said to the County Council, it's a multi-million project, we did that for a 
quarter of a million. It's a multi-million project to do it around the lakes and 
the Council got behind it and have developed the idea and got it to the point 
where, through the National Planning Strategy, the funding programme 
there and in July last year, through the good work of a lot of people in the 
County Council got €5 million in funding from the Department of weren't for 
a 42km greenway right around the lake and I can tell you that the final 
design and procurement team have been appointed, Chief Executive, in 
recent days or weeks and they are about to begin their work and it will go to 
procurement and that should be, the actual building of the greenway should 
be well under way early 2020, so how long that will take, it won't take too 
long in my view, but certainly in 12 months’ time we should see dramatic 
progress towards the finalisation of that greenway.  
 
So, it just shows what can be done when community and local authorities 
work together. If I can rewind maybe then, that is the greenway bit, to what 

 
19
Christine said about the impetus for the Town Team. Blessington won 
Leinster's most enterprising team award that scheme in 2017 and there is a 
way of building on that, in the way of establishing a Town Team came from 
the County Council. It's a collaboration between the local community and the 
local authority and, as Christine again said, the Town Teams were grown 
organically, how ours have grown is two pillar, the private pillar, which is a 
community forum which has been doing good work if Blessington for about 
18 years now, the Tidy Towns group, the second element and the third 
element, the business network. There have been various efforts to get 
businesses working together, but they have now come actively together as 
the business network, so they are the three community elements, the 
private element, of the Town Team. On the public sector side we have the 
main one being the County Council and the local authority. The education 
sector represented by the principal of the local community college and the 
Garda Síochána represented by the local sergeant. So those private and 
public figures come together in the Town Team and we meet monthly, I see 
it as effectively a communication vehicle between the public and the private 
sectors. It's a way of making sure that we are singing from the same hymn 
sheet, working off the same page, but we are all going into same direction. 
As to how we are structured beyond that, I came over here about 18 months 
ago and met with Dave, as chairman of the Town Team and with some 
experience under their belt and imitation being the sincerest form of flattery, 
we stole your idea of working teams and we established six working groups. 
Tidy Towns and public realm. Planning and infrastructure, business, tourism, 
cultural heritage, and healthy Blessington, which is a localised form of the 
Healthy Ireland initiative.  
 
So, those six working groups lead out on various proposals and proms and 
greenways and CCTVs and the health check and the branding of the town. 
There is a whole lot of things, I won't go through them all. That is generally 
how we work. In essence, we had a lot of good relationships there with the 
local authority, with the public sector, we are building on those in the Town 
Team, and I would like to conclude by thanking the councillor, our local 
councillors, Cllr O'Neill here and your colleagues on the Baltinglass Municipal 
District Council. Jim Ruttle before you was a great help to the Wicklow 
County Council Chief Executive and the staff, some of whom I am not going 
to name, a lot of them have been very helpful and without whom all of the 
work that is happening in Blessington couldn't happen. Finally, we are on our 
town health check, we have met, we have our town health check team 
appointed, we met them this morning for the first time.  
 
They are meeting the full Town Team tomorrow evening and they are 
developing a vision for the future development of the town. Some of you 
may have heard, I have concluded this competition running on east Coast 
Radio for people to come up with a good tagline for Blessington, building on 
the sort of thing, the outdoors and the one that won it and what will become 
the new tagline, which I hope you will hear over the next months and years 
is: ' Blessington, where nature meets history.'  Thank you for your 
attention, I am happy to take any questions.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Matthews.  

 
20
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you for the presentations, Bray Town Team is 
revitalised at the moment, so to have a presentation from two enthusiastic 
chairs as yourself is an inspiration, but it is healthy in Bray. Just in relation 
to the Wicklow greenway you mentioned. The draft report is available, is 
that available for us to have a look at?  I would be interested to have a look 
at the environmental impact assessment of that?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I will answer that. It isn't ready yet, because we have a 
draft ready because there is two big issues with that greenway, one is costal 
erosion and we need to see where that is going, so a parallel study that is 
going on, so early next year we will be able to mash those two together 
much the second one is the ecological side of it and there is a lot of extra 
work that needs to be done during the summer in relation to making a 
termination of that, so that is a nearing completion and when that is put 
together, early next year, we will be able to do exactly that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Shay Cullen.  
CLLR S CULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. First of all, thank you both for a 
very informative presentation. It can't be underestimated the amount of 
work that is being done by an all Town Teams across the county and I would 
like to wish them well. In particular, John, your huge endeavours on the 
Blessington Greenway, I suppose it's something that is going to make 
Wicklow stand out from the rest of maybe Leinster counties, but I think it's a 
fantastic project and I want to wish you well with that. On the downside, 
from the Wicklow point of view, when you said it took ten years to basically 
get it from the start to this point, and I know, through the Wicklow Town 
Team and the work that Dave is doing, we will be quite frustrated if it takes 
us ten years to progress the greenway from Wicklow to Greystones. 
Nevertheless, I want to pay tribute to Wicklow Town Team, who I am very 
closely involved with, I suppose any good team lead as good leader and 
Wicklow has a fantastic leader in Dave, that you have heard from. I suppose 
from our point of view on the Wicklow Municipal District, we have tried to 
assist, particularly in the public realm space of the upgraded works that are 
going to hopefully soon starting on Fitzwilliam Square which we hope will 
make a huge difference to Wicklow Town, obviously the current works of 
Wicklow Library, I was going to appeal to all of our TDs to get behind the 
redevelopment the courthouse in Wicklow, it's one of the services we have 
missed so much in our town and certainly the restatement with the Wicklow 
court services will be hugely significant to our area.  
 
I suppose, the enhancement of Wicklow and in particular what Dave has said 
with regard to the proposed greenways from Wicklow to Greystones is 
something that will be absolutely vital to grow our town, as a tourism 
destination and I have no doubt that the work that has been done locally 
and the efforts by everyone involved, I think we will certainly get there in 
the near future and I want to wish everyone well in the Wicklow Town Team 
in the future. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I would just like to thank Dave and John for their 
presentations, very professional. I had the experience of working with Dave 
on the greenway so I know what he is capable of and during my time with 
Wicklow Tourism I worked close list with John, as Dave said he has plenty of 

 
21
time. Good luck with what you are doing and the value it's adding to our 
county and again it's being done in a cost effective way. Well done.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Glennon.  
CLLR GLENNON: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I would like to congratulate John 
and Dave on their presentations. I am going to confine myself to Blessington 
because that is where I come from, no disrespect to Dave. Your team have 
done tremendous work over there, involving the Tidy Towns, the forum and 
the business network. So I congratulate you on your day forward. I know 
you already mentioned Jim Ruttle needs a special mention from having 
gotten behind it from the early start. And Father Tim should be mentioned 
because he was at the forefront in the early part of this as well, who has 
since left us. So, thank you and well done.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you, John and Dave for 
your presentations. I am going to concentrate on Wicklow. First of all, I 
remember meeting Dave a few years ago, I know he felt the people were 
imagining to get some money into kitty to start these projects and he was 
frustrated with the whole thing and I think looking at him today he is 
starting to learn that there is different ways of getting some money to 
facilitate these projects. The East Coast Greenway is interesting, John 
mentioned that Phase 1 and I think that is the way we should be doing it as 
well, we should be look at different phrases. I think we need to find out 
which is the easiest part to do and start it. And we have problems within the 
actual greenway itself, nothing we can't sort out, but if there is part of the 
greenway that can be done we should go and do it, we shouldn't be held 
back because to do the whole scheme will take time and I think we should 
do it in phases.  
 
Just when you were talking about the historic walks, I would like that tied in 
with the Cliff Walk as well, because it has provided great tourism to Wicklow 
Town. The amount of people using the Wicklow Cliff Walk is unbelievable. 
Every single morning if you go out there the amount of tourism is 
unbelievable. We still have a lot of work to do, Dave, and I think with the 
different committee there is an enthusiasm now, Cllr Cullen mentioned the 
library, at last there is things, at the moment seems to be doing in Wicklow 
Town and it hasn't been like that and Dave, you should take credit to that, 
your enthusiasm has carried forward and we are looking forward to seeing 
how Wicklow Town is going to develop in the next couple of years. I think 
you need to take young people into the fold and agree with John that they 
will bring enthusiasm, they know what is new and what the town needs and 
a different aspect of the people that we maybe do not listen to, so I think 
neighbour is a good plan and maybe to get it on to each forum would be a 
great thing. I am enthusiastic with how things are going.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Dermot O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Thank you for the presentation, 
as someone who is a new councillor in Bray, I appreciate we get to hear the 
stories of how other models are working. I get a sense that sometimes 
things go in cycles, and I am exciting about the potential for Bray to take 
some of what we have heard today and I hear strong words like partnership 
and I sense that this collective ownership is important in how you roll out 

 
22
your work and I particularly appreciate that you look forward and that you 
see where there might be gaps, and, again as a youth worker, including 
young people in this shared ownership of the future of our area is critical or 
we will get to a point that we have done a stuff and they might tell us their 
real opinion on it. So, I appreciate having this slot today and I am excited 
about Bray, particularly taking away some of the learning from this and 
again looking at how we are going to implement it. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Obviously I want to congratulate 
the two gentlemen and the people who represent for the magnificent work 
you are doing in your own local areas. I also want to thank Christine for your 
presentation at the outset. As Cllr O'Brien has mentioned the one word that 
came back at me strongly was the word partnership. I think what has been 
successful in Wicklow and Blessington is there is a proper partnership 
between the public representatives, the council officials, the business 
community and community leaders and for it to work in Bray, or any other 
place there has to be genuine partnership.  
 
As far as I am concerned, genuine partnership has to involve elected 
representatives as well as council officials. I would be interested in your 
comments gentlemen on that particular issue, because in Bray we don't 
have a Town Team. Money has been extended on a survey without reference 
to councillors at all. If we don't have a Town Team, my assumption is that 
council officials decided that we are going to spend this money on the survey 
and I am looking forward to hearing the recruitment. At least we are going 
to hear the result at a future council meeting, but I want this to work, I think 
what you have said would give a lot of councillors enthusiasm, but it has to 
be right from the start and the foundation has to be that everyone who has 
a stake in the town is involved in it.   
 
And I would just say that going forward, particularly in Bray, because Bray is 
the area I represent, if there isn't true partnership with elected 
representatives, it's not going to work and I would appeal to the executive, 
to ensure that we, as members are fully involved in every step of this 
process, but I would be interested in your views, gentlemen on the question 
of elected representatives being centrally involved in Town Teams.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Pat Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you Christine and 
John and Dave for the presentations. John, I know you were in Rathdrum 
recently and you spoke at a public event there and it was very interesting, 
what I was hoping that Dave and John would come, if you are available, we 
would like to invite you to come to Rathdrum in the near future because we 
are working on setting up a group at the moment through Christine and I 
would love if you had the time that you could come and give us your insights 
moving forward. So, I would extend that invitation to you and hope to 
contact you in the near future about that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you to John and Dave for their presentations and to 
Dave, I mean, you said at the outset, Dave, that the Town Team of Wicklow 
was formed in August 2017 and you went on to list the achievements and 

 
23
the work which has been done on that committee and I must say it's so 
impressive and well done to you and your team, of course. I work closely 
with you on the east coast greenway project and we are all excited about 
that and excited about what it will mean to the tourism offering for Wicklow 
in terms of economic terms as well as everything else we saw the difference 
that the Waterford Greenway has made, so it will be interesting for the 
coastal protection report, shortly to advance that. Just to John again, I 
worked with John through Wicklow County Tourism and in particular, the 
Blessington Town Team is involved through the very successful Blessington 
forum and again I want to congratulate you on your work on the greenway 
there and being successful to get that over the line. We all look forward to 
seeing that over the project being delivered in 2020, so well done to you 
both. I know as a member of Greystones 2020, we have had some great 
encouraging advice from both of you, so we hope to continue that 
relationship. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you to John and Dave 
for your presentation. Obviously your examples of Town Teams that are 
doing great work on the ground. The concept of Town Team came out of the 
government forum where town councils were abolished, it was a way of 
allowing a town to participate in an area with the local authority following 
those abolition of town council. I see the only town that doesn't have a town 
council is Blessington and you can see the work they have achieved. I don't 
think towns like Baltinglass could do with a Town Team and I notice that the 
health check which was supposed to be, I think Christine was suggesting 
that the health check would be a first step in establishing the foundation for 
a Town Team, but I think Blessington's example, the Town Team is blowing 
out its own health check and therefore the dynamics of bringing in the group 
of people to get that going makes sense in my view, rather than doing a 
health check and kicking the can down the road for the formation of the 
Town Team. I like to ask the officials with regard to the other towns in 
Wicklow and any other villages, where it would bringing it to a Baltinglass 
with a view to setting up a Town Team, would that be taken forward.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Paul O'Brien.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Can I just comment the three individuals, Dave, John and 
Christine for, I suppose a very enthusiastic and not just for yourselves but 
for us, I am a new councillor. It's great to hear it, I think it's important for 
us to hear it but for the general public to hear. Some of this sound work is 
done unnoticed. I think we deserve credit. Of course I would be biased. I 
have believed that Wicklow Town has never reached its full potential and it's 
an exciting time to come on as a new councillor and looking at the new 
works on the greenway and the hotel on the quay. It's all illumination of the 
black castle, but I think we should look at the basics as well, in terms of 
public toilet. I was born and bred in the town and we always had public 
toilets, you know where I am from, the black castle area, I visit regularly 
when I am let in. The tourists coming into the town have nowhere, bar one 
public toilet in the town. Even know it's great with the grand projects we 
should also look at the basics as well.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Miriam Murphy.  
CLLR MURPHY: I would like to thank the presentations, I won't be on either 

 
24
side, I am in Arklow. I think it highlights, for me, who chaired the Town 
Team for a year as Cathaoirleach and it's funny how the three Town Teams 
in the areas have different, I suppose set up, committees and I think I have 
learned from that here today. Also, I think the Town Team for me, in Arklow, 
have bridged a communication gap, I think between the public and the 
businesses and other areas that wasn't there for a long, long time and now 
we have brought them in, hand by hand on different projects. I think it also, 
as highlighted, I suppose the way some public people didn't realise the work 
of Wicklow County Council and the way things are done. Maybe not the way 
that we want things done, but the way it works and it also, I think, for me, 
has highlighted the passion and the love that other people have for our 
town, sometimes we can almost be very negative about our towns. I think 
when you bring people into a room, we learn from each other, we also 
realise what we have in front of us and what we need to have maybe more 
in front of us. In all aspects of tourism and businesses and for, as one of the 
men said, we want you to come here and live and play and work. I think, 
again, through the Municipal Districts, a lot of the work is linked through the 
staff and I would honestly say that the Town Teams, for Arklow, wouldn't be 
successful, only for the dedicated staff they have there and the knowledge, 
again through Wicklow County Council, but I think we all need to have a 
vision for our own teams and I think the funding needs to be looked at and I 
think without the leader certainly none of our projects would work and I 
think we need to give dedication to the credit of the leader who has always 
been there. Again, looking at maybe coming along down the next year to 
that network with the Town Teams because you can learn from each other 
and things we mightn't have thought of it working in other towns, so I think 
it's a credit for other people.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gerry O'Neill.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Again, I would like to congratulate John and Dave, I know, 
John for a long time in the Blessington area and I have been a founding 
member of the forum there and we have always got on well there, a group 
on the ground worked together, it's very important that we work with the 
board and elected representatives work with these groups. There is a, as Cllr 
Mullen said, I think it's very important that we don't leave other areas 
behind and if you look at the likes of Baltinglass, I would agree with Cllr 
Mullen that those areas must get the same attention.  
 
We have Carnew, which is a very big area, all of these areas have to be 
looked after. I would like to ask the Chief Executive as well on the and this is 
all to do with working together, we must work together, we must work 
together on this stuff, councillors, voluntary groups, whatever, it has to be 
one group working together, so on the greenway in Blessington, we have 
been asked several times, councillors here, what is the situation as regards 
the granting of the 5 million for the 28km route. I mean we do have the, it's 
28 around the lake, but there is two spurs over there, one to Russborough 
and another to [INAUDIBLE], so I know the people here put me under, we 
must accommodate working together, we must accommodate the people on 
the Lakeside. There are people in some areas and they are only rearing to 
go and get involved in this project, so there would be a fear that monies 
would go into a private business, such as the likes of Clonferris, that is an 

 
25
extra 14km to be taken in.  
 
What we are really anxious there is that the 28km run of the lake would be 
done first. That is very important that it would be the same, we want to see 
everywhere in West Wicklow up and working, but it would be a sin to think 
that the people on the Lakeside were left behind and that other businesses 
would be looked after. That is the main concern, so in actual fact people 
have said to me, there is meetings coming up with Cllr Glennon and myself 
coming up soon. But people have suggested that maybe it might start from 
Lough Erne, to ensure that it would include the lakes.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Snell.  
CLLR SNELL: Again, like previous members I want to congratulations both 
gentlemen on their presentations and I suppose my main concern is that 
there seems to be, in some districts, a lack of consultation with public 
representatives and I see that members that are not represented through 
East Wicklow and through West Wicklow today seem to be getting more out 
of this presentation because, as the district members from east and west will 
know, we have worked hand in hand with both of these Town Teams and lot 
of presentations through district chambers and through the Municipal District 
and indeed we have supported the Wicklow Town Team with a discretionary 
spend and we have always found money to, I think in a two-and-a-half hour 
meeting today because of the suspension of standing hours we are over an 
hour talking about this and while it is a good news story and God knows we 
need to get good news out there, but I think that there is an awful lot of 
important business, while I welcome what is happening and I fully support 
what is happening throughout the county, I think we have gone over an hour 
discussing this and there is only so many times people can congratulations 
both areas. So thanks, again.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Snell, believe me I have a stopwatch here. I have 
only allowed people who asked to speak. Would you like to go back to the 
points that were raised?   
DAVE: Cllr Kennedy, I am happy to, if you touch base with Chris Christine I 
am happy to give you my experiences. With regard to Cllr Behan, I don't 
want to get involved in an internal fight, but from my own point of view an 
Wicklow Town Team, I couldn't imagine the Town Team being able to 
produce and be as productive as we can without the Municipal District 
councillors and, like I said, chairman and outgoing chairman are still on our 
Steering Committee. Each of the representatives are on a team and I think I 
have been to the Municipal District Council maybe four or five times just 
updating on what we are trying to do. Updating as well, but that is, it is a 
partnership, you can get too flowery about these things, but if we don't work 
hand in glove. We have our differences and our rows, that is fine, at the end 
of the day we are all trying to do the right thing for Wicklow County Council. 
I think it was Harry S Truman said, 'It's amazing what you can achieve so 
long as no one is looking for the credit.' I think that is important too.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
DECLAN: I won't take more than 30 seconds for this. That thing about 
information change, saying we robbed some good ideas from Wicklow low 
before, the, County Council and Wicklow staff, knowing we were going to be 
here today we have set up a meeting next door an information on 

 
26
greenways, so that collaboration is still ongoing and will continue. That in 
terms of coastal erosion, that rang a bell with me. We had a problem with 
Blessington, with lake shore erosion where they had eroded into the farmer's 
land, to such a point that how are we going to get there, the ESB were 
putting in rock armour to prevent it, they have done in such a way that a 
greenway can be built on top of it. So there might be some useful points in 
there. Finally on the point of elected councillors, critical, our six Municipal 
District councillors are all part of the Town Team and I know Dave has some 
involvement in working groups on his, so it's critical and important and 
thank you for the opportunity to talk to you this evening.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, both very much and Christine, for giving your 
time this afternoon. Those of us who do already work with knees two in 
particular Town Teams will continue to do so and in going forward for the 
Bray one in the new set up and hopefully it will be successful. Item 5. To 
receive a presentation on the draft County Wicklow Digital Strategy 
2019-2024. I think, as part of this, after the presentation we will also take 
the motion that is there in councillor Tom Fortune and Mary Kavanagh. So 
first of all I will take the presentation and then I will take the proposal of the 
motion of Tom Fortune and then we will go to general questions.  
 
SHORT BREAK  
 
So, sorry now. So the result, picking out some of the main results from the 
digital survey. Well, first and foremost, a total of 935 survey submissions 
were received over 32 days, around a month, basically 91% of them were 
online. We did push paper versions in our libraries and our district offices 
and county buildings, but, I suppose we did undertake a marketing 
campaign, a digital marketing campaign online and that is, I suppose, we 
got very good number of submissions mostly through the online marketing 
end of things, through that way. I suppose the focus of the survey was on 
citizen broadband service, internet and digital technology use, online 
services and remote working, so some of the key findings, like the vast 
majority of people said that they had internet connection of 94%, but two 
thirds are not receiving high speed broadband services, so that is, I suppose 
the EU definition of high-speed broadband is over 30 megabytes download 
and over 6 upload. At the same time, half of people, it's obvious are 
unhappy with their broadband service. The smartphone was the most used 
digital device, so that has to be taken into consideration when developing 
new online services. There is a need for more public training and promotion, 
at I suppose council and government level. 95%, more of the top finding 
were 95% said they utilised digital devices for communication daily. Over 
90% believe communication technologies are critical or important for their 
regional, economic and social development and, I suppose another main 
point was 56% of people said they could work remotely, at least one day per 
week. It's interesting, when you consider the commuter survey, so you are 
talking about on any one day over 20,000 people, who will be able to 
remotely work within the county, or want to. So the working groups were, 
under each of the core teams came together to develop a high level vision, 
key actions, key objectives and actions, which form part of the, which form 
the implementation plan, to the four areas are broadband and digital 

 
27
infrastructure, Citizen Smart, digital economy and digital council.  
 
So, on the right-hand side is your, from the assessment they had seven 
pillars and they are, I suppose incorporated into our four core digital teams. 
On broadband, just to go through some of the key actions we want to 
undertake with the strategy, under broadband and digital infrastructure, our 
vision is to facilitate the development of high-speed broadband and 
infrastructure. Our key objectives are to facilitate broadband, inform 
infrastructural development and high speed access to broadband and 
technology. That is for citizens.  
 
That second key action I suppose is in line with, it's under the broadband 
build connectivity programme where we are looking to develop broadband 
connection points in line with the National Broadband Plan. That, when the 
contracts are signed, the broadband connection points are the first priority of 
that state intervention.  
 
The free public wi-fi provision, we have won four vouchers from the EU with 
regard to the provision of free public wi-fi and there is a lot, there will have 
to be a tender process for the provisioning of that, so we have four vouchers 
across five Municipal Districts, but it will be a county-wide tendering process. 
The first of those was done in Donegal not so long ago and that is the first 
representative on that project.  
 
Also, libraries are increasing their opening times and they provide digital 
access and they are improving their digital technology with the provision 
now of portable digital devices as well as PC desktops. Under Citizen Smart, 
the high level vision was to promote the benefits and use of digital 
technology in a safe way and to improve digital equality and digital skills and 
competency of our citizens. There was four key objectives under the Citizen 
Smart, identify and address digital exclusion and digital inequality. Support 
digital training to increase citizen skills. Raise awareness of the risk and 
benefits for citizens going online and support the development of smart 
communities. So, within that, your provision, I suppose some of the key 
actions were, was digital skills analysis, in partnership with educational 
facilities and that is ongoing.  
 
Really the Citizens Survey fed into a lot of the key objectives of this working 
group, or this strategic theme. An awareness campaign will have to be 
undertaken, raising awareness for the benefits and the risks of going online 
and the digital, I suppose arena and we want to run a pilot smart community 
project. I suppose it will be dependent on winning funding through 
partnership with County Wicklow partnership. And, I suppose raising 
awareness of online safety and risks, I suppose it is in line with national 
guidance and I think in line with anything that would come from the online 
safety commission which has been announced recently. Under our digital 
economy working group and strategic theme, the main vision was to and 
encourage employment opportunities in county Wicklow in the digital age.  
 
So, the key objectives is a digital hub development plan, utilise digital 

 
28
technology and online supports to promote and effect heavily our market, 
our tourism and heritage. Promote and further develop business and use of 
online retail and digital marketing such as our trading online vouchers. 
Facilitate training of business people and the specific skills they need to 
exploit the online economy. So that is a lot of that work is done through the 
LEO office already. So for digital hubs, on the first key October objective, we 
have applied for funding in Clare month and Christine and our team would 
have been working on that with the LEO office, we have applied on a 
regional plan with the Baltinglass courthouse redevelopment and we have 
also applied for that courthouse redevelopment funding under the rural 
regeneration, I think, funding as well. And also, we will have to undertake, I 
suppose, a demand-led digital hub plan into the future from here on out, 
especially with regards fund, if you want to apply for funding you have to 
show how the requirement is there, the demand is there locally in order to 
win funding. Regards, I suppose effectively marketing your tourism and 
heritage we, have to enhance our website content, tourism, heritage and 
film and supports around that and we will be pointing a digital champion for 
retail. They are promoting the trading online vouchers that the LEO office 
are taking care of. Then, finally, under digital council, the high level vision is 
to enhance the delivery of Wicklow County Council's services to its citizens 
by its online services. Under the main vision there was two main objective, 
the enhanced customer care and engagement and this has been undertaken 
via, I suppose a new customer care unit and the customer relationship 
management platform which has been developed, which are both being 
developed at the moment. I think the CCU is being, going to tender or is in 
the process there.  
 
The other key objective was to increase and promote our online services, so 
some of the actions there are open data, creating open data for basically any 
data that Wicklow County Council sees that is beneficial to be open data for 
public use or research purposes, will go on to opendata.gov website. We 
have recently developed an online consultation hub for consultations that 
were undertaken on any, I suppose, development. Improve, to improve our 
conference call capabilities, this has a beneficial, I suppose, environmental 
benefits, basically, we have better conference call capabilities, we won't 
have to travel as much to meetings in other areas of the county, etc, prove 
and also increase our online payment options is another key action there 
under the second key objective. I suppose one thing to mention is 
developing our online services will be in line with the new national services 
catalogue that is being produced at the moment.  
 
So, on the delivery of the Digital Strategy, one of the key items is the 
monitoring section of that and the establishment of an oversight and 
monitoring committee, to oversee, I suppose, the carrying out of the 
actions. The thing will be to continually track the progress plan, identify 
areas of further opportunity and delay progress and to show progress of the 
actions by updating the implementation plan online, on an annual basis so. 
That is a key element for the strategy to be delivered, that committee will 
have to oversee and the responsibilities and timescales are set out within 
the implementation plan. So that is it. Any questions?   

 
29
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, thank you for the presentation. 
Before I actually put the motion to the members I am going to put some 
context around it, first of all I would like to say that I echo the concerns that 
other elected councils have expressed, for example in Clare, Roscommon, 
Sligo and Leitrim that the planning system is flawed, for the telephone masts 
to be 5G or 4 without a public consultation process, involving local 
councillors and local residents and schools. This has happened as far as 
March in Greystones. I also want to make it clear that I support the 
Government's national broadband flan to build fibre broadband, otherwise 
known as FTTP to all Irish homes.  In fact, I believe the Government's 
resources should be confined to this service and not to be unregulated and 
potentially unsafe roll out of 5G. In calling on a halt to the roll out of 5G in 
this jurisdiction, the councils of Clare, Roscommon Sligo and Leitrim drew 
attention to the petition of scientists around the world who are opposing it 
who claim that it constitutes an experiment on humanity that is defined as a 
crime under international law. It ties into what was said in the presentation 
as well that the need for to raise awareness of, besides the benefits the risks 
and what the online safety commission need to be talking about. There are 
three main issues with 5G that people need to be aware of. The first one is 
that no research has been done on the biological effects of this 5G spectrum 
of radiation. Nothing on human health and its effects on the environment, 
birds, bees and plant life, nothing on the microbiome and its effect on 
antibiotic resistance. There is also our carbon footprint. We are consuming 
10% of global activity, 5G will consume four times more electricity compared 
to 3G and 4G. Also both cups will run 5G and the legacy 3G and 4G together 
for ten years making it even worse. Why is this?  4G works off the large 
phone masts but as 5G is different it will use small masts everywhere, 
everywhere below the treeline. The industry led 5G promises it will deliver 
1,000 times the download speed, does it mean the electricity usage will be 
1,000 times higher or 100 times higher or 10 times higher. The fact is that 
no one in civil authority knows or seems to care. What will the 5G madness 
be and how much they will pay in EU fines. With climate change under the 
spotlight should a Government not effect such a climate impact study. Is the 
much-needed energy going to be addressed by the Government in its new 
policy promised this year?   
 
Now, if I can make a few comments on people that who are, have spoken 
about this outside of Ireland. In, for example, in the 2nd of August there 
were 134,000 signatories from doctors and environmental organisations a 
and citizens from 198 countries who called for a halt for 5G, including 5G 
from space satellites. On the 28th of September an interview by Tom Butler 
of UCC headed 5G wi-fi on steroids, he is a leading experiment on the health 
effects of wireless technology and microbiome radiation. He said that given 
the precautionary principle it makes sense to him that school principals 
should be outlawing it on their premises. Also, in Brussels, back in April, the 
environment minister said "I cannot welcome such technology if the 
radiation standards which must protect the citizens are not respected and 
the people of Brussels are not laboratory mice whose health I can sell at the 
cost of profit. We cannot leave any doubt." I 

 
30
 
n February of this year, also in the Senate in the US, the wireless, or the 
industry people were brought before the Senate and they basically confirmed 
to the Senator that the industry had carried out zero health and safety 
studies on 5G and there are dozens of independent studies that indicate that 
5G is a risk to all biological life. When this was brought up in the Dail by 
Catherine Connolly again this year, when she asked the minister about it, he 
said a few things but one thing he said was he had no role in the 
procurement of this project, which has been led by the Government sector 
itself and not been funded by the Department. That just, as the saying goes, 
beats banathir [?]   
 
If I can put the motion to the chair, that Wicklow County Council has a social 
responsibility to serve, inform and protect the public and the environment 
from exposure to harm and therefore it opposes the roll out of unregulated 
5G in the county of Wicklow based on the precautionary principle, pending 
the enact of by Dáil Éireann of protective legislation.  
 
In the meantime it's advised a 5G working group be established who would 
be mandated to report back to the council of the potential harmful effects of 
wireless EMN on our environment and our carbon footprint. So I am asking 
the members, chair of Wicklow County Council, to approve the motion, as I 
say, there is similar motions have been approved already by Roscommon 
and Clare and Leitrim and Sligo and I understand this week Wexford have 
similar motions going before the members. Basically all that is being asked 
here is that we stop and we just talk and we check this out before we raise 
the head. There are lots of people have spoken very seriously about it with a 
lot of expertise and this is very important for, I believe more so for our 
children than ourselves, because of what is going on and there are better 
ways of doing it, so I would ask the members of Wicklow County Council.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I have been lenient on time, Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: It's a very important issue.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: That is why I gave you the time.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: I am seconding the motion. I want to second that 
motion and I just have some, some things I want to say about it as well, if 
that is okay. I just wrote them down because I did a lot of research on it 
before I decided to second the motion and basically I just want to start by 
saying that this is nothing to do with the roll out of the National Broadband 
Plan, this is a separate technology. As councillors we have a duty of care to 
the citizens of the country, we also have a duty to protect the environment. 
5G is a huge escalation of traditional cellular technology. It uses more power 
through higher speeds and bandwidths.  
 
Traditional 1G to 4G uses between 1ghz and 5ghz frequencies, 5G will use 
between 10-300ghz. 5G promises speeds of up to 1,000 faster than 4G. 5G 
signals are short and can only travel short distances without boosters so 
transmitters which boost signals will be placed at between 100 and 300 
metre intervals. The higher number of radiation levels means people living in 
towns and cities will be constantly bombarded with radiofrequency radiation 
at unprecedented levels. They will have no choice because it will be all 

 
31
around them.  
 
Because it is invisible to the eye, we will never know what are the levels are, 
unless we carry metres to measure what is being emitted with public 
buildings. 5G is not to be confused with the broadband plan. 5G masts and 
antennae can be installed without planning permission, Professor Tom 
Butler, who Cllr Fortune referred to from UCC has written an article which 
states that the hypothalamus in a child's brain can absorb up to three times 
the level of radiation than an adult brain. The same found that the bone 
marrow in a child's skull absorbs it ten times greater than an adult. Maybe 
are urging that schools, hospitals and other buildings that house vulnerable 
people like the very young, old and the infirm are treated as sensitive areas 
where 4G is used instead of 5G or 5G routers are set as low as possible. We 
need legislation in the area along with changes in planning legislation to 
ensure that the number of masts and antennae are kept under control and 
at safe levels. American scientists, who carried out studies concluded that 
cell phones probably cause cancer if the exposure is close enough, long 
enough and at sufficient magnitude and more data in the area of Bluetooth 
and other radio frequencies is required to determine the safe levels for 
humans. There is concern that exposure to millimetre wave technology 
which is used in 5G may lead to permanent tissue damage after short 
exposure. Existing exposure guidelines must be revisited. Over 200 
scientists and doctors from 36 countries appealed to the United Nations, the 
World Health Organisation.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Your time, I will give you another 30 seconds.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: I will just sum up by saying that we need to, we need 
to urge the precautionary principle, it should be applied for scientific 
evaluation does not allow for the risk to be determined with sufficient 
certainty. The nation's health, especially that of a child is paramount and we 
have a duty of care to ensure that we are not exposing them to unnecessary 
risk. We have a duty to protect future generations a and that is why I am 
asking people to support the motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. We will also take questions on the actual digital 
presentation as well, so if anyone has any questions on that and then we 
can do the, it may roll into one another and then we will take the vote on 
the 5G motion. So, Dermot O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, the question for Donal and can I 
just preface by saying thanks for all the work you did connecting with young 
people throughout the development of the strategy, even being brave 
enough to come in here during a Cathaoirleach meeting, fair play for that. I 
think it's important they are included as we roll something out like this. My 
question is about the working group, are they going to continue as is?  The 
four working groups or is there scope to include others as you move into the 
implementation of the strategy?   
>>: I suppose the implementation, the actions in the implementation plan, 
have a timeframe and I suppose relevant leads and partners to carry out the 
actions and that will be monitored by the monitoring committee. So, I 
suppose, new opportunities in the digital arena, I suppose something for the 
Steering Group or the monitoring committee to consider and they should be 
brought forward to them. If it's something that in the future, that is not in 

 
32
the strategy, I am sure it should be taken into consideration, but the 
working groups, I suppose the Citizen Smart working group may continue. It 
has, or the chair would work a lot on the actions that are within that, so I 
suppose the Steering Group and the oversight committee are the real areas, 
they are to approach those committees and work from there, but certainly 
anyone that wants to volunteer to help out in any of the actions for the 
strategies I would say they would be welcomed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR WALSH: Gerry Walsh thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you for the 
presentation. A point that was made to you on a number of occasions as we 
prepare for the roll out of the national broadband plan and something that 
became obvious during the election campaigns as we spoke to people in the 
various estates that have missed out on the connection of the fixed cable 
high speed fibre, where the suppliers seem to come into areas and cherry 
pick and they move on again. In the meantime we are talking about rural, I 
know the rural areas, but there is large swathes of areas within our town 
that are still left without, relying on copper infrastructure that is and, like, 
for example, people who have the opportunity to work from home are not 
permitted to do so with the service they are receiving, so just wonder is 
there any update. I know you have been working on this, with the providers 
trying to impress on them the need for this. I am wondering if you have any 
update?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Whitmore.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you for your presentation, Donal and for all of the 
work you have put in over the past couple of years on this. I would be really 
keen, I think one of the key things we need to focus on in the county is 
making sure people who can work from home are enabled to do so. So 
whether that is giving them the broadband capacity within their homes or 
providing digital hubs. I think that is really a focus and something we should 
be moving towards having a number of digital hubs across the county in the 
larger towns, I think would just enable people to work from within their 
localities and that would, in itself create economic benefit, so I would really 
like to see a big push on that, but thank you very much for the work you 
have done.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Derek Mitchell.  
CLLR MITCHELL: I would like to say that this, the lack of broadband is not 
just as Gerry Walsh mentioned, not just a rural problem, even, for instance, 
in Greystones, towards the centre of it there are a lot of people who can't 
get it and are apparently not going to be offered it. I would also say that 
there are also significant problems with the roll out of Siro, which was a 
surprise to me and certainly there has been problems with neighbours of 
mine being told they have to take down a number of trees in their gardens 
to get it and also outages of at least a week once it's been installed. So it 
isn't, it doesn't seem to be simple for them to install it either.  
DONAL: I will come back altogether. I suppose regards the national 
broadband plan, in relation to Greystones, Gerry, I suppose, there was a 
consultation process undertaken by the Department of communications, the 
Department of rural development and the telecoms operators and any other 
stakeholders within that arena, over the last couple of months. In that 
consultation, that was on the national broadband plan intervention area.  

 
33
 
So the mapping, I suppose, as you can see Wicklow is quite amber up there, 
mainly amber zone and that area represents, I suppose lack of high-speed 
broadband services. There are blue areas on the map and larger towns, that 
is basically, those larger blue areas are where telecoms operators have 
promised or are delivering high-speed services. Unfortunately the mappings 
system that was entered into the national broadband plan procurement 
process was done a couple of years ago and there is issues and I suppose 
irregularities and I suppose it's wrong, so that is why the consultation was 
undertaken lately. I made a consultation on behalf of county Wicklow, based 
over the last couple of years of any blue zoned areas that are not receiving 
or telecoms companies have no plans in the near future to deliver 
high-speed broadband services. Those areas were submitted to the 
consultation process, by myself and that basically a map will be rezoned 
before the contracts are signed with the national broadband plan. So areas 
in towns that are now blue stoned but are not going to receive commercially 
developed broadband will get state intervention to get high-speed 
broadband services through the overall national broadband plan state 
invention contracts.  
 
On remote working, digital hubs, like we have applied, there are private 
hubs being developed in many of the larger towns and there is also ones 
available at the moment, or are being developed in Arklow and in Baltinglass 
and funding has been sought for Baltinglass and Claremont. I think 
thereafter, any Government or locally supported digital hubs need to be 
demand orientated, so it would be prudent to go ahead with an economic 
study on where the demand is, so, I would say that would be undertaken by 
consultants on our behalf and thereafter that prioritisation and across each 
Municipal District will be put in place. That is where I see that project going, 
under the digital hub development plan. I have heard of issues regards Siro 
or roll out of commercial, I suppose high-speed broadband services, in Virgin 
Media unfortunately there are cul-de-sacs or small pockets of areas where 
they haven't gone into. Under roll up and licensing system, there is no 
process to enforce them to go into any particular area, unfortunately.  
 
We have tried to work at a local level with the local engineers speaking and 
trying to cajole the commercial investment into every avenue and every 
premises, but it doesn't always work out, it's a commercial decision to invest 
in our areas. Virgin Media invested 10 million in Arklow, Wicklow, Rathnew 
area over the last two years, SIRO have major plan, they have been delayed 
for a significant period but they are rolling out in Bray and Greystones and 
plan to and there is kind of a roll out, I suppose infrastructural plans for 
Arklow and Wicklow, so there are issues unfortunately with commercial 
developers, but that is that is to be taken up with their local work people on 
the ground and try to facilitate a different way of accessing premises.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Members, before we take the vote on the 
motion for Cllr Fortune and Kavanagh, I am wondering, Cllr Fortune, you 
know the planning and environmental SPC, could that perhaps look at it and 
report back to the council rather than setting up a whole new group, would 
that not be the SPC that would look at this.  

 
34
CLLR FORTUNE: I think myself and councillor Kavanagh would like to be 
involved, can I also say that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If you hit your mic.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Can I also say that there is a petition has already been 
signed by 1400 people asking us to adopt this particular motion as well. I 
just wanted to say that.  
>>: [INAUDIBLE].  
CLLR FORTUNE: A local one.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: I wouldn't have a problem with that committee looking 
after it, provided they did feed back to us so we know what is going on, 
because I understand that it is quite expensive to set up committees in 
terms of staffing time and stuff like that, I personally wouldn't centre a 
problem, so long as we are reported back to.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: And perhaps then maybe if that particular issue has been 
discussed at a particular SPC, if they would contact you so that you could 
literally sit in on it if you wanted. If you don't sit on a committee. Any 
elected member can attend any SPC.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I understand that, but I do think that this is a really 
important motion and I do think it has serious and none of us are experts, 
none of us are experts and based on the expertise I have read, a lot of 
people have children, it has serious implications and the reason it does is 
because the industry hasn't explained or has admitted in fact it has done no 
health and safety checks, so on a purely on a precautionary basis, I think 
it's, as a local authority, we should, I think we should in principle agree the 
motion, by all means then pass it on to the SPC and have the discussion I 
am asking in the motion, but I think on a precautionary principle we should.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Then can we take the motion in two parts. What you have 
as part of the motion:  'It is proposed that a cross 5G advisory council or 
working group is established... ' we also have the SPC. So if we can take the 
first part of your motion. Which would be Wicklow County Council has a 
social responsibility to serve, inform and protect the public and the 
environment from peak exposure to harm and therefore it opposes the 
royalties of unregulated 5G based on the precautionary principle, pending 
protective legislation by Dail Erin. Can we take that.  
CLLR FORTUNE: That is fine.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: It's the Department of communications climate action 
and environment is responsibility for the health effects on radiation and I 
know the minister has looked at and that made new regulars for make the 
EPA. ComReg is the statutory body for the regulation of the electronic 
communication sector and ComReg has commissioned audit reports to 
confirm that licenses are compliant with their licenses. I am just saying this 
by way of background. They are covered by international guidelines for 
public exposure to electromagnetic fields for non-ionsing radiation. It's 
reviewed by the World Health Organisation. The EPS is responsible for 
getting the inspection out.  
 
The European Commission, and I won't go through them, they go through it, 
in relation to the queries on the electric magnetic fields and concerns from 
the 5G campaign, but that again can go to the SPC and we have our 

 
35
planning policy in relation to telecommunications which facilitates the roll out 
of the national broadband plan and also the development of new masts and 
antennas in accordance why developments standard as set out in the 
appendix to the plan. I would say send it to the SPC and have a debate and 
come back with a recommendation.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Matthews. Actually, can I hold it there. Can someone 
propose, I would like to propose a time extension that we will sit until a.30.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: I second that.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: I want to thank Cllr Fortune because I know a lot of 
people are concerned about it, however I am not too sure on what we are 
trying to achieve here and I am wondering if I could ask the proposers of the 
motion to explain how the opposition, how we would oppose this and what 
format that opposition would take?  I want to know where they proposing a 
change of planning policy, in other words, that we would seek not to permit 
these masts and that is a change of planning policy which should go to the 
SPC, I would also ask would that contravene Government circulars issued in 
2012. I don't think we can change our development plan if there is national 
guidance on it. Are we talking about having no telecommunication masts in 
the county. Because I don't know how we survive whether it's a 5G or a 3G 
or a 4G or a microwave mast or what kind of transmitter would go on the 
masts. I am not too sure. If we could flesh it out. I think the Chief Executive 
made a good point, this needs further discussion and it should be discussed 
at the SPC, I sit on that and I would be happy to discuss it.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Now we are we are talking about two SPCs, can I just say, I 
agree with what you said a few moments ago, the second part of the motion 
can cover what Cllr Matthews is saying, it can go to the SPC, the 
environment and whatever is the relevant for that meeting or discussion, but 
the first part of it, should be put to the members, purely on a precautionary 
basis, because there is similar motions have been passed by four other local 
authorities and the indications are others are going to do the same. So I 
think it's a very mature and a very proper and indeed health and safety and 
in the interests of our children that we put the first part of the motion, as 
you suggested, to the meeting and hopefully we approve it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Rory O'Connor.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: I understand obviously this happens every time when 
there is a big leap in technological advances, like we saw with the radio, 
people were freaking out with tin foil hats that it was going to damage their 
brain, things like that. But 5G has been researched by the World Health 
Organisation, it's been categorised as at the same threat as coffee. if we are 
going to ban this, I think we should ban coffee at the same time to make it 
equal. Currently 5G sends out 300 or less ghz, it takes 1 million ghz to cause 
cancer, so unless we got 10th G it will do no damage at all. Currently, but 
one thing I will say is we do need to look out for the masts because there 
will be an increase in masts and we need public consultation about where 
they go, because we don't want them ruining the beautiful view in Bray of 
the sea front, that is one thing we need to look out for and that is all.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Mary Kavanagh.   
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Just to answer Stephen Matthews's query about where 
he sees this going. I want to refer too Sligo County Council's motion which 
was passed and I would see ours, if it's passed taking a similar route, which 

 
36
was that Sligo council calls, this was passed by the way. 'Delay the testing of 
5G and 5G roll out in Sligo, call on ComReg to delay the licensing of the roll 
out, call on the minister for chases to establish the facts about the radiation 
impact of 5G, until a full assessment of the health and environmental with a 
report compiled and presented to the Oireachtas. '  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Whitmore.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you very much. I can understand people are 
concerned about this and when you look at the websites and what is 
available online there is some very significant charges being made on it and 
it all seems, there is a lot of science being thrown around on the different 
pages and so I spent quite a bit of time and I was trying to figure out, is 
there anything to the bases of this, obviously I am not qualified in this area, 
however I do have a scientific background, so my understanding of peer 
reviewed research, when I was going through it, I really couldn't find 
anything that I could pinpoint and usually when you went down the rabbit 
hole of these websites there was an anti-vaxxer, and I came across a....  
there is allegations that there’s a Russian conspiracy they want to stop it 
across Europe and the US.  
 
So, there is a lot of conspiracies being thrown into the mix here and it's very 
difficult to figure out what is fact and fiction and I don't think that we are 
actually in a position to make that judgment and I do think we are going to 
have to rely on our institutions to do that for us, because we don't have the 
expertise. This could go to the planning SPC, we are going to be no better 
off, there is a lot of information and you would need to spend a lot of time to 
ascertain what is going on. Even when the name of Professor Tom Butler 
was mentioned, when I go on to UCC's website, his research interests are 
governance risk and compliance, so again there is another, I don't know 
what, where people are coming from and what their agendas are and their 
interests and what their actual expertise, so I don't know, I think we should 
rely on our institutions that we have in place to work this out for us.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Ferris.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I agree with Cllr Whitmore. It's my 
view, personally I don't have enough information about it, so to vote on 
something like that, I would find it very difficult to vote for it or against it, 
because I am not too sure the exact science about it and I am not sure what 
is right and what is wrong, the World Health Authority is saying there is no 
real risk to health, but I believe that, I think it's a reasonable suggestion 
that this should be deferred and sent to the SPC and brought back in a 
month or two where we can take a decision, because I don't believe that any 
of us are really informed one way or other and if it is put to a vote I will 
have to abstain.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: I don't think any of us are experts on this by any mean, but 
I have a problem, my biggest problem with it is if hasn't. Until I am 100% 
sure that it's safe, I want it know if there is a mast beside my house, 
emitting something 24/7 when my children are living in that house and 
every person has a right to know if there is something that can't be switched 
on or off, we can all switch our wi-fi on and off, if this is rolled out it will be 
24/7 and we won't have a say whether it's on or off. That is my problem 

 
37
with it. I would like an independent study and I would push for the 
Government to make the right decision, I don't think it's up to us here, as 
Jennifer said, in the chamber to make decisions on this at the moment, we 
don't have the means to inform ourselves enough.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Look, listening to Cllr Whitmore and Cllr Ferris they are 
saying it's okay, but they are saying they don't know. I am saying because 
we don't know, none of us are expert, I didn't claim to be an expert in 
putting forward this motion, I put it forward based on gathered information 
and what I had read and what I understand and purely on a precautionary 
principle, I think we have to put, as you suggested already, chair, the first 
part of the motion for a vote.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I suggested splitting.  
CLLR FORTUNE: The second part go to the committee, but the first part be 
put to the vote, because on a precautionary basis we have to do that I 
believe.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: After I said that Cllr Matthews came in with a valid thing 
saying should we not have more information, because what we are saying, 
therefore it opposes the roll out of unregulated 5G in county Wicklow based 
on a precautionary principle, we can vote on it if you want, or if the 
members want Cllr Matthews and Ferris seem to be suggesting we send it to 
the SPC and defer it and come back. So, do we take that as a, what is the 
word I am looking for?  An amendment to the motion.  
ADMINISTRATOR: It's a new motion really.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I had a motion put forward that you in an a very intelligent 
manner recategorized in two sections which I support. I, as far as I am 
concerned with the motions, the motion, the second part of it should go to 
the committee which covers Cllr Ferris and Matthews input which was okay, 
but the first part of the motion, as you suggested, already, which I fully 
think should be put to the meeting and I repeat it again, we are saying we 
don't know, Cllr Whitmore is talking about science but at the same time that 
is not her expertise, so even if we looked at the schools around Wicklow and 
the towns, purely on a precautionary basis as adults we should be saying on 
a precautionary basis let's put it to a vote. I want it put to a vote because I 
want to vote on it.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Can I add even if it was referred back to the SPC, there 
is no one on that who is a scientist or a doctor or has electronic engineering, 
so what would achieved by coming back, they would be looking at the same 
research we have been looking at for the last couple of months. I don't think 
they would come back with anything affirmative or anything conclusive or 
anything we know more than we know here today.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Sorry, what I would say is a lot of people who 
wouldn't have the same maybe particular interest in it, haven't made 
informed themselves as well as they could have and that if the SPC is going 
to look at it over the next couple of weeks or months, that they could go to 
all of the state bodies, they could go to ComReg and the Department of 
communications and climate action with the questions that have been raised 
here and get the information back and feed it into the members who could 
make an informed decision. I think a lot of people will vote here today, 
based just on a conversation, rather than own the amount of work that say 

 
38
you and Cllr Fortune have put into it and I just, maybe feel that we are 
better off putting it to an SPC. That is for the members to decide. Does 
anyone want to propose that we put this to the SPC?   
CLLR MATTHEWS: I propose it.  
CLLR SCOTT: I second it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Seconded by Lourda Scott. We have two motions now.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Are we taking your motion in its entirety or half of it.  
CLLR FORTUNE: We will take it the way you suggested it which I think was 
very good.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If we take Cllr Fortune's, most, the first half first.  
ADMINISTRATOR: That is proposed by Cllr fortune and seconded by Cllr 
Kavanagh. The second part.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: On whether we send it to the SPC.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: The second one.  
CLLR FERRIS: Could we have the wording for Cllr fortune's.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Wicklow County Council has a social responsibility to 
serve, inform and protect the public and environment from exposure to 
harm and therefore it opposes the roll out of unregulated 5G in the county of 
Wicklow based on the precautionary principle pending the enactment by Dail 
Erin of the protective legislation. That is the proposal and the second 
proposal is seconded by Cllr Matthews and Cllr Scott is that it go, the whole 
motion go to the planning and environment SPC. Okay.  
 
VOTE TAKEN 
 
ADMINISTRATOR: So that is 17 for, 5 against sorry -- sorry 8 against, five 
not present and two abstaining.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Then we don't need to vote on yours. Okay, now, before 
we just start on the housing presentation there is a couple of quick items to.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Number 9. To consider passing a resolution that Wicklow 
County Council sanction a borrowing of 1.28 million in respect of the housing 
scheme. Proposed.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Seconded by Sylvester Bourke. Agreed?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: To adopt the Wicklow County Council Annual Report 2018 
which I presume you have read.  
ADMINISTRATOR: It's come before you before, if we could adopt it today. 
Proposed by Cllr Bourke and seconded by Cllr O'Brien. To set a date for the 
annual budget meeting for the Wicklow County Council. That will.  
ADMINISTRATOR: That will be Monday 25th of November starting at 
10.00am, breaking for lunch and continuing until we finish the budget. 
Proposed by Cllr Ferris and seconded by Shay Cullen.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To consider the ratification of two elected members to the 
protocol of Wicklow County Council that is Cllr John Snell and Cllr Matthews.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Seconded by Cllr Walsh. That is agreed. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, so housing, to receive a presentation on social 
housing.  
CLLR BEHAN: What about the suspension. I don't mind it's up to the 
proposer.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: The proposer is Cllr Mullen. Can we take the housing and 
can you do your suspension?   

 
39
JOE: Okay, this 
s to augment the information in the Chief Executive report. 
I suppose the size and complexity of housing it was decided to split the 
housing presentation into two parts. We concentrated last week on supply, 
sorry, last month, on supply, particularly in local authority supply and 
construction and HAP. Declan and Jackie are going to continue now. Declan 
is going to give a recap of the supply mechanisms and details the change 
from local authority construction to other forms of supply has increased 
supply. And there is a sum of the streams and the workflows involved and 
then Jackie is going to continue developing and understanding on the more 
traditional type local authority services. That was the plan anyhow.  
DECLAN: Okay. Good evening, members, I will get through this as quick as 
we can. You are familiar with the five pillars of in rebuilding Ireland and 
Breege covered at the last meeting on the supply side of it and that is just to 
give an idea of how reliant we are on other supply mechanisms, besides our 
own build particular any in this year that a large proportion of our supply is 
coming from other sources. When we talk about approved housing bodies in 
addition to the two larger turnkey sites we have, we also have the central 
garage site in Bray which will be, it's at part 8 at the moment, it will be 
coming to the members in Bray shortly. We also have two other smaller 
sites in Bray, that are at design stage at the moment and we have a number 
of other sites under consideration, smaller sites, we also have the Carraig 
Eden development in Greystones. It's a development for Carraig Eden of 35 
units supported living accommodation and that is, we have a contractor 
appointed and they should be starting in the next few weeks and we are 
hoping to have work completed within a year.  
 
Another mechanism for supply is leasing, at the moment we have 20 unit, 
ten in long-term and ten in short-term. They generally, the owners get 80% 
of market rate and we are responsible for maintenance of the property. Then 
there is enhanced leasing which is managed by the housing agency, 
generally in excess of 20 units and they get a higher rent, but they have to 
maintain the property, it can be for up to 25 years as well. We have a lot of 
meetings ongoing with investors and development companies and we are 
look at various properties and sites around the county, so that is ongoing. 
Affordable housing, the Department brought out a circular a couple of years 
ago with criteria for what would make a site suitable for affordable housing. 
We assessed fine around the county and five were considered economically 
feasible.  
 
They then brought out these service sight funds and they made an 
application for our service sight in Rathnew for a possible 20 units and we 
have been successful in that, so that is ongoing at the moment, we will have 
further discussions with the Department to flesh out the detail on it and we 
are also considering two mixed tenure sites for affordable housing. The 
allocation scheme was adopted by this council back in June and it's 
important to stress that like there is no point in people applying, there is no 
application process at the moment, it's only when we have an actual scheme 
available that we will be invited applications and that is when the scheme of 
priority will kick in at that stage. Acquisitions, we have a programme of 
them, we purchased 24 direct any in 2019 and we have 16 been acquired by 

 
40
an approved housing body through a different funding mechanism. Our 
repair and leasing scheme, we haven't had a lot of success in that. A lot of 
application, a lot of interest in it, but for various reasons they haven't 
proceeded and in a lot of cases the properties, the work needed on the 
property exceeding the 40,000 limit, in other cases people decided to sell 
the property or do the work themselves.  
 
There is also the vacant house scheme, we have been looking at that over 
the last number of years and we have looked at in excess of 300 properties 
and trying to trace the owners. These are properties that are identified 
through the census and other methods, through geo directory and local 
knowledge. We have reparations on nine of them and started the process on 
five. That is a slow process, but it is ongoing. Our existing properties, it's an 
ongoing, any time a property becomes vacant we generally upgrade the 
properties to the housing standards and we completed 80 in 2018 and 72 so 
far this year. So it's a rolling programme. There is a lot of work involved in it 
and we are expecting the number to increase significantly over the next few 
years as new properties are rolled out. In some cases people are moved due 
to overcrowding or downsizing or other reasons, so that then generates a 
vacancy we have to look at as well. It's a combination of contract and direct 
labour and we get a lot of help from the Municipal Districts on doing that 
work.  
 
The housing grants, these are generally for disabled persons grants and 
older person grants. They are provided between private houses and council 
houses. Our allocation for private was 1.7 million and we are nearly a million 
so far this year, our allocation for council house was 500,000 and we have 
spent 423 so far this year. This also is, we feed it in with our allocation 
process, sometimes if we know from a grant application that somebody in a 
council house has a particular need, due to health reason, we look at our 
allocations and see if a move would be more appropriate than doing work on 
the house in that case. Energy upgrade works, phase 1 is ongoing, nearing 
completion now, we did 420 units this year, that is generally the houses that 
have a cavity that can be pumped and we insulate the attics as well. We 
have ongoing surveys mostly on Phase 2 and as part of that, a number of 
phase 1 houses are still being identified.  
 
We have just ordered a contract for our first Phase 2 works which is in St 
Peter's place in Arklow and we have services ongoing in other Municipal 
Districts to roll out further contracts. The next one we are looking at is one 
part of Wolfe Tone square in Bray. Our allocation in year was 600,000 
overall. General main continuance we are reviewing that at the moment. 
Generally the reactive repairs are carried out in the Municipal District. 
Central heating provision we had a budget of 150,000. All of that work is 
completed. We prioritised that based on age, to prioritise older people first 
for central heating and then we have boiler maintenance programme and 
electrical upgrades where works are identified. Inspection of rental 
properties, private rented properties, we have a target from the 
Department, which is 15% of our total properties and that includes all 
private rented, so it includes HAP, RAS and the inspection for housing need 

 
41
and also then targeted inspections, risk-based targeted inspections, so that 
is ongoing. Over to Jackie.  
JACKIE: Thank you. Joe mentioned I would be looking at the traditional end 
of the housing so we are all familiar with the concept of the housing list, that 
is where I will start. That is where we meet our clients first and foremost, 
when they apply to go on the housing list. The list is the list for social 
housing support, it's not just the list to get a council house.  
 
So, at the moment, we have 4,248 on the list. Of that there is a sizeable 
number that are in RAS and HAP. So by virtue of people being in the list 
they qualify for RAS and HAP and all of those social housing supports. There 
is eligibility criteria there, they must demonstrate a need for housing and 
there is an income threshold which we have, on our network we have looked 
for review and it's under review nationally, but it hasn't actually been 
advised to us as yet.  
 
So, under the scheme of letting priorities we allocate our properties, the 
members adopted the scheme in 2018, we had amended it to include choice 
based letting which was requested of us nationally. Applicants are 
considered based on the points system and or priority status, so you are 
familiar with the points system and the fact there may be extra points given 
for a particular disability or medical or compassionate or elderly. The way 
the allocations teamwork is that they liaise extensively with the RAS team, 
the HAP team and the homeless team. Just to give a better overall look to 
the allocations and try and maximise the stock with the people. 
 
We do a lot of transfers and what was downsizing is now called right sizing, 
so if someone is in a four bed house and has a one-bed need we will look at 
getting the four bed house back and providing them with more suitable 
accommodation and then benefit to families in that regard. We are looking at 
reviewing it in 2020 again because at a recent review of our traveller 
accommodation programme on equality grounds, we, the TAP quota of 1:16 
isn't contained or stated in the allocation scheme of letting priorities so we 
may have to go back and revise that to put that in there. Also, Declan 
mentioned the disability strategy and how the grand feeds into that. That is 
at the forefront of our mind, if a bungalow comes up the first area we will 
look to disability or elderly impaired.  
 
This is a nice slide. This time last year it wouldn't have looked as good. You 
can see the allocations for 2019. I have included the AHBs, they are still 
nominated social housing applicants. They are nominated and they get a 
social house basically. They are in accordance with the scheme of letting 
priorities and the AHBs have to have regard to the minimum 1:16 quota.  
 
So, it's the same as our social housing programme. As you can see there is a 
significant increase in supply which is very welcome. It's also very 
rewarding, in housing at the moment, that we are able to give out houses to 
people that have been on the list a long time and we are beginning to see 
progress in that area. The increase in supply impacts on every aspect of 
housing. So there is a significant increasing workload there. So that is like 

 
42
266 allocations so far in 2019. Social housing tenancies, the differential rent 
scheme. The differential rent scheme is based on household income, it was 
last fully reviewed in 2016, the scheme was, we have been awaited a 
differential rent scheme for a number of years now. We are still awaiting it. 
We are considering a local review of the scheme in 2020 and we will be 
putting that through our SPC. We undertook a major rent review in 2019 
and now our weekly accrual is.... arrears are running at over 1 million and 
the team are working flat out on that at the minute. Estate management, 
again we have a tenant liaison officer, she deals with antisocial behaviour 
and issues raised by residents. She has established really enduring 
relationships with the HSE and Tusla and Garda Síochána. One thing we 
know about housing is it is not just bricks and mortar, it has to be a holistic 
approach. To this she sits on a mental health board because we have noticed 
a significant number of increase with tenants presenting with enduring 
mental health issues that we have to provide supports for them. She has a 
significant case load, trying to get cases into court for breach of tenancy. 
Again there is a huge amount of work with the Garda Síochána and we have 
a good relationship with them. The antisocial behaviour strategy is under 
review and it will be wrought to the SPC next year hopefully. On the nice 
side the State Development Grants we allocate them to improve estates. 
Incentives for tenants, purchase scheme and mortgage allowance, they are 
still ongoing, they weren't stood down.  
 
Rebuilding Ireland home loan, I won't dwell on it. We have 265 applications 
this year, this is since its inception. We have approved 90, the decline rate 
seems high, but that can be declined by the housing agency based on credit, 
the ability of repay and other things that the applicant might have. That they 
could not sustain a loan. Obviously we need to have regard to that. Then on 
to homelessness. The members are aware we sit on the Mideast Region 
Homeless Forum and we had advised on action plan for homelessness, we 
are starting the review process towards the end of the year and it's our 
long-term vision for addressing homelessness in the region. Basically it plans 
advice and reports, it's strengthening preventative policies so we are all 
working together to ensure that prevention is key to how we address 
homelessness. It addresses the needs of the long-term homeless in 
long-term emergency facilities. Within the region Wicklow is the only one 
without an emergency hostel. Our budget, for 2019, direct expenditure we 
are looking at 800,000 of which 80% is recoupable under Section 10 
funding.  
 
We have had five presentations of homeless in 2019 to date. We have 37 
families in total in emergency accommodation, including our own doorstep, 
that is when we use our own social housing stock, where families may not be 
able to avail of bed and breakfast accommodation for particular reasons. 
One of the queries that came up earlier was about children in bed and 
breakfast, these aren't the same families, there is transition in and exiting 
out. There is a constant flow. I think the statistics we have given on the 
Chief Executive's report, which show you the lengths of time that people 
have been in long-term emergency accommodation, but there is always key 
support work given to those in emergency accommodation to ensure we can 

 
43
transition out the benefit of homeless HAP and they work closely with these, 
as does the homeless outreach officer. It's understood, you may not always 
see both sides of a story about homelessness. Some people presenting have 
complex needs that have to be managed and that have contributed to their 
homelessness and it can pose health and safety risks for emergency 
accommodation. If something doesn't look right, there is probably another 
side to the story.  
 
One of the things we had written into the plan this time around was the data 
capture. At least if we can capture that that will inform us going forward on 
how we can put policies in place, for example there is a high level of notice 
to quit, we have people exiting from prison and how we deal with that. We 
have a lot of protocols we have to put in place as part of our plan and the 
data will form that process. The homeless help finder is very welcome 
addition to our team. I won't dwell on it, but just to say that it was provided 
to 57 prevention cases. That is significant. That prevented 57 households 
were falling into homelessness.  
 
 
 
Short break.  
 
 
>>: It's not just about bricks and mortar. We recognise that for example, 
some people are close to housing, day ever services in Bray. And we have a 
very good history of providing supported accommodation models throughout 
the county, we have a great success with transitioning from homeless, into 
medium supported accommodation and throughout to our shared housing. 
We have a lot of examples where it's worked and will continue to build on 
this model. We can't call it Sonas anymore, because they have left the 
county. We are going to have to rename it. We are caught up in legalities at 
the moment which we are reworking on, but I will keep you posted on that, 
we are trying to put the pressure on to get the legality sorted on this. The 
capital assistance scheme is useful scheme for us to progress because it 
works with target groups, disability elderly, homelessness and they have, we 
are going to have our first care lever, this is where children are exiting foster 
care and need to be assisted into permanent accommodation. Peter McVerry 
has purchased one of those.  
 
We have identified an absolute need for emergency high supported 
accommodation in the north of the county. We have identified a property; 
we are at a preliminary design stage and we hope to have an application 
with the Department hopefully by year end to progress that by 2020. That 
has always been included in our homeless action plan and included in any 
strategies we talk about in partnership with the approved housing bodies. 
The cold weather initiatives, there were some queries on that, it's proposed 
to recommence the cold weather initiative. We have an agreement with 
Dublin Simon and they operate beds for us. It's a 12-bed facility, it provides 
night shelter. We have good occupancy last year, but what was crucial last 
year is that the key support work undertaken by the support worker, with 

 
44
the clients, to ensure they are on the housing list, that they understood they 
could move into supported accommodation, so we are proposing to do that 
key support work prior to the CWI, we are starting with, with storm Lorenzo 
we had 7 rough sleepers that came in, that was good, showing they are 
willing to come in and use the facility. Sometimes a lot of the entrenched 
rough sleepers won't avail of the opportunity to come in.  
 
That is it. Traveller accommodation, you adopted the traveller 
accommodation programme in September. One of the learnings we got, was 
that despite the media, the majority are seeking standard housing not 
traveller specific housing. Transient sites even though it's part of the culture 
and the lifestyle it's not a priority for travellers in county Wicklow, they have 
asked us to state that, that it's not a priority given the current priority and 
we need to concentrate on the current housing in the plan. There is an 
increased number of homeless travellers an increase in illegal encampments 
which pose costs for us for legal cases. The traveller specific accommodation 
is seen as positive action. 1:16 is only a minimum, in recent allocations it 
was more than that. We are looking to progress Rathdrum group housing 
scheme going forward and we hope to engage the AHA for travellers in that 
regard as well.  
 
The Part A for Silverbridge was Deferred. My last slide will answer some of 
the questions on direct provision. This is where we are welcoming 190 
refugees, these are Syrians and this is under the Irish Refugee Protection 
Programme it's nothing to do with direct provision and asylum seeker which 
is not dealt with by housing and Wicklow County Council. The committee is 
led by CCSD. All of them sit on it. It's the Gardaí, Tusla, the HSE all sit under 
that. We have formed a housing subgroup which is meeting tomorrow, just 
to nail it down. We have identified areas for resettlement, we have 
purchased extra houses and delivery by approved housing bodies has been 
identified as part of the solution and we are commencing the roll out of the 
programme, probably towards the end of this month. The programme 
implementer has been appointed, they are currently recruiting the workers. 
So a lot going on. That is me finished, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Thank you for the presentation. One item which doesn't 
appear in the presentations is rural cottages. There they were something 
that was common in its past and were successful. I would ask we consider 
reintroducing them. You often have people who live in rural areas that don't 
have the finances to build or apply fog planning to build themselves, but 
they have a bit of land they are willing to give to the council to build. Really 
these people want to live there because they have lived all of their lives 
there, their parents may live beside them and nearby and they really are 
discriminated against, vis-a-vis people who qualify for rural planning and can 
afford to build a house. I would urge this area be looked in again. I have 
come across a lot of places where people are in rural areas and they are 
doing something like putting a mobile home nearby because they can't 
afford anything else, they don't want to move into the town and they are in 
a dilemma and they are people who have land and a site that the county 
could avail of and take ownership of and receive rent. I suppose I am 

 
45
disappointed over the last couple of year, it's few and far between and it 
seems to be something that is disappearing and I would ask that it be looked 
at again, because it could solve a lot of the problems of homelessness in 
rural areas. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, I have a real concern that we are going to run out 
of time, so I am going to take them in sections of three, then Jackie can 
answer, so once the clock runs down, it runs down. Cllr Mags Crean.  
CLLR CREAN: Good news to hear good news around the social. I witnessed 
some good news recently. It's good to see that. About the emergency 
accommodation for North Wicklow, is that for families and single people?  In 
light of the fact that a lot of responses to homelessness is based on single 
men, the traditional approach, where if we look at the stats 60% are 
families. We need to respond to that need. At the moment I was talking to 
someone, they said if someone is referred as a woman with a child they 
would be sent to a woman's refuge. So for families and women and children 
there should be emergency accommodation. The other thing, I know we are 
stuck for time I would have appreciated my motion that I have on the Notice 
of Motions there on the use of public land for social and affordable housing 
to be integrated with this presentation the same way that Cllr Fortune 
motion was integrated with the previous presentation, because it ties in 
nicely. My concern with our social housing provision is one that the bar in 
rebuilding Ireland T is too low. We shouldn't be aiming for that, we should 
be trying to do added value for that and if we are using public lands for 
private builds we need to be clear why we are doing that. I would agree with 
a tenure mix, but that can be social and affordable. The affordable issue is 
the most alarming concern. It's going to be a massive issue over the next 
few years and we need to address that. For me that means that public land 
needs to be prioritised for social and affordable, that being the mixed tenure.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: I as newly elected councillor I want to thank Jackie and 
grainy and the team they have been such a great help to me coming in 
green. I would like to ask how fairly things are done. Is the points system 
for allocation of social housing, I have had a lot of people coming to me that 
have been there a long time on the list and it's something that is becoming 
aware to me is that there is a points system in place, I am not sure how it's 
assessed and what is the public knowledge of that points system. 
Sometimes the people that shout the loudest aren't the ones that need the 
help and how is that, is there an analysis of that, or are they sent out letters 
to show them there is a points system, do you tick these boxes, are you 
suffering from mental health and the different things and that would be 
something that I would like to be looked at.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, Jackie, if you want to take those.  
>>: Jackie. Cllr Crean spoke about the emergency accommodation and the 
singles versus families, the proposal for North Wicklow is a mix. The site 
would be a model of emergency, medium high support plus families. So we 
were looking at a low rise apartments or, of that ilk, so it wouldn't be just for 
single individuals. Yes, there is a huge rise in families. Homelessness. That 
has been a feature of housing crisis. It's starting to slow down and reverse a 
bit. The women's refuge piece, people only get accepted in there if they are 
fleeing domestic violence and that has to be part of the piece for them to be 

 
46
selected there. I can't discuss a particular case.  
CLLR CREAN: I can come back to you on that.  
>>: Jackie. Then the points system, it's stated how that work, you get 
points for time on the list and each year you are on the list and location and 
points for medical grounds, you get points for, there is priority status within 
the list, so I can go through that with you.  
CLLR LEONARD: It's not for me, it's the people on the social housing are 
they aware of.  
>>: They are. We try and get extra information, do you have a recognised 
mental health issue, or do you have a disability. We try and get...  
CLLR LEONARD: It doesn't intermittently.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: It can't be back and forth like this. If the director wanting 
to come in.  
JOE:: On the rural question, there is no scheme in the Department, I know 
the year last I discussed with them because there were a number of queries 
but there is no scheme, there is currently no scheme, all things are under 
the four stage process for larger schemes.  
>>: Can I come in, you just said public knowledge and people shouting the 
loudest, there is always going to be conversations in public and on social 
media about who got what and who didn't get what. We stand over our 
scheme and we stand over our allocations that are done under the scheme 
that has been adopted by the elected members of the council. So the people 
on the list know they get, it's a points-based system. They know that length 
of time on the list is primarily how they are allocated housing and if there is 
additional information on their file that affects them, for example, a 
disability, there will be extra points afforded to them in that regard. So I 
don't know how...  
CLLR LEONARD: It's a lot of people that I have spoken to don't...  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry. Declan, if you want to come in on the rural 
cottages.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you for the presentation, it was obviously an awful lot of 
good work going on, as a new councillor I appreciate hearing what is going 
on. Declan, I have a query on the statistic on the 300 vacant properties that 
were investigated and the Compulsory Purchase Orders on nine of them. It 
seems like a phenomenal volume of potential use that is in the county that 
we are, can't tap into. I was wondering is there any more detail on what is 
the delay or are they just not useable or is there any way of tapping into 
that resource?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Mine is two observations more than anything else, 
just thank you for the presentation and having worked in a housing 
department and more local authorities I know the absolute amount of 
volume of work that goes on in the housing department and it's to are that 
reason I suppose I am questioning the tenancies court officer and just one 
seems very little for the county or maybe I have misunderstood that, maybe 
it's more than one for the county. Just having that done that role previously 
and given some of the challenges and family challenges that are evident by 
the condition of some of the stock in the county, I would imagine that there 
would be a need for more there and the other comment is in relation to staff 
support, the staff that are working in the housing department, I am just, I 

 
47
suppose I am wondering and again it's from working in this area, what sort 
of additional supports they are getting. I know from my own time working in 
this department, there would have been people working in the Department 
and it can be quite a challenging environment.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: I like to thank you for the detailed presentation as well and 
all of the great work that is taking place. Just a quick question on 
turnaround times for relets, is there an average on that and is there a 
discrepancy for Municipal District to Municipal District and if there is a longer 
than expected average waiting time, is that due to budgetary constraints or 
over reliance on not enough contractors. Would you like to comment on that, 
thanks.  
DECLAN: On the vacant properties issue, a lot of the properties weren't 
suitable for council housing. Some of them were too large, in rural areas 
where we wouldn't have a demand. So, we also have a lot of difficulty trying 
to identify owners of properties, some of them then after we identify them 
were put on the market or were let by the owner, so they weren't all 
suitable, as I say, we have about nine at the moment that we have 
recommended for CPO, where we feel that is the best option, obviously we 
try and explore other options and try and push repair and leasing, or offer to 
purchase straight out or try and encourage the owner where we can identify 
them to do something with the property themselves. So it's not to say they 
are all suitable for social housing either. On the turnaround times for the 
relet properties, it isn't generally due to budget costs. That isn't an issue, 
the average time it varies a lot. Some houses with can he turn around in a 
few weeks if there is little needing to be done to them. Or sometimes it 
might be a house that was done up in the last few years, but some of our 
houses they come back in very poor condition, due to the age of the 
property, not always due to the fault of the tenant and they need extensive 
works done and they could take eight or ten weeks to do. We have had 
delays with getting contractors, certainly, as contractors are very busy, we 
have to work off a framework for procurement reasons, so we are limited in 
the number of contractors we can use in different areas and they can be 
delayed. Sometimes the same contractor might get two or three houses and 
they have to manage between those, there is various reasons for delays. We 
do work to turn them around.  
JOE:: Just on the estate management, that is one person, but there is a 
team around that person, if you want to put a person that is a full-time job, 
but there are other backups or supports there.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Vincent Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you for the presentation, certainly a reflection on the 
work that is being done by the housing section of Wicklow County Council. I 
know we are talking about one-off houses but one of the big issues we had a 
problem with from Dunlavin where we had no water in the past, to Kiltegan 
where we had water problems and Shillelagh and Aughrim and Avoca. All of 
these because of the fact we can't provide social housing in the future, 
because of the lack of facilities there.  
 
It's creating problems for people having to go on to the list in Arklow or 
elsewhere and putting pressure on the Arklow list as well to be 

 
48
accommodated and we don't have, our ability to be able to provide new 
housing for them in some small towns and villages. I know the CEO in the 
past here has given a commitment he would engage with us and with Irish 
water as well, with trying to resolve the issue of providing sufficient funding 
to upgrade the sewage systems in a lot of the small towns and villages. 
Thank you, chairman.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Bourke.  
CLLR BOURKE: Cathaoirleach, thank you, it was an excellent presentation 
and it shows you how hard the Department is working, it's probably one of 
the hardest working departments in the County Council. Just a couple of 
points there, the group housing scheme, when do you have a timeline for 
that?  I met that family who are hoping to be the beneficiaries of a group 
housing scheme in Rathdrum and I would like to push that case as fast as 
possible, because they are a decent family and deserve to be housed rather 
than left where they are. Secondly, manager, why don't you continue and 
push for more social housing for the County Council, given that the 
€300,000 a week in rent is flowing into the revenue account, surely you 
would be able to balance the books better in the future if you had more 
social houses on your books, because I know from previous budget meetings 
you raided the housing rent generally used to balance the overall revenue 
account in the County Council and an extra few hundred houses in the 
housing stock surely would benefit the council's revenue account into the 
future?  Rather than leaving it to the approved housing bodies to pick up 
the slack for half of the proposed expansion in housing stock in the county. 
Why aren't we doing that?  And taking all of that for ourselves?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: You said there were 4,348 on housing support and unfair 
question and I won't get the answer today, how many are looking for social 
housing and how many are on low income that need housing support?  That 
is the first question. The second question on the HAP system, I am aware of 
other councillors, there is extreme difficulty in some of the other properties. 
Now you have to check them in certain periods, is it ten months that is the 
time?  Eight months. That doesn't happen all the time. I mean some of the 
accommodation is less than what you would like to live in. The problem is as 
some tenants say to me, if they are forced out of the house there is nowhere 
to go. So it's a situation that is a very difficult situation for the tenants. I 
have lodged some issues there and I want to compliment you Jackie and 
Joe. I have had my light on for a long time, I am just talking for a minute 
there. I think my light was going to someone else by the looks of it. I want 
to thank the staff for the work they are doing. In nigh opinion, most people 
on the council know how the points system work because it's been relayed 
to them on several occasions.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If you want to come back on this.  
JACKIE: Cllr Fitzgerald said about the demand versus need. Traditionally we 
would say that the need is probably a third of the actual list that is 
traditionally how we worked it out. You can see a lot of people availing of 
social housing support, their housing need is deemed to have been met. So 
if you look at the fact that there was net of 2,400 outside of, that were in 
RAS and HAP. Their housing need is deemed to have been met, so you 
would take it that the other 2,000 would be in need of social housing 

 
49
possibly. It's not an exact science. The HAP inspections, I will let Declan 
answer and the group housing scheme, the timeline for the group housing 
scheme that is referenced in the TAP. It's going to be two to three years 
down the road before delivery, but it's at preliminary design stage at the 
moment, it has to go to detailed design and we have to get KINA [?] Board, 
they do the liaison work with families and the site that is available would be 
available for building pending the completion of the Rathdrum scheme.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay.  
>>: The numbers for HAP, I don't have the exact figures to hand, but I will 
get those, the up to date figures for the where we are at on the HAP 
inspections.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: Thank you for your presentation, I just have to two 
questions. In terms of the work being done in Wolfe Tone or part of it, a 
constituent was on to me about whether her house was going to get done or 
not, it would be helpful if we could have the rationale for where what is 
being done and what the priority. I understand it can't be every house at 
every time, but I it would be helpful if we could tell them why. In terms of 
choice based letting, I know I asked you, Joe, and you said that 
choice-based letting is usually started in places where the allocation system 
isn't working, but are we moving towards choice-based letting in terms that 
it does give agency to people on the housing list, but it might stop time 
wasting so where are we at with the movement towards that and what are 
the challenges?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Again, thank you Cathaoirleach and thank you for the 
presentations, they illustrate the vast amount of work being done by the 
housing staff. Jackie, in your presentation, you refer to the increase on the 
traveller accommodation section, you refer to the increase in illegal 
encampments and just to elaborate, I know in our area we are dealing with 
a particular encampment and I know there was a legal process initiated and 
there was other arrangements in place to house the occupants. I was 
alarmed and concerned to get, to get a call in morning from a resident in the 
general area stating that this particular family have moved out of the site, 
but someone else have moved in and it's suggested by arrangement. So I 
am wondering the council's policy on securing these sites when these, the 
occupants move out for whatever reason, to prevent further encroachments.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Jackie.  
>>: Just to go back to Cllr McManus. Choice based letting, we were obliged 
to put that into in our scheme nationally. We generally don't need it in areas 
of high demand because we have no trouble with people taking up 
allocation. But if we end up with houses in areas of low demand, where it 
could be decimated by someone who is on the list for two years we would 
look at a county-based approach for that and advertise out for choice based 
letting. It's worked in other areas, for example, Kildare is working 
successfully with choice-based letting, but again it depends on the areas of 
demand, how and low. It is contained within our scheme, so we will look at 
doing a pilot if it's appropriate to do so. Cllr Walsh, I am reluctant to discuss 
the legal encampment because it would involve discussing a family and as 
the housing authority I have to be mindful of that.  

 
50
>>: Just the general policy of securing...  
>>: If that is not notified to us we work closely with the guards. We would 
look at, recently the guards were able to use their powers to move families 
on under the miscellaneous provision act. If the people on the legal 
encampment, if people are illegally encamped are on our housing list and 
indigenous to county Wicklow, with very to be mindful of our duty to care to 
them as a housing authority. This is where the difficulty comes in. We have 
to go under trespass law, it's difficult to prove proofs and to get people who 
have witnessed incidents to stand up in court for various reasons, so it's 
quite complicated. The particular site you are talking about is with the law 
department at the moment and that is probably as much as I can say on 
that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I won't delay. Just picking up on the last point that Jackie is 
saying, there is a serious case in existence at the moment with trespassing 
that is causing horrendous intimidation to a bunch of residents and it's 
scandalous at this stage that it's still being permitted. I have said this before 
in the chamber. I attended the high Court on two occasions in relation to it 
really and truly it's, I am astounded as an organisation we haven't been able 
to sort. It could be sorted out as we speak in the next couple of days 
because of things that are happening and I think it's essential that we do it 
to be fair to people, because we are not being fair to people.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I won't allow you to respond to that, because we only 
have two minutes in which time, if it suits the members we can go to item 8, 
to credit the adoption of the county Wicklow council litter management plan.  
CLLR WHITMORE: What about the suspension.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I will go for the suspension, but this has to be done 
before 5.30.  
ADMINISTRATOR: If we are doing it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: So are people happy to adopt the litter management 
plan?   
CLLR BEHAN: Cathaoirleach, unless there is a reason for having to do it 
today I would prefer us to have a discussion on it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, we will leave it until next month.  
CLLR BEHAN: I am sure people would be interested in.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: John, if you want to speak briefly on your suspension of 
standing orders.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you, chair. Is this working?  Just, I was advised this 
was the best way to do it, but basically I will read it out, that Wicklow 
County Council notes the personal abuse and threats being made on social 
media against personal representatives, Wicklow County Council asks all 
public represent yourselves to be leaders in ensuring that bullying and 
threatening language is not used on line and ask their spores to engage in a 
respect of manner. Wicklow County Council also asks anyone who is being 
targeted on online to engage with Garda Síochána. Look, social media is 
used by all of us. It's a way of getting in touch with your constituents, you 
about there are frequent issues of people going beyond the line. I have been 
talking about it, we need to nip this in the bud at the start of a new council. 
Which want debate and engage with debate, but let's keep it polite and 
respect each other.  

 
51
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: I know everyone is tired so I won't keep everyone all night. 
I do feel passionate about this and I thank Cllr Mullen for his motion. I spoke 
about this at our Municipal District council meeting. The reason I say this is 
over the last few weeks I have noticed it's got worst. I was going to say 
some of the older councillors, but they might say as a new councillor this is 
what you are signing up for, that doesn't mean it's right. In my other life, 
my role, I am the President of the referees in Ireland, so we are well used to 
abuse to be honest with you, but I have seen the other aspect of abuse 
online and I have had to visit my members in hospital after they have been 
beaten up.  
 
So, I want to say as an elected representative I have every much right to be 
here as everyone else. My viewpoint should be taken as seriously as 
everyone else, as I take everyone's else's viewpoint, this thing of naming 
and shaming people on social media has to stop. We are a democratic 
country, I respect everyone else's here, I respect everyone else's opinions 
and all I am asking for is the same in return, so I would urge elected 
members to consider when they are posting things on social media or even 
in the media itself, to remember that they have families, we have families 
and the officials have families too and to bear that in mind. Thank you.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you very much, chair. I was really glad to hear my 
colleagues were putting in forward. Particularly over the weekend, there was 
documentation that was handed out around the Charlesland area in 
Greystones from a particular group who an anti-immigration, very much 
Ireland for the Irish type of group and I posted something on it on Facebook 
and I have literally spent the past day dealing with abuse online. It has now 
moved to Twitter and I will expect tonight I will be dealing with it on Twitter. 
I have been called all sorts of names and frankly it's unacceptable, but you 
can see that level of discourse, not just in online trolls but how we deal with 
each other as professionals in the social media sphere and I do think that we 
need to recognise that there are people behind, they are roles that we are all 
individuals and we have families and we are here to do what we believe is 
best and I think rather than knocking everyone down all the time that we 
should be just trying to work together for the people of Wicklow. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Grace McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: Maybe I have a slightly unusual experience in that I have 
experienced online trolling twice both times before I was elected, so once 
during the repeal campaign and once in the lead up to the locals and sadly it 
was to do with very personal things about the way I looked or my gender or 
sexuality and that made me laugh a little bit because if they don't have 
something to say about your politics they will go for what hurts. I want to 
share three things I learnt. The first thing I noticed that my friends were 
watching me to see how I would react and by taking some time to deal with 
what people were saying about me and to be resilient to it in the sense I 
noticed that other people then started to react like that as well and we need 
to be mindful that people are watching us, when we are getting abuse and 
how we handle it and we have an opportunity to showcase resilience in that 
regard. Secondly, I learnt that you have to have red lines so I just delete 
comments that are abusive. I am happy to debate policy and if people want 

 
52
to question mark and I don't mind to be named if I voted for something and 
then being tagged why did you vote for that and I give my rationale, but I 
won't accept abuse, again that shows for young people, especially, you 
wouldn't let them be shouted at in the street, so why would you let them be 
shouted at or why should they let anyone shout at them on their pages. That 
leads me to my third point. I appreciate this is being brought up, because 
we know how bad it feel, so I can't imagine what it would be like if you are a 
young person being abused and you don't know yourself or you don't have 
your scaffolding of support, so I would like to keep an eye on this and 
maybe we need to lobby or make points for legislation to come in to protect 
our young people in that regard, but I agree we should be leaders and I 
appreciate that you put forward this motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I went into politics to help people and I was very 
saddened recently to see a communication that carried a message that upset 
my family and to say I was only in politics as part of a group to gain and 
what I got out of it and I am absolutely abhorred and so are my family. That 
message has gone out all over the place. That is not the way I am and I 
think the person that wrote it should apologise for it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, just listen to the elected 
members, this is becoming an increasing issue as people use social media. I 
know you are talking about the difficulties that you people have experienced 
online, but just to say that we have an acceptable use policy in Wicklow 
County Council. The purpose of the document is to outline the policy for the 
safe, professional and proper use of Wicklow County Council's computing 
online and messaging system. The procedure applies to all users of the 
information systems and any services accessible from those systems by any 
users from Wicklow County Council. This includes permanent and temporary 
staff members, elected members, independent contractors and 
subcontractors and staff or partner organisations or any other user of the 
information system and related services provided by Wicklow County 
Council. So user of the information system are expected to abide by this and 
all other appropriate policy and procedure documents relating to the use of 
ICT systems and devices. So all users of Wicklow County Council's 
information systems and related services are expected to use these 
resources in an efficient, effective, ethical moral and lawful manner. That 
applies to always of us, I know what you are talking about is about the 
abuse and experience that you had and that is a huge issue, but I will 
circulate the acceptable use policy, it's no harm to recirculate so we can all 
recap on it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, sorry yet again we didn't get through the 
agenda.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Behan's urgent question. So, Cllr Behan liked to ask 
the question the cost to Wicklow County Council of the event hosted by 
Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall, the cost was €23,388. The 
value of the media covered was estimated to be €350,000, so based on the 
estimate the nationwide programme broadcast in July and based on sites 
visited by the Royals possibly generated another 300K. So they have a 
report here from the media consultant which says that internationally it's 
recognised that editorial in a TV programme on print and in radio is valued 

 
53
at three times the rate card cost as impacts more people. So TV3, 5.30, 23 
seconds.  
CLLR BEHAN: That is okay, it was €23,398. I just want the cost.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Do you want that circulated.  
CLLR BEHAN: Yes, no problem.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There is a lot of motions that the council prepared 
answers to, I am going to ask you to send out the Notice of Motions, if you 
are unhappy with the answer you get contact me and I will get it put back 
on to the agenda. Or contact Lorraine and get it put back on to the agenda.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: If you could do a special motion day, because it's so 
backlogged in a sense.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If you get your, we will see how many there are, of what 
is there that come back and then we can look at that, one will he would have 
to have a special meeting. Certainly I won't do that until January because we 
have a meeting in our budget meeting is going to be in November and then 
we are going to have our council meeting in December and we are not going 
to meet Christmas week, so it would be, if we are having a special meeting 
for motions it won't be until January, but if you look at your responses in the 
meantime and we will see how many motions are and we will try and get to 
them.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: Okay.  
CLLR KAVANAGH: Can I ask a motion, the 5G motion be circulated can I ask 
that the result of the 5G motion be circulated to other councils?   
ADMINISTRATOR: If you want to.  
>>: Thank you.  
ADMINISTRATOR: It wasn't agreed at the council meeting. She it's gone. Of 
course we have protocol here now.  
 
 
 
End of session 
