 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 4th MARCH 2019 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
Elaine McCarthy 
Elaine McCarthy 
 

 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: We’ll start. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Disabilities and our access officer 
have started a process of creating a series of 
videos for our website to inform the public how to 
have success with the five MDs, access to buildings 
and should help all ages to familiarise themselves 
with building prior to getting there.  As part of 
that, they'd like to highlight the live streaming 
text facility in the Council Chamber throughout a 
meeting, so with the permission of the elected 
members and it was considered for PCG there will 
be a small bit of filming of today's meeting to 
highlight the TV screen and full chamber in 
session, is that OK. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Nobody has any problem with that?  
I'll let you in now.  Is that OK.  Votes of 
sympathy. 
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  I'd like to give a special 
condolence to the Doyle family in Kilcoole, and who 
sadly died, the whole Doyle family as they were the 
Byrnes before that, are synonymous from Kilcoole.  
Our thoughts and prayers will be with the family. 

CLLR WALSH:  Condolences to the family of former 
Senator Noel Mulcahy, who lived in Greystones, 
condolences to his family and wife. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Just want to offer condolences 
John Annesley helped so many people to get work when 
times were difficult, Cllr Tommy Annesley and his 
family had a difficult time over the last few weeks, 
I want to offer my sympathy to him and extended 
family. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  A family who received tragic news 
last Monday evening when they heard their son, 
Stephen O'Byrne was killed tragically in Arklow, 
a dreadful accident. I sat beside Stephen's father 
John in school, a horrible accident, worst that any 
family could receive so I would like if we extend 
our sympathies from the whole chamber to the 
O'Byrne family as well. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I'd like to be connected to 
condolences to the Doyle.  Family, who has been 
associated in the area for generations and very 
good to the community, for example they recently 
donated the site for the playground in Kilcoole who 
turned out to a tremendous asset, so I'd like to 
pass on the sympathies. 

CLLR BOURKE:  I'd like to be associated with the 
sympathies to the Annesley and Doyle family, both 
work in the council and their sister died and was 
buried recently, so I would like to express our 
sympathies. 
CLLR NOLAN:  I would like to be associated with the 
remarks to the family of Cllr Tommy Annesley on the 
sad passing of John and vote of sympathy of the 
ex-county GAA secretary, Michael Murphy who passed 
away, I knew him well through GAA circles and he 
was a great asset to the GAA in Wicklow and sorely 
missed by all. 
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you I'd like to be associated 
to the remarks from Cllr Daire Nolan, Michael was 
a great person in the GAA and current secretary when 
he sadly passed away and of course he was involved 
with the county board for many years as Secretary 
of the County Board and anybody with dealings with 
him would know the door was always open with 
Michael, a lovely man originated from Cork, and 
worked in the Post Office for a long number of years 
before going to the GAA and I'd like to express my 
sympathy to the family, thank you Chairman. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, Cathaoirleach for Liam Gahan 

a retained firefighter for Wicklow for many years, 
Eileen Doyle, general services and Eileen McBain, 
mother-in-law to David Ford administrator in Bray 
and Billy Kelly father to Aoibhe.  
>>:  Back in November, October time, we looked for 
a feedback on update on the CWETB situation, we have 
five members on that board. 
CLLR CULLEN:  I'm asking on point of audit before 
the meeting, and is it possible to have update to 
the members?  Because, all we're reading is in the 
newspapers and may be accurate or not.  There was 
an article in one of the Sunday newspapers, so it 
has been requested in the Chamber, so ... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I know it has, you're very well 
aware, that there's a possibility, like there's ... 
  The Gardai are working on this as well from what 
I can gather anyway, as far as I'm concerned it was 
agreed in the chamber here if Gardai are carrying 
out any type of investigation there will be no 
discussion at this meeting.  All right.  That's 
the ruling I'm putting on it anyway. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  I put on notice I was going to be 
looking at sending orders today and just to let you 
know I won't be going ahead with that application. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much indeed.  
There is a procedure by the way, in regard to 
suspension of standing orders that we adopted a 
number of months ago, if people want to go down the 
route, they have to be going down the procedure. 
I can't put the meeting for a vote on it.  Grand 
we're on to the agenda now.  Confirm and sign 
minutes of the meeting in January, by Cllr Cullen, 
agreed, grand.  Two, signed minutes of ordinary 
meeting of Wicklow, Cllr John Snell and Cllr 
Stephen Matthews.  Three, consider the disposal of 
free hold interest in ... 
Seconded by Cllr Nicola Lawless.  Number four in 
Arklow, Cllr Pat Fitzgerald you want to propose it?  
A seconder?  Cllr Pat Kennedy is that agreed?  OK.  
Agreed thank you.  Anne are you ready.  Could I 
just, welcome Ms Anne Graham Chief Executive of the 
NTA and her deputy director of transport services.  
You will make a short presentation and then we'll 
open it to the floor for questions, question and 
answer session as well. 
 
ANNE:  Thank you very much for the invitation 
today.  We just want to bring you through quick 

presentation on the NTA, role of the NTA and some 
issues, transport issues, public transport issues 
in particular in Wicklow and give you the 
opportunity to ask us any questions about our plans 
for public transport in the Wicklow area.  So just 
quickly:  See if it is going to go down for me ... 
So quickly just to give you a view of what we 
actually do.  So, we procure bus, rail and light 
rail services on a national basis, we license taxis 
and commercial bus services, Wexford Bus and Air 
Coach and buses like that.  We invest in public 
transport infrastructure in the greater Dublin 
area and responsible for the integration and 
technology like Leaf Card, real time passenger 
information and have a key role in the greater 
Dublin area in relationship to transport and policy 
and work on programmes to try and encourage people 
to use public transport through workplaces, 
colleges, third level, schools, just to encourage 
use of sustainable modes.  So, that's to summarise 
there in what we do.  Statutory, responsible for 
wide range of function, including those listed 
there.  But we want to focus on the three 
strategies and plans that support the delivery of 

sustainable transport and there's two key plans, 
one is your own Wicklow County Development Plan and 
our own transport strategy for the greater Dublin 
area, 2016-2035 and it is fair to say it is good 
engagement between the two organisations in 
relation to encouraging and supporting each other 
in our development plans. 
  
Transport strategy sets out the key infrastructure 
to support the development of your county and the 
other counties of the greater Dublin area, and sets 
out the public transport infrastructure that 
should be developed over the next 20 years to 
support that development.  Both in light rail, 
heavy rail, and bus and also, supporting park and 
ride.  So, in terms of the heavy rail network the 
key part of that is the expansion of the DART system 
and electrifying rail along, on main corridors into 
the city.  It also proposing the Metro line as 
well, Metro Link between Swords and Sandyford and 
other Light Rail lines into cycling, we have done 
as much as we can, available to us, in improving 
our cycling infrastructure as well, we want key 
routes to the extent practicable would be 

segregated routes where the cyclist is safely 
separated from motorised traffic.  In terms of 
making services more attractive so people use them, 
we've developed an international long journey 
planner and app, we've been working on providing 
that information both on-line and also at stops, 
and also on app, and that's available at our 
transport for Ireland website.  And we have 
developed integrated ticketing via Leap Card.  
But, what to do in terms of further improvements 
is putting on additional services, improving 
reliability and functionality of services, 
improving information at stops, and then using 
transport for Ireland brand to develop that 
unifying brand even more, that you can rely on that 
brand, and that website for getting all your 
information.  New public transport infrastructure 
so national development plan 2018-2027, sets out 
the time infrastructure we've seen that level of 
development proposed, 2.4 billion, 2 billion for 
expansion and 3 billion for Metro Link and cycling 
infrastructure has a proposal as well.  Ending up 
with a public transport network out to 2027 along 
all the key corridors, and particularly supporting 

connections from Bray into the city centre. 
Bus Connects then what is it?  It's about improving 
the bus services, right across all the different 
means of travelling by bus.  Bus corridors, 
redesigning bus networks, improving ticketing, 
moving towards cashless payments, Park and Ride 
services, new delivery and stops and shelters and 
transferring our fleet now to being low emission 
fleet because our fleet is 100% diesel at the 
moment.  In terms of the network we went out for 
consultation in redesigning the Dublin's bus 
network, again, that impacts, particularly around 
the Bray area, we've over 130 routes, the system 
is not easy, not designed to allow easy interchange 
between services, and under Bus Connects, we 
propose to undertake a redesign of the network.  
The object of the redesign is to make the system 
more efficient.  So, we will be going out with, we 
had extensive consultation last year, we will have 
a refresh of our design going out for public 
consultation in quarter to of this year.  In terms 
of the bus corridors, Bus Connects why we need it, 
we need to address congestion and enable population 
and economic growth and support housing 

development as well.  And the benefits that bus 
corridors will bring is about journey time savings, 
up to 40-50% journey time savings if we put in place 
the type of infrastructure we want to see.  There 
on the core radial corridors and ones that would 
be of particular interest to this, county, is the 
Bray to city centre, and that has just been 
published as one of the final corridors in red, 
published there.  And the consultation will be, 
will take place until the 30th of April 2019.  This 
is what we're trying to achieve in terms of the 
target road layout which is achieving segregation 
for bus and cycling along with retaining a car 
traffic lane in each direction.  However our 
streets and roads make it challenging to deliver 
this layout and to achieve this, requires a lot of 
difficult decisions, including lots of portions of 
garden, driveways, reduction of on-street parking 
and removal of trees, however we're proposing 
mitigating measures which rebuilding walls, 
gardens, payment of compensation and tree 
replanting programme and improvements in key local 
centres, this is the benefits it will bring to 
cycling and urban centres, this is the biggest 

cycling plan in the history of the state and by 
providing this number of cycle tracks will 
significantly meet what we want to do in terms of 
the greater Dublin area cycle network plan, we want 
to improve urban and provide additional 
landscaping in those centres, but another key part 
to supporting access into the Dublin city region 
is the provision of Park and Ride facilities.  So, 
we are proposing bus space Park and Ride which will 
supplement Park and Ride sites as well and number 
of potentials have been identified along the key 
radial road along Wicklow and Dublin and more maybe 
added.  These will be integrated with the review 
to optimise the efficiency.  In terms of the next 
steps, in terms of delivery of the National 
Development Plan, and Bus Connects, we will be 
publishing as I said the proposed network of Dublin 
services in quarter to 2019 and develop the designs 
for the 16 bus corridors following consultation 
with planning application in 2020.  We want to 
commence procurement of low emission bus fleet to 
start moving towards meeting our challenges in 
terms of climate change.  We want to propose 
procurement plan for ticketing in terms of the 

delivering our Leap Card, which is insuring people 
will pay by account rather than through their card, 
which means we can offer a lot more in terms of 
integration and one fare that will connect to many 
services.  Next steps of delivery Metro Link is 
consultation on preferred route followed by 
planning application in 2020 and our extension, we 
want to procure of fully electric and by mode fleet, 
diesel with, diesel battery or electric for 
expansion of rail services and develop the 
electrification programme after that. 
In terms of managing public transport services, so, 
the main act and regulation that governance public 
transport are European Union regulation, and DTA 
act, 2008 the state companies provide the majority, 
Dublin Bus for bus service and Bus Eireann for 
Dublin and nationally. 
10% of bus services are provided by other 
operators, like go ahead Ireland and JJ Kavanagh 
who is indigenous operator providing tendered 
contract services.  10% of services are provided 
on fully commercial basis, so no subsidy is 
provided, they're mainly InterCity and Wexford Bus 
would provide services on this basis.  We have 

direct contracts with Bus Eireann, Dublin Bus and 
Irish Rail since 10 September 2009, bus services 
were renewed in 2014, five-year contracts, they're 
renewed in 2019 and not competitively tendered.  
We have periodic and quarterly performance reports 
and funding they get is conditional on meeting 
performance targets and those reports are 
available on website for public examination.  
Reliability and functionality are key things we're 
trying to drive continually and continually 
strengthen targets for operators.  And we are 
also, having enhanced reporting and targets sets 
for customer issues and moved from reporting to us 
generating the reports on their performance.  And 
we regulate the public transport fares as well.  
We've seen significant growth returning from 2014 
onwards across the number of journeys each year on 
a national basis but a lot of those will be 
generated in the Dublin region, so between 2014 and 
2018 we've seen a return of passenger growth of 2% 
in a significant growth and we have to try and meet 
that demand.  Transport services, important part 
of our service delivery, we have a budget of 
14 - most services are door-to-door, that 

generates, two million journeys per year across the 
state.  We've developed a central booking service 
and on-line booking facility, brand and website, 
local link offer services have been tendered and 
we're happily say there's no changes in the service 
provider for Wicklow.  In terms of the demand 
responsive services we have 25 operating in 
Wicklow, we have five pilot evening services, 
running the pilot is has been extended until the 
end of March.  And we've a new 183 Glendalough to 
Wicklow Town to be launched this month which will 
be integrated with train services.  As you can see, 
we're continually trying to grow the type of 
services, and try to respond to people's needs and 
travel needs throughout the county.  Just to give 
you a quick update of where we are in terms of small 
public service vehicles, such taxis provide an 
important role in delivery, of transport services, 
and we've seen a very significant reduction in the 
number of vehicles since 2008, 24% reduction in 
number of licensed vehicles throughout the state 
and then the number of drivers' licensed to drive 
is had 4% reduction since 2009, while it wasn't 
impacting on the service delivery during the 

economic downturn it is now beginning to delivery 
on service delivery, particularly peak times where 
the size of the service has reduced.  Some of the 
issues, significant issues are the cost of 
insurance, it is a very prohibitive cost and it is 
definitely having impact on people coming into the 
industry.  And the other thing is that although the 
number of vehicles, or numbers have stabilised in 
recent years, the overall number is not growing 
despite us doing a recruitment campaign, and also 
increasing fare cost of insurance is prohibitive.  
Looking at Wicklow's services, we have a number of 
challenges, this is a map I took this from our 
planning documents this, is core strategy map, and 
really, one of the big issues in terms of delivery 
of services obviously the county's geography 
itself so by you've two main corridors on the 
N11/M11 corridor and one going from Blessington 
into Dublin.  And while these are serviced by 
public transport, you then have your rail corridor 
along the coast as well.  So, there's challenges 
to delivering services along those corridors but 
also cross-county through what is the mountainous 
regions and centre of the county.  So, as I said, 

in terms of responses to earnings in Wicklow, one 
is it is difficult with the county's geography, but 
we have to respond no doubt, there's road 
congestion issues particularly at peak times in 
travelling to the Dublin region and in terms of the 
N11, M11 we are engaging with TII on widening for 
bus priority particularly at key points.  And then 
within towns themselves we want to try and put in 
bus priority where possible in partnership with you 
Bus Connects then the Bray corridor is obviously 
a significant corridor we want to improve and 
improve journey times along that corridor. 
In terms of the other challenges, so we have a 
single rail track, that goes along by the coast, 
we are undertaking feasibility study on track 
changes between Greystones and Bray to assess the 
potential for a 20 minute DART service and 
feasibility study will be completed this month not 
that we'll be able to achieve a 20 minute DART 
service by the end of the month but we will look 
at the feasibility of doing that.  And then in 
terms of additional rail services south of 
Greystones, that's subject to additional fleet so 
you may have seen in media today all our Irish 

Rail's rail fleet are fully used in the peak periods 
so we've no potential for extension of services 
currently, in any part of the state because all the 
fleet is all fully utilised we're looking at every 
means we can to increase the fleet that's available 
to Irish Rail, I would allow us to put on additional 
services and additional services south of 
Greystones as well.  So, we recognise that public 
transport to and from and around Wicklow is slow 
not optimal.  But we will continue to help raise 
the quality and frequency of services.  Thank you 
very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  Open it up to the floor now.  
Remember this is question and answer series, 
there's a huge amount of people that want to make 
a contribution here, so this is question and 
answers, not long.  Not long speeches in regard to 
this. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Thank you.  I never take too, long 
do I?  Just, thank you very much for the excellent 
presentation, just two points I wanted to make in 
relation to the cycling, you said you will rolling 
out 200 kilometres of pathways in the region, will 
that extend at Arklow and what way will you help 

us, be specific grants to the local council to 
install and retrofit cycle lanes or how do you 
intend to achieve it?  And secondly, in relation 
to I don't think you touched on the signage, but 
I have an issue in this area with signage off the 
motorway for one of the villages that was left from 
the bypass with the no signage, people keep getting 
lost trying to find it, it is Barndarrig, junction 
18 and 19 doesn't have proper signage and if 
wouldn't be a big job to have that stuck on the 
advance notice signs off the motorway at junk 18 
and 19, thank you. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Get them sorted out before May for 
you. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks for an informative 
presentation.  I live in the west of the county 
near Baltinglass, I work in Blessington, I drove 
here from Blessington today via the M50, via Dublin 
it took me 55 minutes, normally across the gap it 
takes me 55 minutes, I had to come off through 
Tallaght so west Wicklow is cut off from this part 
of the county.  But my main comment is to let you 
know that the N81 which we've been looking for 

upgrade for many years and it's proven to be one 
of the most, if not the most dangerous stretches 
of national road in the country, records are there 
to prove that, where we're told there's no plan to 
upgrade the N81, there was provisional plan and 
route outlined from Tallaght to Blessington dual 
carriage to Hollywood Cross, new road, so, that's 
been shelved, we've no rail coming through the 
county.  So that brings me on to another option of 
what might be something to consider from a 
strategic point of view and I'd ask you to consider 
this seriously, what, could you look at and 
consider in the strategy about running extending 
Luas from Saggart to Blessington, it is seven miles 
of a distance, probably shorter if you found a 
direct route.  It might end up being a cheaper 
option than dual carriageway coming down that 
direction.  Also, it would be a safer solution, and 
it is a more efficient way of moving people quickly 
from outside the city into the city, and with the 
way the car is now becoming practically banned in 
cities all over the world and the trend against 
cars, could I ask that, that strategy be 
considered.  It is a short distance, Blessington 

is a growing town, it also provides another access 
into the city, not through Naas, up through the N7 
which is becoming clogged despite it is going three 
lanes until the turn off for, that corridor is going 
to grow and grow and still be choked, it will need 
four lanes soon.  So, this option of parallel way, 
you know, only whatever five miles eastwards by 
feeding traffic into the city through the 
Blessington side, I think it is an option that has 
to be looked at and moving people more efficiently 
into the city, do it through that way.  A so I ask 
you would consider that please. 
CLLR LAWLESS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, thank you, 
Anne for coming in today it is very welcome to see 
you.  I know the Greystones, we've had a couple of 
meetings with NTA about different things, because 
I have you here today, I'll direct them more to 
yourself.  Just in regards to Greystones, we do 
have a very good transport service in Greystones, 
to an extent but, we're getting that most 
commuters, Greystones is the first stop on the DART 
line so we have people coming in from Newtown, 
Newcastle, possibly Wicklow and they're all coming 
down to Greystones, I would be looking at Kilcoole 

it is a station that's already there and 
possibility of it, I know you're saying you're not 
looking to extend south of Greystones but I look 
you would look at extending down to Kilcoole.  And 
utilising that stay, there's infrastructure there 
and putting in proper shelter, ticket machines and 
lighting and having a facility to take the load off 
Greystones and providing Park and Ride in around 
there as well for Kilcoole.  And also, in regards 
as well, you know, there's the feasibility study 
as well for Greystones, I would be hoping that we 
would be able to look at that ourselves as 
councillors because on the ground it is important, 
we see the information because it would be great 
to give you some feedback in around it, and on that 
as well.  Just in regards, there's a lot of 
positives there, the Bus Connects, there's a lot 
of money being put into public transport, but I'm 
just wondering on time frames because there's 
issues and you know, are we looking at ten years 
down the line, five years down the line?  These are 
the questions we're asked by commuters, we want 
people off the road and in public services, so time 
lines are important for projects as well in and 

around that.  Of course I have issues as well in 
around the N81 has been brought up here by many 
councillors in the west and just in regards to the 
rural transport as well, you know, it does need to 
be looked at for Wicklow, because it is very poor 
in the rest of the county, we're lucky on the East 
Coast but more investment is needed in the rural 
transport to connect the county up.  Thanks very 
much Anne. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thank you.  Thank you, Hugh and 
Anne, very welcome to Wicklow.  I've three 
questions for you.  One on cycle paths, one on rail 
and Bus Connects.  Firstly, want to thank you for 
the considerable investment in Bray over the last 
few years and I hope you'll continue with that 
investment and we do our best to do our duties at 
that end as well. 
In terms of cycle paths:  When you put in a design 
for cycle paths, one of the biggest issues is they 
don't feel safe on a painted strip of road, so, what 
would the extra costs be involved in making 
segregated to the extend if there was a slightly 
raised footpath or linear strip that demarks the 
two lanes to make it safer for cyclists and would 

you include that as a new standard?  Second 
question on rail is, can you consider carrying out 
a feasibility study for electrification extension 
to Wicklow, we've spoken about the three areas that 
are looking at electrification to the north and 
west of Dublin and I think Wicklow might benefit 
greatly from electrification.  At least as far as 
Wicklow anyway.  The third question on Bus 
Connects, which I think is absolutely necessary for 
the greater Dublin area, I would be supportive of 
most of it, I think some of it, and I think you agree 
some you need to look at some aspects but on the 
whole I think it is a good plan and needs to be 
implemented, but I put in a proposal as part of 
that, to look at a circulating local town bus route 
for Bray, and I submitted a proposed route and 
frequency, do you have an update on that?  I didn't 
get a response on that; would you have update on 
that proposal for a local bus route for Bray?  
Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach and again I'd 
like to welcome the two Chief Executive and Deputy 
Chief Executive of the National Transport 
Authority here today.  And thank you for their 

presentation.    And for the on-going 
relationship we have with you. 
Could I just make one point at the start as general 
point and applies to the whole country, you 
referred it to yourself about the fact that we as 
a country find ourselves at the moment in a position 
where we haven't got any option to increase our rail 
service in this country because we don't have 
carriages. 
Now, if that's not an example of extremely, 
extremely bad planning, I don't know what is.  And 
I would like to know what is the reason for this?  
Can that not have been foreseen, we're hearing day 
in, day out, get on to public transport, use the 
railway, use the buses and so on.  And now we find 
you can't find carriages to accommodate people who 
want to travel on the rail.  Is it because it is 
a lack of funding?  Is it a lack of foresight by 
the Government or is it lack of foresight by 
yourselves?  That's a question that everyone in 
the country would be asking after they heard that 
report this morning. 
Just on a more local point then with regard to 
County Wicklow, I am amazed you did not mention at 

all any prospect of the Luas to Bray.  Once upon 
a time we believed there was a Luas extension to 
Bray but also in particular to what are known as 
the Cosgrave lands presumed to be developing lands 
on the outskirts of Fassaroe, and this particular 
site we zoned for residential, which could deliver 
up to between four to five thousand housing units 
and I would have thought it should have been a 
priority for you to at least address that aspect.  
And the whole question of extending the Luas 
further into and along the line, the Green Line and 
in particular into County Wicklow and in particular 
into Bray.  I'm surprised you haven't mentioned it 
and perhaps you might address it in your reply.  
Thirdly in relation to the Bus Connects project it 
created controversy in Wicklow, there may well be 
and sure there will be benefits attached to it.  
But there were issues that came up in that, that 
again, I found very, very difficult to understand.  
The 145 service from Bray to Dublin has been one 
of the most successful services ever introduced and 
the Dublin network.  And you proposed to actually 
completely upend that service by forcing people to 
have to go from all parts of Bray, down to the main 

street or down to the DART station to access that 
service. 
Now, I'm just hoping that common sense has 
prevailed because I'm sure you got a lot of 
representation saying please leave 145 service 
alone, don't mess around with it, it is working I 
would like confirmation today, I was involved on 
the day in Tesco when the public consultation 
process happened, have you made a decision to 
change that particular proposal because I think it 
would be welcomed if you did.  The other point I'd 
like to make Cathaoirleach in relation to the Park 
and Ride and the option of Park and Ride, based in 
County Wicklow, could you be more specific about 
what you mean there?  And what you might have in 
mind in relation to the N11, M11 upgrade and the 
fact that you're suggesting or talking about to 
Wicklow County Council or consultants or 
representatives of to the council here of providing 
a bus corridor, how would that bus corridor work?  
Would it be a completely new route?  I think it 
might be something that could be very successful 
if it were to happen.  But it would have to be 
attached to a very, very big Park and Ride facility 

further south, perhaps nearly as far south as 
Ashford.  For it to really work to get traffic off 
the N11 and assist people commuting having this 
nightmare commute as they have every day as it 
stands at the moment.  Thank you very much. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks.  And thanks Anne for the 
presentation.    Just like Cllr Nicola Lawless 
there, I attended a meeting January 28th in a range 
of issues where issues were brought forward and it 
was a useful meeting for the councillors, the 
Wicklow County Council had a commuter survey on the 
third quarter last year which was widely responded 
to, it made interesting reading and one of the 
things that jumped out was the least happiest of 
the commuters were the people using their cars and 
more people would use public transport, if it were 
more attractive to use, so there's a whole range 
of issues there.  But, just one of the things were 
the presentation I note you mention N11 and M11 
improvements there, and you would be supportive of 
dedicated Park and Ride locations and dedicated bus 
lanes along that route, and that's something that 
would be widely accepted and welcomed.  Another 
point we mentioned there in the meeting, hue was 

present, overnight parking at Greystones DART 
station, maybe the evening before ready for the 
early morning rush, I know there was an issue with 
fleet there, that worked well in the past generally 
and I know people were wondering if it were a live 
issue or live proposal at the moment.  That, 
between Greystones and Bray, there's a big 
difference there with pricing so that's again 
something we would have brought to our meeting in 
January.  So, there were a number of other issues 
there, the Dublin tracking you mention there had 
and you referred to it in your presentation, the 
DART expansion programme and that's to be welcomed. 
So, Park and Ride again, is another big problem for 
us in Greystones, it is full at 8am in the morning 
so that badly needs to be addressed and expanded 
upon, the 84 bus service which is a most attractive 
and well used routed, again, additional services 
there, particularly during peak hours would be 
welcome I know there's an issue with fleet but these 
are the services working well and have been of great 
benefit to commuters and more as I said earlier, 
more would get out of the cars if the services were 
more widely available.  So again, thank you for the 

presentation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm going to run through the whole 
lot in case there's replication, and you can answer 
the whole lot after that.    Give all the good news 
I'm sure shell. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  We look forward to good news.  
Just to say the basic problem for transport in 
Wicklow, is that the rail lines out of Greystones 
is empty at rush hour, there's one train at rush 
hour and one train used to be called before rush 
hour but probably rush hour extended is getting 
earlier and earlier.  So, there's only two trains 
on the rail line, it is effectively empty.  And the 
N11 is massively overfull and those trains are 
short trains, they're normally four carriages, 
they're not more.  So, have an empty rail line at 
rush hour and full N11 there's something wrong with 
that.  I look forward to the study which I'm, I was 
pleased to hear the Chairman say was coming out this 
month before providing extra capacity from Bray to 
Greystones, but it is, will be important not just 
for Greystones but the services south of there, 
that extra capacity can be provided.  Now, I think 
it is important also that the trains are made longer 

south of Greystones, people are standing from 
Wicklow Town and certainly from Kilcoole.  And 
there are a number of complications about making 
them longer, the wiring on the trains or length of 
the platform, it is not the same as other commuter 
railways which inhibits longer running trains at 
shorter platform stations, I'd hope the new rail 
stock which is ordered, will have appropriate 
facilities to open half the doors. 
The Metro is another issue, we saw on the paper last 
week there was significant campaign, to stop it 
going to Sandyford and bring Rathfarnham because 
the especially aspects tension of Luas to Bray will 
depend on the inner bits of the met a changing the 
Luas to the Metro and it is important that that is 
done, and that we don't have diverted to 
Rathfarnham because someone don't want to cross a 
level crossing, which in my youth was a bridge.  
That's not good enough.  In terms, we also like to 
see express buses and certainly Greystones is 
expanding rapidly and Kilcoole in number of houses 
and we loo see 84X services now which is a good 
service so we can cope with this and get the people 
arriving in the town, into the habit of using 

transport.  I know you're reluctant do that, 
because the Bus Connects will happen in a 
year-and-a-half's time but these people are 
arriving right now, and we need something for them.  
Also like to see expansion of the Park and Ride 
which, we have a large one in Greystones, but it 
is absolutely full, so, thank you. 
CLLR O'NEILL:    Thanks, Cathaoirleach, thanks 
Anne for your presentation.  Just, I'm from west 
Wicklow as well and, of course my concerns would 
be the N81, like Cllr Edward Timmins but just a 
question in there, in the presentation you said 
that a number of locations of Wicklow have been 
identified, regarding safer, cycle paths, now the 
upgrading of the N81, we're waiting and waiting and 
it is down the road, I don't know what linkup our 
joined up thinking you might have with the TII, but 
anyone who knows the N81, especially our end of it, 
Cllr Jim Ruttle and myself it is a narrow road and 
it is a dangerous road, it is a nightmare for bus 
drivers to try and pass the amount of cyclists that 
are on the road.  We have, we have probably two 
reasons why we have more cyclists in west Wicklow, 
number one is probably the most beautiful part of 

the county, but number two, is that it is, every 
other road out of the Capital is carriageway, which 
means cyclists aren't allowed to use.  So, we would 
be very concerned that with the hundreds and 
hundreds of in the summer months there's thousands 
of people use the N81 and it is a nightmare for all 
sorts of traffic, including a bus driver, as I said 
a second ago.  So, I'm just wondering, my question 
as direct, is regarding what you say there, that 
the locations have been identified are any of the 
locations in west Wicklow? 
  
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thank you.  I won't be so long.  
I'm wondering under the rural transport scheme 
local link, is there with bus services at the moment 
with Wicklow Glendalough and Roundwood is there any 
plans to include Rathdrum and join up with the train 
station, it is the only inland train says on the 
East Coast. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thanks.    Just a couple ... 
Short, sharp, maybe sweet I don't know.  So, first 
question is about the privatisation and - actually, 
even more so, about when you talk about performance 
management and credit control what the sanctions, 

I'm someone who uses public transport every day, 
whether it is the disappearing thirteen 
or the 84 single decker that has devolved into a 
service that's far worse than it ever was, I wonder 
what are the sanctions you impose, if services 
underperforming? What are the sanctions or what are 
the incentives for better performance?  In terms 
of Bus Connects, I'm fascinated to see how the 
consultation which was very extensive how it does 
inform the new plan, because for me there's two 
critical elements that is the lived experience of 
the drivers, who know inside out, all the results, 
and all the times, and what is needed and maybe 
isn't, and the passengers as well.  So, I know that 
in particularly councillors from within the 
Chamber better very much were involved in 
supporting the public to get involved in that 
consultation, so I'm interested to see how that 
information becomes alive in the new proposal. 
And likewise, similar to Cllr Stephen Matthews 
fascinated to see whether the Luas service within 
Bray is this an opportunity to enhance service as 
well as the other proposals.  Thank you. 
CLLR RUTTLE:  Thank you very much Anne for your 

presentation, it is great from someone to your 
position to speak you directly to you I would be 
three councillors who live in the west Wicklow 
area, the Dublin border with exits which is on the 
N81 and ongoing continuous problem, there has been 
huge expansion in travel and in population, and in 
Dublin and commuting from Baltinglass, all that 
country below us, as far as I see the dual carriage 
was the same width as sixty years ago with a few 
changes here and there.  A small example is 
yesterday afternoon when the snow came I had reason 
to go to Tallaght, I left my house from Tallaght 
is six miles from the square, I'm third or fourth 
farm in from county Dublin, and on the famous 
Embankment Hill, rising hill, while I was capable 
of getting through the with the four-wheel-drive 
I had, jack-knifing took place, lack of carriageway 
width and the N81 was closed down completely at City 
West, I had to retreat via Naas, and Blessington, 
and in all, it took me three hours to get to my home, 
when I was finally stopped by the cars in front of 
me. I was within four miles of my home, three hours 
to do that.  And a lot is down to lack of 
carriageway width, it is two, one side by side, 

dreadful.  As regards as proposal for Luas 
extension, look, up to 1932, we had a Luas tram 
system in Blessington, and it worked well but sadly 
it was replaced by other things, but certainly, it 
is something that needs to be looked at, we can't 
go on, talking about N81, to Hollywood which is not 
delivered and other proposals not looked at, we 
can't do the two and it is causing a lot of problems.  
The other proposal, which could be done more easily 
is the development of a proper Park and Ride 
facility because there's loads of land available 
at Blessington, interim solution that is would 
definitely work.  Another development which is 
coming along soon is the development of the 
Blessington Greenway which is anticipated to bring 
hundreds of thousands of people in the area and they 
this turn, will while welcome and we have behind 
the development will constitute more traffic and 
more people coming that way by all sorts of means, 
buses and cars, and they in turn will have more 
pressure on it, we need to do something to, the 
problem is very extenuated from the Hollywood, 
Blessington area because of the population there, 
and through traffic from Tullow, Bunclody.  I'm 

involved in farming so I'm out early looking at 
animals and that kind of thing and see the 
continuous stream from that road, it is a huge 
volume of traffic on really what is a single 
carriageway road.  And, I think, I, correct me if 
I'm wrong it is the only national route out of 
Dublin that's not improved at all.  We have N3, and 
M9s, but there's no improvement upon that road and 
certainly by way of road improvement on one side 
and transportation infrastructure on the other, 
whether it be extensions of the Tallaght, like 
colleague suggested, extension of that system, or 
by doing the road, we can't have a situation where 
nothing works, we're left there considering it.  
You know, it's a term that Cllr Edward Timmins' late 
father used, "paralysis through analysis", looking 
all the time at something but not actually doing 
something about it, or finding reason to defer it, 
be economic or strategic, but we couldn't get any 
real explains as to why the upgrade of M81 was 
deferred, we found nothing was done, something has 
to be done. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  By your own admission, you 
recognise the public transport through and from 

Wicklow is not optimal, all as a person who travels 
up and down every day, I concur with that.  Wicklow 
is one of the fastest, has been one of the fastest 
growing counties in the last 20 years and Wicklow 
Town itself is now considered to be a dormitory town 
of Dublin for jobs.  As a result of that the roads 
are absolutely chock-a-block, there are more and 
more accidents every day, I see them and held up 
from them, I started to work from home two days a 
week, I'm lucky can I can do that, but a lot can't.  
What we have to start looking at is feasibility 
study to try and bring the DART to Wicklow.  The 
train tracks are there.  At any time of the day you 
can walk along the tracks and they are completely 
empty, you get occasional train going back, it is 
like an event, you nearly want to run after it and 
wave at it, it is so infrequent.  We have to start 
bringing transport to Wicklow Town it is as simple 
as that, and because the DART line or train line 
is already there, it would seem to me to be the most 
obvious thing to try to do.  So, is there any chance 
you get a feasibility study under way for that?  
And briefly, is there any chance we could get a copy 
of this presentation, emailed to us, because you 

covered an awful lot and it would be nice to be able 
to just read through it a bit more?  Thank you. 
  
CLLR FORTUNE: Thanks, and thanks for your 
presentation. If all the investment happened that 
you outlined the big-ticket ones, it would be great 
and a semi-miracle as well.  I'm part of the 
Greystones district and we had a very good meeting 
with your team on the 28th and we covered most 
things.  I want to raise four specific points:  
One would be communication.  And this might be 
correct, and it maybe not totally correct but we 
have a perception or certainly I would, and others 
might share it, that it is difficult to communicate 
with the NTA or if you try and communicate with the 
NTA it is difficult to get an answer that you can 
kind of think is a rational response.    It is 
easier to deal with the bus company direct but we've 
had occasion recently around Bus Connects that have 
more contact with yourselves so that is a key point 
that could help.  Also, what I'd ask you to could 
is when you're looking at the I'm thinking north 
Wicklow and Greystones district to treat the 
district as a unit and don't think it stops at dray 

stones, because Greystones as you heard, has been, 
is pretty well serviced because of its location and 
nature.  But, Kilcoole and Newcastle tend to be on 
the behind leg if you know what I mean and there's 
a population in those areas of over 10,000 people, 
and, so when the some of the bus changes were done 
the last time, there was serious issues with buses 
taken off at certain times that caused a lot of 
inconvenience.  So, also, in that getting back, 
ties that back to the communication, I think when 
you're making programme changes, we did say to you, 
you're going to be met on the 28th it would be nice 
if the district was pre-informed what is going on, 
and maybe we can anticipate the challenges and sort 
them out before you officially announce it through 
the various transport companies.  The other point 
I would raise is, there seems to be a trend of 
privatisation in the transport system.  And so, 
I'm struggling with the fact that private company, 
UK company can come in and start doing services and 
obviously have to make a profit out of it, and we 
can't make our existing system more efficient.  
So, my question really there is, what is the plan?  
What's the thinking on that end of it?  And is it 

the right way to go?  I would question how that is 
going?  If I take back to Kilcoole where there's 
a railway station, there needs to be more training 
coming through it in morning and evening in 
particular, and also, there's a need for investment 
in it.  Because, bear in mind that Kilcoole at this 
stage is the same size as Blessington and if you 
actually drove to Blessington now and look at the 
infrastructure they have and the way the town is 
set up and drive back to Kilcoole.  It is chalk and 
cheese, so I ask you when you look at the plans to 
think about that, come right out to the end of the 
line as I call it.  OK.  Thanks. 
  
 
CLLR RYAN:  Thanks Anne for the presentation, I 
raised a number of points at the subcommittee in 
Dublin, I like public transport I use the 145, the 
one thing that bores me most about using public 
transport is people's sneezing all over you.  I 
know it sounds a strange thing to say, but if I get 
on a bus, people in Ireland don't know how to sneeze 
properly, they teach children how to do it 
properly, that you need into your - yeah, but to 

be fair now, the NRA could have asked the providers 
to run a campaign.  I honestly think it is a serious 
campaign, because you particularly in the amount 
of people on both the DARTs and buses these days 
in a tightly confined space for 60 minutes or odd 
it is a huge amount of opportunity for disease to 
pass.  And I think a campaign in that regard would 
be worthwhile.  Simple three points is obviously 
there was excitement when Bray thought it was 
getting a Luas, it now seems like it is dead in the 
water.  I wonder can you confirm that or give us 
a sense realistically - hope - not unrealistic 
hope, I just want to know where the thinking is to 
get a degree of clarity on that.  And I suppose, 
when we talk about you know, I'm happy to hear you 
have a good relationship with Wicklow county 
because previously, NTA and Wicklow didn't have a 
great relationship and honestly the frustration we 
have with regard to, as Cllr Joe Behan was saying, 
Cosgrove's lands, and Old Fassaroe, that's the 
development area and that's the future in a 
desperation fit for housing, where we're going to 
have loads of houses and suddenly because we don't 
have capacity on the M50/N11 it gets knocked on the 

head.  We obviously desperately need a solution, 
and you guys can provide that, and I'd love to know 
what is your current thinking on that is it a 
fast-segregated bus from there to the city?  Or 
what is the solution?  We're desperately want an 
answer to that?  And with regard to Bus Connects, 
I mean you've had the feedback and you say there's 
another iteration of the plan coming out.  I don't 
know if you're in position to tell us, but, have 
most of the concerns in Enniskerry because the 
refuse plan hadn't taken implications of the bus 
network currently in the region.  Thank you 
CLLR CULLEN:  We had a successful day last Friday, 
and we had the N81 to be considered for a dual 
carriageway from Dublin to City West and got passed 
there would be consideration of the Luas extension 
from Saggart to Blessington, and I think they are 
both objectives of this council, and what I would 
ask, your office today is that would you support 
in your submission to that document that was 
approved last Friday, would you support the 
inclusion of the extension of the Luas line from 
Saggart to Blessington?  And that the dual 
carriageway would get the go ahead.  Because if it 

doesn't get the go ahead, we're effectively locked 
out for consideration of funding until 2040 under 
the national plan.  And there's no.  That's an 
unbearable situation for to people of west and 
south Wicklow who use the N81 and have to commute 
into Dublin, that, until if this is not ... 
If what was approved last Friday, is not kept within 
that plan and is not depleted, that we would be 
locked out until after 2040, possibly as far as 2050 
before we get any funding for either a Luas or 
upgrading of the N81 and meet the people who we 
represent in this county simply can't afford or 
tolerate such situation.  In that context I would 
like to formally attend to our municipal district 
as you're so kind, as your offices so kindly 
attended the Greystones, so, we like to extend 
invitation to come and discuss it with the local 
councillors because you'd get a warm welcome there, 
but I do think we would need your support on this.  
As Cllr Edward Timmins and Cllr Jim Ruttle and I'm 
sure other councillors felt, we're in complete 
agreement for the need to upgrade services.  I 
looked there, we have got new services into 
Blessington, so Blessington, as a town within the 

next decade is going to a population of 15,000.  
And at the moment, we have the 65 bus that travels 
maybe every 30 or 40 minutes as the only public 
transported.  And, it is an intolerable situation, 
that's developing, and we really do need your 
support.  And we need your support to support our 
commission, what’s being proposed at EMRA at your 
office and we would like you to invite to come down 
to our Area Meeting and we'll formally send your 
office an invitation to come at your convenience, 
but Chairman, I think, I want to congratulate 
yourself and Cllr Derek Mitchell and all Wicklow 
members to work on EMRA and success we've had, but 
we need to have a bit of support from the TDs in 
this county.  I'll extend invitation to come down. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's finally it.  One of the 
problems when you're Chairman you get to speak 
last.  And everyone else has covered most of the 
particular items. 
I'm delighted that you came here, Cllr John Ryan 
was referring to, I was at that infamous meeting 
NRA with regard to in Bray at the time, when the 
NRA came out with a fait accompli with Hill's 

Roundabout and they were sent packing to say they'd 
never return to Bray again in regard to proposals 
for that and I'm just glad to see the NRA are back 
here today and thank you very much for coming.  In 
regard to the Bray area.  As you're well aware with 
the proposal for Old Fassaroe and golf club lands 
in Bray, what Cllr Joe Behan was saying, we're 
probably talking about extra 15,000 people in the 
Bray area.  And it was always told to us, that in 
Old Fassaroe that area, that, there was a economies 
of scale with regards to Luas, there had to be a 
certain population to connect there, and I can't 
for the life of me see or why or who changed the 
Luas going from there and Woodbrook and said it 
won't have the population, and where Old Fassaroe 
would have, and also, that you could have put a Park 
and Ride in this new greenfield development, you 
could put a Park and Ride there and effectively take 
a lot of population coming up from Wicklow Town and 
rather than bringing them into the town centre in 
Bray or over N11 in Woodbrook, it is a crazy type 
of situation where, you have the land to bring the 
Luas into Old Fassaroe and that, and maybe, if you 
could address that.  Also, as well, is that, there 

is a road system that I know we've been talking to 
you about it in regard to improving, that 
particular area between the border between Dun 
Laoghaire and Bray, in getting access into the town 
and out of it as well.  And if you could address 
that please.  Obviously, the N11 is a major artery 
in and it is probably the only one that doesn't, 
hasn't had anything done with it in the last 20 
years, how it is effectively, we all know this is 
happening as well and that's a great help as well.  
So maybe, if you can answer the questions you can 
answer, and maybe, if you'll get back to us with 
some of the questions that may, you may have a 
problem with or getting the information on, and 
then we'll distribute it to the members as well.  
Listen, thanks again. 
 
ANNE:  We're going to tag on.  Then Hugh will 
start.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I don't think there's been a 
greater participation and shows you how important 
it is for us now. 
HUGH:  I'll be brief because I'm conscious of the 
time.  I'll start with Cllr Sylvestor Bourke, 

cycling, that includes, our proposal includes 
cycling facilities to and from Arklow, there's 
greater area cycle network covers the whole region, 
including key towns in Wicklow and connection 
between the towns.  Our issue is funding to fund 
it all, and then within the local authority the 
willingness and resource and commitment to start 
to deliver on it.  Your council executive are doing 
what they can.  It is down to funding I suppose to 
get a lot of it done but the plan is there to cover 
all of those.    On the signage issue for 
Barndarrig.  That's issue for transport 
infrastructure Ireland so you won't find us often 
doing ponchos pilot, but that's one that sits with 
transport infrastructure Ireland.  On N81, Cllr 
Edward Timmins then, we are transport strategy for 
the region does include and identify the N81 needs 
to be upgraded so you won't find resistance to us, 
it is transport infrastructure Ireland, they're 
successor to national roads authority and for them 
it is a question of where it is in their priority 
list and whether they have funding to do it but I'm 
sure you will make plenty of fields in that area.  
On extending Luas from Saggart to Blessington, that 

is not had in our strategy, honestly, Bus Connects 
do a service on that connection, our transport 
strategy has to be reviewed ever review business 
six years, it maybe the sensible outcome is we start 
with buses linkage that provides connection in a 
satisfactory way and one of the reviews of the 
strategy see if there's demand to upgrade it to a 
full Luas service.  If we move on to Cllr Nicola 
Lawless then, extending the DART line further, or 
extending services down to Rathcoole and extending 
a DART service came up a couple of times further 
southwards, that's not on our agenda, at the 
moment, it is something that we can look at, but 
we don't it wouldn't come down and promise things 
we can't deliver.  Our key piece of rail 
infrastructure down here would be making changes 
to get a 20-minute DART service in Greystones, 
that's our priority, in years ahead we're happy to 
look at, whether something can be done to electrify 
further and what the implications are.  So, I don't 
think we can give you a stronger answer to that at 
the moment.  If I then go to Cllr Stephen Matthews 
then, you mentioned cycle paths, and the fact that 
people don't feel safe with painted line on the 

road, we concur with that, it really, it is a 
low-grade of psych killing facility to put a 
painted white line and expect people to use it and 
busy roads and kids, et cetera, what we're 
proposing to do is segregate psyching traffic, so 
it is separated from vehicle and traffic, and 
whoever is cycling should be there safely.  On 
electrification study to Wicklow, capture there in 
Kilcoole.  It is not on the agenda yet but we will 
look at it future, Bus Connects proposal I spoken 
to you previously, I do accept put forward for local 
around Bray, we are still going through 30,000 
submissions and we're not in a position to say what 
the outcome is, but, I do acknowledge that proposal 
is in there, and it will, there will be outcome to 
it when we conclude the analysis work. 
  
 
ANNE:  Cllr Nicola Lawless mentioned time frames, 
what times are we talking about with the 
infrastructure, in terms of Bus Connects, the Bus 
Connects, network, we would hope to once it is a 
I greed, in broad outlines we would hope to be 
starting to deliver that in 2020, start of 2020, 

21, because that's about services, there's no 
infrastructure really needed except at key 
interchange points we want to put in better 
facilities.  So that's inertial kind of delivery.  
The Bus Connects, bus lane infrastructure, is a 
longer term delivery but it is one that can be 
delivered, at over a period, time period, based on 
whatever funding is available so, we would seek, 
hope to seek planning permission, starting in 2020, 
and if that comes, quickly, we'd like to start 
construction in around 2021/22, on key corridors, 
but it is something delivered as funding is 
available.  We need to keep traffic and transport 
moving as we're doing that construction.  on the 
rail side, in order to get new brand-new fleet, in 
there's a time period of three to four years.  So 
that's where you have a current provider, and this 
is just to answer some of the questions that was 
raised by another councillor was do we not foresee 
this happening, well we did foresee we would have 
issues with fleet, there was a funding issue, 
because there hasn't been the investment in 
infrastructure that we would have liked over the 
last ten years.    But we did put forward a 

procurement to try and refurbish a number of 
fleets, that was before purchase fleet but the cost 
for that it was just not feasible to bring it 
forward, it was too expensive.  It was schedule I 
think it was about 50% the cost of a new fleet, so 
it just was not feasible.  So, our interim solution 
didn't work, that's why we're now procuring to see 
can we lease or purchase fleet that will meet that 
interim period before we actually go and procure 
more fleet and more numbers of fleet. 
Hugh:  If I pick up then, Cllr Joe Behan you 
mentioned Luas line to Bray and what's the position 
on it?  The position on it is National Development 
Plan provided a lot of funding to public transport 
but didn't fund everything.  So, the National 
Development Plan has in it, a commitment that 
during the period of that plan, which runs to 20207 
the design and planning work will be done for a 
future extension of the line out towards Bray and 
implementation is to be considered in the next 
development plan, that's what we have to work to. 
I think it was later question, that was raised why 
was it changed from Fassaroe to Bray?  I would say 
that, say that's an indicative line, and all to be 

sorted out in the future as to what particular route 
we take.  So, in the transport strategy we give one 
line, but also say it is indicative and further to 
further development when the details emerge, if it 
is a stronger case to move it in a different 
direction, we can work our way through in the 
future.  I think, you asked, about the 145 service 
and Bus Connects, as I said earlier, we're going 
through the commissions, we expect to address a lot 
of people's issues but not every single issue and 
we're not in a position to say today whether the 
is 45 is one of the ones we can address or not 
address.  The Park and Ride and facilities, and the 
M11, N11 upgrade, we're ware the T1 and with 
encouragement with this council are looking to do 
a feasibility study to upgrade the N/M11 and pass 
recalled of that we will link up to see how to enable 
Park and Ride and bus facilities as part of that, 
and we this came up - we would also like to improve 
the, increase the parking facilities at Greystones 
train station or in that general area and that's 
something we will link up with council officials 
in the couple of years ahead to do that. 
ANNE:  On the route 84, I think the 84 and 84X, was 

a request for additional services, we'll look at 
that and see if we're in a position to provide 
additional services because we require funding for 
that.  But certainly, we will put that forward in 
analysis of in terms of additional services 
  
Hugh:  Cllr Derek Mitchell mentioned a number of 
things about the rail line, you're familiar with 
it as well.  What we do, south of Greystones, we're 
not jumping up here to say we have an answer to that.  
So, I think as I said earlier focus is to get 
additional service frequency in Greystones and 
we'll see what the service pattern will be south 
of Greystones.  As you're aware, services coming 
south of Greystones in peak hour, which have DARTs 
every ten-minute, diesel services need a create a 
window which is disruptive to the DART system, so 
we're in a balancing act, if we get proposal that 
gets us to 20-minute DART service we can figure out 
a slight I service south of Greystones.  I know the 
Metro to Rathfarnham it is isn't viable but there 
are people campaigning for it and as regards the 
additional 84X service in addition, no promises, 
we'll see what happens over the months ahead. 

ANNE:  Just picking up on rural transport issues 
so I think it was Cllr Nicola Lawless said we 
obviously need more investment in rural transport, 
we agree with you and we would like to deliver more 
rural transport services, there's certainly a 
demand right across the country and I presume in 
Wicklow for more services, and as we have more 
funding we will put that towards additional 
services.    But the one service that we are 
bringing forward and I think it was counsellor 
O'Neill asked whether it was Rathdrum was included 
in the new service we're proposing, as far as I 
understand it is not.  I suppose one of the things 
when you're putting together a scheduled service, 
which is going to be running on a timetable rather 
than a demand response-type service which is 
picking up from a particular area and dropping to 
the nearest towns is that the service has to be 
reasonably short kind of in terms of timetable.  
So, at the moment, the service will be Glendalough, 
Lara, Roundwood, Ashford, Rathnew and Wicklow and 
then return, spaced over the day.  So, it is a new 
service, we hope to launch it this month.  And as 
with all services, we review them after a number 

of months operation and seeing whether there's any 
changes that need to be put in place 
I was also asked about perform manse and what kind 
of sanctions are in place.  So, we hold back some 
of the fee for the delivery of transport services 
from our operators, and if they don't provide 
services, on a particular day, if a 133 or service 
isn't operated, we accept operators can't operate 
100% service, there's always a few services that 
they won't be in a position to operate due for 
various reasons, but above a threshold, they are 
penalised and they are not paid for the services 
they don’t deliver.  Similarly for punctuality we 
set a target rate across all our services, on a 
stop-specific timetable, and if they run early or 
if they run late they're personalised again above 
a certain leisure hold, similarly for the customer 
service issues, so if buses is not clean, or and 
again, if it goes beyond allowable Threshold, 
they're penalised so it is significant penalty that 
can be imposed on the operators. 
  
Hugh:  Cllr Gerry O'Neill mentioned the 1781 that 
needs upgrading, we support that, it is down to 

where it sits for funding list for transport 
funding Ireland when it gets down, and asked if 
there was other psych killing, there's a whole 
network agreed a number of years ago with executive 
went to public consultation and it is on our website 
and has a lot of routes in west Wicklow, it is 
getting around to getting them built.  On, Cllr Jim 
Ruttle then, mentioned yesterday's significant 
problems by the sounds of things, which, was a long 
journey home to say the least. 
I suppose, it just underlies the need to upgrade, 
no resistance from us, you'll find ... 
As regards Park and Ride facility in Blessington, 
just to say, bus-based Park and Ride, only works 
if the bus can go faster than the car traffic.  So, 
if that bus is going to get caught up in congestion, 
people do not get out of their cars, to get on a 
bus which takes you longer, it doesn't happen.  If 
we get routes from the Westside of Dublin, into 
Dublin city with better bus priority which is the 
next bus priority, places like Blessington, we can 
put a dissented size Park and Ride facility to help 
it work there on a bus basis.  It is the only 
national route out of Dublin that hasn't been 

approved, that's because it is national secondary, 
other ones are national primary routes.  OK. 
Cllr Tom Fortune you mentioned about 
communications, I'm disappointed if you do find it 
difficult to communicate with us, we do try to make 
ourselves available.  To say while we're here, 
there is a dedicated e-mail for public 
representatives, including e-mail address, 
including public representative is on the screen.  
We get a lot of requests in, so we cover the whole 
state, it takes us a few days to get back, about 
you we want to be available, we don't want to be 
seen as difficult to meet.  And somewhere the place 
as a unit rather than isolated parts on it.  
Privatisation. 
ANNE:  The rational for the 10% of services we put 
out to our market of services that are, were 
operated by Dublin Bus and Bus Eireann, we're 
obliged as authority to say and to be able to say 
that we're getting best value for the spend, the 
public money that goes into the delivery of public 
transport services, and when an operator is 
contracted and they don't go through a tendering 
process, you're even more owe obliged to check 

you're getting value for money.  How do we decide?  
We need a means of comparing to other operators and 
we didn't, we don't the means, when you've one 
operator, operating a monopoly, both between 
Dublin Bus operating a monopoly in Dublin and Bus 
Eireann operating around the state.  So that's one 
reason as to get for in terms of cost, not just cost, 
but also, the quality and the way another operator 
may approach the delivery of punctuation wall 
services, so that's why it was felt in the leadup 
to 2014 contracts, it was would be beneficial to 
the state to competitively tender, 10%, which is 
only relatively small percentage of the subsidised 
bus market and see what comes out of that.  We've 
done another iteration in terms of 2019 contracts, 
because contracts have to be renewed in 2019 and 
we have avenue decided to do a small additional 
competition on Bus Eireann services, including the 
133, is one of the services set out for because we 
felt it wasn't a very well, a good performing 
services for the customer, and in terms of Dublin, 
we are going to retain Dublin Bus with the level 
of service that they have, but we retain that if 
we want to make a decision on doing more it would 

be above what they currently have, or directly 
award to Dublin Bus.  So, there's no I suppose 
there's no trend in privatisation.  We did a very 
small opening up of the market, we want to see how 
that works, before we would make any decision to 
significantly increase the amount of tendering, we 
do.  We don't use the term "privatisation" because 
we set the timetables, we give the pus the neat the 
infrastructure around that is managed by us, really 
what we're contracting is an operator to provide 
services to our specification. 
Hugh:  We look at the sneezing campaign, we'll go 
back, it hasn't come up for you, and you asked Bus 
Connects and it is the same answer, we're working 
our way through it I would be disappointed if we 
couldn't address the Les of them.  Your own comment 
about the NRA and WC meeting, I'm correct I'm aware 
of it, we're NTA, not the NRA. 
You're aware of that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's in folklore at this stage.  
Could I just say thank you very much again, I think 
it was a very good meeting and thank the members 
as well for being brief.  We got a lot of 
information out that and I really appreciate you 

coming thank you very much. 
ANNE:  Thank you very much for your time. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're moving on.  We received the 
annual report of the county audit committee.  I 
think Mary and Tom, Noel had to leave, I think he 
was under time pressure. 
the Chairman of the committee, Tom will make it in 
regard to the audit report, thanks very much for 
coming. 
Tom:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and good evening. 
Cathaoirleach CEO in frank Curran, elective 
representatives, fellow audit committee, county 
council officials, ladies and gentlemen, thank you 
Cathaoirleach for affording us at space to make 
this presentation, I know you have a busy floor so 
we'll be as brief as you can.  The scale complexity 
@ diversity of local government business as well 
as the need for transparency and accountability in 
local authorities, serves to highlight the 
importance of regularly reviewing the 
effectiveness of the internal financial and 
operating controls that are in place. 
With the county council audit committee was 
established in 2007 under the local government 

improvement tickets act in 20205 and 
re-established after the May 2014, local election.  
The membership of this committee comprises of Mr 
Noel Geraghty.  Vice Chairman, me to leave on an 
important appointment.  Mary Savage.  Cllr Edward 
Timmins and Cllr Gerry Walsh and myself.  The 
committee is sorted and assisted by Mr Brian 
Gleeson, head of finance, Jerry Kea and Tom Murphy 
meet on a formal basis five or six times a year.  
I'd like to recognise and thank those three 
gentlemen who have been excellent over the years 
for their support.  In at the meetings attend other 
meetings throughout the year in relation to the 
comprehensive annual work programme.  The role of 
the other committee is to advise council on 
financial reporting process, internal controls, 
risk management and audit matters.  The function 
of the audit committee includes the following, to 
foster, development of best practice in 
performance of local authorities of internal audit 
function, review the financial and budgetary 
reporting practice and procedure with the local 
authority.  To review audit financial statements, 
auditor's report or special report in relation to 

local authority and access any action taken within 
the authority by its executive, this response to 
report and report findings to the authority.  To 
review systems there are operated by the local 
authority for the management of risk access and 
promote with money with report of local authority 
functions.  Review recommendations of the 
national oversight and Audit Commission, and the 
response of Chief Executive and take further action 
as appropriate.  So, moving on internal audit 
assignment for 2018, following a tinkering process 
in early 2018.  All audit sign on insurance rating 
and have control environment operating in the area 
under review.  Insurance ratings are categorised 
under four he headings, which are full, 
significant, reasonable, and limited.  I'm not 
going toga there the description, they're on page 
two, or maybe three of mine, and you can have the 
time to read them yourself. 
The following audit taken during the course of 
2018, review of payroll systems and controls.  The 
objective of this audit was to conduct an 
independent assessment of accuracy of Wicklow 
County Council's assessing, and review current 

controls of payroll in place against best practice 
We reported no high-risk findings that may result 
in material financial loss or operational 
disruption to Wicklow County Council that controls 
test operating effectively.  Our assessment 
indicates that reasonable assurance can be placed 
on sufficient to mitigate or manage key inherent 
risks that the payroll process could be exposed to.  
Accounts payable.  Objective was to conduct an 
independent assessment of the accuracy of Wicklow 
County Council's accounts payable processing and 
effectiveness for control payable against 
recognised best practitioner Our review, report a 
number of findings, however, it is important to 
note that the points identified would not give rise 
to any financial loss, or operation disruption to 
Wicklow County Council. 
Our assessment indicates the current control in 
operation provide a reasonable assurance to 
Wicklow County Council in mitigating the relevant 
risks.  Management accepted the recommendation 
made on the foot of this report.  And moving on to 
review of stores and machinery yard, operation and 
value for money. 

The objective of this review was to review the 
operation and effectiveness of stores and machine 
yard, access to the contribution of the stores and 
the machinery yard to Wicklow County Council, core 
operation on the cost benefit basis, review funding 
model of the stores and machinery yard, review the 
viability of the stores and machinery yard as going 
concern.  Management are currently considering 
the findings which will be reported in full to the 
council in due course.  Next heading is prewetting 
repair costs, objective is to review inhouse 
policies and access progress in relation to 
recommendation outline and value for money study, 
number 28.   
(Comfort break for captioner). 
>>:  Was arranged in November with the public of 
administration.  And the key themes just where.  
Of.  In addition, audit committee members, present 
... 
(Reads from leaflet given to all members). 
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much Tom. 
CLLR WINTERS:  Just to thank Tom and the members 

of the committee for the work they do, and it is 
nice to see that there's so many audit opinions 
reflect well on the council and the work that the 
staff do in terms of compliance.    Just the one 
on the I suppose the two we don't really know what 
your report is:  The review of the stores and 
machinery yard operations and value for money - you 
say the management are considering the findings, 
you met a finding, when or why you can't make us 
aware of that?  And then the pre-letting repairs 
costs, when do you think that draft report would 
be ready?  Thanks. 
>>:  So, over to you. 
>>:  I don't want to be seen as critical about it, 
but on page four, reletting repair costs, I know 
we're waiting for a draft report in regards to it, 
but nevertheless it is always an issue out there 
in terms of the turnaround of repairs to our local 
authority housing, and I'm just wondering in 
regards to the departmental grants we get what 
level of grants do we actually do this, and are they 
contributing in any way to the delay in turning 
around the local authority housing.  And the 
second point is on the following page, regarding 

public lighting.  We're having a problem there 
from a local council point of view and certainly 
from the Baltinglass district and number of lights 
programmes, additional lights programmes have been 
included in the last particular years in 
Baltinglass and Carnew in housing estates built ten 
years ago and still waiting for public lighting to 
be extended to them.  So that's an area, to us out 
on the ground is something that hasn't been 
addressed and I'm wondering in terms of the audit 
committee, I don't want to be critical of it, but 
in terms of the oversight of it is there any other 
opinions other than what is written down here. 
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you very much, two things I'd 
like to along Cllr Irene Winters to find out what 
the store situation is and the roadway the low value 
purchase cards, that you're going to continue with 
that, it does away with a lot for the staff a lot 
of messing about, let's say, you can go straight, 
get the purchase done quickly and it is easier to 
do, so I'd like to see that continued, thank you 
Tom. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  Thanks very much Cathaoirleach, 
Tom thanks very much for a good comprehensive 

report, there's a lot in it, and I'm sure anything 
involved money and auditing, questions, I mean, how 
long is a piece of string.  But two questions I 
would like to ask, I'm only four-and-a-half years 
in the council, one thing, I know above in the Bray 
municipal and one thing people have been asking me, 
it is the question in relation to procurement.  
And, in the case of people providing services, and 
I've seen the situation, where, you know, some 
people, the same people have been over and over 
again doing the services and some people are coming 
to me, weren't other people asked to give these 
services. 
And they feel like, there's a bit of imbalance 
there, I'd like to know, does audit, do you cover 
that?  Now another question I'd like to ask as well 
in relation to people that receive money from 
Wicklow County Council, is there an onus on these 
people to produce financial reports? 
  
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  What do you mean by financial 
reports. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  I'm saying, if we talk about audit 

and money and finance, I'm saying, if people 
receive money from the Wicklow County Council, 
should people produce, and show up financial 
reports? 
>>:  Why. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's not appropriate what we're 
talking about here today. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  It is about auditing and finance. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Not in here. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  This is in relation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's not relevant here. 
Brian:  Can I explain that position, the draft 
report has been produces, we say it has gone to the 
roads department who are responsible for the stores 
and they are collating their response to the 
findings and when those responses come back, they 
will be considered by the management team and 
subsequently by the audit committee.  In relation 
to the pre-letting, we would hope to have that 
report very shortly in the next two to three weeks, 
we will be anticipating.  In relation to, we can't 
go into the detail, I suppose, council later Blake 
raised grants, that's not part of the objective of 
that audit.  I don't think they will be looking at, 

that would be the main cause, but as I say, when 
we get the actual draft report, we can have a look 
at the findings of that report, and we can address 
those in due course. 
  
In relation to Cllr Vincent Blake raised the matter 
of public lighting, I suppose that was under the 
public spending codes and that particular audit 
looks at checks and balances in relation was there 
procurement in place and appraisal done beforehand 
as regards looking at value for money, as regards, 
what has been done-or-still needs to be done, it 
is the expenditure that has been incurred, whether 
it complies with procurement regulations and so 
forth, so it would be limited in its scope, that 
particular review, and it's part of a kind of 
national review for the procurement, or the 
procurement spending code. 
  
>>:  Significant insurance.  There was egg 
insurance on that report. 
Brian:  On all projects that we're examined the 
public spending code there was significant 
assurance on that.  Rim the public energy and 

lighting, yes. 
Tom:  Yes, Cathaoirleach I forgot to say, and I 
wish all the elected representatives here the best 
of luck in the forthcoming elections.  No better 
people to have represent the county.  And to you 
too Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Most of them!  
>>:  Yes Pat. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  On our behalf could I thank Tom and 
Noel and Mary, Gerry, Brian, and Derek and Tom for 
the work here, I think it is very valuable work 
they're carrying out on our behalf and thank you 
again. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  The Chief Executive is on now. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, I'll 
take the report as read, one thing I will add 
something I raised at CPG in relation to the Irish 
refugee protection programme.  We will be getting 
families like all other local authorities from 
Syria, between at a later half of this year, between 
July and September/October and by way of 
background, the Irish Government has given a 
commitment to resettle, approximately 4,000 

refugees and asylum seekers, called Irish refugee 
proaction programme, so they largely originate 
from Greece, Syria, and Lebanon, if it is taken from 
Italy, you know the background in terms of the 
families fleeing violence and there's 11 million 
Syrians around at this stage, so the procedure for 
accepting asylum seekers, and refugees, involves 
officials from Department of Justice, travelling 
to Greece, for vulnerability assessments and 
security assessment, once this Ireland, the 
arrival will be provided for temporary 
accommodation in number of emergency reception, 
and the international protection office will 
prioritise the applications for international 
protection for those arriving under the relocation 
programme.  Those granted refugee status will be 
entitled to same range of services as Irish 
citizens, so those coming to Wicklow will have the 
full refugee status, 38 families will be allocated 
to County Wicklow which is in line with counties 
of similar size.  And this regard, interagency 
committee has been established to ensure the 
necessary supports are in place, prior to the 
reception of the families.  It is chaired by 

Michael Nicholson, and the HSC, it is larks 
Department of Social protection, County Wicklow 
partnerships, and Wicklow county childcare semi, 
Wicklow volunteer centre are provided with support 
from the Wicklow County Council, the role of the 
committee is act as management team for the 
resettlement projects in the area, insure 
financial probing under the asylum migration fund, 
and assure they have their entitled and employ two 
workers, and intercultural workers for two year 
period and work in partnership with members with 
resettlement, there's a suite of options, 
primarily in partnership with service providers 
and accommodate the families across the districts, 
where suitable accommodation has been identified 
and supported and support provided, and meetings 
have been taking place with approved housing bodies 
to provide and extra accommodation by this 
programme.  That's by way of information.  Thank 
you.  
CLLR BEHAN: Accommodation will be sourced or has 
been.  It has to be sourced? 
>>:  So, options there would be affordable housing 
bodies, our own house, housing that we would have 

proved so there's a range of different option, and 
we haven't looked at that yet but will be. 
CLLR BEHAN:  There will be funding for central 
Government for this, will there? 
>>:  Of course. 
CLLR BEHAN:  In relation to the executive's 
report, an issue arose this morning for me anyway, 
at Irish Water clinic, concerning a decision made 
by the Chief Executive last May in relation to 
staffing.  And the closure of the water services 
Capital office here in Wicklow County Council.  
And when I raised an issue, I've been following up 
with Irish Water for at least two years now, if not 
longer, which was an upgrade of the sewer along the 
Herbert road, and I had given my question in 
advance, I was the only person attending the clinic 
from Bray, there were three representatives of 
Irish Water there, and they had no report from me.  
They had absolutely no information for me.  But in 
the course of the discussion, I was told that a 
decision has opinion made here, by the management, 
to reassign two engineers, to other duties.    
From the water services Capital office.    And at 
the effect of that reassignment, has been to I 

suppose significantly slow down the work that would 
be done on Capital projects here in the county.  
I'm still waiting for the update from them on a 
specific area on the Herbert road but this is a big 
issue for people living there, but bigger issue 
from me if the Chief Executive has made this 
decision, why did he make it, and why weren't we 
moved about it and why weren't we told it could have 
impact on Capital developments in the water sector 
in this county?  Because I certainly think it is 
a very important decision that you've made Chief 
Executive and I would like explanation for it thank 
you.  
CLLR LAWLESS:  Thanks, one comment on the report, 
the climate adoption strategy, which is very 
welcomed of course, I see it is reserved function 
for the members, it will be advertised in a 
hopefully it will come before the council September 
so my laptop's just logged down, so I can't see the 
detail.  I'm wondering around, will we get to see 
that strategy at April meeting, I would have 
thought to have it at manage meeting it going out 
on public consultation, was there any input at all 
from any councillors, was the input just solely 

from the executives, within the council, probably 
by department, departments, I'm wanting background 
around the actual strategy and when we as 
councillors have to an opportunity to look at it 
and go through it as well and are we allowed, 
obviously if it is going out for advertisement, I 
presume we're allow today make comments and 
submissions in on that as well. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  For the record I attended the Irish 
Water clinics there as well, one Bray member 
attended, same question as Cllr Nicola Lawless on 
climate change adoption strategy, obviously 
there's a draft been produced or in production, 
that's to go out for public consultation, at what 
point do councillors input in the draft, do we 
participate with the public consultation or is 
there a members prior to that.  
 
CLLR BLAKE:  I query in regards to the local 
office, the communications I had with Irish Water, 
there's an issue that came up there, in 
particularly, what we're talking about in the area 
the small schemes, whether small water sewage 
schemes and problems we have with progressing 

additions to some of our sewer wage plants in the 
area and Irish Water were saying there's a problem 
because Wicklow County Council closed offices in 
terms of communications and getting work done, 
small work done out there in regards, I do want 
answers from the council as to whether it can rein 
stated in here.  And, the benefits it could have, 
but certainly there's an issue out there.  Irish 
Water raise it had with us, maybe they're not 
funding it, maybe this is a funding problem, but 
there's an issue out there that needs to be 
addressed and if at all possible, need to be 
reinstated within here in the council. 
CLLR BOURKE:  I got the same response, in Avoca, 
need for extending networks, and nothing had 
happened because we shut down the office here and 
will delay project.  So, I think we need answers 
on that one. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Some counties had changed their 
mind, Meath and Louth had gone back the way they 
were, it was a surprise because it made clear 
several project will be delayed, some have, and the 
same, we didn't raise the issue with them, they 
raised the issue about us, we had three councillors 

there, and I think, we were all surprised to hear 
it, and we were all, to some of the questions we 
asked before that, then that came up that these 
project were delayed and decision had to be made 
to close the office.  So, it was surprising to hear 
it.  And, they were insistent it is interfering 
with some of the small Capital works. 
CLLR DUNNE: Again, I was at Irish Water this 
morning, and that arose, so maybe we could have an 
answer for it and something that has concerned me 
Chief Executive over the last while, is, while it 
is great to be allocating money in discretionary 
funds et cetera, last year, we didn't, we weren't 
able to get 15,000 worth of project, now we 
allocated money this year, and it is up to 297 and 
my problem is, are we, putting more work on top of 
already a staff that are working so hard in the 
municipal districts they're finding it hard to 
allocate the money because again they go out and 
get, prices and things like that, there's so much 
work and would it be more next year?  Would it be 
over 135, and maybe allocating staff, I'm presuming 
this is happening in different districts, not just 
in Wicklow, should some staff if out and get project 

over the line, because, there's money there, and 
there's money, you know, there's money there and 
projects to be done and there seems to be slowly 
coming on stream, now I'm not blaming the people, 
the engineers and all, I know they're out the door 
with work, and it is just a suggestion, that maybe, 
we could get maybe some of the project over the line 
with extra staff.  And just finally, again, on 
staff, outdoor staff, I would like to see more 
outdoor staff they're doing the work on the ground.  
And the foremen, out interest do they need extra 
staff? Thank you. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Yeah, I might address the 
comment on the Capital office for a second. 
Michael:  Wicklow County Council has a - with Irish 
Water until 2025, and, we have a number of staff 
on the operation and maintenance side which is just 
a figure of approximately 68 staff.  We have two 
staff on finding feets and figures are there, 1.3 
staff working on Capital project.  Now some time 
ago, Irish Water were talking about regionalising 
the Capital office, and it was to be regionalising 
our office to be was regionalised up to County 

Meath. So the issue you have at that point is when 
the staff in the office, when they got promotion 
or whatever, out of it, it didn't seem right at that 
time to, this happened last year, it didn't seem 
right at the time to staff that office again, and 
then be left with a situation that the staff that 
would come into the office would have to be sent 
up to relocated out of the county.  And it is 
becoming a bit of an issue at this stage to keep 
staff in water services because, people know that 
there's ongoing discussion, at national level 
between Irish Water, the Government agencies, and 
the councils about how Irish Water will run into 
the future, so with all that in the mix it was felt 
that, the right thing to do was not to reallocate 
any posts at this point in time, but to the Capital 
offices.  Now other counties had done this before 
we had done it, we just took the opportunity to do 
it, and that's where it stands at the moment. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  My understanding as well is that 
Irish Water were taking over that function and they 
would provide staff in their own central 
organisation to deal with the Capital issues, it 
is something we'll look at now.  If it is holding 

up projects, we'll certainly look at it and talk 
to Irish Water.  Absolutely. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I would like at it as a matter of 
urgency, we're pursuing with Irish Water, we're 
told they're delayed because of your decisions. 
It is not that there's a lack of money, there isn't 
the people there to get it there.  
CLLR BLAKE:  Briefly the CEO, when we brought up 
the issue about small sewage schemes around the 
county that he would meet, whether it be with the 
council members, Irish Water or where else, to try 
and sort out the issues, it did give that 
commitment.    Sorry Chairman, they are starting 
to come but Chairman these are the issues we didn't 
know about, are starting to come to the top now.  
So, I think it is important. 
TOM:  One point, the Capital office we had was 
major Capital office and dealt with the schemes 
this year would have dealt with after sewage 
scheme, all small schemes were dealt with 
maintenance people.  And that is still on going, 
just to say that, that's all SFO 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Climate change adaptation, 

we're working on this at the moment all sections 
are making input, as soon as we're ready, we can 
put representation on that at April, and you're 
right it will be September and reserved function 
but there's a lot of work done on that at the moment 
and we can share it with you.  Just in relation to 
allocating discretionary funds and get be the work 
done.  All the municipal districts are getting as 
much as done as possible before the roadworks 
programme kicks in and including carry over from 
last year.  Outdoor staff we have interviews 
coming up, we have a panel to replace permanent 
staff and temporary fillings if we feel we need to 
get extra work done thank you. 
  
CLLR LAWLESS:  Will we make submissions, Cllr 
Stephen Matthews asked the same thing, are we going 
to if through the same process, just to say. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Sean is dealing with it there, 
if he wants to come up. 
SEAN:    Obviously, this is a national issue, and 
these are being prepared, we're part of a group of 
17 local authorities that come under the climate 
action regional office which is based in Kildare.  

So, there are, there will be national policies that 
will feed into our local adaptation policy.  So, 
yeah, the plan is that we'll present it to you prior 
to going on public display or about at the same time 
and get your feedback then, and then, it will come 
back because of the elections, obviously it won't 
happen in August so it will be September.  It's a 
tight time frame but it should be doable.  And but, 
you'll have an opportunity to input here, or 
through the public consultation process. 
  
CLLR LAWLESS:  Thank you Sean.  Cathaoirleach 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Eight now. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Three year programme has been 
circulated, it is indicative of the money that will 
be spending on the Capital account over the next 
three years, this will change needless to say 
depending on the funding we get from different 
source, it is set out over three year period and 
increased by 48 automatic million over the last 
one, or increase of 300 million, due to the housing 
programme which is 1300 housing units, which is 
significant Capital investment, the rest I suppose 
is best guess where we're at the of the funding 

available from the various different sources. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS:    Yeah just briefly I had notes done 
on this, but I can't get my hands on them, but from 
memory, just a couple of things in it, just, it is 
great if they happen but they do seem to be guest 
amounts, swimming pool in Blessington, and five and 
ten million over the next two years, course I 
welcome that if it happens but how realistic is the 
Capital programme?  The Baltinglass traffic town 
centre traffic amendment, have, over two years, 1.2 
million between 20/21, there's a couple of things 
like that, I wonder, Blessington Greenway, I think 
it is big numbers, 7-10 million, so just ask how 
realistic are these things?  I mean it is like 
doing a budget, you do a budget based on history 
and your best guestimate what will happen rather 
than optimistic view of the world, I'm asking is 
it a realistic view. 
  
CLLR MITCHELL:  I received this on Friday, it was 
a complex document to read, however when I looked 
at it over the weekend, I was concerned about what 
I saw.  And I have mentioned these aspects before 

for a number of years.  And, essentially, 
Greystones and Kilcoole are stuffed with houses at 
the moment, around 800 houses are being built in 
the area, and it is catching up on the population 
of Bray quite quickly.  And well over 30% of the 
development levies in the county are being 
collected in the area.  However, in terms of roads 
which is the greatest deficit in infrastructure in 
that area, only 4% of the development levies are 
spent in this programme, within the Greystones 
Kilcoole.  Municipal district and that's 
completely unacceptable.  People, I've been 
calling into a few doors recently and people are 
absolutely fed up with the amount of building going 
on in the area, it is disruptive, the dirt, the 
lorries, all that sort of stuff but very concerned 
how anybody's going to move when all the houses are 
complete.  So, this is a very urgent issue and 
people are very concerned about it now.  And it is 
completely unacceptable that only a small 
percentage of the roads development levies are 
being spent in the area.  In particular I have 
spoken at many years about Delgany and Blacklion 
Road, I imagine it will be in the region of five 

million, so where is this money going to come from?  
The Chief Executive has frequently stated it is 
going to be done.  I have to say engineer did 
contact me in the last two weeks, to speak about 
how to do it, or to speak how he is going to do it 
and we had a good discussion.  However, where is 
the money coming from?  In addition to that, our 
other projects such as Delgany improvement scheme 
has been agreed and in the development plan for 
Kilcoole.  There's relief roads that aren't 
mentioned at all anywhere and these areas are 
expanding rapidly, only 7% of the recreation budget 
is spent in the area, and the whole concept of 
development levy is to support development and 
here, they're not spent in the area which is 
expanding the fastest, but spread all over the 
place, and people in the area are very annoyed at 
the building and the inability of the council to 
get the roads sorted.  There's concern, that in 
last year's Capital investment plan, the Wicklow 
Port access was supposed to finish funding of half 
a million in 2018 but it is now, two projects which 
sound similar in description, are now going to be 
spend 2.75 million over the next three years, which 

wasn't expected last year, what is happening here?  
So, I'm very concerned about this, and I have to 
say, I cannot support a Capital investment plan 
which spends all the development levies in areas 
other than where the building is. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Cllr Derek Mitchell raises a very 
important point.  The experience he's talking 
about, in Greystones and Kilcoole, what will happen 
in Arklow? We don't have much development yet but 
we will in three years’ time when sewage plant is 
under construction and I do know the manager had 
planned, was hoping to get half a million for the 
transport study from the last round of funding that 
was announced last week but we got nothing for the 
transport study for Arklow and failing that I was 
hoping to find out today will the manager be able 
to provide funding himself out of the Capital 
budget to proceed with that transport study in 
advance of significant housing construction that 
will take place in Arklow?  And as a matter of 
interest, I'd love to know what is the balance in 
the Capital account at the moment?  It fluctuates 
a lot, but it would be interesting to know what our 
current credit balance is.  And I just wanted to 

make those points and also, I'm concerned that 
businesses, we're talking about reversing the 
commute from Dublin in the mornings back into the 
county to generate economic activity locally, and 
I'm concerned that in our area in Arklow because 
we're very south of the county we're competing now 
with Wexford county council's development charges, 
for commercial development levies which is 
actually only tenure yes square metre, I checked 
to that and talked to Gorey-based councillor who 
told me that, purposely left it at that level to 
encourage business to locate in that area.  Our 
current rate is 45 euros a square metre applying 
to Arklow, and seeing as we have given an exemption 
for the film industry, I was wondering should we 
look at the peripheral area, south area, should we 
look at reduced development charge for commercial 
rates for manufacturing industries?  Because I am 
quite concerned that we will start losing 
businesses to the Gorey area.  I know one case of 
a business who is expanding, who is considering 
moving to Gorey to save at least 100,000 on 
development charges on expansion project.  That's 
an issue that deserves discussion and should be 

debated by the members.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  I would support the comments of Cllr 
Derek Mitchell in relation to the lack of 
references to schemes like the Delgany School and 
Delgany, Blacklion Road, that's what I'm getting 
from concerned residents and would like to see some 
sort of references to it and definite plan going 
forward and the report, ask the CEO in relation to 
Wicklow County Campus, there's over four million 
for project cost, and just maybe elaborate the 
plans for this, I know there was application rather 
than before Enterprise Ireland before Christmas, 
which unfortunately we were unsuccessful with, so, 
I don't know would it be representing it at the next 
opportunity.  So again, is this the plans there, 
you know, conditioned to be successful in 
applications such as this for it to be broad 
forward.  Thanks? 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thanks, Cllr Edward Timmins just 
the Blessington Greenway, we spent the entire day 
with assessment panel so better' shortlisted so 
we'll know before May, I'll be hopeful from what 

we were hearing but we'll have to wait and see, but 
we'll put our best foot forward, Baltinglass, 
traffic management wasn't successful in the rural 
and regeneration fund but we're getting feedback 
and resubmitting it, I think it is a good scheme 
if you look at the ones that are funding around the 
country, it is the right out there with the best 
of them.  We did well in the urban regeneration 
fund and the Government does try to spread money 
around, but we'll keep working on.  Swimming pool, 
we're doing feasibility study and the grant for 
major Capital spend that's coming up now, I still 
think, we will see but there's a case for swimming 
pool in Blessington in terms of servicing the 
schools and population up over five or six thousand 
now, and saying to people could travel into Naas 
and that, when you're talking about schools it is 
not particularly - we do the feasibility, summit 
grant application, depending what comes out.  But 
the one is hopeful.  The Greenway, we'll have to 
wait and see, but put our best foot forward and get 
the funding we'll drive home the schemes.  In 
relation to Cllr Derek Mitchell the Delgany to 
Blacklion Road, the developer in the middle of the 

scheme will be developing the roadway there, in 
discussions with him there now.  We're also 
pointing consultant to carry out design north and 
south of that, and CPO and know the costs of the 
CPO, it is hard to tell at this stage and complete 
the rest, but I assure you it is priority and 
something that will be moving on to, St Lawrence's 
road was on last year.  The Delgany Village has 
just been, gone through the Part 8 again, we'll 
apply to NTA for funding, to for that, if we get 
it, we'll drive on with that.  And Wicklow Port 
access, funding in there, from what I gather is 
3500,000 is landowners and stuff, it was there last 
year and Park and Ride in the train station here 
in Wicklow.  Just in relation to Arklow, yeah, we 
were disappointed not to get funding for the 
traffic management study for Arklow but I think, 
we'll have to do that, absolutely, so that will have 
to come from our own resources and yeah, it is in 
there Capital plan but we have to be very recently 
you said for the housing development coming on in 
one, two and three, we need to have a plan for the 
traffic infrastructure.  Development 
contributions, it is done as part of a scheme, done 

every few years when he list the number of projects, 
we then look at development that's coming through 
and how much we charge in different classes, so that 
was done at, when the development contribution 
scheme was done, we can have a look at it next time 
around but you if you reduce from 45 Euro per feet 
you reduce it what is available for the Capital 
schemes, I know ourselves in terms of industrial, 
we're similar to Kildare, Meath, all the 
surrounding counties, Wexford is low, that's 
obviously a decision they made, similar to what we 
made in the film sector, but we can look at it doing 
the development contribution scheme.  Cllr Gerry 
Walsh I mentioned the Delgany, Blacklion road, in 
relation to the caps, we're revising it for content 
creation scheme, so, there's a lot more work into 
it, and bringing outdoor, outside expertise into 
it so we would be confident next time around there's 
a better application, we got the feedback, we 
qualified but we were below the line for so much 
the schemes that was competing against, so hopeful 
to get that back in again this year.  Thank you.  
 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I know, that, but other 

companies are willing to come to Arklow and there's 
no problem about development levies as well so that 
we're willing to come to the town.  So, that one 
is probably the first time I've heard of an issue 
with the development levies, others come whether 
they're 45 or whatever, and talking to the Wexford 
councillors, they did that for a reason, they're 
obviously hoping to attract people across the 
border as they say, but in my with my knowledge of 
the situation at the moment, there's not a rush to 
go into Wexford, do you know, because the point is, 
within 600 or 700 metres of the N11, if business 
is north, the I don't think it will interfere what 
jobs are coming to out of Wicklow.. 
 
CLLR WALSH:  No response on the Delgany 
improvement scheme, that's accessibility scheme on 
R762, what I would reference, Cllr Derek Mitchell 
Mitch would have meant the village it was, Convent 
Road which is a separate scheme again and area 
that's badly in need of improvements, thanks. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  With regard, throughout the 
county, I mean, if everyone has a parochial 

attitude there won't be an awful lot done in sense 
Arklow is getting 35 million sewage system and 
going to have significant development down there.  
That's a very significant amount of public money 
that's going into Arklow.  And in Bray for 
instance, like, it could have up to maybe 6,000 
units in the next few years in Bray and that's 
absolutely very significant and so if the 
councillors in Bray had the same attitude as some 
councillors around this table in regard to keeping 
the levies in their own areas, there would be nobody 
getting any money outside.  So, and also, I think, 
I know I've said it time and again, people forget 
that 7 million from Bray to Southern Cross sale that 
went down to this council and this council had never 
paid a penny off the loan, take those into 
consideration, because it works both ways with 
things like that. 
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  I think you're out of order 
there, I think you're parochial yourself, well 
there is nothing wrong with the fact that the 
councillors in Greystones and Kilcoole feel 
there's a huge amount of development and nothing 
back to town, we're not saying we want to keep it 

all, what we said is we want a fair share, nothing 
more. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I would consider, I was talking 
generally, not only Greystones, but if you want to 
talk about Greystones, I remember a former 
councillor saying to me one time, tell me something 
they don't have in Greystones.  And I couldn't name 
it.  I couldn't name what it was.  And there's an 
awful lot of places around this, would find that 
very desirable to have what they have in 
Greystones.  We're moving on anyway, right to 
note, we note nine OK.  Ten.  County Wicklow 
Annual Service Delivery Plan.  Tom. 
TOM:  Members have been circulated, and 
performance indicator report, 2017, which runs 
into 112, pages this, is the fourth performance 
indicator report published by NOAC, the corporate 
plan sets out the high-level goals for the 
council's activities.  And, the that provides 
context and framework for the councils’ Annual 
Service Delivery Plan which is next up on the 
agenda.  And the annual service delivery in plan 
sets out in detail the services to be provided, the 
standards to be expected and how the services will 

be monitored and measured SFO as you know the 
performance indicators help us to monitor and 
service the services we provide, NOAC, under the 
local reform act is with a scrutinising performance 
of local authorities against the relevant 
indicators.  In 2017 there were 35 performance 
indicators, used in the report, and they cover a 
wide range of functions, carried out by the council 
in the areas of housing, roads, planning, water, 
and waste water, environment, fire services, 
housing, library, youth, community, corporate, 
finance, and economic development.  The results of 
each of those performance indicators are set out 
in a series of tables, at the back of the report 
and they span for 50 pages.  Wicklow performed 
reasonably well across the 35 performance 
indicators for 2017, NOAC, encouraged local 
authorities to use for their performance, when and 
where appropriate, so as to see what we can learn 
from one another.  And to assist us in improving 
perform NOAC, encouraged us to work with parties 
throughout the organisation to increase awareness 
and understanding.  The management team has 
considered this report and the report was also 

considered by the corporate policy group earlier 
this morning.  The report is also considered by the 
Wicklow County Council audit committee.  And as 
I've mentioned the next item on today's agenda is 
council's Annual Service Delivery Plan and that 
also contains a number of indicator data.  Thank 
you. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thank you. 
Thanks Chairman.  Briefly, yeah this came before 
the audit committee two weeks ago, a couple of 
points.  It is a very useful report.  Benchmarks 
us all over the county so I urge all members to have 
a look at it, you don't have to heard the 112 pages 
but see the charts, there are certain charts on 
roads, housing, you know the main tasks for the 
council and they list out and you'll see where 
Wicklow ranks and so, ten minutes you would pick 
up the highlights of it.  The highlights from me 
are housing, we're low down.  Now the other problem 
is it is 2017, we're seeing this, 14 months after 
2017, I'd ask could we if we have influence with 
NOAC, can we have it earlier in the year, not 14 
months later when the stuff is out of date I know 
housing improved but 2017, we ranked very low, same 

with roads, roads grants haven't been good.  And 
the other figure, which we're well aware of, we're 
third lowest in the country for per head spending 
per Capita per head, 637, third lowest, in Ireland, 
Meath is lower, they're the highlights and it is 
useful document, it is very useful document that 
we can use, at senior management when we're looking 
for grants and pay-out from the departments that 
Wicklow, when I was Chairman I brought up, Wicklow 
is still not getting its fair share, we're making 
progress but not fair share. 
CLLR BEHAN:  It is a detailed report and I tried 
to read as much of it as I could, the one point is 
it is grossly unfair actually in the way it is 
reflecting back to a period of time when there was 
a lot less Government funding for housing.  If you 
were to read it, and you weren't aware of the 
background to the situation you'd think wick 
Wicklow County Council is doing nothing on housing, 
when we in fact know the op is the case and huge 
amount of work has been doing, is being done and 
will be done, including the amount of Capital spent 
in the next four or five years on building local 
authority houses.  So, to me it indicates that the 

indicator, the performance indicators are not what 
this is cracked up to, because they're out of date 
and give a false impression of work that has been 
done, particularly in this particular report. 
By the housing section which has been working 
magnificently and therefore, it has, weaknesses if 
you like as a system for looking at how we are 
performing.  It should be real time, up-to-date, 
rather than two years old.  And the other point I'd 
make is everybody, around here, or attached to the 
council, is consulted but the public, the general 
public don't seem to be asked their opinion at all 
about how the council does the operation and how 
did does its business.  I'm surprised the powers 
that be, haven't, not here, but nationally, haven't 
come around to some way of finding out what do the 
people, the taxpayers and citizens of the country 
feel about the local authorities as well.  And 
that's a weakness in it as well, I think. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Note that.  OK.  We're move on 
again. 
 
>>:  Annual Service Delivery Plan has been 
circulated to for 20719.  There's quite an amount 

in it, it sets out objectives for the year, and also 
sets out for the performance indicators. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do we have proposer and seconder?  
Yeah.  11. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Under article 535 local elections 
regulations local authority may issue polling 
information cards to be sent at electors at 
election if contested, as per article 55 it is 
reserved function of members to issue polling 
information cards to every elector, every name on 
the Register.  Proposer and seconder.  Thank you 
very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  On to twelve.  Presentation on 
the draft litter management plan. 
  
POWERPOINT PRESENTER: Good afternoon everybody.  
I was asked to give a brief presentation on the 
draft litter plan that has been prepared and put 
out for public consultation since last week.  So, 
I'm going to run briefly through a presentation on 
it.  Plan sets out policies and objectives for 
Wicklow County Council and number of different 
areas including enforcement and regulation.  The 
control and prevention of litter. 

Education and awareness and community 
participation being an area we've added into this 
plan, it wasn't previously in our litter management 
plan.  It is an important area.  We do have a lot 
of community support, and engagement in tackling 
the problem of letter throughout the county so it 
is important that it gives recognition in our 
litter and management plan.  Why do we need the 
plan?  First of all, it is a requirement under the 
litter pollution act 1997, under Section 10.  Each 
local authority must prepare a plan, but it is 
already important for us to set out what are the 
litter problems we're dealing with in the county?  
What our priorities are?  And how we're going to 
tackle the issues going forward. 
There is a process, sorry, ... 
There is a process for drafting the plan, the first 
stage was to consult with the staff within waste 
management section, about the issues of litter.  
We also looked at some of the plans that had been 
prepared by neighbouring counties, in particular 
we looked at litter plans from Meath, Kildare, and 
south Dublin to get an idea of best practice in 
terms of formulating the plans and what was done 

elsewhere.  We reviewed the current legislation on 
litter and updated the plan accordingly.  And then 
we consulted with more widely with staff throughout 
different sections.    We're now at the public 
consultation phase.    Which involves yourselves 
and also the wider public, and then once that has 
been done, we'll take note of any submissions that 
come in, and amend the plan accordingly and 
hopefully have the plan published early in the 
summer months.  More on the consultation and 
public how we're doing it.  We are it bring the plan 
to the environment SPC in December for consultation 
and now currently out for public consultation, it 
has been advertised in the radio, local newspapers, 
it is on the website, Wicklow.  I have copies 
available in the Municipal Offices and County 
Buildings and circulated it through the public 
participation network.  What the plan does, it 
sets out the legislation covering litter to find 
out what the problem of litter is.  Sets out the 
responsibilities of different sectors with 
relation to litter, it is not just ours the local 
authority we need to consider, we also need to look 
at responsibilities of the general public and the 

business sector in tackling the issue of litter.  
We evaluated types and causes of litter, that we 
would be finding throughout the county and that 
leads on to establishing what are our priority 
areas for action going forward on litter.  And 
setting up objectives, to prevent and control 
litter through the plan.  And the types and causes 
of litter, this comes from detailed litter surveys 
under taken both here in Wicklow and the county.  
And there's probably no surprises what type of 
litter are most commonly found, cigarettes, is, are 
the most common type of litter, by count.  
Accounted for over 40%.  And packaging, 
food-related litter, sweet-related litter, which 
are very common, litter items, and I'm sure you're 
all aware from working with local communities what 
issues they're bringing and certainly the 
packaging and food-related litter is something 
that's coming up quite strongly were groups like 
the tidy towns, plastic bottles and that sort of 
thing are the things and coffee cups are the items 
they're expressing concern on.  We, it looks at 
what the sources of the litter are.  So, 
pedestrians account for a significant proportion, 

over 40%, motorists as well are a big cause, retail 
outlets, gathering points, places of 
entertainment, fast food outlets can be a cause, 
if it is not managed properly and schools as well 
if not managed properly is a big source of litter 
and smaller sources of litter as well.  So, for us, 
in County Wicklow, we've identified as our 
priorities, tackling litter from pedestrians, 
motorists, illegal dumping and fly tipping, dog 
fouling is one we increasingly are getting a lot 
of requests to tackle the issue of dog fouling 
throughout the county, so we have that as a 
priority.  Legal authorised signage remains an 
issue, major open-air events need to be controlled, 
poorly covered vehicles, schools, take away 
consumption, and bin collection services, where 
bins are overflowing, and places of pleasure and 
recreation can also be an area of concern. 
So, in terms of our objectives and policies, on 
waste enforcement regulation, I have a list of them 
all, but the key objectives are to maintain a 
visible enforcement presence with five officers 
throughout the county, record and investigate all 
complaints received, to pursue legal waste 

activities, taking action to stop them, 
collaborate with key partners EPA, which is the 
waste enforcement lead authority, Gardai and our 
PURE partners, to ensure explains with all relevant 
sectors and use technology, CCTV to increase 
detection of offence, antidumping initiative has 
been a key development that allows us to use more 
technology in tackling the problem of fly-tipping 
and dumping at present. 
The second area is prevention and control.  And 
under this category we’d be working with municipal 
district offices to ensure maintain adequate bin 
numbers adapting locations as needed.  There are 
sometimes, need to add more bins and sometimes you 
need to take away problematic bins or bins not used.  
To ensure bins are inspected and serviced, street 
cleaning in the towns, adequate resources, given 
for litter control to the municipal districts, is 
important, monitoring and regulating events to 
comply with regulation, tackle dog fouling with 
signage and bins where appropriate and to monitor 
and control the litter black spots that are out 
there.  On education awareness, we continue the 
campaign, targeting litter through thematic 

campaigns so we would have campaigns on issues such 
as gum litter, dog fouling, graffiti, general 
litter, we work closely with the schools on a number 
of campaigns, particularly green schools, we're 
providing educational resources for schools and 
community groups.  Promoting and supporting, 
community campaigns including tidy towns pure, and 
the national spring clean campaign. 
Providing resources that those communities need, 
for their own campaigns through the anti-litter 
grant.  And to promote a better approach to waste 
management, to promote a better approach to waste 
management and litter control to different 
sectors, including businesses and householders, 
and use of all relative media so increasing the use 
of Facebook and social media to get the campaign 
message out there and working with tidy towns 
groups around the county to spread that message 
further.  Community engagement, as I said, this is 
new area in the plan, and it is looking how we work 
with local community groups, encouraging them to 
engage, in a range of adverse range of people to 
get involved in coast care, Pure mile schools and 
businesses and Scouts often get involved, to 

promote the national spring clean campaign which 
is during the month of April but extends out beyond 
that, and has grown to a level where in a typical 
year we have 150 clean-up events happening 
throughout the county as part of the national 
spring clean campaign.  To give pour and any groups 
doing clean-ups have the materials they need to 
undertake their work.  To work with tidy towns to 
delivering campaigns and photo is there of one we 
did on the theme of roadside litter. 
And, that advertisement was put up by us in social 
media and we got the tidy towns to join on the 
campaign an about five or six of them spread the 
message throughout.  One got it into signage, so, 
it was a particularly important thematic campaign 
and tidy towns can help us at that message out at 
local level and have more impact with the campaign.  
We ran annual awards, tidy towns estates, 
environmental award to recognise the work these 
groups are doing, it is important to give 
recognition for the work they're doing, Wicklow 
County Council continues to fund and support PURE, 
which is also had great success with the PURE Mile, 
I was talking to Ian, he has 250 miles of road 

adopted as part of PURE Mile, it is like 70 orb 80 
groups involved with the campaign.  And to ensure 
good liaison between Wicklow County Council and 
community is involved with the work it is important 
they get improvement and quick response to clean-up 
materials and pickup after they've done a clean-up 
event.  So finally, just to mention, I have a 
submission, can be made between now and the 12th 
of April.  5pm and submissions can be made to 
Theresa O'Brien, her e-mail is up there.  OK. 
Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much.  Briefly 
because there's a bit of correspondence I want to 
leave at 5.00.  
 
CLLR SNELL:  I want to thank Jim for his 
presentation, and importance of it on the county 
as a whole can't be underestimate.  In regards to 
the community initiative I want to thank Jim and 
colleagues, before him and Ian with the PURE Mile 
in regards to incorporating tidy towns, residents 
associations, youth groups and schools, but I would 
issue a word of caution in regards to I am familiar 
with a number of bins that have been removed outside 

of fast food outlets, shops and is used they're used 
for household rubbish and that's confirmed and 
happening unfortunately in a minority of cases.  
But removing a bin is not the answer.  And I think 
in Jim's presentation, he outlined about the type 
of bins that need to be put in place, to stop this 
type of unwanted action.  We also heard earlier in 
regards to the Capital three year Capital programme 
where there was 75,000 euros put forward for dog 
parks over three years, which is a drop in the ocean 
and I'm listening to Cllr Oliver O'Brien for the 
last four-and-a-half years talking about dog parks 
in this county, we will have dog fouling on a large 
scale until we provide these parks, and 75,000 is 
not going to go anywhere near and addressing what 
is needed.  So, I would ask that the senior 
management, Wicklow County Council look at that and 
perhaps more investment is needed, and certainly 
across the five districts. 
  
 
 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Dog fouling, do you have things 
that are implemented as a successful means to 

combat it?  What was it?  So, let's do it, let's 
find out who is doing the best and that's one of 
the things we really need to look at most strongly. 
>>:  The dog fouling is the issue we're getting 
most feedback from the communities and one we've 
done research on it, I would a lot of if there's 
a magical solution this campaign will work, we've 
tried a few different techniques in recent years 
which is partially successful, one that we've done 
recently is audio devices which are popular and 
they relay a message as they're walking by it pick 
up after the dog.  It is something we'd like to 
continue going forward.  The only town that did a 
study of the impact was Wicklow Town, did an impact 
study and so they measured the dog fouling before 
the audio device went in and afterwards and there 
was over 50% drop in the amount of dog fouling how 
is that sustained long-term is more difficult to 
gauge, I suspect numbers would have crept up, but 
I do think we need to be creative and innovative 
when it comes to dog fouling to capture people's 
attention, so there are a number of different ideas 
that are tried out there, and we'll have to work 
with tidy towns about taking more innovative 

approach to getting it into people's thought and 
getting them talking about it, is the important 
issue. 
And recognising that best practice, in terms of 
tackling the issue.  So, we have a few ideas with 
the antilitter grant the spend on dog fouling has 
been going on in recent years, it was very small 
a few years ago, it is now nearly half of what we're 
spending is going on the issue of dog fouling and 
that recognises what the communities want to see 
action. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks Jim for the comprehensive 
report there, I see the plan that's badly needed 
about the ways things are panned out with the 
illegal dumping et cetera, but I'm glad you 
prioritised you've spoken about education and 
getting into the schools again and working with the 
likes of community groups like tidy towns and PURE 
Mile, in one question to enforcement, and pursuing 
the legal activities, have we had many, are you in 
a position to give figures in relation to the number 
of prosecutions and cases taken by the council.  
How many were successful. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Half a minute each for the next,  
CLLR BLAKE:  I've done a lot of work with the with 
the schools, one thing is the level of the 42% 
almost of passing pedestrians, are causing the 
biggest problem.  The to get it in schools, second 
point we're relying on the PURE project and tidy 
towns to empty our bins as well, that should be a 
concern to us, and the last point is in view of the 
data protection, and the fact the use of CCTV, in 
the detecting dumping of there, that's a concern 
to us, we have to address and look at as well.  And 
the final point is, the fly tipping at, certainly 
surprises me, fly tipping out there is a major 
problem to us. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:    One point, and just in 
relation, I really appreciate the community 
engagement dimension to it, there's something, I 
imagine all of us when we are hear knocking on 
doors, something about response times so it is 
about them telling us where it is litter and 
something needs to be done about it, and there's 
a narrative around that that's important.  People 
will tell you years ago I used to make a phone call 
and they'd pick up a process and it would be gone 

and now there's a process and still contacting us 
about the mattress that's still there.  So, 
there's a huge value on the community engagement, 
and but we have to prove to them we value it when 
they're telling us, and they're identifying areas 
where there is litter. 
  
CLLR THORNHILL:  Thank you.  Jim's thank you very 
much for your report.  I would just like to concur 
with everyone, the tidy towns, I mean, you can't 
go beyond them, they're brilliant.  Dog fouling it 
is disaster, I phone I see it day in and day out, 
people who collect their dirt from the dog, plastic 
bags is thrown everywhere.  The education of the 
youth, it has to be emphasised but one thing I would 
like to put to you and conundrum, bonfires, if you 
put a fire in your back garden, right, it is illegal 
and against the policy of the Wicklow County 
Council Wicklow County Council yet I see people, 
I brought it up at municipal about bonfires and I 
have seen a situation in an estate where a tree, 
trees were burnt down.  Now, maybe Jim you might 
give answer to that, because people are getting 
mixed messages and the thing about it’s on the one 

hand it is illegal and on the other hand people are 
doing it, it is something that has to be addressed. 
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  Something I came across in the 
UK and if you were looking at something interesting 
with regards to dog fouling what they've done with 
the local authorities in the UK is they brought in 
bylaws if you don't have the bags, you get fined, 
if you're with a dog irrelevant, whether you own 
the dog or not, if you don't have poo bags, there's 
an on the spot fine that could be a very innovative 
way of maybe sorting something out.  Thank you. 
  
 
CLLR OLIVER O'BRIEN: Three points, if you get rid 
of the litter problem, you’ll get rid of the 
thousands of jobs, it is basically because of the 
packaging, that's the first point, the second point 
is a lot of the litter you're looking up there is 
caused by the cost of people disposing of their 
litter.  And Cllr Brendan Thornhill mentioned the 
bonfires and I'm convinced it is a cheap way of 
getting rid of the litter at the end of the year.  
And the third point is dog fouling, I don't see it 
as litter, it is a far more serious problem and all 

this thing about picking it up, when it is dropped 
it does damage on the ground, if we have children, 
as we have in Bray, we've a pitch in Bray used as 
a dog fouling area and I've asked the council to 
move on that and put a dog - I have shown where a 
dog park can be used in Bray, in America, when the 
first dog park went in, when they noticed about it 
was, the first thing people checked in a new town, 
was there a dog park, they knew the community spirit 
would be better, because they won't look at 
problems caused by dogs.   
Where a child has lost their sight so far more 
serious problem and needs to be addressed.  
They're the three points I would make and hope to 
be taken on board. 
>>:  Dog fouling, I don't see a solution, signage 
is a good start, but we have to think cleverly how 
to reduce it, because it is coming up everywhere 
now.  Just technical point second last page 
district in the west is Baltinglass municipal 
district not Blessington. 
>>:  It is huge issue in the west as well, I'd be 
of the opinion it is going to take a while to solve 
this, but it will go back to education and schools, 

and very collect type of bullet point signage to 
children and education, because if they really 
realise that, you know, you've people walking on 
this, car park, open spaces where children are 
playing, and most importantly cyclists and people 
on wheelchairs, people realise when a kid is out 
there pushing a wheelchair, manually, and 
gathering that dirt up, it is horrendous, and it 
is completely irresponsible for anyone to do.  We 
had woeful problems with Blessington, where they 
were using parts of the graveyard where the waste 
to graveyard is dumped, people were taking their 
dogs out and in the cleanout here a few weeks ago, 
there was hundreds of, dozens of bags of dirt.  So, 
I think it is going back to school, education and 
schools for children, that the damage's been doing, 
to young children in wheelchairs, and elderly 
people if they feel the torment they're causing, 
they may think a second time.  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Briefly, maybe it is time to start 
looking at it from a different perspective, we have 
avenue asked people for years to clean up after the 
dogs and it seems to be disappearing in the ether, 
nobody seems to care, there are conscientious, 

people bring backs and then dump them, and I don't 
know who they think will clean up after them.  But 
maybe the time has come at providing bags, 
biodegradable bags so that people will have no 
excuse for not using them and no excuse for not 
bringing them home and maybe receptacles for them, 
far more than we have.  It is time in investing in 
the problem not just talking about it from a 
philosophical point of view, wouldn't it be great 
if people didn't do it, I don't think it will 
happen. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I think there's two good ideas, 
Cllr Grainne McLoughlin in regard to enforce be 
people should have doggy bags, and another one, 
what Cllr Mary Kavanagh was saying, maybe not be 
a bad idea for a project for provide bags for people 
who are, under their normal, a lot of people go on 
the same type of walks around the same town all the 
time.  So maybe something that could be looked at 
as well.  But, the key to a lot of this is 
enforcement, but unfortunately, we don't have 
enforcement in this country with regard to dog 
fouling particularly.  And, litter to a certain 
extent, we're lacking in staff in that particular 

area.  Can I thank Jim for making the presentation.  
It is very interesting.  And thank you for your 
good work as well.  There's correspondence now, if 
we want to briefly go through. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Three things. 
The members were this morning's circulated with a 
letter from the Department of Housing, planning and 
local government in relation to the elect really 
register reform project consultation period which 
closes on the 15th of March.  There's a public 
meeting for the Wicklow JPC, that's in the 
Greystones Tennis Club on Tuesday, 12th at 7pm and 
launch of healthy eating strategy at 5.15pm. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  It is decided as well that the last 
meeting of the council will be on the 29th April, 
we're not going into May for a May meeting.  
Obviously, the first Monday in May, being a bank 
holiday, then it would mean it would go too far into 
May, and it is, we have a number of issues we need 
to get through on the 29th, so we will have two 
meetings in April one the first, the following then 
on the 29th, no meet financial May, OK.  All right.  
Give people a free run in the election then.  No 
meetings then, right.  OK. 

And protocol meeting now.  Thank you very much.  
And there's a presentation of the healthy plan in 
a 5.15pm. 
  
