1 
 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 29th APRIL 2019 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
J Sinnamon 
J Sinnamon 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
NON-VERBATIM TRANSCRIPT OF ORDINARY MEETING HELD AT WICKLOW 
COUNTY COUNCIL ON MONDAY, APRIL 29TH 2019:  
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Members, can I have your attention please. 
Certainly on behalf of all of the members I would like to 
welcome everyone here to the chamber today. Particularly 
the climate change people and also the relations of the 
members that are retiring, I think, they all arrived today 
to make sure we are going to do this and don't change our 
mind. Anyway, the first item on the agenda is votes of 
sympathy. In regard to, I propose a vote of sympathy for 
Triona Irving, who is a member of the Municipal authorities 
in Bray on the death of her brother last week. Sorry, 
Councillor Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE: The Kinsella family, on the death of her 
mother, Eileen Kinsella.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: On the death of Peter Byrne, who died in a 
tragic accident last week.  
>>: I like to propose a vote of vote for a local man, I 
would also like to express my condolences for the deaths 
and slaughter in Sri Lanka, where two Catholic churches 
were blown out and one Protestant church blown out with 
more than 200 deaths.  
CLLR RUTTLE: I would like to propose a vote of sympathy to 
the sister-in-law of my predecessor, Jimmy Miley.  
ADMINISTRATOR: For Violet Williams, she was a member of 
Wicklow County Tourism for a long number of years. Our 
former colleague, Sean Byrne, a retired plumber who served 
in the Arklow office. Book of Condolences on the death of 

3 
 
Lyra McKee and the Sri Lanka attacks have also been opened 
and are online.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor BEHAN.  
CLLR BEHAN: Just to propose a sympathy to John O'Brien who 
was a guitarist in Bagatelle originally from Bray. So 
Bagatelle was a group that were very much associated with 
Bray and south county Dublin.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, Mary Kavanagh.  
CLLR KAVANAGH: I want to propose a vote of sympathy to the 
family of Lyra McKee.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I think we stand, peace. Sorry, Miriam 
Murphy, did you want to come in then?   
CLLR MURPHY: I wanted to acknowledge the Special Olympics, 
I was represented and I think they did astonishing work and 
I think they should be acknowledged and I know I spoke to 
you, but I just wanted to highlight it that the medals they 
brought home to Wicklow was way beyond expectation and 
their ability, not their disability needs to be 
acknowledged.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I think there is a recommendation from the 
protocol committee that that will be acknowledged by the 
next Council. In regard to the agenda could I have 
confirmed the ordinary meeting of Wicklow County Council on 
the 1st of April proposed and seconded.  
>>: Proposed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: And Nicola Lawless and seconded. Now, I am 
going do the disposals first and if there is agreement, 
that because of the considerable amount of people here, the 
climate change, which the presentation on climate change 
which is number 13 on the agenda, with people's permission 
here I intend to move that up after we do the disposals 
here and to take that with the Notice of Motion from the 

4 
 
Greystones Municipal District as well. I am going to take 
those together if there is agreement. I don't want to have 
a lot of people around for a long time. If that is agreed?  
Agreed. Okay, I will do the disposals first and item number 
2.  
ADMINISTRATOR: So to consider the 5 plots of land and land 
situated to west side of Mill Road, can I have a proposer?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I want to propose the disposal of the fee 
simple and it will result in a great opportunity in Arklow 
so it gives me great pleasure to propose it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can I have a seconder for that?  Is that 
agreed?  Agreed, okay. Item number 3.  
ADMINISTRATOR: So consider disposal of portion of land in 
0047 hectares comprised in folios WW12328 and WW2803F and 
WW4484 to Rathnew to Rathnew, First Floor Block 1, as per 
notice previously circulated.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Snell.  
CLLR SNELL: I would like to propose this. It's going to 
deliver 88 family homes through an approved housing body 
for the people on the housing list.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Could I have a seconder for that. Seconder, 
Councillor.  
ADMINISTRATOR: So consider disposal of part of the interest 
on WW5279BF to Rossa Murray and Deirdre Murray as per 
notice previously circulated.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Both 4 and 5 are together. This was a typo 
in the last, where we approved it and we got the numbers 
mixed up, so it's just to regularise it from the legal 
perspective. I want to propose this, will I have a 
seconder?   
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Yes.  

5 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Seconded Councillor O'Brien. Number 5 as 
well.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposed by councillor Vance agreed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: 6.  
ADMINISTRATOR: So consider the disposal of properties known 
as 41 Seafield to Ms Karen Murphy, the legal notice.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposed, seconded John Snell. That agreed 
again. Grand, okay. We are on to item number 13. We 
received a presentation on the draft climate adaptation. We 
are also taking a proposal on the Municipal district in 
Greystones as well. Director of planning, Sean Quirke.  
SEAN QUIRKE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, and members, happy 
to introduce the item on the Climate Adaptation Strategy, 
which appropriately has been moved up the agenda and it's 
moved up the agenda everywhere nationally and 
internationally and that has to be a good thing for us all. 
Our Climate Adaptation Strategy has been prepared in 
conjunction with the climate adaptation regional office, 
the CARO. There are 17 local authorities working with the 
CARO to produce their own Climate Adaptation Strategies. 
There are commonalities between, obviously between the 
local authorities, because we won't solve the crisis on our 
own, it has to be co-ordinated and a national effort. So 
there are particular items which are obviously local to 
Wicklow and Jim Callery, who will introduce the strategy to 
you will go through these. It's not just a strategy, there 
are action, included in it as well, there are 61 actions 
for Wicklow County Council to address, some of those are 
budgeted, some are not budgeted. So it will be a challenge 
for us from a financial point of view also. This strategy 
has been considered already by the SPC and, who recommended 
that it be brought forward to the full council for placing 

6 
 
on public display and for submissions from the public, so 
that, we hope to do that in the next week or so, subject to 
your approval and we must have the Climate Adaptation 
Strategy adopted by the 30th of September. So the timeframe 
has been quite tight for us. So it will be the new council 
that will formally adopt the strategy, but hopefully, 
subject to your approval today it will be this council that 
resolves to put it on public display. So I will ask Jim to 
maybe go through the strategy now, thank, Jim.  
JIM CALLERY: Okay, thank you for having me here today to do 
the presentation on the Climate Adaptation Strategy. It is 
about how we are going to adapt our process, policies and 
procedures here in Wicklow County Council to protect 
ourselves from some of the harm and some of the risk we 
know is coming down our way with climate change. How do we 
plan our activities to make sure that we are more 
resilient? That is the whole focus of this strategy and we 
are how we are going to build stronger more resilient 
county that can deal with the challenge that is coming our 
way.  
 
So, adaptation, it is about how we are adapting, how we 
avoid the harm and exploit as well, potential opportunities 
that may come from climate change. There is often a lot of 
focus on what the negative impacts are and we do know there 
is more likely to be more negative impact from climate 
change than any positive. There may be some positive 
benefits and opportunities that we can work as well. So the 
plan can look at both and identify actions that can help us 
to see the harm and the opportunities coming our way in the 
coming decades.  
 

7 
 
Just to start off with, what is climate adaptation?  When 
it comes to climate action we talk about adapting to 
climate change, but also mitigating or preventing climate 
change, the two distinct areas that we need to focus on and 
need to work on. So the mitigation is about how we present 
climate change, how we reduce our carbon emissions, how we 
reduce our consumption and reduce the level of change 
incurring in our climate. Adaptation is about how we learn 
to live with what is coming our way. So we are dividing it 
into two distinct areas, mitigation and adaptation and the 
focus of this strategy is very much on adaptation.  
 
There are certain measures which will help us in both ways 
which can both mitigate and help us adapt, so for example, 
something like tree planting can be used to attenuate the 
risk of flood and be absorbing the carbon emissions so. 
Will is some crossover in terms of climate action and this 
strategy will be largely focussed on adaptation.  
So, just to give some examples, of the two types of 
measures. An example mitigation would be to install solar 
panels to generate renewable electricity and reduce carbon 
emissions and that is a project that has been considered as 
you will be aware, by Wicklow County Council, to install 
photo tele thick panels in the car park to allow us to 
reduce our energy consumption in the county buildings. An 
example of adaptation is looking forward to projections and 
change in our climate. We may be able to reduce the 
frequency of gritting as the temperatures increase and we 
get warmer temperatures. We know with climate change it 
does bring risk, one is more intense weather events we need 
to be planning for events like Storm Emma which occurred 
last year in March 2018, which was quite a challenge for 

8 
 
all of the services of Wicklow County Council and for every 
community across the county.  
So, we need to prepare for events like that and that is 
what the adaptation is about, how we change our practices 
to make sure that we are reducing the risk and harms going 
forward. Just before we get into the further adaptation 
strategy, I just want to show you a little diagram, a map 
of the globe, it's looking at temperatures between 1880 and 
2017 and it shows how our temperature has been changing 
over time, so we are going to run this, I hope it will work 
for me, and it will show how temperatures have changed over 
time, deviating from the mean temperatures and you see 
before it gets started there, there is a range of colours, 
but it's mostly light blue and light yellow and that means 
that there will be very little deviation from the median 
temperature back in 1880. You will see there is a blue 
patch up the top, so that is a cold spell that occurred 
that year. There is a red and bright orange patch in West 
Africa, over towards Senegal, they had a particularly hot 
year back in 1880 and that is something that occurs 
naturally. We always get natural variation in our climate. 
We are always going to see that, but what we are interested 
in here is the human induced change in climate that is 
happening. I hope this, when we play it will demonstrate 
that our planet is changing and the planet is heating up 
over time.  
So, it runs between 1880 and 2017 and watch how the colour 
changes away from the light blues and light yellows in 
stronger colours showing clearer, stronger deviation away 
from the mean temperatures and in particular pay attention 
to what is happening in the northern latitudes up near the 
North Pole. You should see interesting developments there. 

9 
 
So you can see temperatures are changing over time, not 
much variation to start off with. Has that stopped or 
frozen?  I think it's freezing up on me here. That is not 
going to work. What it would have shown if I had been able 
to get it work is that you would have seen stronger red 
colours appearing the closer we got to 2017, the more the 
temperature was deviating away from the norm and particular 
it was deviated in a very positive way with higher 
temperatures occurring, particularly in the northern 
latitudes over the poles, we saw very strong warming trends 
occurring over the last century.  
With relation to Ireland what has been happening with our 
climate, we all know we have a climate and one year we 
might get a summer like last year and another year a wash 
out. That is part of the normal variation, but we do have a 
variable climate in Ireland, but there have been trends 
observed in changing climate and when we talk about 
changing climate we are talking about what is happening 
over decades which don't compare one year to the last year, 
we don't say this year was a warm year so that proves that 
climate change is happening. We are looking at the 
long-term trends over decades to see how things are 
changing and what has been observed looking at the climate 
data for Ireland over the last four decades, temperature 
are rising, there is no doubt about that, they are rising 
across all seasons, the timing and spatial distribution of 
precipitation, which is rain, sleet and snow is also 
changing, we have observed that sea levels are rising and 
we have noticed that the frequency and the intensity, so 
intensity of weather events are changing. What it means by 
intensity is we are having stronger, we are having stronger 
storms and stronger rainfall events, so that is the 

10 
 
intensity changing over time.  
Looking forward, between now and 2050 based on what we had 
observed and the climactic models that are used to look at 
how climate change will affect us so it's a combination of 
what the trends that are already in situ are happening and 
what the models are telling us. We are expect doing see 
mean temperatures increase between 1 and 1.6 degrees 
Celsius. In the east of the country will see the largest 
increase, 1.5 is the target, we want to keep climate change 
below 1.5 so already the models and trends are telling us 
we will hit 1.6 degrees change in climate. We are seeing 
particular warming in the extreme. So what that means is in 
winter and in summer that is where we are seeing the 
strongest change in temperatures occurring, so some are 
daytime temperatures and we are expected to see an increase 
in average summer daytime temperature of 2.6 degrees. Lower 
winter night-time temperatures we are expected to see an 
increase of 3 degrees Celsius, so frost-free days are 
likely to increase and the frequency of days in which we 
will have icy weather will decrease significantly, up to 
75% reduction in the amount of icy days and 50% reduction 
in frosty days going forward.  
We are also expecting to see an increased frequency of heat 
waves. In terms of precipitation and maybe rainfall, we are 
expecting to see lower rainfall in the spring/summer 
months, going forward to 2050, but linked to that we are 
expecting to see the number of extended dry periods 
extending, so five consecutive days of no rainfall, unusual 
enough in Ireland in general, but we are expecting to see 
increased dry spells occurring, that is of significance 
here in the east, with relation to water supply. We are 
also expecting to see the frequency of heavy precipitation 

11 
 
events increasing during winter.  
So that brings with it the risk of flooding, how do we deal 
with that heavier rainfall that we are seeing going forward 
and we are also expecting that this change, both in the 
summer months and the winter months, in precipitation will 
have an effect on our rivers, on the hydrology. So in terms 
of hydrology, we are expecting to see flow in our rivers 
decrease in the summer months but during the winter months 
we are expecting to see increased flow in our rivers and 
that will bring with it the risk of increased river 
flooding in the winter. We are also expecting that fresh 
water temperatures and soil temperatures, their increases 
will match what is happening with the air temperatures. We 
are expecting to see an increased frequency of extreme 
rainfall events in winter and an increased frequency of 
extreme wind storms in the winter months.  
 
Overall the frequency of storms annually will decrease, but 
where the storms happening they will be more intense. It is 
the more intense events that cause the damage and harm so 
that is what we need to keep an eye on, it's not the number 
of storms we are getting, it's how intense and strong that 
they are. In terms of chronology, which means plant growth, 
we are expecting a longer growing season, which in many 
ways will be a positive benefit for agriculture in the 
county. Spring is occurring earlier in the year and that is 
likely to continue and autumn arriving later. That can have 
positives for agriculture, but it's also having an impact 
on biodiversity and many species are getting out of sync 
with the other species they have relationships, that is 
basically what they are eating so. If a bird is nesting at 
a certain time of the year and it's food supply isn't ready 

12 
 
that can have a significant impact on the chicks in the 
nest. So changing in the season will have an impact on 
biodiversity as well. Why do we need to develop this 
strategy now?  First of all under the climate change low 
carbon development act, all local authorities and a variety 
of sectors are required to produce climate change action 
plans going forward.  
 
As Sean mentioned, we are in a region which has 17 local 
authorities working together to develop our strategy, there 
is 30 strategies at the same stage as ourselves around the 
country, being developed and processed at the moment. The 
Dublin local authorities have a slightly late, their 
climate action strategies went out about a month ago, but 
most of the local authorities are at the same stage as 
ourselves, putting together their climate strategies now 
and also very importantly the sectoral strategies are also 
being developed and present.  
That is something that will influence our work, because 
many of the sectoral reports will cross relate with our 
strategies and we will need to work together, so we will 
need to work together with partners like the OPW, the 
National Parks and Wildlife Service, Irish Rail, the ESB 
and link up our strategies and make sure that we are all 
working together to adapt to climate change. So the purpose 
of the strategy is to ensure that we have an understanding 
first of all of what the risks are, where are we vulnerable 
to climate change, how is it going to have an impact on us 
and then once we know how it's impacting on us we can start 
to develop actions that will help us to become more 
resilient and to plan and to take a proactive role in 
changing our policies and procedures to adapt to these 

13 
 
potential risks or vulnerabilities.  
So, essentially we are going to be trying to ensure that 
climate adaptation comes in mainstream into all of our 
activities across the organisation and is fully integrated 
in all of our operations and functions across every service 
in Wicklow County Council because climate change is 
something that is going to impact on all of our services. 
Some services will be more impacted than others but every 
service will be impacted in some way or another. The 
strategy has six chapters, the first one is an introduction 
and background to climate action and climate adaptation. 
This second chapter looked a bit closer in the region, the 
17 local authorities, what are the commonalities in terms 
of the challenges we face across this region and also it's 
a bit more local, what are the things we need to take 
account of here in county Wicklow, what trends in weather 
at a very local level will impact on us and our weather 
will be very distinct here to other counties, we have the 
uplands which has an impact on our weather and even in the 
west and east we see a difference in the weather, so we 
need with climate action to need to get down to that local 
level and understand what is happening in our weather here 
at local level.  
 
Chapter 3 looks at the baseline assessment of our climate, 
so we have tried to identify where we are vulnerable and 
how we identify where we are vulnerable is we look at some 
of the past weather events that have had an impact on our 
service. Try to assess how they have impacted our services 
and what does that tell us going forward in terms of how 
it's going to impact on our service, when we have similar 
weather events and possibly more severe weather events. So 

14 
 
we are learning from what has happened in the past with 
relation to that, how we have impacted us and what we have 
to do to react to them. This leads on to identifying our 
climate risks going forward, so we are looking at the 
projected changes in climate out to 2050 and we are looking 
at our vulnerabilities, with relation to different types of 
weather scenarios and how they are likely to change over 
the next few decades and whether the risk is going to get 
stronger, or not and adapt accordingly.  
Chapter 5, as mentioned we are developing a range of 61 
actions that have been identified that we can take to make 
our operations and governance stronger and more able to 
adapt to the changes, so chapter 5 outlines what those 
actions will be and then chapter 6 looks at how we 
implement the plan, no time in having this strategy 
written, we are looking at how we are going to put it into 
action, how we are going to monitor progress and evaluate 
how we are performing with relation to the strategy going 
forward. So up here I have put up an example of one of the 
baseline assessments, so we are looking at heat waves and 
droughts, so we are looking at the type of weather we would 
have expected on that.  
 
What has happened in the past and how we have responded?  
So the first one up there under heat waves, more call outs 
for emergency services and what the exposure to sensitivity 
was, we had an increase in fires last year in the heat 
wave, 2018. A bit more on this one later, but it was 
affecting the upland areas of gorse, forest and fog and how 
we responded was to call out the emergency services. We 
tried to give this a risk score in terms of the impact it's 
had on our services. With five being as a score being 

15 
 
catastrophic, you will be looking at total failure in 
services, you will be looking at permanent environmental 
damage, you would be looking at serious loss of life and 
multiple injuries. Down to level 3 you are down to moderate 
risk, you are looking at temporary impact on the 
environment, you are looking at a temporary impact on our 
service delivery, you are looking at some cost involved in 
tackling that, you are looking at a slight risk of injury 
involved and down to 1 where there is almost no risk 
involved, so we are scoring the impacts, what is the level 
of impact, so this was given a score of 3, it was a 
moderate risk and it did some very significant damage to 
some habitats which would take a year or two for those 
habitats to recover. We are looking at who is involved, who 
is working with us, who are our partners in tackling issues 
like that.  
 
So, for this one with the fires, the National Parks and 
Wildlife Service would be an important part, An Coillte, 
DART, with the closure of the railway and the Gardaí. So we 
are trying to identify who are the key partners in relation 
to the impacts. So there is a full suite of impacts that 
were observed during the heat wave last summer and we are 
trying to document those impacts and learn from what 
happened and what impact it had on our services last year. 
We do that for all of the different weather events and we 
do it for rainfall, when we have significant rainfall 
causing flood, what impact that had on our services, 
storms, rainfall and snowfall and we are learning from what 
happened during the past.  
Some of the significant weather events we would all be 
aware of have happened in the year in the county and the 

16 
 
damage that was associated with them. We had Hurricane 
Charley, there was a lot of infrastructural damage county 
wide and there was coastal erosion that occurred as a 
result of that event. Storm Barney in 2015 caused 
widespread power-loss in the county. It damaged the roof in 
County Wicklow and the Rathnew GAA. Storm Ophelia, October 
2017, did significant damage, coastal erosion in the 
Borough and there was a high point of damage to the 
Wexford-Dublin rail line with the erosion coming close to 
the line in that instance. Storm Emma last year caused 
major disruption to businesses, we had loss of water supply 
in some cases, the emergency services had difficulty 
getting out and the civil defence had to be called in to 
help people get to medical services and there were power 
cuts county-wide.  
 
The heat wave last summer, we are talking high temperature, 
the heat wave and drought that resulted, we had a hosepipe 
ban from July-September and we had a significant number of 
fires throughout the county. Just looking in a bit more 
detail at some of these, we are trying to get some of the 
costs and the information back on the cost, that is 
important, we need to think about how much these weather 
events are costing us and how much they are likely to 
impact on our services going forward. The first figure I 
have up there is it's UK and Ireland, so it's giving a 
broader picture for the winter storms of 2015 to 2016. We 
had Barney which everyone is familiar with, cost 198 
million, Desmond which came next a few weeks later, 907 
million. Eva which came after Christmas, December 2015, 
this surprised me when I was looking at the data. 2.2 
billion.  

17 
 
That was what the big costs were in the UK and Ireland. I 
think Barney did more damage in county Wicklow, but across 
Britain and Ireland it was Eva who did the damage. That was 
due to the land was saturated at that point with water and 
it couldn't absorb any more rainfall and Eva brought 
significant rainfall and there was nowhere for it to go. It 
caused huge flooding, I am sure you will remember the 
flooding in the Shannon region and parts of England. Then 
we have Frank finishing up at the end of December, causing 
310 million worth of damage. You can see they are not small 
sums. Closer to home here in Wicklow what were these storms 
doing to us in Wicklow?  Well, the Wicklow swimming pool 
roof which came off cost 190,000. The damage done to roads, 
drains and culverts, was estimated to cost €1.3 million, 
housing reported €38,000 worth of damage, the fire crews 
spend 24,000 dealing with storm-related issues and down to 
something as small as the Wicklow Library which only cost 
€1,000, but lots of small events like that, and the impact 
it's having on services at local level.  
So those storms had a significant affect here in Wicklow. 
There was also damage done to the weir in Ashford and 
coastal erosion in the Brittas Bay. Storm Emma, last year, 
Wicklow County Council had a certified expenditure of 
€677,830. It's estimated that the cost of repairs to roads 
was just under 6 million and this was particularly in the 
west of the county and the south of a county. A lot of the 
roads were badly damaged during the snow. Fire services 
dealt with 21 incidents during those few days, there were 
several homes flooded in Wicklow town and also erosion 
occurring on the coast, you can see the building has been, 
the erosion has taken away a lot of the foundations of it 
and any of you who live on the coast will probably be aware 

18 
 
last year with Storm Emma, the amount of plastic that 
washed up on our beaches, as a result of Storm Emma, there 
was even debris from a marina, and there was a lot of 
effort put in place, with all of that washed up on our 
shores.  
 
There was also extra resource for dealing with the 
homeless, providing them with the night-time shelter, but 
you also have to consider daytime shelter for the homeless. 
Last year we all enjoyed the good weather, but it did have 
a significant impact on our services, particularly the fire 
services and I have put up some data there, which shows 
call outs and their cost from last year. April was a pretty 
typical month last year, they had 90 call outs for fires 
during the month of April and that was fairly typical, that 
cost about 12,500. We expect to see some fires in the 
spring months, agricultural land has been cleared of gorse, 
and we expect to get calls, we don't expect to get it in 
summer months, but what we are seeing is the number of 
fires increasing into the summer months. May we had more 
than twice than was expected and June was totally 
unprecedented, there were 132 call outs in the month of 
June last summer. That cost 84,000.  
 
It's estimated that 170,000 extra was spent dealing with 
those fires last summer. There was one school evacuated and 
several homes, so communities were at risk. On a more 
positive note a lot of our tourist venues were much busier 
during the summer month last summer, that did create 
challenges and one of them was dealing with the lit other 
left on those beaches. You can see the pictures of the 
litter piled up, that was one day clean-up of what was left 

19 
 
behind on Brittas Bay and there were issues with parking in 
some of the more popular sites throughout the county. So 
after we have looked at the impact of past weather events 
we try to... following on, looking at the weather events we 
try to look at the future going out to 2050 whether those 
risks are going to increase, which in many cases they are 
and how much and we are using a system of marking to try 
and identify which ones were most vulnerable to, or likely 
to have most impact, so the higher the score moving from 
yellow through to orange into red and where we see arrows 
coming in in the red area it's one that we need to be 
particularly concerned, so we are concerned with relation 
to damage, to habitats by fires going forward into 2015. So 
we are using that data to predict where do we need to 
develop our actions going forward and we are developing our 
actions under different themes, we are looking at our 
governance and business operation.  
 
The infrastructure that Wicklow County Council is 
responsible for providing and maintaining, we are looking 
at land use and planning development, we are looking at the 
drainage and flood management, we are looking at natural 
resources throughout the county and how we are protecting 
those and we are looking at our communities, how they are 
protecting the wellbeing of our communities going forward. 
Then we are developing actions based on that, across these 
different themes and how we are going to respond and ensure 
that we deliver resilient services going forward.  
So we are looking at things like setting up a climate 
action Steering Group, we are looking at incorporating 
climate action into the county development plan and into 
the corporate development plan, we are looking at ensuring 

20 
 
that climate action is something that will be discussed at 
management team meetings going forward. I am just going to 
try and rush through this, I know I have taken more time 
than planned. We are looking at actions across a range of 
different sectors. Where we are in the process at the 
moment, we have been working for the last few months on 
developing the strategy and I said at the start, we have 
already presented it to the SPC and we are now presenting 
it to yourselves for consideration, we are hoping to put 
the plan out to public consultation during May and we hope 
to have the plan ready to come back to the council for 
approval in September, so the schedule is quite tight. We 
need to have the plan strategy adopted for September, but 
that is where we are in the timeline.  
 
Just before I finish up, one thing that did come in there 
towards the end of last week, there are 30 local 
authorities also at the same place as ourselves getting 
their strategies finalised and getting them ready for 
public consultation and we have been working with those 
local authorities, getting feedback from them on where 
their plans are, one thing that is coming up in many of the 
plans is many of them are looking at mitigation than was 
originally planned.  
 
The strategy is supposed to be about adaptation, that is 
the statutory requirement and it is important to separate 
those two areas and have a distinct focus on that 
adaptation, but good practice seems to include some 
information on mitigation, so we are looking at putting 
something in referring a little bit more to mitigation in 
the final document than is in the draft that is before you 

21 
 
and how we hope to do this is put some information in the 
appendix, about the measures we are undertaking in Wicklow 
County Council already on mitigation, so how we are looking 
at energy and performance and we will add that into the 
document we are already working on. Okay, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Jim, thank you very much for the, you can 
feel the enthusiasm for this particular subject. Thank you 
very much for that. Now, there is a host of people who want 
to come in. I will ask for brief comments and no 
repetition. So Councillor Fortune is the first one in.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Will I deal with the Notice of Motion?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: You can deal with it, if you want to propose 
that, fine.  
CLLR FORTUNE: First of all, can I say thanks to Jim and 
Sean for the presentation and Jim, in his usual style, very 
detailed, I would have to say also that generally speaking 
we have a very good environmental department I think here 
in Wicklow County Council, so and Jim kind of, I suppose 
reflects what that actually is, it was interesting that, as 
you got into your presentation that it was like, when you 
talk about the storms it was like a contrary family, if you 
go over the period with it.  
 
Obviously the implications facing us and our cost and 
obviously the objectives and the actions you are talking 
about will be interesting when you start to roll out those, 
obviously the county development plan and the corporate 
plan are going to play a serious role in that. Just before 
the meeting we were outside talking to the group, I must 
say the turnout in the chamber today is probably the 
biggest we have in a number of years, I think the last time 
we had a crowd like this in the chamber we were talking 

22 
 
about illegal dump, if I remember correctly. But we were 
talking outside to some of the people and the kids were 
asking questions. One of the questions I was asked was why 
has it taken us so long to act on this?  You get a question 
like that you say what do I say to that?  It's difficult to 
give an answer. The answer I made to the chap was that 
yeah, it's taken a long time, but the initiative has been 
taken by the, primarily by the school children and the 
action they took, I think that has provoked and poked 
everyone in the right direction.  
 
As I was saying, that you were going to do the presentation 
here this afternoon that was very important and that what 
should happen, resulting from this is that the 
presentation, which is 101 pages long, the draft policy 
should go out then to the groups and to the school children 
and they can look at that and submit then what they think 
about it and what they can add to it and everything else 
and dialogue with the local authority on it that is all 
very positive. The Notice of Motion we put forward was in 
support of all of that in support of that. Basically we are 
saying that Wicklow County Council acknowledge and support 
the action by the school children in Bray, Arklow, Dublin 
and around the country, Wicklow County Council have 
listened to them and demand that all act to ensure that 
young people have a liveable future in Wicklow and in 
Ireland on the planet in general. Wicklow County Council 
agree with the evidence of emergency is overwhelming from 
the various bodies that are talking about that to us that 
Wicklow County Council agree that the world's most liveable 
community must step up and show visible leadership. Wicklow 
has done that.  

23 
 
We have declared a climate emergency for Wicklow, publish a 
climate action plan, declare a biodiversity action plan for 
Wicklow, update and publish a biodiversity action plan and 
report regularly on progress and action plans and to be 
fair, Jim, what you have outlined to us today is indicating 
that is the way we are going to go, but I think with 
everyone's involvement to make sure it happens and it 
doesn't just become a plan that sits on a shelf that it is 
real and live and happens. So I suppose the momentum has 
started so I am proposing that an behalf of the district 
and I am sure the others may talk on it, if I may. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Please, I have given you a bit of latitude 
now, please.  
CLLR FORTUNE: It's unusual for me to talk so long.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: It's the last day, don't take advantage.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I would never do that to you, chairman. We 
have two students in the chamber today Shona Edge and Molly 
Gordon, they are two climate change activists from 
Greystones. They and the students in Templecarrig have been 
doing tremendous work, the reason I wanted to highlight is 
that Molly and Shona have recently been in making 
presentations to the Joint Oireachtas Committee on climate 
action. So I invited them here today to see how we behave 
in the chamber and what happens at a meeting. But.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: A pity we couldn't take make it more 
exciting.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Maybe we will before the meeting is over. The 
other thing was for them to listen to the plan that Sean 
and Jim were putting before us today so they've can listen 
to us at first hand and take it away and go through it with 
the rest of the students and tell us what they like and 
don't like. Just two quick quotes chairman, and then I will 

24 
 
wrap up. Basically they are delighted to be here and Shona 
was commenting with their close relationships, the local 
authorities can play a key role in addressing climate 
change, they can react faster than many global agencies. 
Molly's view is that the council and local authorities have 
a critical role to play in using their local knowledge of 
the environment and working in partnership to make the 
community a safer place to come. With that, two 17-year-old 
girls with that kind of initiative and push is very good. I 
would like to finish with giving the girls a round of 
applause for the achievement in the Oireachtas talking 
about that. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Well done, girls. Councillor Matthews, I 
know you are going to be brief.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: I don't know where to start.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Finish as quickly awes can. I am delighted 
to see a document like this, it's the reason I got involved 
in local government was to have proper environmental 
protection and to see a document coming on the agenda means 
it wasn't 20 years wasted on my behalf. I want to thank the 
chief for put it on. To give people hope, you might 
remember in the 80s we talked about a hole in the ozone 
layer and we took it on and we defeated it and that can be 
done with climate change as well, but we have been talking 
about it for 20 and 30 years with no action whatsoever and 
it started off as the greenhouse effect and people thought 
we were the loony green tree-huggers and then it went to 
global warming and people thought great, we need it to be 
warmer, but now we are in climate brokedown and emergency 
and I hope this isn't more words, that it needs to be 
followed by actions. I read this strategy document and it's 
101 pages and the first 92 pages describes what is climate 

25 
 
change and why and how it happened what is likely to happen 
and that is great for background reading but there is ten 
pages left in the document that talks about strategy. A lot 
of that isn't funded and a lot of it is aspirational, so 
while it gives me hope we have now produced a document like 
this, I am very disappointed that we don't see actual 
actions included in this. I appreciate it's a strategy 
document, we have loads of strategy documents.  
 
This is really an emergency, it doesn't matter what 
background you are from, it doesn't matter where you live, 
it doesn't matter your financial status or what political 
party you are part of, climate change is the most serious 
thing that is going to affect us, it's the most serious 
issue we discuss in this chamber and people have to realise 
that. It does give me a boost of confidence to see so many 
people coming out and especially young people, looking and 
demanding action on climate change. Now, what I want to ask 
is that support will remain there, when we start to 
implement policies to address climate change, because I 
have suggested policy changes here over the last five 
years, chairman and most of them were rejected because they 
were unpopular, because they were long-term beneficial, but 
short-term pain and people are going to have to realise 
that is going to come, if we are serious about taking on 
climate change that is going to have to happen and I ask 
the people to stay with us when we start to introduce those 
policies that are required and I ask every councillor of 
the new Council as well to be strong on this and take it 
on, seriously, that this is the most serious issue that is 
going to affect us. We have had 30 years of inaction and 
that is why we are facing ten years of serious action is 

26 
 
going to have to be taken if we are to take it on. The 
opening line in the Chief Executive's forward says, "this 
is a long battle." It's not a long battle, it's a very 
short battle, we only have a short amount of time, this 
isn't long-term. We have to take action on this now. I want 
at the thank the people who came down today and forcing 
councillors and politicians to take action, because we are 
the ones that set the policy and I ask for their ongoing 
support in this. Thank you, Cathaoirleach. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Miriam Murphy.  
CLLR MURPHY: I know you said not to repeat it, but I am 
going to get my last say here because I have been very 
quiet for five years. I would like to thank Jim and Sean as 
well, you know, we are listening here for many years and 
now it's here the discussion, at least, in putting the 
fractions of the action the budget and the education of the 
staff at all levels. And will it be a large cost, how many 
years will it take to even see a gleam of hope, but I will 
take the heat waves, what I am wondering is that whoever is 
lucky to sit here in the next five years that are formally 
put together from the Municipal District Members to 
network, so important. As the other previous speakers said, 
I suppose for the last 10 or 15 years we were worried about 
the climate change, it's here now and now it's probably a 
bit late, but at least we can go forward.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: It's not too late.  
CLLR MURPHY: Also that Jim has highlighted the national 
networks which I have never thought of before, how 
important it is, their big issues as well, we have here in 
the chamber behind us, the next generation and these are 
the future, these are the people that is going to be 
affected and on the last clip you showed, Jim, there was 

27 
 
six pointers, the last one being the community and 
wellbeing. I would put that up there as number one because 
it's the whole link, so I think that, number six should be 
number one and thank you very much for the people that has 
brought this here today.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, Miriam. Councillor Gerry Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you for this and in the meantime it will 
go out for public display and I will welcome submissions 
from the public, I am sure there be plenty. Just as a 
matter of interest, watching in Reeling in the Years during 
the week there was a feature on this topic and it explained 
the urgency we are facing with global warming. That was in 
2006 and I know people like David Attenborough have been 
talking about this for 30 years now, but globally we face, 
Governments face challenges, big businesses face challenge 
in reducing their carbon footprint, but shamefully Ireland 
we haven't been meeting our targets and I think we are 
bottom of the pile in EU terms, but look on a more positive 
note we had the Government all party committee report 
published recently and we are hoping that this will provide 
a road map for a more sustainable future.  
 
We know that our dependence on fossil fuel and other such 
products has to change and we have to look at alternatives 
such as wind, solar, biofuels as alternatives. Big business 
has a role, but we all have a responsibility in our own 
personal habits and our food consumption and the way we 
recycle and reduce our waste, our choices in transport, 
insulation of our homes, the way we use the internet, all 
of these, it all has a combined positive effect if we react 
in the right manner. Can I finish on a positive note? I 
want to complement the staff, Jim mentioned the weather 

28 
 
events we have faced in the last number of year, we want to 
complement the fire service, the civil defence and the 
outdoor staff for their responses to those events, they 
were exemplary and I want to thank them.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Walsh, will you second what 
Councillor Fortune has said?   
CLLR WALSH: I would certainly do that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You would second that. Councillor Whitmore.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you very much, chair. Thank you very 
much, chair and thank you to Jim for the presentation. I 
would also like to say thank you to everyone in the gallery 
for coming down today and in particular for the students 
and the youth. I think it's safe to say you have spoken 
loud and clear and we are listening. It is now up to us to 
be the leadership that you are looking for, because this 
isn't an issue that is just popped up, it has been ongoing 
for a long, long number of years and we have not been 
listening. So now, that, we do have to change how we deal 
with this and actually start being proactive and getting 
things done. There is a lot of headlines over the years and 
even recently, 60% species loss, all of these headlines are 
coming at us and I think sometimes we can be immune to 
them. They seem a bit abstract and they are happening 
somewhere else, but each and every one of us around this 
chamber will remember years ago you would go out and see 
the curlew, the lapwing, there was flies over your 
windscreen, there was sticky things hacking out of the 
ceiling in every country and we don't have that anymore. 
While some people might be waiting for some big chaotic 
event to happen, it's not going to happen, it is going to 
be slow and it is happening now.  
 

29 
 
So, we need to start acting and we need to be very 
decisive. I spoke to Sean and Ben outside, two students I 
think from the Gaelscoil, one of them said to me why can't 
you just act, why is it taking so long?  What is the 
problem, why can't you just do it?  And they are right, we 
need to be a bit blacker and whiter with this issue and 
stop looking at the nuances. Unless we get this right we 
are going to fundamentally undermine every single 
ecological and biological structure in our society and so 
we need to deal with it, it's not something we can put on 
the long finger. I am really pleased to see the Climate 
Change Adaptation Plan and I think we need to look at it, 
but also biodiversity, they are linked we will not be able 
to look at climate change unless we look at our natural 
assets and ensure that the biodiversity loss we are seeing 
across the country is stopped. That will mean us, as a 
County Council, I believe, getting a lot more active in 
ensuring that our natural assets are being protected. I 
think we are going to have to look and appreciate some 
areas for just being there, not put any additional pressure 
on them and not looking to put recreation or tourism or 
business interest ahead of the value that that natural area 
has in its own right. I think that might be a challenge to 
us, actually, but it is something that we are going to have 
to look at. Restoring our environment is critical to 
addressing this climate change and that means looking at 
our forests, wetlands, peat bogs, all of that has to be 
part of the plan. What I found very welcoming in the 
document was the language that was used in the foreword, 
because you spoke about involving and listening to the 
youth of Wicklow, which I think is really important, 
because it's not our future that we are looking at, it's 

30 
 
their future and also the fact that you spoke about Wicklow 
County Council taking a lead on this. That is really 
important and it's important that we are strong. There is a 
few areas I think within the document that we need to look 
at, so including biodiversity, looking at the 
recommendations of the Joint Committee on Climate Action, I 
do believe we need to look at that and incorporate that 
into the plan. We made targets, there needs to be funding 
and grants associated with this, essentially every decision 
we make as a County Council should be guided and should 
take into consideration the environmental climate change 
and biodiversity impacts of that decision. I would like to 
see and I think, we have a biodiversity plan, but it was 
incorporated into the heritage plan, that needs to.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor, finish up shortly.  
CLLR WHITMORE: We need a climate change officer to deal 
with this and I would propose that any implementation 
committee, whether it's the SPG that is looking at it, that 
we would have a representative from Comhairle na nÓg on 
that, because this is very important to the students and to 
the youth, those are the ones who have been part this of 
this and I think they need to be part of the monitoring and 
implementation of the strategy. Thank you very much. 
APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Grainne McLoughlin.  
CLLR McLOUGHLIN: I will only be a few minutes. The bit that 
was most important was the bit we couldn't see in the 
video, to bring to life how bad things are, we all know 
about the storms and we do appreciate the costs involved, 
but I think when it's in colour, and it's getting redder 
that is when we really have to be concerned. There is one 
part in the objectives and listening to Stephen over there 

31 
 
saying 99% of it is information and 10% is implementation, 
so we do need to learn about this and I think we have 
learnt at this stage that it's this 10% that should go into 
a 90% document and the 10% is because we all know about it. 
The one part in the objective to ensure that the climate 
adaptation is mainstreamed into all activities and 
operations of the local authority and it then goes on with 
various actions, but the one action I think needs to be 
done immediately is appoint a climate action officer who 
has responsibility for climate related activity in the 
county and a minister for that area. That person has not 
been budgeted and it's not needed in the short-term, medium 
or long-term, it's needed now. APPLAUSE So what I am 
suggesting today is that Wicklow County Council would 
commit to putting the money in for that member of staff, 
who would be on the senior management team, he or she would 
also have an evaluating committee, so I don't like the word 
short, medium or long, I have been here for nine years and 
that is only short-term, so what does medium or long-term 
mean?  We need to have exact timeframes, when things are 
going to be done, how they are going to be done and who 
that is going to do that. We have done it with the LEPC 
plan, for the Local Economic Community Plan and I think it 
should be an action for today that we are going to appoint 
someone, he is going to have a team, every single 
department within Wicklow County Council liaises with that 
and can do nothing without the approval of that team and 
also on the monthly CE's report an action comes from that 
which explains exactly what is going on. So, we have seen 
over the years lots of things like this and they go up on 
shelves and I really don't believe Frank and whoever is 
chair and whoever is going to be here will do that. However 

32 
 
it has to be much more determined than other plans and Jim, 
I know you will be part of that team and I know that you 
are doing a great job, but you need more support to stop 
the amount of money that has to be spent and to stop the 
things that have happened in the past, you need a huge 
support service behind you and I wish I was going to be 
here to be giving it to you, but I have no doubt the people 
around here and the people in the gallery are going to give 
you that support if they can only get it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Well done. APPLAUSE Councillor Lawless.  
CLLR LAWLESS: Save the best until last, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I will let Councillor Mitchell in, it's just 
because the motion came from Greystones I gave you more 
time than the people coming along.  
CLLR LAWLESS: Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There is a time constraint on this, I don't 
want this to go on all day.  
CLLR LAWLESS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I will be fairly 
brief because a lot of the councillors have already said 
more or less what I was going to say myself. Jim and Sean, 
thank you very much for the presentation and the plan here 
today, but I suppose I really want to thank is actually the 
children, because I was in Greystones that day when we had 
the climate strike action that was on. Myself and 
councillor Gerry Walsh. We spoke to them and I suggested to 
them, give us your actions and give us what your demands of 
what you want for climate change, what with can we do as 
local Government. I think they should be very proud, they 
have given us a kick up the backside. A lot of us are 
sitting around here, we should have been discussing this a 
long time ago and it's taken young minds to come along here 
and give us the kick we needed. Well done to those children 

33 
 
to try and create a better future for themselves as well.  
 
The other thing is I would like to second Councillor 
Whitmore's proposal. About the Comhairle na nÓg having that 
on the SPC would be very valuable. We do need young people 
involved in our local politics anyway, even if it is under 
climate change or whatever it may be. So it's not going to 
be adopted until September, but I am afraid climate change 
doesn't wait. There is no time on it and I will be hoping 
that Wicklow County Council, regardless of waiting for the 
adaptation that you would start implementing some stuff 
now. Stuff that can be done, you don't need to wait for us 
councillors to say yes, please go ahead and help our 
environment, naturally the answer is yes, soy will be 
hoping that Wicklow would start and we have put in motions 
here, Sinn Fein, as well about the single use plastic here 
as well trying to reduce that down here in the building and 
obviously the carports as well with the solar power that 
was on the agenda as well. That is very welcome, all of 
those things are very welcome here. I suppose will I leave 
it with this.  I will be short.  
There was one sign that I saw a couple of children have 
that day down in Greystones when I spoke to them and it is 
there is no Planet B. I think that is very essential that 
we all remember that. We have only one planet and we need 
to make sure we look after it as best as we possibly can.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Mitchell.  
CLLR MITCHELL: I want to endorse what has been said before 
rather than repeat it, but councillor McLoughlin said about 
the implementation of the plan that has been prepared for 
the council I would agree with that, I think we need a 
greater emphasis on implementing what is there and the 

34 
 
concept of having early appointment of an officer who is 
going to kick the system into dealing with it, would be 
useful and important. Also, I think an important thing has 
been the Oireachtas joint committee report, where a number 
of political party, the majority have come together on a 
compromise and produced a document and we should look at 
implementing as much as possible of that, it will be very 
much Government policy for many parties and we should get 
that done. Thirdly just to congratulations the groups on 
raising this issue very publicly and making, demanding that 
things happen, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Oliver O'Brien. [INAUDIBLE DUE TO 
NOT SPEAKING INTO MIC].  
CLLR O O'BRIEN: The question has been asked why nothing has 
been done for 30 years, I read a statistic that 90% of the 
companies control 63% of the emissions on Planet Earth..  
You need to change the consumer mentality that business is 
pushing consumerism and consumerism is consuming the 
universe. It's you look at packaging for example, that is 
one of the huge things I take a tablet called Nexium 
sometimes, it comes, that tablet or size and they come in a 
tiny bottle, but the tiny bottle is packaged three or four 
times over, so that I was talking about the two day week 
and I was laughed off it, I guarantee, if you stopped the 
problems you would have the two day week, there wouldn't be 
half the packaging, I grew up in the 60s when everything 
was bottled and they were recycled again, that was, you 
could get 90% people who control 63% of it. I saw something 
on the forum recently there and there was a person in Bray 
saying is everything the Council does nowadays does have to 
have a business slant on it?   
 

35 
 
That was the problem they were facing. It has to be sorted 
out overnight, but unless we are prepared to see there is 
going to be jobs lost not gained, you look at people taking 
away the rubbish from your house, two bins go out every 
week and most of it is packaging, if the way we do business 
doesn't change immediately, I was disappointed that Jim was 
rushed, I thought he was coming to the, actions I would 
love to see what they were, I didn't get to read the 
document, I think that it would have been far more useful, 
people are not looking for plans or policies they are 
looking for action. They realise that it's only 2 degrees 
if the climate will get more worse. They are looking for 
immediate action, are we going to get that with the present 
structure?  That is my worry.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you very much. Mary Kavanagh, then 
Councillor Winters.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We are moving along nicely.  
CLLR KAVANAGH: Thank you to Jim and to Sean for the 
presentation. Like Councillor Matthews I read through the 
document and for the first 90 pages wondered where the 
action plan was, it was full of statistics, charts 
everything we needed to know about increasing climates, 
heat, drought, precipitation, you name it, it was there, 
but I was looking for the action plan. My own particular 
interest is in biodiversity and I am going to mention just 
five points that I would like to see the council commit to, 
it's very simple but it would really help the biodiversity 
in this county.  
 
Each one of the first four points are points that I have 
had to write to the council about, because they have been 
happening, so it's a fact. It's factual. Right, I would 

36 
 
love to see no further use of any pesticides containing 
glyphosates such as Roundup, because it is, it is killing 
our pollinators and we all know what will happen if our 
pollinators are driven off the planet, it will be goodbye 
to the human race as well.  
The second thing I would like to see and it has been 
implemented by Dun Laoghaire and Rathdown is no cutting of 
verges. They are a valuable food source, they provide seeds 
for our birds and when they are blooming they provide 
pollen for our pollinators to pollinate plants. I would 
like to see no felling of healthy trees. It has been 
happening all over the country, there are conspiracy 
theories that it's to do with 5G, I don't know, all I know 
is it is happening. Finally I would like to see and this I 
have had to report recently no hedge cutting during the 
nesting season.  
Apart from the fact that it's barbaric for the birds, there 
is no need for it, we know when the time, when the nesting 
season is, we know when the time that is allowed for 
hedge-cutting is. It can be planned in advance, there is 
absolutely no reason why it cannot be built into a calendar 
of works and done outside of that nesting season.  
Finally the Local Tidy Towns here have started a 
sustainable energy community initiative, they are having 
their second meeting this Wednesday and, like everything 
else, so much work is falling on voluntary groups and an 
ordinary citizens. I think our local authorities should be 
taking the lead in this and I would sincerely like to think 
that some members of the climate action change group will 
be in attendance so they can work in tandem with the Tidy 
Towns community who are doing tremendous work as it is, but 
it shouldn't fall on them to deal with a project as big as 

37 
 
climate change and finally just as an observation, we have, 
we are a country that is roughly the same size as Scotland, 
Scotland is ahead of its targets on climate change, we are 
to quote the Taoiseach, the lagards of Europe, why is this?   
There should be no reason why two countries of a similar 
size should be at opposite ends of the spectrum. Finally I 
would like to say that it's taken the youngest, Greta 
Thornburg, a 16-year-old Swedish girl and the oldest 
celebrity, David Attenborough to try and concentrate minds, 
we really should be ashamed of ourselves. So thank you very 
much. APPLAUSE  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Irene Winters, I have five left, a minute 
each, as John Bercow would say.  
CLLR WINTERS: No bother. Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  I agree 
with many of the comments of the, my fellow councillors. 
However, I really don't believe that it was just today that 
this Council discovered climate change and I look at some 
of the actions we have taken over the last five years and 
the five years prior to that and would think we have been 
making steps and maybe small steps, we need to take an 
awful lot more steps and we need to implement them quicker.  
 
The challenge for the new Council is they will have 
responsibility to ensure that all of the measures that are 
in that report are implemented and they are also 
implemented along with many others. Some of the measures 
are outlined in the report and some of the other measures 
that will need to be taken if we are to stop ourselves 
hitting the 1.6, 2 degree increase will not be universally 
popular. I would urge the new Council to look at them and 
say that we have to actually act in the common good for all 
of our citizens and that must prevail against small 

38 
 
interest groups and just small local communities. It will 
have to be a decision that is not just county-wide, but 
country wide. And I know everyone says it's not our future, 
well I actually hope to still be here in 20 years and not 
necessarily here, but I like to be still in county Wicklow 
and maybe in the 20 years after that, so I am not just 
doing it for the young people, I also want do it for 
myself, I want a nice, safe place to live for myself along 
with my nieces and nephews, so if I get re-elected I will 
be working to make sure that this Council implements 
everything that is in that report and a lot more. Thank 
you. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Dermot O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I absolutely 
support Councillor Whitmore's proposal that young people 
being on the Steering Group that is driving this forward. 
It's great to have them outside and they are making demands 
of us, but they should also be inside for every 
conversation and every decision that is made and similarly 
Grainne McLoughlin's suggestion that someone be the driver 
and be responsible for driving this forward. I am lucky I 
get to spend a lot of time with young people and feed off 
their energy and what I would say is to the people who came 
today, who are here on behalf of their children or their 
children, this is what it looks like when you hold us to 
account. This is what it looks like and this is what it 
sounds like, when councillors have to speak to you, because 
you here, so keep coming and keep making sure that you are 
listening to us, this you are in front of us, that you are 
making eye contact with whoever ends up in this chamber 
after the 24th of May. Keep making sure that you hold them 
to account for the decisions and the actions. Thank you, 

39 
 
Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Daire Nolan and then Councillor 
Burke.  
CLLR NOLAN: My last ever say here. Just to touch on 
something that Councillor Matthews said, I read somewhere 
that the ozone by year 2050 the holes will be fully healed 
or repaired and that is a positive move and that came from 
people fighting CFC gases in the 80s. I would like to thank 
Jim for their presentation and the environment section for 
their presentation as a member of that SPC I was delighted 
to say, to bring it before the full council as I thought it 
needed to be done as soon as possible and the sooner it 
gets done and the sooner that the actions and 
implementations that are detailed there can be spurred 
forward the better.  
 
I would like to thank the crowd that came down here today. 
Everyone, young and old, people who have been fighting this 
issue for years, this has been their first exposure to 
politics, it's great to see it, because it is the future 
for everyone, as Councillor Winters said, not just for 
young people, but for everyone. Climate change is a real 
issue, despite what dangerous and vapid populous leaders 
like Donald Trump would have you believe. Real politicians 
and real leaders know that the environment has to be 
protected. And, it is great to see so many young people 
down here, because they are the future, they are going to 
be getting into politics, as time goes along and they are 
going to see how this.  
CLLR MURPHY: They might not.  
CLLR NOLAN: Maybe not. But that is, it's great to see that 
young people are getting interested and taking an interest 

40 
 
in what is happening here and at national level and here is 
hoping that they are able to lead us into the future much 
better than we were. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Well done. Councillor Bourke.  
CLLR BOURKE: Thank you for that excellent report. Three 
points I would like to make. The first one, Jim, you 
mentioned about bringing in the panels hearing in the 
chamber and the car park, I would love to see you 
broadening that out to broadening it to bring it out to 
landlords, buildings all over the county that could be used 
for generation of, micro generation of electricity. As you 
know the ESB won't take in, you can't export a micro 
generated electricity to the grid, so that policy needs to 
change to allow people all over the county to micro 
generate and get paid for their surplus electricity 
generation. That would make a huge difference.  
 
The second point, I would like to see the farmers in county 
Wicklow getting some credit in the report for what they 
have been doing so far to help address climate change and 
talking about specifically their participation in the Glas 
scheme, which was introduced about four years ago and a 
great many in the county are fully participating in it and 
reducing their carbon footprint by setting aside land, not 
cropping it intensively, by setting aside margins around 
headlands to allow natural growth and flowers to flower, to 
support the bee population and that has gone unsung, I 
didn't hear any mention of it in the report, but I think it 
deserves some mention, it might not be perfect for people, 
the world may not look perfect when you are looking at 
farmers and the criticisms they get for greenhouse gas 
emission, that is another debate, but I think they have 

41 
 
done a lot of work and are very conscious of the 
responsibilities to ensure that we have a sustainable 
environment into the future and I would caution a complete 
ban on Roundup, we currently enjoy very low food price, if 
you do away with Roundup, we will go back 40 years in terms 
of food production back to the 60s when my farm was 
farming, he was getting a tonne-and-a-half was the top 
yield because there was no round-up to control weeds like 
that, if we do away with that without an alternative, we 
are going to go back 40 years in food production and maybe 
not have enough ban to feed the world, because it's a 
worldwide ban on Roundup and it's coming based on what is 
happening in America.  
I fear for food production we won't have an alternative in 
place and in a couple of years we will be back to food 
rationing like we were in the 50s and have no food.  
CLLR THORNHILL: I would like to say to everyone here, the 
citizens of the future, here, it's great, to take the 
responsibility, to see this true, because, at the end of 
the day, like I know, the way the climate is going, 
something has to happen, in relation to the country itself 
I would like to see in relation to energy sustainability, 
the more emphasis on wind farms and wave power.   
 
One thing I would like to say in relation to, at the end of 
the day the carbon footprint we are all responsible 
ourselves and we should all be ourselves because take for 
example, you take the traffic in the roads, I mean the cars 
burn fossil fuels, so how often do we see cars upon cars 
and there is only one person in the car, it's very 
inefficient and we are all responsible so at the end of the 
day, Government and this is true they have to bring out 

42 
 
policies but it's going to lie with the people, for 
example, I have to say in relation to an initiative that 
was brought up recently on the Bray Sea Front, go to the 
sea and pick up the plastics, little initiatives like that, 
it all adds up.  
At the end of the day, I would say about the honeybee, it 
is something that we have to look at, because the honeybee, 
well the honeybee will be extinct we can be lucky and think 
about our future. Fair, fair play to everyone here, we have 
to remember that each and every one of us have a role to 
play for the future. Go ro maith agat.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Finally, councillor Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to the 
people who have attended here today, I hope to see you here 
today, I would like to raise one issue, I don't think it's 
been mentioned and ow powers, as consumers and your power 
as a consumer, when you are buying something do you ever 
think about where it comes from?  Be it the clothes or the 
food?  How far has it travelled?  What is the carbon 
footprint of what you are buying?   
 
A lot of the things that are causing the climate issues are 
based, are coming from corporations, multinationals, they 
drive what we consume in the world. So, I don't think 
people are fully aware of stuff they are buying, where it's 
coming in, what the background is, they just, I think these 
corporations need to be made more accountable and people 
need to be more aware of what the background of what they 
are consuming is coming from and to think about what they 
are consuming. That is really your ultimate power, your 
purchasing power, because that is what the corporations and 
the consumption society is based on, getting you to 

43 
 
consume, getting you to buy and if you are aware of where 
that is coming from and what the background is and what the 
ethics of that company is. They often put in glossy 
language in their Annual Report but to get to the root of 
what the real background of companies and corporations is 
and I think once we get more information on that, people 
can make more informed decisions and that will need to 
change because it will be purchasing power and that is what 
drives these Corporation, purchasing power and profit that 
is the power that consumers have. Thank you. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, I am going to let the Chief Executive 
in and then the Director of Planning.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I would like to 
thank everyone for coming down as well. It is reassuring to 
see young people taking such an interest in climate change 
and this strategy and the actions that come out of it will 
be a priority for the council and for the management team. 
It isn't just the environment section, it's roads, waters, 
housing, ICT, planning, community, fire, it's a priority 
for every section and they will all be developing their own 
actions and some of the issues such as, that were raised, 
the Climate Change Steering Group, will be enacted. That is 
an action in the plan. So the plan will be on display from 
now until the end of May. So I will invite people and 
members of the public to make submissions, it will be back 
before the councillors in September to adopt. So I would 
like to thank everyone again and we have noted all the 
comments that have been made.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sean.  
SEAN QUIRKE: The support for the strategy is very 
encouraging I have to say, but there are 61 actions in it 
and there is one further action, that is for yourselves to 

44 
 
recommend that it goes on public display, or agreed to go 
on public display. The challenges will come following that, 
there will be financial challenges as I said at budget 
time, but I can sense an appetite to grasp those and move 
on with our mitigation measures, which are equally as 
important as the strategy. The strategy does provide for 
review and measurement against the actions and so on, so it 
won't be a document that will sit on a shelf anywhere. So I 
would commend it to you for going on pub list display.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: With that, can I have agreement that this 
will go on public display?  Proposer and seconder, the same 
two people. Also, can I have unanimous agreement in regard 
to the motion that was put before us, proposed by 
Councillor Fortune and seconded by Gerry Walsh that we 
adopt that particular motion that appeared in their names?  
Okay, can I, is that unanimously agreed?  Okay, listen, 
thank you very much.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Can I just?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: We are finished.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Can we send it to all of the councillors and 
to the TDs as well, because they are going to be very 
important.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: That is okay, we are will do that.  
SEAN QUIRKE: One final thing, there is a small bit of 
formatting on it to happen, so if you are going to 
circulate it, maybe wait for the formatting.  
CLLR WHITMORE: It's the motion.  
SEAN QUIRKE: Sorry, on the strategy, I was talking about.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. We are moving on now. I want to be 
finished by 4.00pm with your help and co-operation. We are 
on to item 7 now, please. Just wait for a second until the 
room is clear, please. Okay, members, we are on to, I am 

45 
 
taking items 7, 8 and 9, the Chief Executive, please.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Sorry on issue has been raised.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, members, can I have your attention, 
this is important. Wait a second. Go ahead.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. An issue has 
been raised in relation to the site notice and newspaper 
ad, it's not complying with recent legislation. A paragraph 
should be included in schemes now that don't require an 
EIA, that paragraph wasn't included. Our legal advice is 
that process could be challenged as a result of this and 
legal advice is that we don't consider these today, that we 
withdraw them and start the process again and it will be 
back to the members in a few months' time and again 
ultimately this is a decision for the council, but the 
legal advice is that if there is an omission in the ad go 
back to the start and come back to the Council.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I want to propose that we withdraw them from 
the agenda here today. Do I have a seconder?  
CLLR McLOUGHLIN: I second that.  
CLLR BEHAN: Before it comes to whatever new council, if 
there are housing policy.... [INAUDIBLE DUE TO NOT SPEAKING 
INTO MIC] matters involved in issues like this, they should 
go to the housing SPC first. This did not happen in the 
case of 8 and 9. That was outrageous treatment of members 
of the housing SPC and whoever is here, we should decide 
here that the new council should, as a matter of principle, 
refer issues such as this to the housing SPG, that is why 
it was set up. I want to propose that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I can't see why that wouldn't be taken up, 
Councillor Behan. Is that agreed?  I have proposed, 
seconded by Councillor Snell. Is that agreed?  That will 
come back to the next council.  

46 
 
>>: Does it go to districts as well?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: The recommendation I would have is that the 
district should have it and make a recommendation back to 
this council as well, because of the side of it, it's this 
council that is going to make the decisions but effectively 
it should be discussed in the municipal areas and a 
recommendation come back from that, I don't know what the 
next council is going to be, but the likelihood is that if 
an item does come back and he doesn't have the support of 
the municipal authorities should have no support.  
CLLR McLOUGHLIN: I think it's really important to hear, I 
would have no issues with any of these going into the 
housing SPC. I don't think they can overrule, when it's to 
a local council that is more important than someone's 
agenda on an SPC. I would be worried.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I know where you are coming from. People are 
making decision and they are the people who are making 
decisions. The SPCs should have the information and that is 
what they are there as an information, but they are not 
there as a body like councillors are who are going to make 
decision, at the end of the day the councillors will make 
the recommendation and the decisions on it and if, it's no 
harm that the SPC has a view of what is happening in the 
particular housing area, I think that is only reasonable. 
Okay. Okay, we are moving on. To consider the Chief 
Executive's report.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. One or two 
points. We have two new members of staff, a lot of members 
of staff recently but two in particular, Colm Lavery starts 
as Director of Services for roads fire and water, I am sure 
you a lot of you have met him and Dorothy Kennedy, who is a 
new law agent that started in the last few weeks. One or 

47 
 
two items.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Very welcome.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Yes. The Open Library in Arklow was opened 
two weeks ago, it's open 8-10pm, 365 days of the year. 
There is going to be one in every county and it will be 
interesting to see how it works out. The feedback so far is 
very positive. The Kilmac safety scheme is likely to be 
signed this week, there were some technical issues in 
relation to the location of the gantries but all has been 
resolved. The Town and Village Scheme 2019 will be 
advertised soon for expressions of interest. We have had 
three, in Tinahely, Glenview and Laragh. We are looking at 
public realm, projects that create economic activity, 
encourage town centre living, etc.  
 
There is funding available, 20,000-100,000 and 200,000 for 
exceptional projects, so closing date the end June, we will 
be looking at community groups around the county, but if 
you are meeting any of them, you might let them know this 
is open and to contact the community section. The 
applications we applied for 34,000 funding last week. Again 
that is around the Greenan area. We did very well last 
year, this is the small scale schemes that will go through 
the LCDC up to 20,000, you have the medium scale, 200,000 
and we have funding last year for Vartry and they are also 
looking for large scale works up to 500,000 and again we 
got funding there last year for the Avonmore Bridge we, 
will be looking with various groups but to let people know 
that is open. What has come down is the RRDF, the Rural 
Regional Development Fund, at the moment they are looking 
for larger schemes that are ready to go, greater than 
500,000. I think we put back in Baltinglass, but we expand 

48 
 
it to make it more attractive.  
We are looking at one around Glendalough, Laragh, 
Roundwood, Rathdrum. The current one is for schemes ready 
to go for 500,000 and later they will be looking at schemes 
for feasibility and stuff like that. I will take the rest 
of the report as read and he take any questions.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Thornhill.  
CLLR THORNHILL: I would like to ask a question in relation 
to a certain matter which has come up recently. It relates 
to.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, hold there for a second. Is this in 
the Chief Executive's report?  Is it, can you point it out 
if it is in the Chief Executive's report, if you can't you 
are not talking about it, right? It's as simple as that. So 
it isn't?  So we are moving on. You are not talking about 
it.  
CLLR THORNHILL: I am only asking the question.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We are on the Chief Executive's report, 
nothing else can be discussed you are aware of this, you 
are five years here, you are not speaking on anything that 
is not in the Chief Executive's report. You can argue all 
you like, you are not speaking on it.  
CLLR THORNHILL: I am just asking the question.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I am moving on to Councillor Fox.  
CLLR FOX: Thank you, Chairman, thank you to the Chief 
Executive for his report, just in relation to the safety 
scheme on the N11 at Kilmacanogue, I would welcome the fact 
that it's going out to tender shortly in the next few days, 
I know there was delays around the gantries and the land 
required for the gantries, but can I urge, I know it's not, 
or it wasn't within the remit of the scheme but pedestrian 
safety and footpaths in particular, that are not included 

49 
 
in the scheme will have to be looked at, currently there 
are a number of residents in Kilmac who terminate at the 
bus stop at the Woodies roundabout on the Southern Cross 
and have to walk along the hard shoulder of the N11 to get 
back to Kilmacanogue, I note the safety scheme doesn't 
include a foot path along this stretch of the road.  
 
I know, to be fair to the engineers involved in the scheme, 
it wasn't within the remit of the scheme, but we will have 
to find alternative funding and to me, it's simply a must 
that this pedestrian footpath is provided, because since 
the 145 bus route stopped travelling to Kilmacanogue, the 
amount of people who walk along the hard shoulder of the 
N11 is a disaster waiting to happen. Can I urge the Chief 
Executive to speak to the engineers in the roads section 
and try and bring forward some form of scheme for 
pedestrian safety? Thank you, chairman.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Just following on from what.  
CLLR FOX: Said, first of all it's amazing me how long this 
has taken to get to the point where we would begin the 
work, many people are very disappointed, we are 
disappointing it's taken so long, but hopefully we will see 
progress immediately. The other point I want to make and 
it's across the road from Christopher Fox's point, it's 
becoming a real problem at the garage, for people coming 
down the Roundwood Road attempting to get out on to the 
N11. There are cars parked across that side road or service 
road at the moment and it is becoming quite a hazard and 
quite a hazard and frustrating for people coming on to the 
N11. I know it's not part of this proposal, but I would ask 
the Chief Executive to ask the roads directorate to have a 

50 
 
look and see can something temporary be done to allow 
people access on to the N11.  
 
The second point is it's under housing and it's in relation 
to people who are living in the Oldcourt Estate in Bray, a 
number of them have asked me and I have already written to 
the director of housing on this and I got a very 
disappointing negative reply and I was asked to ask the 
Chief Executive today, there are a number of houses in the 
Oldcourt estate which originally were local authority 
houses but they have been bought over the years, either by 
tenants who were original tenants or people who bought them 
as third party purchasers and they are in immediate and 
urgent need of the same energy efficiency works that the 
council has just about completed in their own houses in 
Oldcourt. I am asking here, on their behalf that the Chief 
Executive do a full examination of this case. He may not be 
fully up to date on all of the ramifications of the 
Oldcourt estate and the various refurbishments and I am 
asking that consideration be given to a special scheme of 
energy efficiency works for the remaining houses in the 
estate, I don't expect an answer today, but I am asking him 
to take it on board with the housing directorate and the 
Department.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Matthews.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: I just want to fully endorse and support 
what Councillor Fox said about that cycle path along the 
N11. To make the Chief Executive aware there is a letter in 
circulation from the NCA saying they will positively 
consider an application from Wicklow County Council to 
provide such funding and infrastructure. I wanted to let 
the Chief Executive know that. Councillor Oliver O'Brien.  

51 
 
CLLR THORNHILL I would like to second that to ask a 
question.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, listen, you know the situation.  
COUNCILLOR THORNHILL: I have had problems in Bray with 
minutes being totally eliminated, because.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Excuse me, Councillor Thornhill, you are not 
going down that road, you are not going down that road, he.  
>>: He is entitled, (ALL TALK AT ONCE).  
CLLR THORNHILL: You are not going to object me down this 
time, you might object me, but you are not going to shout 
me down.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There are not going to be any proposal from 
Councillor Thornhill on this matter. Mary McDonald.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Go ahead.  
>>: I am going to put it to the floor.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Go ahead, Mary, you have the floor.  
CLLR McDONALD: Thank you, it's just an observation and a 
question.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry.  
CLLR McDONALD: I have a question around the HAPS scheme, I 
have asked before on previous occasions, I have asked where 
we are with the HAPS houses. It's just a general question, 
I notice from the April meeting we had 1063 houses under 
the HAPS scheme and this month, I think it's 1136, that is 
a difference of 737 houses in a month. I know there was a 
backlog with inspections of those houses and I was 
wondering where we up to date, 73 houses on top of what 
were already waiting for inspections a quite a lot.  
 
It's slightly worrying, the condition of some of the houses 
being taken under the HAPS scheme, you would have to 
request are they up to standard what I really want to know 

52 
 
is are we on top of the inspections and do we still only 
have the one inspector inspecting the house and basically 
where we are at with the whole inspection of these houses 
and the follow-up inspections for any works that have been 
representing that are done on the existing works?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: We will try and get something on that.  
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you, Chairman. I was delighted to see 
that the for the Oireachtas took place I would like to ask 
the Chief Executive when would these people start?  I think 
it's important we get them out into the different districts 
as soon as possible. My second point is to do with the old 
FCA hall in Wicklow, given it stopped on the housing scheme 
that was down there and I am wondering has a new contractor 
been appointed and when he hopes to start that project?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor winters.  
CLLR WINTERS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, in relation to 
housing under the rebuilding Ireland mortgages, I know 
people have applied and for various reasons they are turned 
down, but what seems to happen in other local authorities 
is if they have applied for an amount that is too grate, 
when they are being turned down they are told you applied 
for 275, if you applied for 250 you would have got it and 
they can come back in.  
 
In Wicklow, they told you, you haven't got it, I am 
wondering if we could adjust our response to people so we 
can say to them, look you have applied for too much, your 
criteria gives you maximum, then they know where they could 
go in terms of houses.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Chief Executive.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Yes, we will 
certainly take up with the TII and with the roads section 

53 
 
here in relation to the pedestrian safety at the Kilmac 
scheme and also across the road in relation to the cars 
parked there, they sound like very significant issues but 
we can certainly work with TII and our own inhouse design 
team in relation to that. In relation to the Oldcourt 
estate it's a problem which has been around for a long 
time, when people buy their houses they see schemes coming 
along, windows and doors and retrofitting in council 
housing schemes but our funding and our scheme is really 
only cover our own houses, but we will have a look, as I 
say, in relation to the specific issues in Oldcourt, 
sometimes there is funding for energy retrofitting where 
there is fuel poverty involved, but as a general rule 
schemes just cover our own houses, but I will have a look 
at it. In relation to the HAPS schemes and the inspections 
we are getting there, we have taken our new technician who 
is working exclusively on those and ensuring they comply 
with the Private Residency Tenancy Board standards. We will 
clear that backlog.  
 
The GOs, we have the panel, I know there is one definitely 
in Wicklow and two in Greystones and two in Baltinglass and 
a number around the county. When the GSSs are upgraded 
there will be more vacancies coming down the line, there is 
about ten in a year or so.  
So it's very useful to have that. The old FCA hall is going 
to tender again, it has gone and Rebuilding Ireland 
mortgages, that is a good point and it was raised with us 
by the housing agency as well, so we can have a look at 
that, absolutely.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Joe, did you want to come in here?   
JOE LANE: See you tomorrow [INAUDIBLE]. What stage that is 

54 
 
it I will have that for you?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, we are moving on to note number 11, 
that is just to note that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Can we have a proposer and seconder for the 
budget.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Matthews and Councillor Walsh.. 
Brian needs to go through a few things here.  
BRIAN: Sorry, it's just at the can request of our auditor 
to highlight the unders and overs as part of the AFS. If I 
can refer you to the financial review at the start of the 
document and on page 6, page 4, we just require approval by 
the members for the additional net expenditure in excess of 
budget as per section 1047 of the Local Government Act 
2001.  
 
The overspends, the net overspends are division A housing 
and building 109, 4607. Transportation 194,256. Division B, 
20,854. Division E environmental services 793,115 and 
division F recreational amenity 100,031.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposer and seconder for that. Councillor 
Matthews and Walsh.  
>>: No problem.  Could we get the detail in the post as to 
who they are not now, Cathaoirleach?  
BRIAN GLEESON: In the previous page it explains the reasons 
for over expenditure.  
CLLR BEHAN: Sorry.  
CLLR TIMMINS:  I know you get over and under expenditures, 
it's a normal way that you operate. But is there a new 
department denture brought to our approval.  
BRIAN GLEESON: No, it's always been part of the financial 
review and the auditory requested that it be highlighted as 
part of this process of noting. It's always been 

55 
 
highlighted in the documentation and financial review. It's 
just based on the auditor's request.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Fine, we are moving on to item 12, we have, 
there is a scheme of priorities were sent out to people, 
Jackie is here if anyone has any questions in regard to the 
scheme of priorities. Jackie is going to go through it for 
a couple of minutes and then we will take any questions on 
it.  
JACKIE CARROLL:  [INAUDIBLE DUE TO NOT SPEAKING INTO MIC] 
Just to go over in relation to the scheme. Not used to 
public speaking.  
As you are aware, the minister has given a commitment to 
progress an affordable housing scheme, which will target 
those who have been squeezed out of the private rental 
market and haven't got affordability to buy in the open 
market. So the 2009 scheme has been enacted, we commenced 
part five of the Act in June 19 so the Affordable Housing 
Scheme now has statutory footing. There is 19 different 
sections I am not going to go through them because I will 
be lynched.  
The minister under this scheme is making regulations and 
part of those regulations makes a scheme of priority where 
we would chair a methodology to allocate the house when we 
have a scheme and assessment of eligibility under the 
scheme. The new scheme, places all previous affordable 
schemes, it provided for discounts of up to 40%, what was 
the clawback in previous schemes is now what we call in an 
equity share. Throughout the period of the 25 years or 
payment at the end of it, we will be going into a new 
strategic affordable housing fund. So our purpose here 
today, I suppose, is because the scheme was enacted or 
commenced in June 2018, it is a requirement of the scheme 

56 
 
that the scheme of priority be adopted by June 2019 which 
poses a bit of a dilemma because the regulations didn't 
come out until recently, so this is the last meeting that 
we are available to adopt the scheme.  
It's important we have a scheme of priority in place for 
when we commence advertising scheme, when we have 
identified schemes that are suitable to provide affordable 
houses, so it's very important for the chamber and I know 
the members are keen on affordable housing, so it's 
important we have a scheme in place that will show our 
methodology and allocation of houses, Section 85 is the 
making of the order of priority, I won't go through 
everything on these, so the scheme of priority is Section 
85 and as I say, it includes the methodology that will be 
applied to determine the order of priority and we have to 
have it adopted before the 18th of June. There is an 
ascending order of priority. You can read that at your 
leisure.  
 
Very much so, if you tick all the boxes you have the 
highest priority and descending in that order. There is 
provision for eligibility, that is where you are eligible 
to be allowed apply for the scheme, the dwelling suit the 
to your needs to your household accommodation needs. Living 
in the area for 12 months, preceding the application, that 
will be another tick box, then the two areas where the 
members have discretion to actually identify the number of 
kilometres, the distance from employment and education, 
education first and then employment. So I sent out a draft 
scheme where we mooted 30 kilometre just as a starting 
point to get the scheme across the line and get it adopted 
by the members. We can revisit that at any time, this is a 

57 
 
reserve function so this can come back into the chamber at 
any stage. I think the thinking around it was that would 
get people living in Wicklow, but going to the Gaelscoil in 
Arklow.  
Some local authorities are looking at 300 kilometres, but 
to me that would lessen your discretion, if you want to 
look at making it more local, but this is something that 
can be revisited when we have a scheme on the table. So for 
today, the purpose of today, I suppose, is to hopefully 
adopt a scheme of priority, to have the methodology in 
place and we can revisit the kilometres, if you wish, at 
another stage. So, I am asking the members just to give it 
due consideration and adopt today.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Fox.  
CLLR FOX: Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Jackie.  I 
would welcome putting on order of priority in place, I 
certainly feel that affordable housing is one area that 
perhaps has been overlooked. A lot of people seem to talk 
about social housing and rightly so, there is a huge amount 
of people on our council housing list, but for people on 
moderate incomes, the availability of affordable housing is 
certainly a huge issue. I know there are no schemes planned 
yet, we are just putting the order of priority in place and 
we have only two areas of discretion and I know you spoke 
about the 30 kilometres perhaps as the most appropriate 
distance, I have been thinking about it and I know I spoke 
to you during the week, but the distance between Bray and 
Arklow is 50 kilometres, so if there were circumstances 
where someone from Arklow lived or worked in Bray or 
vice-versa, they would be precluded under the 30 kilometre 
rule and I am suggesting 50 kilometres, but that is up to 
the other members, thank you, chairman.  

58 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Snell, please will people be 
brief.  
CLLR SNELL: It's very unfortunate with the time constraints 
in regard to the Department sending this out that we have 
been sitting and waiting for such a scheme for a number of 
years indeed and I know through the housing section they 
have identified land, certainly that would be available for 
affordable dwellings and we, as public representatives meet 
people day in day out who want to get on this scheme for 
families who earn over 38,400 unfortunately can't go on the 
housing list and therefore cannot be accepted for the HAPS 
scheme and there is an awful lot of people waiting who 
can't get a mortgage to purchase the new builds going on in 
this county, so this is a scheme and it's a core group of 
people that I feel have been forgotten about. I am glad 
that the Department have stepped up to the plate and they 
are putting something in place and for today's purposes 
it's very important that this has happened. There is only 
two pieces that can, we have any discretion on and it's 
something that the new council can come back and look at 
and earn certainly I would have no objection To Moving the 
30km to certainly the new council and the new SPC will be 
able to put that in front of the new council and it's 
something that can be addressed, but for the benefit of 
moving this scheme forward, we, like all other local 
authorities have something to go back to the Department 
with, I would be recommending that it would be accepted 
here today by all members and certainly it's a scheme that 
is wordy of support from everyone in these chambers.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I believe the scheme can be amended in 
September as well, so if there is any problems with it, it 
can be amended in September with the new council. Please be 

59 
 
brief Grainne McLoughlin.  
CLLR McLOUGHLIN: This will be very brief. I felt when I was 
reading it, maybe it's just me and I am tired, just 
difficult to understand, could it be put in really easy 
layman's language so when people want to know what the 
categories are, what boxes they have to tick they can do 
that, if that was possible?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Blake.   
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you, Chairman, and Jackie, for the 
presentation. Any proposal that comes before us here I 
support them in terms of providing houses out there for 
people who really need them. Whether it's the social houses 
programme, the HAPS programme or anything else. I know this 
particular aspect of affordable housing schemes haven't 
delivered to the extent we hoped they would, but 
nevertheless if there is a new scheme there has to be 
tweaks in terms of mileage or kilometres or the distance or 
whatever else in relation to it I will support them. 
Anything we can do out there to help people to have their 
own homes, to have a roof over their head is vitally 
important and I certainly, if Councillor Snell's proposal I 
would second it.  
CLLR MITCHELL:  I have some concerns I am not sure if this 
applies to people in Wicklow or people in Dublin can apply. 
Which have enough trouble supplying houses to people in 
County Wicklow, so I wouldn't want the distance to go too 
far so I would prefer it was kept tight at 30 kilometres. 
That is my concern.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Winters.  
CLLR WINTERS: I think we need to get it over the line today 
and we can tweak it or the new council with tweak it at 
that stage.  

60 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: Councillor Mitchell makes an eloquent point 
about the fact we cannot allow a situation where we give 
over our land to a possible sale by private developers who 
won't care where the people come from, that would have been 
my point if those parties had been discussed and I hope the 
management of the council take that on board, because 
Councillor Mitchell has made it very well. The other point 
is many thousands of people, young families in this county 
are waiting for the chance to get on the property ladder.  
CLLR MITCHELL: That wasn't the point I made at all.  
CLLR BEHAN: They might read this in the paper and say great 
there is going to be an affordable housing scheme, we 
haven't done one affordable house yet and the chances are 
this is going to be delayed for even longer and I think 
many people will be disappointed for that. The one 
technical question I want to ask Jackie is if this comes 
back before whoever is on the new council and there is a 
change in the distance, for example, is that going to be a 
simple majority vote or will we have this think where it 
will have to be a two thirds majority to change it?  I am 
hoping it will be straightforward.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Simple majority.  
CLLR BEHAN: That is agreed. That is fine.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Unless it's set down in statute.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: As far as you are aware the council operates 
only in special circumstances that it's two thirds.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Unless it's set down in statute.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There was a couple of questions can you 
answer them.  
JACKIE: If the members want to change it to 50 today or 
leave it to September?   

61 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: I would say leave it 50 today and it can 
come back and be adjusted in September and people think 
about it.  
>>: Leave it at 30.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Leave it at 30, it can be adjusted. There is 
toos and fros in this, on one side there is one thing and 
there is always situations that will come up outside of 
that.  
CLLR WINTERS: Unintended consequences.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If we leave it at 30 and the new council can 
adjust it if they see fit in September.  
 
JACKIE CARROLL: As regards the order of policy, Councillor 
McLoughlin, you are not crazy, I made that simpler than the 
legislation because the legislation is extremely 
complicated. So that is the simplified version of it. So 
you have eligible, B is that you have lived in the area in 
county Wicklow for at least a year preceding the 
application.  
CLLR McLOUGHLIN: You have to live in the area of county of 
Wicklow.  
JACKIE CARROLL: For the immediate year preceding. If 
someone is in school within X amount of kilometres and you 
go back again if someone's employment in the county, within 
X amount of kilometres, so that is really as simple as I 
can make it. That would be determined by us as we were 
processing the applications and we hope to have an IT 
system in place as well that will ease it forwards down the 
road. I think issues for the, we don't have a scheme at 
present but I will hand over to Joe.  
JOE LANE: Just to get this, this is required within one 
year of the act, there is still a hole amount of 

62 
 
regulations to come out, the main one will be salary 
scales, that hasn't come out yet, we are still waiting on 
them.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Still waiting on them, okay. Can I have a 
proposer and seconder. Councillor Snell and... is that 
agreed then?  Agreed. We are into correspondence.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just before, can I have a proposer and 
seconder for the minutes of the protocol meeting of the 
15th of January, 4th of March and 1st of April.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor O'Brien... I will propose and 
Gerry Walsh as well. Now, there is no correspondence, is 
there?  No correspondence?  We are at the end of the 
meeting, thanks be to God, says everyone. Just before we 
finalise, just from my point of view I would like to wish 
all the members of the council that are standing again the 
best of luck in the elections in a couple of weeks' time. 
First time for a long time that I haven't been knocking, 
well I have been knocking on doors but not for myself, it's 
much easier to knock for someone else than yourself. It's 
my first time and certainly from my point of view I would 
like to wish all the members well in the election coming up 
and obviously I would like to thank the majority of members 
of the council as well for their help and co-operation with 
me, not alone in the past year but in previous years in 
regard to this. There are 7 members of the council that are 
leaving and almost 150 years of experience is going with 
those 7 members.  
CLLR FOX: That is just you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If it was I wasn't talking about myself. I 
just want to pay tribute, I think on our behalf as chairman 
of the council to the returning members of the council, Jim 
Ruttle, who I probably, probably is the longest-serving 

63 
 
member of the Council. APPLAUSE. 
 
Jimmy has been on the Council since the 80s, former Senator 
and former member of Fianna Fail as well. Jimmy has given a 
huge amount of his life to the service of people in west 
Wicklow, he follows in a long line of people who have given 
a huge amount of service in west Wicklow and I would like 
to wish Jim and Catherine health and happiness over the 
rest of their lives and thank Jim for your service and your 
friendship to me, particularly over that, and your support 
to me during that time as well. Thank you very much for 
that.  
To Pat Doran, Pat Doran, I think is gone, I think he has 
gone, he is a colleague of mine of Fianna Fail, a quiet 
man, tremendous worker for the people in south Wicklow, 
particularly in Carnew, I remember I served on the Health 
Board and I seen the health facility in Carnew and I was 
blown away that someone could play such an important part 
in provision of the community. An unbelievable facility in 
a small village and that will stay testament to Pat Doran 
and the work he has done in the Carnew area. He is going to 
be a very hard act to follow in regard to this .  
Grainne McLoughlin, I have often said, Grainne comes from a 
great Fianna Fail background. She strayed like her sister, 
but she has the work ethic of her mother and father who 
were great Fianna Fail people as well. Really Greystones 
will be all the poorer for Grainne going, I don't know if 
she will really be going, because she is the type of worker 
that will always be doing something for the community, 
chair of the LCDC, Grainne has contributed in a very quiet 
way to the development of Wicklow over the years. She has 
been a tremendous worker and also she has shown courage as 

64 
 
well because she is getting married in July and on all of 
our behalves I want to wish her well as with regard to 
that. APPLAUSE. 
Daire Nolan is the youngest member of the Council and I 
have to say he brought a fair amount of freshness and youth 
to the Council chamber.  Daire is going on to another job 
in the community as well and I am sure you will bring the 
same enthusiasm to your new job than you have in your five 
years here. You have been a great servant for the five 
years here, you have been absolutely wonder. APPLAUSE  
 
My colleague in Bray for a number of years, John Ryan. 
Former Cathaoirleach of Bray Town Council, he has been a 
tremendous worker for the Bray area. He is a man of vision 
and he has always wanted to portray a positive image of 
Bray and Wicklow and he was the main driver of the 
think-tanks in his role as chairs of the Council. Had a 
strong opinion on how the county, Wicklow and Bray should 
develop and most importantly always had the courage to back 
it up, so John, thank you, again for your services. It's 
been wonderful. To Christopher Fox, I have to say one of 
the greatest honours I have had on this Council is I have 
sat beside the three Foxes in my time in the Council, when 
I came on to this Council in 1991, Johnny, Mildred and 
Christopher, it's been a great pleasure to sit beside you, 
they had everything everyone could wish for in terms of 
decency, integrity and humour and a work ethic second to 
none and there are not many families who have contributed 
to the people of Wicklow. He is a busy man as well and 
certainly I would like to wish him and his family well in 
the future years.  
 

65 
 
Now, for myself, I am 34 years in the Council as most 
people know, 28 of them have been in this Council here and 
the other six in Bray and certainly through all of that 
time I would like to thank everyone for their help and 
their friendship over the years.  
Sorry. I am very proud to have served some great people in 
this organisation, of all parties over these years. It's 
been a great honour to be elected to the Council and the 
greatest honour has been to serve as your Cathaoirleach. I 
want to thank the staff, the Chief Executive here, we have 
had a number of Chief Executives here, Blaise Tracey, Eddie 
Sheehy Brian Doyle and Frank Curran here who have been a 
tremendous help to me over the years. I want to thank all 
the staff because I would leave out some people here and I 
don't want do that, I want to thank particularly Irene 
Winters has been a very great help for me and filled in a 
number of times when I couldn't make it in the county in 
year, Irene, thank you very much and the best of luck to 
you in the next few weeks and I think I have spent most of 
my time in Wicklow County Council probably in the Planning 
Office and I have been lucky enough to be chair of the 
Planning SPC for a long number of years and they are a 
group of people that have been under siege from some 
members for the last number of years and all I have to say 
so when you are dealing with planning, as you all know, you 
never get everything you want, you might get something of 
what you want. You never get all of what you want and I 
think most people expect that you won't get everything, but 
I have never come across an organisation in the council 
that have provided more service, more honesty, more 
integrity than the planning department in Wicklow County 
Council.  

66 
 
>>: Here, here.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I want to say, particularly to the former 
Director of Services, who I am delighted to see here, Des 
O'Brien, to Fergal and Sorcha who have given me 
unbelievable advice over the years and particularly when we 
were developing the recent assembly, the report on the 
regional assembly. I got tremendous advice and professional 
help from them and I all I can say from them is thank you 
again for them and to wish them well and hope that they get 
the support that is necessary from the planning staff.   
 
And finally, at home, I have a wife that tends to tell me 
all the things that I don't want to hear you know what I 
mean. When I am feeling good about myself can drag you down 
in a few words and tell you are run losing the run of 
yourself, for that I thank her. I haven't liked it most of 
the time, but it's worked and my family are here at the end 
of the room and I am delighted to see them here. I always 
say, Lorraine is my Wicklow County Council wife, she tells 
me all the things I would love to do, but I can't do that. 
All of the decisions I have made over the past year, you 
can blame them on Lorraine, because I was only taking 
instruction. Lorraine, thank you very much indeed, she has 
been a wonderful help and a marvellous public servant as 
well. Thank you again. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. A number of people asked me if 
they could say a few words at the end of the meeting 
outcome did you want to come in and say a few words.  
CLLR RUTTLE: When I arrived there in 1980, a then 
councillor friend of mine John Leeson indicated on day one, 
you have two good days here, the day you come in and the 
day you go out. So I suppose this is one of the good ones, 

67 
 
but there was always a mixed bag in between. I suppose on a 
day like this, you look back on your career and in my case 
it goes back 39 years and who you have to remember and what 
you remember.   
 
Firstly, I have to thank the West Wicklow electorate for 
returning me to this council on five occasions and I am 
very honoured to have represented them. Their loyalty and 
support has been my bedrock over the decades and I thank 
them all from, I mention two places in west Wicklow that 
not many people might know, two areas Ballyguile to 
Tubberville. I also want to thank my staff for all the 
support they did over 30 years. Never backed off, 100% 
commitment, it's quite amazing.  
The other huge element, like you mentioned yourself, 
Cathaoirleach, too, in my political life has been the great 
support of my wife, Catherine and my sons. Catherine run 
the constituency office out of our farmhouse and it was a 
fantastic operation and we were a great team together. 
Without such family support I could not have functioned, I 
could not have endured for so long and I thank them all 
most sincerely for that.  
Another aspect I suppose of my career was my association 
with the farming and the rural community as well is 
well-known and their unwavering support over all of the 
year has been crucial to me. I also tried to be involved 
heavily in education in West Wicklow, particularly with my 
involvement with Blessington community college and the 
Blessington education service, I found that very rewarding. 
In more recent times I have pursued politically, given the 
Blessington Greenway Project, I looked for to the final 
fruition of that and it will be a great advantage and a 

68 
 
great thing to see and I hope it comes soon. The funding. I 
first became a public representative in public 39 years ago 
and it's a long time and many of the people I worked with 
then have now gone to their eternal ward, people such as 
Podge, Geoffrey and Johnny Fox. All of those benefitted 
their community with no spin tactics whatsoever, people of 
integrity and dedication. Just reflecting on it over the 
weekend, I am one of the few people who would ever have run 
a General Election campaign on a ticket with Podge Brennan, 
particularly given that he was elected to the Dail, the 
year I was born, so the connection with me with a past in 
the middle of the last century, but Podge was a fine man 
too like Godfrey Timmins and the late Johnny.  
I would lake also to like to thank the staff for all the 
work they did in my career years here. On behalf of the 
public and a lot of the Government as well. Various things 
came into my mine over the weekend. I recall the amazing 
Ultan McCabe and also the memorable contributions of Brian 
Johnston to debates in this chamber on how he could handle 
it. I never fell out with any official, I disagreed with 
them, yes, I fought hard, but I never fell out or had a 
disagreement with any official in my time here. I always 
had a good relationship with the manager, now CEOs, I don't 
know why I call them managers, from Blaise Tracey, Brian 
Doyle, all the way down now to Frank Curran who is a very 
good Chief Executive as well. I also want to thank all of 
the staff over the years in the Blessington office which I 
have seen for many years. In many ways the Blessington 
office was one engineer and one Jean Brady.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Our engineer from Bray is over there at the 
moment.  
CLLR RUTTLE: For the helpful co-operation and friendship I 

69 
 
received there, I think it was a very good office to work 
with, a very positive and very communicative and 
supportive. I think I is gone now, but I also wish to thank 
Myles Buchanan of the Wicklow People for the fair courtesy 
I have received from them and their predecessors for the 
Wicklow People.  
 
I also want to thank my own group for their loyalty over 
the last few years and wish them well in all they do, I 
think Miriam is standing so I have a lovely leaflet here 
worthy of support and I wish her well in the election. The 
other three of us are not, so you are our flag bearer 
Miriam in that one. Thank you very much. In this regard I 
want to say a special thank you to the man on my left, 
Christopher Fox, who arrived here I think 15 years ago and 
has been a huge support and help at all times to me, it was 
a pleasure to work with him and he would always be 
available and he would always speak and travel into west 
Wicklow and we would do things together. At a time like 
this, somewhere further back again I suppose I have to 
remember the support I would have received from Susan 
Phillips over the years and the great contribution she 
made. Over the years I worked with various members of one 
family in this regard. I have worked with three regards of 
the Timmins family, Godfrey, Billy and now Edward. All 
gentlemen of integrity and it was a pleasure to work with 
them and the help and support I received from that family 
will never be forgotten by me. Thank you so much for 
everything. Also, the Fox family, from Johnny S who is a 
very good friend of mine and we had great times.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: They are here at the back.  
CLLR RUTTLE: Are they.  

70 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: I want to welcome them.  
CLLR RUTTLE: Welcome along. Also a great friend of mine, I 
can remember the '92 General Election campaign, which was a 
great day and sadly it all ended too well and then Mildred 
came along and then Christopher came along.  
 
The Blake family I have caught up with them twice, because 
in my first incarnation it was Vincent senior, it was 
Vincent senior but then they redrew the map and I got 
Vincent junior. That was a great support with the people 
always to the fore and very constructive another family who 
have gone out of the Council, the Sweeney family in Arklow. 
I worked with John in the 80s and then with Pat, when he 
was here as well and I remember them. I wish all the 
retires well and those who are going forward I wish you the 
best of luck as well, I hope everything goes well for you.  
I want to pay tribute to you as well, Cathaoirleach, not 
just for this year but for all of the years I have known 
you, courageous leadership, not afraid to do the right 
thing rather than the popular thing and it's wonderful what 
you did. May I also, on this occasion, say that, I want to 
acknowledge the co-operation and help I always got from my 
own party, Fianna Fail in this chamber. Despite the trauma 
of 1991, no one interfered, only helped what I was trying 
to do here and the same way the Fine Gael party. We worked 
together to get things done and I want to acknowledge that 
I received that all the time.  
Now, I suppose, when you think of leaving this, I have 
farming interests obviously and I hope to travel and I have 
a good interest in music and dancing as well. But I always 
think of what a prominent member of my organisation said to 
me when I told him recently I was retiring, that is Peter 

71 
 
Corrigan in Hollywood, he said from now on, Jim look up not 
down, move forward. There is a good future ahead and 
hopefully.  
Other things on occasions like this you have to thank the 
lord for giving you the health and the strength. Thank you 
to everyone, I hope I have helped or made a difference in 
some way throughout my 30 odd years in poll I can it is 
here. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Irene Winters and Christopher Fox.  
CLLR WINTERS: I will let Christopher talk first.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Go ahead, Irene.  
CLLR WINTERS: To all of the 7 councillors who are retiring 
today, Jim Ruttle, Councillor Pat Doran, Grainne 
McLoughlin, Christopher Fox, Daire Nolan and John Ryan, 
along with yourself, Cathaoirleach, Councillor Pat Vance.   
 
It's probably the last few weeks you may be called a 
councillor and some of you may be happy with that. I think 
it's clear from the closing remarks that Jim has made and 
Pat and the others who are due to speak, that the town 
councillors, that contrary to popular perception, all of 
these people have entered politic because of a commitment 
to better their communities. Being a councillor requires 
good communication skills and have you to be able to manage 
your time well and be empathic, sympathetic, you have to 
have a smattering of knowledge on everything and then the 
ability to do the research when you have a vote on 
something to know the topic well. But you also have to have 
understanding, patience and commitment, I think it's going 
to be a huge loss to this Council that the seven that are 
retiring are retiring together and it will be the new 
Council's loss, but what will hold it together is the fact 

72 
 
that the staff and the experience of these people, by 
working with the staff, that has been gained will still be 
in the building. I wish all seven of you well, I want to 
thank you for the time that you have all given to your 
communities and to all of the things that have happened 
within the council and I wish you and all of your families 
the very best for the future. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you.  
CLLR FOX: Thank you, Chairman. I suppose I have to say a 
few words, first of all can I also thank the staff from day 
one since I came in here, the staff have been nothing but 
helpful to me in every section of this building, from the 
girls in planning, the whole way through and right to the 
top when I was chairman, again, Lorraine, you were 
fantastic, so professional, it was a total eye-opener, also 
to Frank, Wicklow County Council is in safe hands, because, 
since you have come into the job I have been nothing but 
impressed and you were certainly going to lead the county 
forward and I wish you well in that.  
 
To all of my fellow councillors, both retiring and those 
that are not, or the ones who are not, I wish you well in 
the election. I don't envy you, we have always had lively 
debate, I haven't always agreed with some of your point of 
view, but I have always respected it and I respect each and 
every one of you, regardless of your political affiliation 
and, can I say that any time that I maybe gave it hot and 
heavy it was nothing personal and I never took anything 
personal when it was coming back the other way, so I wish 
all the very best. I can't remember seven councillors 
retiring at one time before, it's certainly a lot.  
When you see people like Councillor Daire Nolan part of me 

73 
 
feels sorry that someone so young and fresh, I know he has 
other interests, but it's Wicklow's loss when people like 
Daire are retire, so the best of luck, and also Grainne and 
I know Pat has gone, but Pat is typical of what a lot of 
councillors are, they are people who start at community 
level and get involved in community groups and there is no 
greater person for being involved at community level than 
Pat Doran and I wish him well in his retirement. Of course 
my constituency colleagues, both John Ryan and yourself, 
chairman, John huge amount of respect for you, your passion 
for Bray in particular is infectious and you know, I have 
enjoyed working alongside you enormously and you were one 
of the people that kept me going when things, some days are 
more difficult than others and it's people like yourself, 
kept me going.  
To yourself, Chairman, I found that you are probably the 
most courageous politician I have ever met. Regardless of 
how popular or unpopular a decision was, you made it 
because you thought it was the right thing to do. Time and 
time again you came into this chamber and made unpopular 
decisions, which were for the greater good and I commend 
you for that, you were the least Populace person you could 
walk into a room and tell them what you wanted to hear 
because you thought it was the right thing. Your loss will 
be huge in this chamber, the same I remember Councillor 
Jones retired the last time, it's your knowledge and 
experience and I think your loss will be massive.  
To the man on my right, probably the person who has been 
closest to me on this, in this chamber, Councillor Ruttle, 
he is the person I have always confided in, he has offered 
advice, he has been a superb confidant and when I listen to 
what Jim has to say I feel I should be going on another 10 

74 
 
or 15 years. Thank you, Jim for your help over the years. 
Like Jim, I had a fantastic organisation around me, they 
made it so easy for me, it was an organisation that started 
with my father, they were friends of my father and in 1992 
when he decided to go independent and they stuck with 
Mildred after and they stuck with me and they were just so 
loyal, so knowledgeable, they were just a fantastic group 
of people and I would like to thank them. Of course, you 
can't do this without support from your family, as you know 
Councillor Thornhill spoke about family dynasties and it 
was maybe a negative thing, but really and truly politics 
for me started answering the phone as a 7 or 8-year-old 
when there was no mobile phones or emails and people were 
calling to the house and looking for my father. I know I 
spoke to Councillor Timmins and Godfrey's father had 
consultations on a Saturday when you were trying to watch 
television.  
It was the same for me, my father used to come in at 1.00pm 
for his lunch, we were always telling people ring at 
1.00pm, he would come in at 1.00pm and take the phone off 
the hook. At 2.00pm, he would put the phone back on the 
hook and go out the door. If it wasn't for my mother, she 
held it all together.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: That's right.  
CLLR FOX: My mother is a wonderful woman and thanks to her. 
Also to my wife, Jackie and the kids for their support and 
of course Mildred as well. I was on the front foot from day 
one because of Mildred, she was a fantastic politician. My 
father, of course he was a very popular person. He died at 
46, I am 46 now, so with that there is a realisation that 
maybe you should look at family first and politics second. 
So thank you, chairman.  

75 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Well done. APPLAUSE Councillor John Ryan.  
CLLR RYAN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I suppose it's 
difficult to come after that, because sometimes I don't 
feel like a real politician at all. When I see the length 
and breadth and history of people in this council, it's 
quite amazing and for me, like 15 years is just gone like 
an absolute flash. It feels like yesterday when I arrived 
here and the previous council had left all of the decisions 
around the development plan to the new council, which was 
an absolute gift that they gave us. So that first meeting I 
remember just getting two big huge tomes of development 
plans and I thought it was the worst decision I had ever 
made in my life, but thankfully it didn't turn out to be 
that way, it was an amazing time and an amazing 15 years 
and obviously just for me, it's about saying thank you to 
so many people.   
 
I suppose the person I look at most when I joined was 
George Jones, as a fantastic mentor and just to see the way 
he contributed in a very thoughtful way and kind of took 
the party political stuff out of it and I think recognising 
that when the election is over the election is over and you 
are all together here to try and better the county with 
something that was really important for me to learn. Pat, 
the year you have had has been brilliant, but it's exactly 
what I would expect because you have done it every single 
time, you, honestly have been a fantastic mentor to watch. 
You say you were, you sat with the three Foxes, you are as 
cute as a fox in everything you do, so now I know where you 
got it from. And obviously having the double whammy to 
finish as both Cathaoirleach of Wicklow and Cathaoirleach 
of your town of Bray it's very special for you and I know 

76 
 
every time somebody is being install as Cathaoirleach of 
the county, you always say that it's a huge honour for them 
to lead their county, or their town and for their family 
and I know the family piece is hugely important to you.  
I think when you look back at it you can look back at 34 
years you can be, extremely proud of in terms of everything 
you have managed to achieve. Okay, so you are retiring but 
never say never, I know there is a few councillors out here 
who are still trying to get back in, who previously 
retired. Christopher, just to return the absolute words you 
said about me, absolutely just in terms of someone who just 
was always there, when I just needed to kind of chat 
through issues and get a decent honourable absolutely 
independent perspective on an issue, you were 100% bang on 
and never let me down and I never forget that, so thank you 
very much for that. To everyone who is retiring, I am going 
to leave someone out now, it's been great to be here, 150 
years, combined services, incredible, but I am also certain 
that there is new people with new energy, hopefully new 
diversity coming into this council, which I think is 
important, that it really reflects the county as a whole 
and I think that is going to be a fantastic thing, to my 
party colleagues, it's been fantastic, the party, first of 
all to give you the opportunity to actually represent them 
has been fantastic, to the time I have spent with my 
colleagues here it's been a fantastic bunch of people, I 
think we have been extremely united and hopefully we have 
managed to achieve the lot. To the other councillors in the 
council it's been brilliant to work with you all too, but 
absolutely, as others have said, to the staff of this 
council who, as you said yourself, Pat, have taken a bit of 
a bashes over the years, I just have come across fantastic 

77 
 
people, who are completely passionate and hugely driven, 
you talk about us as councillors but also the passion they 
show for the work they do and the dedication they do and 
the hours they work and the interest has been amazing and I 
just wish there was some way that we could get that message 
across to the general public, because I don't think that 
they really get to see that and it is so, so important that 
they actually do get to see that.  
So just again to absolutely everyone, also to my family as 
well, because it is really important, you wouldn't be able 
to do that without that. So it's been a fantastic joy to 
have been here for 15 years and to everyone who is going 
for election have a great election. Thank you very much.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor McLoughlin.  
CLLR McLOUGHLIN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  When I started 
on this journey it was George Jones who said to me you are 
going up for election and said for what?  He said for the 
Council. I said I didn't know how to do anything in the 
Council or anything about the council. He said you will 
very shortly with me beside you and you are probably doing 
it anyway. S. 
 
O that was all of those years ago and I have to say George 
was one of those people who brought me along the way and 
most times he was giving me a kick up the backside if I 
wasn't doing it the way he wanted me to do it and then on 
the left side I had Fianna Fail Pat who insisted I was part 
of his party. I was quite secure on both ends. I want to 
say a particular thanks to the staff here, I remember when 
I started doing the Live Come for Wicklow, I had to go 
after all of the different departments to find out what was 
going on and I couldn't believe how much great stuff was 

78 
 
being done and I just said why doesn't anyone know about 
this?  Why do we always hear the bad stuff and never the 
good stuff?   
Then, over the years and I know I have said this before, my 
colleague John and I know he is going to be so missed here, 
he decided that PR for Wicklow is so important and it is 
really important because the staff here, for the most part, 
are great. I don't like going to doors when I see staff 
upset because of media stuff and things being said about 
them that are absolutely not true and they can do nothing 
about it, so for me and I know on behalf of 99% of my 
colleagues here, we believe in you, we think you have done 
a great job and it's been my privilege to work with each 
and every one of you.  
Who do I start with?  My colleagues, I can't believe so 
many are going. Jimmy, you have been there from day one, 
like the old dad, notice I didn't call Pat the old dad, he 
would kill me.  
Daire, thank you I have much. When we were going out and 
about the burst time around, we got each other in our 
humble beings then you have Christopher Fox and I see 
Mildred and we went through the whole thing together and 
it's going to be so sad, I still don't understand why Chris 
is going, because you are needed and I was really sad to 
see you go.  
Who have I forgotten?  Pat, what can I say about Pat?  Pat 
has been an absolute wonderful friend to me over the years. 
Originally I was, I am from Bray so when I was growing up 
we used to call into Pat to get the shoes done and an 
estate opposite was where we used to get our hair cut, so I 
have known Pat since I was a child and party politics aside 
you have treated me with courtesy and you have treated me 

79 
 
with respect and I hope, Pat, I did the same back to you 
and I think the work you have done for this council has 
been absolutely tremendous and you have I know not everyone 
agrees with you, but I know whatever you were doing you 
were doing with the best integrity and the best will of 
Wicklow so for that I can thank you.  
Mr. Doran, now we have a certain pleasant relationship over 
the last ten years or so and Pat I would like to say thank 
you very much, we laughed more than we did anything else. 
He has got, I was sitting beside him and I said we could be 
called the Chuckle Brother and sister, this is before me 
and Nicola got that reputation.  To my colleagues here 
thank you very much. To my colleagues in Greystones, they 
are absolutely fantastic team and it just, I think other 
councillors should come in and have a look, be a fly on the 
wall, people working together, irrespective of parties can 
achieve a lot more than if you don't work together. I wish 
this council, all the new people, all the staff the very 
best of love and luck and I know I am not going anywhere, I 
will probably be in here on a rampage about something or 
other in the years to come, thank you very much. It's been 
an absolute pleasure and privilege to have worked with you 
and served with you. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Daire Nolan.  
CLLR NOLAN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I will be as brief as 
I possibly can. I would first just like to thank the people 
who elected me five years ago, the communities in east 
Wicklow, but in particular the community of Newtown and 
Kilpedder which is where I am from. We hadn't had a 
councillor for a few years and people felt they needed 
someone and know came together as a committee to get me 
elected and it worked very well. I had the most incredible 

80 
 
team behind me in New town, it was absolutely unbelievable, 
we had a team of, at nights there was 20 of us descending 
on a housing estate to go canvassing I never saw a team 
like this and the great part of it was we were all new to 
it, so there was no one who was very experienced, we went 
out and learned as we went. I would have to pick out a half 
a dozen people from that. My own mother and father, of 
course, every night of the week they were out with me. My 
aunt and Geraldine and Robert, my aunt and uncle, they live 
in Bray, but they were out with us just as often, but there 
were two others who started the ball rolling at lot, who 
kept it going and were behind the scenes a lot and they 
were Pat Doyle, a former councillor here and Paul Kavanagh, 
the two of them were hugely involved and I owe them a debt 
of gratitude as well. I would like to thank the municipal 
staff and the Wicklow Municipal District. They were 
brilliant and I never had any problems with them, we have 
had seven district managers and I would like to 
particularly pay tribute to two who I have worked closely. 
I was sad when they left because I felt we had lost two 
great people, they were the former District Administrator, 
David Porter and Paul Byrne.  
 
I felt they were an excellent for the Wicklow District and 
I would like to thank them for their work. I would like to 
thank the council staff themselves, in particular Lorraine 
Gallagher, whose name is always on the letter requesting we 
attend. Sometimes they don't get the praise they deserve, 
particularly in the press. One of the things, when I was 
elected I always wanted to try to do the right thing, to 
try to be on the right side of history in particular and in 
the five years there were two referendums and I was on the 

81 
 
yes side in both of them. Whether you agreed or disagreed 
with the cause you have to admit that is a wonderful thing 
about Ireland we have a truly healthy democracy because 
when the results came out, whether you agreed or disagreed 
with it, people moved on, they got on with it and they 
accepted it and everyone I think was happy at the end of it 
and I think that is a wonderful thing about a healthy 
democracy that we have in this country and I don't think we 
appreciate that sometimes, that this is a fantastic country 
for democracy, that everything is so open and so 
transparent.  
I would just like to also pay tribute to the people in our 
own grouping here, Miriam, Christopher and Jim. It's been a 
great five years to serve with the four of us in this group 
and it was a wonderful experience and I also want to wish 
all of us who are stepping back as well the best of luck in 
whatever they do, I am sure your significant others have 
nice long lists for you, cutting grass or whatever, 
whatever project you may have put off, you now have no 
excuse, have you to get them done. And to those of you who 
standing for re-election, it's to stick your head above the 
parapet and put yourself before the public. It's a daunting 
task and I don't think that people appreciate that. I think 
it's a very daunting thing and a very scary thing, but at 
the end of it it's a very rewarding thing and to those of 
you who going for re-election I wish you the best of luck. 
I want to say a very small story, I have a deep connection 
to the Newtown and Kilpedder, but also Kilmacanogue and the 
connection is my mother, she taught for many years in 
Kilmacanogue National School in the first class she taught 
in her career, Councillor Fox was in that class. I think he 
has just recovered from it.  

82 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: She didn't make a good job of that.  
CLLR NOLAN: You can take it up with my mother. To show the 
circle of life, in the last class, Christopher's son John 
was in that class, so it was like the full circle had been 
completed and it was a wonderful time and she is delighted 
she has just got her free travel pass, so she is absolutely 
delighted with that, but it was definitely to say that is 
how deep the connection goes back to Kilmacanogue and the 
Fox family. It was an honour and a privilege to be here for 
the last five years and I want to thank you for the time we 
have had to work with her. I don't think any of us have 
fallen out completely. So I, no doubt I will still be 
around, like Grainne McLoughlin, I will be in here giving 
out about something. So best of luck to everything, thank 
you very much. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gerry Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: As a first time councillor I would like to pass 
on greetings to you, a huge wealth of knowledge going to be 
lost. To you in particular I sat beside you for four years 
and tunnel coming in here for the first time I learnt so 
much from watching you in action. Have you been a good 
friend and I am sure you will continue to be a good friend 
to me. Again you are going to be a huge loss here, but you 
have contributed so much over the period of time in the 
council. You have had a fantastic last year as chair here 
and as Cathaoirleach in Bray. 
 
Looking across, Grainne, you commented how well we worked 
together the six of us did, have a good working 
relationship over the last five years and hopefully whoever 
is there the next time will continue on with that and I 
thank you for your help and support, we go back to when you 

83 
 
were on the Greystones arts festival and I saw how you ran 
that and I would work closely with that you at that time. 
Again your role with Greystones 2020 and the huge effort 
you have put into that is to be commended and Councillor 
Ryan, I think I only got to know you there, you were part 
of the economic think-tank and your role in that, I was 
privileged to travel with you when you were Cathaoirleach 
of the county and you certainly did the county proud on 
that visit. Chris, I knew you through GAA circle before I 
came in here and I think I can certainly say you brought 
your strength, your tact, your guile that you had on the 
GAA field into this chamber and again you were a rock on 
the field and a rock in here and you certainly will be 
missed. Jim, we will miss the story, I really enjoyed the 
stories of times gone by and how interesting you are to 
listen to and to talk to and you shared a wealth of 
knowledge.  
 
Daire, disappointed you are not going again, like us 
first-time councillors, it takes time to get to know the 
system and how people work here and I feel you are into, 
you have three years gone and you are only getting on your 
feet. I was disappointed you were not going again, but I 
know you have made the right choice for you personally. Pat 
isn't here, I used to follow you with hurling teams around 
the years and I have seen the tremendous work Pat did if in 
his community in Carnew and I will be missed. So again 
thank you to all 7 of you for your help and support over 
the last five years.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Councillor Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: I know you are probably waiting for the 
refreshments so I won't delay things. I fully totally and 

84 
 
utterly agree with everything that has been said about 
everything about the retired councillors. I wish you every 
health, happiness and success in the rest of your lives. I 
am just looking down, I see mother, sisters, sons, 
daughters, brothers, all of the family members here today, 
as has already been said by yourselves, none of us can 
survive in politics without the support that we get from 
our family members and it's fantastic to see all of Pat 
children and Mary here. I know them since they were small, 
myself and they have given you, as you know, massive and 
huge support. In particular I want to single out Susan Fox, 
while everyone has talked about Johnny and Mildred and 
Christopher and rightly so there was one person who was the 
beating heart of the Fox organisation from day one and I 
don't think she got the full credit they is entitled to, so 
Susan to you, a very big thank you on behalf of all of the 
people of county Wicklow.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, Miriam Murphy.  
CLLR MURPHY: I wasn't going to speak, I actually wasn't 
going to speak, but I couldn't let it go out the door.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You couldn't resist it.  
CLLR MURPHY: I might never be here again. There is 7 
outstanding councillors leaving today and I came in five 
years ago and I know Alison, I can't think of your name 
now, I came in and they were fighting over where our seats 
would go and I turned around and said Jesus Christ, no one 
ever fights over my seat, no one wants it and she still 
slags me about it. Grainne, you were the first person that 
came up and said to me, look it, we are here now and we 
will sail this storm together and I think we have done that 
as women and as independent women and I am very proud to 
say that. Pat, the chairman, seen a good-looking woman, 

85 
 
besides his wife and decided to take me under his wing. 
There was two reasons for that, he needed me as a sideliner 
and I needed him to get on the Wicklow Tourism Board.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: It was a mutual attraction.  
CLLR MURPHY: It was a mutual attraction, actually my name 
is Mary by the way. I came in and I was accepted for me and 
me as a person and I will have to say sincerely thank you 
to every one of us. Especially the outgoing councillors. I 
am probably going out more broken-hearted than everyone 
else, because will is not many women who can say they can 
lose three men in the one day. In all honesty it's 
devastating. I don't know who is going to sit beside me and 
it's a big, if I am here, it's going to be a big change for 
me. But look it, all I can say is you all supported me and 
Chris has a special link with me because of family 
connection and that family connection died not so long ago 
but I value our friendship, Chris. Thank you. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We are coming near to the end now. Shay 
Cullen.  
CLLR S CULLEN: Just like previous speakers I want to pay 
tribute to all seven councillors.  
 
Firstly to you, Cathaoirleach, I have always seen you as 
the father of the council. You are not afraid to make a 
tough decision, whether it's popular or not, and certainly 
you need to be commended for your efforts over the last 
whatever, 30 years that you have been here. The 
contribution you have made to this county, the experience, 
the dedication that you have shown is to be commended and I 
would just like to wish you well in your retirement, I 
think it's unfortunate that you are leaving, like the other 
six councillors, but I wish you well in your retirement. To 

86 
 
both of my colleagues here on my right-hand side councillor 
Ryan and Councillor McLoughlin. When I came in here it was 
a daunting prospect not knowing what happened. Certainly my 
colleagues Councillor Ryan and Grainne here beside me were 
experienced and knew how to guide me in the right 
direction. I appreciate that from both of you. I have been 
lucky enough to sit on the community SPC with Jim, I will 
call you Jim rather than councillor. Jim has a wealth of 
experience, he will certainly be sadly missed by the people 
of west Wicklow, we had a nice tribute to him on our last 
SPC meeting, there is no question you have given a 
tremendous service to your county, in particular west 
Wicklow, I think you should be very proud of your 
achievements on that. Councillor Doran, the quiet man, a 
very productive man, particularly in the Carnew area. Might 
not say a lot, but get things done and was a popular man 
with councillors and staff alike. Daire, my municipal 
colleague, you mention your support base in Newtown and 
Kilpedder, there is no doubt you have served those well for 
the last five years and you have should be very proud of 
everything you have achieved in the area over the last five 
years and I would like to wish you well in your future 
roles. To my good friend Councillor Fox.  
I suppose a little story I have, about five-and-a-half 
years ago when I was considering going for Wicklow County 
Council myself I went over to visit Chris on the farm and 
we sat down on a bail of straw and we had a chat about what 
was involved as a councillor and he told me nothing only a 
pack of lies. And to add insult to injury he is leaving me 
now. He has a bigger smile on his face on the day he is 
leaving. To my mind I am disappointed he is leaving, I 
think he is far too young, sorry to say that to him, to be 

87 
 
leaving this council. His experience, his dedication, his 
vision, his promotion of the county, it was mentioned 
earlier about the word respect, he has respect for 
everyone, whatever side of the fence you might be on, he 
will respect your point of view and that doesn't come easy 
in this job and it's just his dedication to the people that 
he serves, across the county because I know he has served 
people across all parts of county Wicklow and never says no 
to anyone, I think that is tremendous testament to his 
efforts and values that he has. He will certainly be missed 
by, certainly by myself and certainly by all of the other 
people, particularly in the other areas of the people that 
he has ably supported and so again I wish you very well, 
make sure that herd of cows are looked after well and enjoy 
your retirement, well done. APPLAUSE.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: On behalf of myself and our group I would 
like to wish everyone all the very best in your retirement, 
retirement, it's probably not retirement, it's probably a 
career change is a better way to describe it. I find coming 
into the chamber brings it back to a sporting parlance is 
like playing a football match or a hurling match back in 
the day when the ball, you came in here the ball is thrown 
in and we get stuck in in different ways. Sometimes we 
agree with each other, sometimes we argue with each other 
and that is democracy and it's healthy and it's good for 
our constituents but when the whistle is blown we are good 
pals and friends. I want to wish every single one of you 
the very best. Some of you are very young and age, I don't 
buy into the age thing, I think it's just a number.  
 
So I have no doubt that you will probably rethink as time 

88 
 
goes by and you will probably end up back in here. I just 
want to wish everyone, it's great to see the families here 
supporting you and the traditions and everything else, but 
you can't beat the bit of competition, it's great. We can't 
all agree with each other, we have to have an argument, 
chair, if I can, and Grainne, because I have worked with 
you in the town council and the district council for many 
years. He always had a great team and we agree and 
sometimes we might have the odd disagreement and again I 
think that is very good, personally, but talking to you 
about yourself, Chair, I have a lot of respect for you, I 
have had a fair bit of interaction with you, I haven't 
always agreed one and you haven't always agreed with me and 
there is nothing wrong with that at all.  
 
It's all part of what we did, every one of us has different 
opinions on how the world should be and how things should 
be, but the one abiding memory I have of you and every time 
we end up in a situation when we are having conversations I 
always think of it and that is you walking down the main 
street in Bray past Woolworths and you were heading down to 
go out to play for Bray Wanderers, that is the memory I 
always have of you. Every time I have an argument with you, 
I think of that. I wish you the best, you have had a long 
political career and I am sure you have enjoyed it, it's a 
challenging activity, it's an enjoyable activity, but the 
public own you once you get into it, whether you like it or 
don't like it, that is the way it is. I think most of us 
probably enjoy out of what we do here is being of service 
to the community and servicing people and trying to do our 
best in every way we can for them, so I wish every single 
one of you the very best.   

89 
 
Enjoy what you decide to do going forward and if you change 
your mind you might come back into the chamber under a 
different guise so well done, everyone.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We have three more councillors and then I 
want to let Frank in for a minute and I am conscious of 
catering staff upstairs as well, so please. Councillor John 
Snell.  
CLLR SNELL: I will be as brief as I can be. I suppose it 
will be seen as a sad day indeed for the loss of the 
experience, the hard work and the honesty that I whether 
refer to you as the magnificent 7. Over the course of my 
ten years here, decades here in this chamber, I certainly 
appreciate each and every one of you individually and 
collectively and I won't discuss sports, whether it be 
football, hurling or Gaelic, because where I am from we 
don't forgive, so we won't mention anything about sporting 
achievements or otherwise. But certainly, while it is a sad 
day for Wicklow County Council and the staff and the 
members of these chambers to lose that experience from the 
shortest term to the longest term,. 
 
I think each and every one of you in your own rights have 
achieved a huge amount for the county and as Jimmy 
Shaughnessy used to say, our garden county and this county 
of ours. I just feel like no doubt we are losing you to the 
chambers but as a county we won't be losing you and the 
most important thing outside of, because this is the 
toughest challenge anyone can have is to be a public 
representative.  
I would sooner play against Carnew or any of these teams 
but certainly, at least your families will get you back and 
that they will enjoy having you 100% around the house and 

90 
 
under their feet. Certainly for a week or two.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I don't know about that.  
CLLR SNELL: I certainly want to thank you on behalf of 
myself and Gerry and Oliver, I think it would be remiss if 
you didn't mention today of all days, Councillor Pat 
Kavanagh, Mervyn Morrison and Conal Kavanagh.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Thornhill and last speaker is 
Nicola Lawless then.  
CLLR THORNHILL: [Speaking in Irish]  Cathaoirleach, may I 
just say I would agree with what everyone has said. I wish 
everyone that is retiring the best and I myself, like my 
colleague and speak on behalf of our group, the group, I 
like to say that like Councillor O'Brien and myself, newly, 
new people to the council, we do appreciate the fact that, 
being a councillor it's a very hard job from the point of 
view that you are putting your head above the parapet and 
an awful lot of people can't see, but the thing about it is 
there is so much in it, but I would like to say especially 
and I know from my own view, to your family, to your 
spouses to your children, people don't realise what an 
intrusion it is to your life and you are doing it for the 
best, I mean people are there and they say, well, what are 
you doing, but fair play to anyone, for putting your head 
above the parapet and I would like to say, as well, and I 
would agree there with Councillor Snell saying about the 
late Councillor Kavanagh, I mean it puts everything in 
perspective, but overall I would like to say and I know 
that I, as a member, maybe things have come to the fore, 
but we have to discuss and as public representatives it's 
on us to discuss matters and put things out in the open and 
whatever and the thing about it is it's discussion and if 
we can't discuss together and I think it's for as 

91 
 
Councillor Nolan said it makes for good democracy, so from 
that, go ro maith agat.  
CLLR MITCHELL: Just in relation to the seven retiring 
councillors, thank them for their service and I will echo 
the comments rather than repeat them. I would like to 
comment on the retirement of Grainne McLoughlin, having a 
running mate in the same party can be a difficult 
experience, because there are natural frictions but I would 
say that relations with Grainne were always bright and 
cheerful. That is not easy to achieve, so I would like to 
thank her for that. Also I think has Greystones has been 
much improved by the work that Grainne did on summer 
festivals and the Live Come and various other websites and 
to thank her for her work on the LCDC, it was a great 
pleasure working with her, thank you.  
CLLR LAWLESS: Thank you, on behalf of Sinn Fein here, we 
would like to wish the 7 retiring all the best. As I said 7 
heavy hitters of councillors are now gone, but it's still 
opening up an opportunity for some new fresh blood to come 
on and we are losing a lot of experience, very nice to see 
a very emotional today, Pat, 30-odd years, he does have a 
heart, that is what I was, I was a little bit emotional 
seeing you getting emotional Pat, there is something 
seriously wrong there.  
 
But, look, we all have had our ups and downs here, we have 
had a great political debate here in the chambers over the 
last five years that I have been here and I know, just from 
the five years that I have been councillor, you are given 
nearly 100% of your time to this job and I can't imagine 
what it's been like for the other councillors who have been 
here long-term and so I am sure you are going to enjoy your 

92 
 
peace and quiet and as I am sure your spouses will be sick 
of you within a week, so with the divorce referendum coming 
up it may be dropping to two years it might be useful!. 
Sorry.  
I want to wish you all the best for the election and 
hopefully I will be back here myself and see familiar 
faces. I would also like to acknowledge Grainne McLoughlin, 
I know we are on different sides of the fence, but my first 
experience of you was at the summer festivals. You were 
like a little peacock I was only a young girl, the 
experience doesn't go unrecognised and us as six 
councillors have worked have cohesively together and we 
have got a tremendous amount of work done so hopefully we 
can continue that. All the best to everyone and well done 
for your retirement as well.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Finally, Councillor Timmins and then I will 
let the Chief Executive and then refreshments.  
CLLR TIMMINS: I am not going to spend time going over the 7 
people. They all know what I think of them. A high opinion 
of every one of them. I would like to thank the service 
they have given. My old friend Jim from the west, thank, 
Jim, Christy who started the same time as me got elected 15 
years ago the same day I as I did. Thank you, a guy of 
superb integrity.  
 
Daire Nolan, I just gold to know you in the last five 
years, a lovely guy, a great guy. May two party colleagues 
here, John Ryan who started the same day as me, thank you 
for your contribution. Grainne, your commitment is plain to 
see. Pat Doran my colleague in Baltinglass I would like to 
thank him and finally chairman to thank you and really 
thank you for the support you gave me when I was chairman a 

93 
 
year ago, you were advice chairman and you were a superb 
support and really something I will always remember and 
just to thank everyone again for the support they have 
given to this council. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Chief Executive.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just on behalf 
of myself and staff I would like to wish all 7 outgoing 
councillors the very best of luck. In particular to 
Councillor Vance who was a gentleman and a pleasure to deal 
with. So professional and courteous and you will hear from 
the staff in Bray, in housing in corporate and around the 
organisation. As councillors have said he always wanted the 
right thing and always saw the bigger picture. He didn't 
always agree with us and when he didn't he told us straight 
up, but when he did he backed us 100%.  
 
We saw that recently in things that will benefit Wicklow 
for year cost come. He was a man of patience and 
resilience, we have seen that through the years and we will 
see projects coming to fruition in the last year or two. I 
know he will be watching from a side in relation to the 
likes of Fassaroe and the Bray Golf Links and I would like 
to wish himself, his wife, son and daughter the best of 
good health in years to come. Also to the other councillor, 
to Councillor Ryan and Fox, also very progressive and 
supporting projects that will benefit the people of the 
county for many years. To Councillor Doran I have been 
there in the Wicklow Home Care and Hospice and councillor 
McLoughlin who put Wicklow on the map as the most liveable 
town.  
And Jim Ruttle and to Councillor Nolan, who brought the 
young man's perspective to the chamber over the last five 

94 
 
years. It is disappointing to see so much experience going, 
there is no other way of putting it, but it is a tough job 
that people have in terms of representing and developing 
their communities and balancing that with work, business 
and family life.  
 
So I would like to wish all seven and their families the 
best of luck and again on behalf of myself and the staff to 
thank them very much for how professional and courteous 
they have been to us. Also to members who are running 
again, wish them all the best of luck. Thank you. APPLAUSE  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Up in the canteen there is refreshments and 
everyone is welcome.  
