 
1 
 
 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 1st DAY OF APRIL 2019 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
Elaine McCarthy 
Elaine McCarthy 

 
2 
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I have your attention, votes 
of sympathy. 
>>:  I'd like to propose a vote of sympathy to Ann 
Rowntree of Newcastle who died recently, was a 
great contributor to Newcastle community and 
Wicklow lifeboats. 
CLLR WINTERS:  I'd like to propose to the family 
of Maureen Doyle who died at the weekend and her 
son Seamus works here and Andrew Daley’s TD. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To the family of Paddy Dunne who 
passed away last Friday, from Greystones, Paddy was 
one of the first members of the Sugarloaf Lion's 
Club the area there, so condolences to Paddy's wife 
Mary and extended family. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  No other votes of sympathy? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, for James Johnson, member of 
our colleague Jon Braine, we also opened a Book of 
Condolences for the victims of Christchurch 
victims attack.  Duncan worked with Wicklow County 
Council as resident engineer a number of years ago. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Members we have two requests for 
suspension standing orders.  The first one 
Lorraine. 

 
3 
 
MS GALLAGHER:    Yes.  Cathaoirleach this has 
come in from Cllr Gerry Walsh and seconded by Cllr 
Pat Vance and in accordance, or Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald, sorry, and accordance with the 
protocol I'm going to read it to the members and 
members can decide then without further discussion 
as to whether it is to be heard or not.  As 
chairperson of the economic development and 
enterprise support SPC for Wicklow I wish to 
request suspension of standing orders to be 
considered in order to discuss the recent 
revaluation process by the Valuation Office of all 
commercial and industrial properties in Wicklow.  
Proposed valuation certificates being received by 
small businesses over the past two weeks have 
resulted in considerable confusion as well as a 
high level of anxiety to the recipients, we imposed  
rates to 2020 over 100% in many cases, clinics 
proved ineffective to the timing as business owners 
were just receiving new evaluation certificates 
and did not have time to absorb, digest the 
consequences of the changes to the business.  
Clinic being held during day time business hours 
were also not an option for small business owners 

 
4 
 
occupiers, business owners have 40 days to make 
representation regarding new evaluations from the 
day of issue, I contend the situation should be 
considered urgent to the business of this council. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I don't have a problem with that, 
is that agreement?  Yeah.  4.30.  There's another 
one now.  
MS GALLAGHER:  OK the next suspension request for 
suspension of standing orders was submitted by Cllr 
Brendan Thornhill, and seconded by Cllr Oliver 
O'Brien so I'm going to read it to the members and 
the members can decide then whether they're going 
to hear it or not.  I wish to seek suspension of 
standing orders at the Wicklow County Council 
meeting at 2pm to discuss urgent planning and 
related matters that have come into the public 
realm in the past three weeks, Cllr Brendan 
Thornhill councillor will propose suspension and 
Cllr Oliver O'Brien will second the proposal. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm going to make an order on this 
particular proposal and the reasons for it are as 
stated now:  In regard to this there may be a future 
High Court action.  There may be a future Garda 
year as well.  And people are entitled to their 

 
5 
 
good name and reputation and two years ago on March 
7th meeting 2016, planning issues were discussed 
and we had a representation from the planning 
department in regard to various claims and various 
things were happening in regard to the planning 
department who were very upset and we decided that 
meeting that there were procedures that go through 
when a complaint came in in any shape or form and 
these procedures are set out in part 15 of the Local 
Government Act 2014, namely the ethical framework 
for local government framework service and this is 
how this particular problem will be dealt with.  
And I am ruling on this matter in accordance 
withstanding order number 44.  And that says the 
Cathaoirleach shall have power to deal with any 
matter not covered by standing orders.  And I'm 
dealing with that we're not taking this suspension 
of standing orders.  OK. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  I would just like to say that I 
think we should - I was given sworn affidavits. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm not having any discussion on 
this at all.  There's no discussion on this, I'm 
ruling this is not going to be discussed at all.  
Right there, is a procedure for this counsellor you 

 
6 
 
are he well aware of it, well aware of it and it 
was agreed and I'm not taking it. 
I'm not going to look, listen, we're not discussing 
this, I'm ruling on this, this is not going to be 
taken here today.  Right.  Not going to be taken. 
And I moving on, I want to confirm minutes of the 
meetings Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and Cllr Gail Dunne. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Consider disposal of .0379 hectares 
of Ballinaclogh Rathnew to Mr Aubrey Armstrong as 
per notice previously.  To consider the disposal 
of part of the free hold interest in the property 
comprised in folio WW5279F being 25 Hawthorn Road, 
Bray to Mr James Mulrooney and Ms Elizabeth Carroll 
legal represents of Mr James Mulrooney Bray County 
Wicklow. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Who wants to propose this, I'll 
and second it, Oliver O'Brien. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed?  Consider the 
disposal of part of freehold interest in property 
comprised folio WW5279F being 25a Hawthorn Road, 
Bray to Mr Rossa Murray and Deirdre Murray, 25a 
Hawthorn Road, Bray.  Cllr John Snell propose, and 
seconded Cllr Nicola Lawless.  Is that agreed.  
Thank you very much. 

 
7 
 
MS GALLAGHER:  Item five to consider the disposal 
of .00208 hectares of Merrymeeting Rathnew, being 
50 Seaview Heights, Rathnew to Mr Thomas Butler and 
Elaine Butler, 50 Seaview Heights, Rathnew as per 
notice. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr John Snell and Cllr Pat 
Kennedy.  Cllr Gail Dunne is that agreed?  Yeah. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item six.  Yeah.  We're item 
number six.  No, listen, you're item number six.  
We're going with that. 
We're on item number six you could have asked the 
start of the meeting. 
CLLR CULLEN:  You haven't acted in a democratic 
way. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm on item number six. 
The Chief Executive's monthly report. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  I'll take the report as read 
Cathaoirleach and take any questions. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Any questions on this?  Chief 
Executive's report?  Cllr Pat Kennedy you there 
no. 
CLLR TOMMY CULLEN:  I've been in contact about the 

 
8 
 
document I received, and it is a serious document 
and it's referring to the issue of a certificate 
of compliance and planning without the full 
planning levies being paid in the Greystones area 
on residential houses.  And I'm not going to go 
into. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  This is the Chief Executive's 
report. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're not taking anything that's 
not in the executive report. 
CLLR TOMMY CULLEN:  This involves a major 
residential development in the Greystones area, 
which I've been in communication with and it 
involves, Chairman, I have this document here and 
there's communications between Mr Fergal, a senior 
executive engineer and senior planning officer of 
the council.  Five after the letter of complaints 
and there's the document there. 
CLLR LAWLESS:  It's on.  (inaudible). 
  
CLLR LAWLESS:  Can I come in the cold winter 
initiative, it is an item in the Chief Executive's 
report and I believe it was closing down recently 
and we have an extension I believe for four weeks 

 
9 
 
which is fantastic, but I'm wondering, if the Chief 
Executive and obviously with housing as well they 
would actually look and speak to the minister again 
and see if we extend that for a further couple of 
weeks (INAUDIBLE – ALL SPEAK AT ONCE) 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You've done your headline stuff 
for the day you're a bit ... 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  The cold weather ... 
  (INAUDIBLE DUE TO MANY PEOPLE SPEAKING AT ONCE) 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  People look after want to co-do 
council business. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  As I say it has been extended for 
your weeks, we'll contact department in relation 
to extending that and having more permanent 
facility in place. 
CLLR LAWLESS:  Sorry, I would appreciate that 
because obviously we're very short in emergency 
accommodation and that's through no fault of our 
own here.  So, yeah, it would be very welcome if 
you would investigate because I believe the 
minister if you ask, we'll possibly get that 
because we would like to ensure piece people aren't 
out on the streets.  So, thank you very much for 

 
10 
 
that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Anything else in the Chief 
Executive report.  We're moving on.  Sorry. 
CLLR WALSH:  Just a comment there, looking at the 
supply programme, 355 units that is to be welcomed 
at long last we're seeing social housing come on 
stream and things in the pipeline, like Kilmac, 
kill bride lane, but as I said before, 
Cathaoirleach there's still an overreliance on the 
private sector to supply our housing and we still 
have HAP, hope to have HAP houses for part fives 
rather than, a hundred more, so we're still, 
overreliance on the private sector, but we're 
making strides and that's to be welcomed.  Thank 
you. 
Cathaoirleach thorn. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  Go raibh maith agat I would just 
like to ask the Chief Executive an item in relation 
to Whitestown remediation, maybe he will be able 
to let me know or the Chamber here know the update 
on that situation, because it will involve a lot 
for the future. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll get them in now. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Briefly that's for the presentation, 

 
11 
 
in relation to the issue concerning the problems 
we have with water and waste water in the county 
the Chief Executive did say here in recent meetings 
they would convene a meeting to have this 
discussed.  To see if we can have some level of 
improvements, particularly my own area, where we 
have significant efficiency in sewage capacity.  
And Dunlavin where we have water deficiency and the 
he would say he would convene a meeting in the near 
future, any update regards to that? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Anything else no.  OK. 
  
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you Chairman I just welcome the 
progression of interviews for last week, and this 
is a welcome situation, and hopefully they will be 
appointed as soon as possible. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Could I ask the Chief Executive in 
regard to the engineering system in Bray municipal 
authorities in regard to, is there any movement on 
extra engineering staff in regard to that as well. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  OK.  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  
Just relation to Whitestown we have appoint a 
consultant to do full remediation report, that's 
on going, they did a top graphical survey and 

 
12 
 
appointed a contractor to do full site 
investigation, set up a website and liaised with 
the different landowners so they'll be back in 
September with fuel remediation plan, to bring EPA 
and talk to the landowners and look to set out a 
programme for the remediation, so that's where it 
is at the moment.  They're involved in detailed 
site investigation and done a lot of investigation 
including water quality and river et cetera, so 
that's on going.  Waste water and water, picture 
them following the last meeting and they just on 
the ones mentioned here hereabout road is by 
director water programmes, approved for funding 
and with design build, Ballyconnell scheme was 
mentioned, the it is finalise and documents is 
prepared, and a large percolation area required and 
but all that design work is done, documents being 
prepared, Dunn laugh sarin, significant work 
tonight in testing the groundwater source and they 
will be pushing on with that one.  Discuss the 
issue with on terms of staff, a lot of the staff 
we had involved in Capital office were looking at 
the bigger schemes only, whereas we had maintenance 
staff would work on the smaller programmes.  They 

 
13 
 
have difficulty getting staff, I said we'll take 
on staff here, we have a panel of executive 
engineers to work on that if they give us approval, 
we'll take them on if that helps the scheme.  We'll 
get extra staff and us ago the normal maintenance 
staff to run with the schemes as well, so we'll keep 
in contact with them and keep you informed.  Just 
in relation to the outdoor staff and engineering 
staff, we have done a workforce plan so the 
interviews are held for general operatives, we're 
filling vacancies and taken an extra ten over the 
next two years, we will have an assistant foreman 
working with each supervisor and taking on five 
apprentices and we'll have a panel then of 
temporary staff we can take on if various funding 
if they have a particular scheme, take them on for 
a particular purpose so looking at that, the 
engineering resource in the Bray area, that's 
something we're looking at to get the best mix so 
once we finalise that we'll come back on that as 
well. 
CLLR BEHAN:  You might remember in relation to 
Irish Water and I know the Chief Executive has 
referred to it there in his reply, when they had 

 
14 
 
their clinics there last month I raised the point 
I had submitted a request for information on a 
particular project in Bray, in good time as we had 
been asked to do, on the day in question, three 
employees of Irish Water looked at me if they didn't 
have a clue, they said about the issue of 
engineering staff and however, I was told on that 
day they would come back to me with a response, to 
date he was received no response.  Now what that 
means for everybody else, I think is that Irish 
Water have gone off the boil now, pardon the pun, 
when it comes to dealing with public 
representatives.  I think because the whole 
charging regime has been parked, they feel the 
pressure is off them, that's another pun by the way, 
but they feel the pressure is off at this stage and 
that they can basically treat public 
representatives in a way that is just very offhand 
and not serious, and while I accept the Chief 
Executive might have a response, as public 
representatives we were told this system was 
designed to give us feedback and allow us to raise 
our case.  I'm asking we write to Irish Water 
management and we, make it very clear when we go 

 
15 
 
to the clinics and raise issues, we expect a 
response on the day if we do it in advance but 
definitely entitle today a response very quickly 
afterwards.  CHIEF EXECUTIVE: The people were 
Capital office have to be at meetings as well, what 
you're getting is the programme staff who are not 
familiar with the Capital schemes, so they need to 
have the replies re-allied and Capital people there 
on the day. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll write a forceful letter. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, I just 
want to thank the Chief Executive for the report 
and welcome the news of the outdoor staff and 
especially the apprentices as well, well done to 
the management team for putting that in place, I 
thank them for that. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Just one matter there on 
transportation and roads infrastructure which 
regard to public lighting and I know there's great 
work being done by Declan here but on the statistics 
there on hold at 16th February, 305 lights, 247, 
January up to 305, and then, I see, the figures 
there, underneath that, 293 grand totals.  Is, we 
don't seem to be getting the number of lights, the 

 
16 
 
number of lights out of order repaired very 
quickly.  I know myself that electricity is doing 
their best, but the numbers seem to be going up and 
up here, on hold means 305 out of order does it? 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  It is about 2.5% which is in line 
with the rest of the country, sometimes there's 
spikes and depending on the time of year.  It is 
something, I don't know if Michael Flynn is here 
now, it is something we're working with 
electricity, we're going for tender for a new 
supplier, but it is pretty much, 2.5% which is all 
over the country, it should be lower and we're 
working on that. 
>>:  The other thing is if a light goes and it is 
a cable issue, you then have to wait for the ESB 
to fix the cable.  I mean, I know of lights, two 
lights in Avoca that's out for eight months, 
they're waiting on a cable to be put down, so 
there's other lights as well and Airtricity are 
there, but they're hand is behind their back there 
at times because it is not their problem with you 
there's a huge amount of lights out at the moment.  
Particularly in the area I know. 

 
17 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  We'll be retendering it, ESB 
networks we're stuck with, we need to have the 
supply, they seem to be improving but. 
>>:  We have a hundred new poles, but it led to a 
lot of people had to be rejigged again because the 
lights didn't work. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'll be saying this for a long 
time. 
>>:  When we get to the summer people don't 
complain as much, but once you get past April, 
people say will you put that on the sexes for me, 
but at the moment I name many placeness Arklow that 
are in darkness and outside Arklow, it needs to be 
rectified I want to commend Declan to in doing the 
things and gets things moving but it is dangerous 
and a lot of elderly people are seriously worried 
about the number of lates that's out of synch. 
CLLR FOX:  Thank you Chairman.  Thanks to the 
Chief Executive for the report.  Just in relation 
to recruitment:  And in particular the law 
department I know our law agent that is retired and 
I wish him well in his retirement and we have a new 
replacement and I wish her well in her role, but 
some of the disposals that we have disposed of 

 
18 
 
earlier in the meeting, could take a number of years 
to sort out because of the staffing issues within 
the law section.  I have disposals, I have one 
particular disposal and it is probably seven or 
eight years at this stage, that's been caught in 
the system.    It is an area that needs 
recruitment, can I get some assurance from the 
Chief Executive that the legal or law department 
will acquire additional staff because we need to 
get the legal issues like disposal notices and 
other issues sorted out the length of time these 
issues are taking is not appropriate thank you 
Chairman. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm well aware of that as well and 
I talked to the Chief Executive I'll let him answer 
that himself 
CLLR FORTUNE:  It is pretty urgent we get the ESB 
to act I'll he a tell you why, I'm aware of a 
situation in my area lights have not been working 
for nearly over a year-and-a-half at this stage and 
there's no sign of it being fixed.  It would be 
dangerous in the dark evenings we'll have dark 
evenings for another short while but if somebody 
could get on to the ESB and get them to do it, 

 
19 
 
because they don't seem to be reacting to being 
asked what they're asked to do. and also, there's 
in the, in Kilcoole the Ballycoan area there are 
lights installed by a developer, they never worked 
but I wonder under Sean's area planning section if 
we can put pressure on to get sorted because it is 
a serious problem as well because it is on the way 
to a school.  So, it does need to be dealt with as 
well.  I'm saying it now and Sean is listening to 
me.  So, but it is very important. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  In relation I have a new law 
agent coming so we have a solicitor and two 
executive solicitors, we advertised for a 
temporary executive solicitor to deal with the 
backlog, there wasn't much interest so we 
re-advertised for permanent post, as of Friday, we 
have six in, so we'll have somebody to concentrate 
on that, so these interviews will be coming up.  
Lighting, we re-tendering it, and we need to talk 
to ESB networks that's the other part of the 
equation we need to speed up on. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Seven to note joint, note that.  
OK.  8. 

 
20 
 
 
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  Presentation by Mr M Nicholson 
and Cllr Grainne McLoughlin. 
>>:  Cllr Grainne McLoughlin will say a few Words 
First. 
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  Thank you Michael, I never 
thought I'd see the day I'd be sitting up here but 
anyway, when I took over the Chair from Pat Casey 
the LCDC were coming to grips with new 
responsibilities for the major development 
programmes in the county, along with the 
department, and the partnership companies were 
still working out the strategic and governance 
arrangements for each of the partners, we were all 
dealing with the scale of change that was going on, 
but we got there.  And both side cap and leader are 
up and running and making a huge contribution to 
community and enterprise development in the 
county.  This report is testament to that.    In 
2016, the local economic and community plan had 
just been completed and adopted and the 
implementation phase of that was just beginning, 
this plan, combines community and economic 
elements working together for the development of 

 
21 
 
the county, it is not a static plan.  It is 
monitored and adapted every three months by the 
LECP advisory committee and progress report to the 
LCDC to development and enterprise report SPC, over 
the three years, the progress has been simply 
amazing, we have worked with major agencies 
delivering high quality integrated services, such 
as the HSE, connection for life, action plans for 
suicide prevention in County Wicklow and healthy 
Wicklow county plan, children and young people's 
plan and now working on a new plan.  W County 
Wicklow food and beverage, age friendly strategy 
and digital strategy and others with JPC, CWP and 
KWETB.  LCDC is developing a migrant development 
strategy in Wicklow, we have avenue had hugely 
successful meeting W ten meetings with excellent 
participation, and this does not include the many 
off site communities we had and the subgroup 
meetings, we have worked closely with other 
agencies, and especially with County Wicklow with 
rural and you are again regeneration such as town 
and village scheme, Clar, community enhancement 
programme, urban and rural regeneration scale, 
healthy Ireland fund and outdoor recreational 

 
22 
 
structural fund.  We have supported the civil 
society in taking part in the works of LCDC and 
other agencies through the PPN which is strongly 
represented in the LCDC.  This will be gone to 
promoting active citizenship.  There is no doubt 
that it takes a huge commitment to be on the LCDC, 
the leader budget for the county is over 6 million, 
leaders possessing between five and ten projects 
per monthly meeting, it is over 40% through the 
Budget and still more projects are coming in.  We 
have funded private entered prize such as Wicklow 
farm laws cheese, wolf brewery, fat bike adventures 
and hidden value holidays with Arklow and Wicklow 
teams, we funded community improvements such as 
community halls and funded local festivals.  And 
there's a load more we're doing just not enough time 
to tell you here.  Similarly, not project base 
asked bringing significant resources in the county 
and having a positive impact on most marginalised 
in the county, the annual report in front of you 
reports in 2018 side cap programme supported 30 
community groups and 100 individuals.  However, it 
sounds like I'm not selling it the positive impact 
of the LCDC is more than rewarding, the strength 

 
23 
 
of coming together to identify the issues of the 
county is, I believe, the most effective way of the 
working, Wicklow as every other county have a 
complex range of development structures and 
organisations that deliver services, while we do 
work together on the LCDC, there was little way of 
structural coordination for this work.  Today, 
socio-economic problems are complex, the 
challenges that face us require integrated 
multiagency responses. 
The focus of local government reform putting people 
first is about maximising the resource toss improve 
services to our citizens.  The LCDC is integral 
part of that, this annual report, before you, shows 
how much we have achieved.  Finally, I would just 
like to say, sincere thanks to our director of 
services, Michael Nicholson, who has spearheaded 
a huge amount of work throughout all the other bits 
we get involved with, and all the team in here in 
Wicklow County Council.  Some are here.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just before I go on to Michael 
Nicholson, on all our behalf, I believe I'm 
speaking on all our behalf to sorry Grainne, to 
thank Grainne for the I can just say wonderful job 

 
24 
 
she's done underneath the radar in lots of cases 
as we all know, a huge amount of work has gone in 
in this particular area, and Grainne has put in a 
huge amount of time over the years and in a quiet 
type of way to deliver the types of programmes very 
successfully.  I think it is one of the areas that 
we've really been successful in Wicklow County 
Council as well and there's a tremendous community 
spirit out there, and that's evidence all the time, 
particularly when awry Chairman of the council and 
go around the county and see what is happening 
there.  And that goes, in no small at to the people 
Grainne has mentioned but particularly to herself, 
on all our behalf we'll all be sorry, Grainne's not 
going again, like other people, but I do feel she's 
made a tremendous contribution that will be there 
for a long number of years and thank her for on your 
behalf. 
(APPLAUSE) 
  . 
Now follow that director. 
>>:  I'd like to endorse the comments you made, you 
certainly have a strong Chair of the LCDC, and you 
are a very strong Chair, and thank you for your 

 
25 
 
work.  It has been a while since we did a 
presentation on the LCDC, so I've taken the 
opportunity to put together a comprehensive 
presentation, on all aspects of the LCDC, just to 
start off and say, while the general modus operandi 
is to build communities from the ground up, we have 
specific roles leader, SICAP and PPN.  I'll send 
you the slides after the presentation.  That's a 
background where the LCDC came from, it mentions 
putting people first and the relevant legislation, 
you can read that in your own time.  So, we've 19 
members, representing all the various agencies 
across the county and with a makes the LCDC work 
so well we sit around the table, we leave the 
baggage outside the room and we're not wearing hats 
at the meeting, we're working for Wicklow, and 
that's unique, the other thing is worth mentioning 
while we are a committee, we make decisions, unlike 
say for example the GAPC and USPCs, they send 
recommendations to the county council, the LCDC 
make decisions, that's the difference between them 
@ other county committees.  With that comes 
responsibility because when you make a decision, 
you can sue and be sued so it comes with 

 
26 
 
responsibilities as well. 
That's the main functions of the LCDC to prepare 
the six-year plan, in fact we're starting to work 
on the next plan, because the first six-year plan 
is complete next year.  We are responsible for the 
community elements of the plan and work 
hand-in-hand with our economic SPC, who look after 
the economic elements of the plan, we work together 
and have advisory group so we're both working off 
the same hymn sheet and we have other 
responsibilities as well, which you can see this.  
So that in a nutshell is what the LCDC four 
functions are.  SICAX, leader programme, local 
mike and pick participation network plan.  A quick 
paragraph on receive leader is as you know has been 
around for a long time, it's a programme for the 
rural areas - now when I say rural areas the whole 
of wick slows a rural area from EU perspective, so 
every county is covered.  Social includes 
programme, we have Bray area partnership for Bray 
and Greystones MD and County Wicklow for the other 
MDs.  And again, I'll be dealing with more of 
these, local economic plan ten high level goals, 
20 objectives and 130 objectives, and PPN. 

 
27 
 
So, start off with SICAP, around for a long time, 
delivered by 45 programme implementers, there's 
two in County Wicklow, most counties have one.  The 
Bray area partnership, budget of 711,000 a year.  
And those two companies won the contract in 2018 
to deliver SICAP for another seven years.  There 
was a tender based process and they won the goals.  
The goals are to support socially disadvantaged 
areas, a lot of the money spent is spent on wages, 
it is providing training courses et cetera by the 
staff.  Again, that's just where the legislation 
came from current programme is to 2022, and key aims 
is to engage in community development most 
marginalised neighbourhoods and support 
disadvantage in all its form, anyone who feels 
excluded from the society is covered under the 
SICAP programme.  Grainne mentioned some of these, 
highlights from last year, 38 groups supported, 721 
disadvantaged were supported. 
495.  They get involved in actions, a lot of public 
health initiatives and particularly in mental 
health, huge focus on mental health and adult 
education, early school leavers, people who have 
fallen out of the system and they bring them back 

 
28 
 
in through other methods.  We've also focused on 
substance misuse as well.  Now, we want a leader.  
A leader, apologies for the acronyms, leader is an 
acronym too.  That's where it originated, EU 
funded programme, originally it was on the CAP 
programme, supported through European fund for 
rural development and delivered nationally.  
Again, that's just background you can read, 
explains what leader is.  Each county has to do a 
local development strategy and that sets out the 
plan how to spend leader funds in each county during 
the six years of the programme.  They're the seven 
key features of leader, that's what is a called the 
leader approach.  How project, developed locally, 
area-based development.  The whole area of leader 
is it is from the community up, so groups come 
together make a project and make application, so 
it is from the ground right up as opposed to top 
down approach.  It has been around for a long time, 
and been here since '92, so over 25 years, total 
spend before this programme of 15 million euros, 
32 projects, so big impact on the county, a big 
funder. 
And the current programme is 6.3 million.  And 

 
29 
 
that's where it is broke up, the total budget for 
the national Budget is 250 million.  So separate 
allocation for food, one for co-operation projects 
and one for the REDZ development. 
A lot of players involved in leader, and it is worth 
noting who they all are.  There's two different 
departments involved, and also Pobal, they act as 
go-between ourselves and the departments.  We have 
local action group in the case of Wicklow and 
others, it is the LCDC is a local action group.  
Now, interesting enough, in this programme, 
there's the financial partner and there's 
important, here before it would be the implementers 
would be partners, what that means if something 
goes wrong the book stops with us, so we carry the 
risk.  If we pay out on a project that is deemed 
subsequently not to be eligible, the book falls on 
us.  That's the first time, that was a big change 
in the current leader programme.  We have an 
independent evaluation assessing all the projects, 
completely independent.  In Wicklow, this has been 
done by County Wicklow partnership.  And then we 
have the actual applicants and they come from the 
private or the community area.  So they're all the 

 
30 
 
LCDC will act as a lag is to build capacity, to 
determine the direction of strategic changes, fair 
and transparent cry tear a we have to be careful 
that when we're voting on any projects as a LAG 
group, 50% of decision-making votes is not from the 
public authorities so we have to do a check to make 
sure we have the 54/49 split which can be difficult 
but we always manage it. 
And we put out calls for various proposals for 
particular teams.  The meetings themselves we have 
to have at least 50% quorum which is high, we have 
to have at least 10 people to have a meeting we've 
managed to have a quorum.  But we've managed it, 
sometimes a few phone calls are made, and we get 
as many as we need.  People have to declare 
conflict of interest if they have leader is tight 
on that, any member that has a conflict of interest 
has to excuse themselves from voting if they're 
involved in a local group they can't vote which is 
transparent, leaders have to sign documents not to 
discriminate so it is very tight and that's all 
because it is EU funding, no additional vote for 
the Chair, if it is voted on, if it doesn't get a 
majority it doesn't go ahead, there's no casting 

 
31 
 
vote on the Chair.  There is a procedure where 
whereby, if we have an important decision to make 
and we're stuck for numbers, we can do a poll by 
phone, we can have someone teleconference in and 
make a vote.  There is that, we haven't used it that 
often, once or twice, it's a facility we have, which 
again is unique to the LCDC.  And financial 
partner, the count is a financial partner and has 
onus implications.    Obviously we make payments 
and we carry all the cheques, they're called 
article 48 cheques, the buck stops with us, if we 
pay out that is deemed to be ineligible it could 
come back on us and we could pay the money back so 
it is a big onus on us to get the thing right and 
make sure projects adhere to all the rules.  Also, 
with leader, someone may know, we only pay out when 
a project is complete, when a grant is awarded the 
people have to take money from bridging finance, 
and once severing expected and above board is only 
when we pay out.  County Wicklow partnership take 
the applications in and to check them all, they 
constantly do calls for various teams as well, they 
monitor and do the initial checks on the 
applications and they do you will the 

 
32 
 
administration before to comes to the council.  
That's just a breakdown of the Budget that we have.  
And the various themes we have.  I'll go through 
them in a bit more detail.  There you have it there. 
There's the 6.3 million, only 4.77 is available for 
projects, the rest is administration over the five 
years of the project.  There's 25% of budget guess 
on administration.  The biggest fund is rural 
tourism and enterprise and job creation, rural 
towns and basic services, and so forth.  That's how 
we break it up.  And that was all done, at 
consultation stage when we're doing local 
development strategy, it was the public that wrote 
the LDS after weeks and weeks of consultation, so 
it came from the public, it is their document we're 
implementing.  And we have loads of operating 
rules, we have to comply with all of the planning, 
heritage guidelines, national standards, else, et 
cetera, all the procurement law in particular, 
health and safety and all national law.  We have 
some specific policies in our LDS, and we focus on 
those type of projects as well. 
Types of funding, most is for Capital works, there 
is a certain amount of funding that will be paid 

 
33 
 
out for marketing, training and analysis and 
development, but most goes on Capital works 
They're the levels of grant we can pay out.  In some 
case, 50% depending, some 75, it can go to 9 a, on 
a um cough occasions we pay out 100% of funding, 
and that can be onus on some groups to get 25% 
matching funding.  That's I suppose the project 
lifestyle from the very start to the finish and 
there's a lot of stages from the initial number one 
there, is the initial call, we put out, expression 
of interest, right the way through, article 48 
checks there's several of them.  By the time it 
gets to the payment stage really it has been checked 
so many times there shouldn't be a problem, there's 
a lot of checks along the way and that's because 
of the financial implications if we miss something.  
Then, independent evaluation committee is exactly 
what it says on the tin, it is independent, there's 
nobody involved that has any hand act or part in 
leader funding it is transparent and it is a 
thorough inspection carried out by County Wicklow 
partnership before they get to the LCDC, so they 
have been checked thoroughly, I mean, anybody who 
has been through the process, will know how 

 
34 
 
thorough the applications are.  They're involved 
and supporting documentation is strong as well.  
Again, you have to do that because it is EU fund, 
they're very tight what you need to do. again, we 
have to take on board a lot of data protection 
issues, GDPR, freedom of information, conflict of 
interests and declaration forms signed by lag 
staff, and all the committees by all the staff it 
is all very tight.  There's some issues for the 
independent evaluation, which they raise with us 
the capacity of the promoters, there is a fear some 
of the established groups are better placed to get 
leader funding and that's why they're working with 
smaller groups to get it across the line and animate 
is the word they used to animate locally to get the 
projects in 
Again, that's our budget, 4.7 million, I suppose 
three main teams are there, social inclusion, and 
enterprise job creation.  We're careful we're not 
grand aiding something they can grant aid, there's 
Leo involved with that as well.  There's the three 
teams, broke down into minor teams as well.  Again, 
just summary of the grants we pay out, most will 
be 75%, couple we will give 90ers. perspective but 

 
35 
 
most 75%.  Now, where are we to date?  At the end 
of 2018 we have paid out as you can see there, we've 
committed 1.7 million and 2.9 million left.  We 
will spend that between next and the year after, 
loads of projects are lined up, big spenders as you 
probably imagine is rural tourism, we've spent a 
lot of money on basic services for hard-to-reach 
towns and enterprises development they're the 
three main ones and a good bit in rural towns.  
There's a bit of money left so if anyone knows of 
projects send them into the Wicklow partnership.  
In rural tourism I've spotted three projects we've 
funded, maximum is 200,000.  There are projects 
under enterprise, we've paid out a couple of big 
ones, Wicklow SPCA, Wicklow Brewery and Glencree 
society as well.  And interesting projects, a lot 
had jobs creating projects as well.  On the cruel 
towns we've spread is across the county, we have 
money going to all five MDs, various things like 
Taste of Wicklow, Around Ireland, Cartoon 
Festival, Festival of Lights all got money.  Basic 
services, brand new playground was funded through 
leader, mostly with matching funding. 
One of our biggest we can pay more than 200,000 in 

 
36 
 
special one was 2,000 and 7,000.  Low local 
biodiversity.  They're complex so slower to come 
in. So, strategy for the next two years:  We've 
almost three million left to spend, we have 1.6 
project in the pipeline so they will come through 
this year and we've another 2 million as well that 
are at the preliminary stages, so, we're very 
confident we'll spend all our money by 2020.  
Again, just going to focus a little bit more on the 
areas of low spend, rural youth, buy co-diversity 
and we can move money around, if they don't come 
in on the headings, we can move the money to other 
areas as well so we will look at that, we won't lose 
any money.  A couple of things, we launched our 
social end prize strategy last month, we will put 
in a call for shortly for:  There are other leader 
opportunities, there are a separate allocation for 
food strategy and co-operation projects and money 
for a Blueway, for Wicklow and Wexford waterway.  
Progress in, six-year plan for economic LCDC, and 
LCDC is it inquiries all the councils existing 
plans into one plan and deals with anything to do 
with the community and the economic elements of the 
Copty.  We have some community goals, there's a few 

 
37 
 
of them there, you can read them at your leisure.  
You probably know these.  We have programmes, down 
the village, outdoor recreation and new scales and 
they provide money for us to advance the goal set 
out in the LCDC, you can see how they fit in.  They 
were late back to the LECP which is starting to fit 
in and make sense.  Again, we've had strategies, 
healthy Wicklow strategy, food and beverage, 
strategy of Somalia families, we fed in the region 
and children and young person's plan and feed into 
leader, so a lot of the series CAP will come from 
the LECP, so it is starting to group together.  We 
have advisory group to ensure, as Grainne 
mentioned, LECP is fluid, it doesn't sit on the 
shelf for six years, every angle has been in 
amendment and this group meets three or four times 
a year to ensure everything is implemented and they 
are a met and members come from LCDC and Leo 
planning department and economic SPC as well.  
Again, some recent strategies we've done, a lot 
come from the LECP, shows it working in the 
community.  PPN, this is my final few slides, 
public participation network, fabulous resource to 
have in the county.  PPNs are been around since 

 
38 
 
2014, they used to be community forum, it is a 
network of community groups from all over Wicklow, 
we have nearly 300 at the moment in the PPN. 
So groups can register with the PPN by their 
municipal area or college grouping is the word they 
use in social inclusion and environmental and all 
the groups together form the County Wicklow PPN, 
three main functions to provide a structure for 
groups to nominate representatives, a lot of the 
reps are on all council committees and other 
committees, and they it works two ways, feed 
information back to the other groups as well.  And 
the they organise workshops and various things, and 
make submissions on various things.    They've 
made submissions, recently on the regional space 
strategy, climate Action Plan, all this sort of 
thing, they're good at makings presentations like 
that. 
Why do we need one, local knowledge expertise 
inputted, the development of the Luas inclusion 
issues and local issues, and these are the kind of 
groups PPN are represented on all the SPCs, LCDC, 
joint policing committee, children's committee, 
you'll see them all there:  Representing on all the 

 
39 
 
groups the council has. 
Some committees look for nominations through the 
colleges for example in LCDC, we look for specific 
nomination for social inclusion and the 
environment.  And then the role of representatives 
is to feedback and make sure they come to meetings 
and bring issues back to the PPN and spread widely 
if you send e-mail about a particular event coming 
up, they'll send it out, it will hit thousands of 
people it is a great network to have. 
And they've' great work plan laid out for the next 
few years, get more groups involved and 
communication and capacity building.  Why be in 
it?  Because you're kept informed of all local 
government plans and decisions in your area, 
opportunity to be a strong collective voice and 
make sure you contain the number of elements miss 
out on anything, really every group should be in 
the PPN. 
Now, it is 290 members, started off with 640, it 
has been growing steadily, target is to break 300.  
I think they will do that.   
At the moment they're on 27 representatives on 16 
committees, they made five submissions last year 

 
40 
 
and three this year, so they're getting very big 
on submissions.  They have newsletters, e-mails, 
and 900 followers, take regular submissions in 
county wise, county newsletter makes a feature and 
loads of interviews and radio. 
And then that's what they inform.  They do funding 
hand book, trading fairs, nine workshops last year 
in particular, and obviously one-to-one support 
when needed.  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Michael. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Yeah I'd like to thank Grainne and 
Michael for the presentation, personally Grainne 
I think you've been a great chairperson, as a woman, 
I knew you would be strong, but it is amazing the 
work that it does, now I can understand why 
Michael's never there to answer the phone, he's 
constantly working there on that.  I'd like to say 
that the LCDC, I suppose at times is difficult for 
the lay person to understand and it is probably been 
a quite a while for all of us to understand it.  But 
I think when you see what Michael has presented here 
today, it just amazing work, it just reaches out 
to very, very many varied sections of our society 
and our community and rural town and villages.    

 
41 
 
And also, for me, it gives great encouragement for 
individuals to be part of their own community.  And 
for businesses to be developed in that area, where 
they have something to services got businesses, 
people have got their area to see what they have, 
for example the likes of Knockananna and look at 
the links developed through all the grants, and I 
think some of the examples from that can be Outreach 
to others in the years to come.  I think they the 
leader, the leader staff are just so encouraging, 
like the staff here in county council as well, but 
they're just fantastic to make it very simple for 
the lay person to go in with their ideas, that when 
they go in first, they may say, look it, I have a 
stupid idea but come out feeling absolutely that 
it is worthwhile project which I think needs to be 
encouraged.  I certainly think there's one of the 
best positive areas of Wicklow County Council, and 
I'm so glad that to see the funding being streamed 
down again over the next year, I'm sitting here 
writing a few notes and I can describe it like it 
is like baking a cake, there's lots of ingredients 
but the outcome is very good.  I have two questions 
that might be answered.  One is a suggestion that 

 
42 
 
we found through the town team, that with funding 
coming on stream all the time, that it is very 
difficult for the administration in the municipal 
offices to reach on those and would it be maybe any 
way possibility of looking down the line and having 
a staff in each municipal district regarding just 
grants coming through, because it is quite an 
ordeal applying for these grants and also, just a 
question what is the changeover on the committee 
for that group?  So well done. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  There's a number of members here, 
so, I'll ask members to be as quick as they possibly 
can with regard to this 
CLLR WALSH:  I would like to echo your sentiments 
to Cllr Grainne McLoughlin I've seen her work close 
hand and that's done tremendous work for leader 
during her last term on this council, and I 
acknowledge that, and certainly say she will be 
missed going forward.  Just in relation to later, 
I know Michael through it there, the work and 
benefits it product to local communities was it 36 
local groups have been supported through the 
scheme, and it brought in both social and economic 
differences to the areas.  When first introduced 

 
43 
 
I know there were teething problems in relation to 
the application process, and I want to acknowledge 
the great work done by the County Wicklow 
partnership in addressing this and the local 
workshops they held throughout the county and this 
helped to create a buy-in for leader, and that's 
again, been proved by the we see the projects in 
the pipeline at the moment, there's 1.6 million 
projects in the pipeline and another 2 million at 
preliminary stage so there's been a huge take-up, 
as Michael said the projects have been spread right 
across the county so again, congratulations to 
Grainne and well done to Michael on their work so 
far, thank you. 
  
CLLR RUTTLE:  Thank you Grainne and Michael to the 
presentations, I want to congratulate Grainne on 
all her great work in advancing these projects over 
all the years.  Her ability to meet people and 
communicate with people, her phone was always 
available, and she was the face on other people and 
representatives as well so congratulations you 
certainly made a great mark in all you've done.  
And as director of County Wicklow partnership I'm 

 
44 
 
aware of the great work that is done, when you see 
it on screen the amount of moneys we're getting out 
into communities, this is real, at the coalface, 
bottom up thing it is fantastic what it is doing 
for areas.  I do agree and I know why it has to be 
the case application system looks complicated and 
very convoluted and it does put people off but I 
would like to compliment all the staff involved 
here for liaising people and helping them get over 
this, it is wonderful to see what the staff do, and 
I mean, one time, years ago there was leader on its 
own but now this has come along, it was the only 
show in town and we're all working together and well 
done and thank you euro thank you so much from 
Michael and Grainne and a job all done. 
CLLR SHAY CULLEN:  I'd like to congratulation 
Grainne, I've had the pleasure in working with 
Grainne for the past five years and I know how 
passionate that is, and as a member of the committee 
there, I can see the work first-hand the SPC, that 
has been done, and huge credit to the staff.  I 
suppose, a couple of things, the I suppose one thing 
I'd like to say is that the public interest @ public 
involvement and particularly the community groups, 

 
45 
 
town teams, district forums, and over the last 
number of years there's been a strong buy-in from 
the communities and the groups across the county 
and the funding that is being secured right across 
the county is very much efficient now, community 
groups are seeing the benefit of all the schemes 
we're looking at, town and village enhancement and 
community enhancement and outdoor recreation and 
it is giving confidence to communities to apply for 
funding and that's to me that's a very, very 
important point in all of this.  We can do so much 
here but we need the community groups to buy into 
the process and I certainly think that is 
happening.  And indeed, there's a roadshow at the 
moment where the committee within the council 
community group here within the council are meeting 
with groups across the county and that's proven 
very popular and has done for the last am number 
of years.  I suppose the funding will you healthy 
Ireland enhancement schemes, the Clar, outdoor 
recognition creational, new strategies developed, 
healthy Wicklow strategy, County Wicklow food and 
beverage strategy, refugee integration strategy, 
these are all very welcome all across the county 

 
46 
 
and need to be given priority.  I suppose, one 
point I would make on the leader programme and I 
hear this quite a bit speaking to community groups 
is, there's a nervousness about applying for leader 
in that the community groups feel the paperwork and 
the amount of time has to be put into leader tends 
to put a bit of concern through groups.  It is 
something that if it was possible to make the 
paperwork less onerous, I think it would be 
welcome.  Nevertheless, when you see the community 
groups that have been rewarded, obviously things 
are done right there.  Rural tourism has been 
mentioned it is critical, we're obviously 
currently working on a Glendalough overall plan for 
the county at the moment and you know, rural tourism 
we're a fantastically well populated rural area 
from a point of view of tourism and what can be gaped 
through our county and I think rural tourism is 1.3 
million has been allocated and that's fantastic.  
My final point is supporting the CCSD department, 
I wonder should we look at providing a project team 
to liaise with, the community groups and CCSD and 
councils officials here on applications to try and 
get the best applications forward?  Because I feel 

 
47 
 
if we can really improve our applications, there's 
obviously a lot more funding available to this 
county and I would certainly welcome that thank 
you. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Chairman.  First of all, 
like the other speakers, I'd like to congratulate 
Grainne and thank her for all the work she's done, 
she's an extreme lie committed person to this 
project and done a fantastic job, I'd like to thank 
Michael for his thorough presentation.  I'd like 
to iterate what others have said, and add other 
things, given there's so much money now, grants 
coming down the tracks and so many different areas 
of grants, and it really is a mind field and I don't 
know does any one person have a full handle on all 
the different streams of funding coming in?  I 
would ask that any grants that are given to 
different groups in the county that you each 
municipal the local councillors are informed once 
the grants are awarded.  A couple of reasons, 
obviously we should give us visibility of what is 
going on, extra information, that we might not 
otherwise have known, but given there's 

 
48 
 
discretionary funding now, which I was a promoter 
of, discretionary money in the districts we as 
councillors are making decisions as having a say 
to where money is spent.  So, to make informed 
decisions, we should know what groups have got 
money, et cetera.  So, I would urge that that is 
put in place, some kind of system, I don't whether 
it is done quarterly or through the Chief 
Executive's report, and allied to that, I have no 
doubt that from what reassurances I've got, there 
are detailed systems in place for checking and the 
grants application system I know myself is 
extremely thorough, but again, given it is public 
money, given that it is a lot of it is new public 
money, it is very important that it is all 
completely accounted from audit trail perspective 
and you foe, that we get full end-to-end 
transparency on how the money is spent, it is a 
precaution to protect everyone involved in the 
projects.  I brought this in my role in the audit 
committee and I believe there will be internal 
audit to verify the procedures and strengthen 
procedures if we identify weaknesses as internal 
audit does, it shows weaknesses and where it can 

 
49 
 
be improved.  That's all to put in place to ensure 
everything is properly done and to protect all 
those people involved who you know, who obviously 
we all want to focus on developing.  Rural Wicklow 
and supporting these groups.  And I'm completely 
for that thank you. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Thanks Chairman I too would like to 
thank Michael and Grainne and wish Grainne well for 
the future.  Leader was in Baltinglass and moved 
to Rathdrum and with Wicklow County Council 
buildings, that's a loss to the rural part of the 
county and there's talk at the moment of 
reallocating some of the work to the old courthouse 
in Baltinglass and I support that, and I sincerely 
hope the County Wicklow and partnership and council 
will ensure we do get that office back into 
Baltinglass. 
I think part of the problem there is in regard to 
the side cap in the rural areas is difficult, 
particularly when you don't have a regional office 
and I think that's why the office in Baltinglass 
will be progressive in that regard.  I think 
Michael the fact that a 50% at meetings is pointing 
and needs to be looked at.  This is probably the 

 
50 
 
most important to me, meetings that we have in the 
county, probably is the most important and 50% of 
meet syncs somewhat disappointing in that regard.  
I'd advocated here for expansion of the Clar 
programme, I don't see it happened, it hasn't 
happened, Nokia nana is the only village where it 
operates.  I see the small towns and villages in 
county Carlow, they're included in the Clar 
programme and we have to continue to pursue the 
department in regard to include a lot more County 
Wicklow in the programme.  I know Michael you have 
attended some of the Board meetings of Wicklow 
partnership in the past and in view of the fact 
there's new members coming on to the Board recently 
and some are joining in the next few weeks ago well, 
it is important that you yourself Michael, would 
come back to the Board meeting in the near future 
and give update what is actually happening with the 
leader programme and all the different aspect in 
regards to it is important we continue to inform 
the Board of what is actually happening there.  So, 
thanks very much both of you. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thank you.  Thanks for the 
presentation and more so, thanks for the report, 

 
51 
 
I genuine lie enjoyed reading the report, that 
might sound a bit nerdy but it was full of action, 
everything that was there jumped out at me and then 
there was more and then there was more and that is 
to be commended, and I think when Michael talks 
about people coming into a room and taking off their 
hats metaphorically, I think that's important 
because in one sense it is easy to do collaboration 
and get people around but cohesion is a different 
world and get people to work together and buy into 
something, clearly this report shows us that has 
worked and I hope that is maintained, in the future.  
I'd like to commend how for me, and I work in the 
youth sector more so than everywhere else and I see 
young people throughout the report and I really 
appreciate that, and so do they, and I want to 
recognise that all this stuff happens and it is out 
there, and we get our recognition, but it channels 
back in here and that's important.  So, we have our 
link person in this building, and it is important 
that the recognition travels all the way back.  So, 
I really, as I say, enjoyed the report and if we 
could, if the people out there, heard more and more 
these stories and they were transmitted in a way 

 
52 
 
that's accessible, I think they maybe would 
appreciate a lot of work is done and should be 
commended so thanks. 
  
CLLR THORNHILL:  Go raibh maith agat first of all 
I concur with everyone has said and I would like 
to wish Grainne the best of luck in her retirement 
and like to say to Michael well done because it is 
until you see what is involved in all the different 
items, in relation to myself, I've been involved 
in numerous items in relation to the PPN, but 
there's one item there, County Wicklow older 
person's council, and I must say it's great to see 
this being promoted and last week I was in Belfast 
with a group and seeing how the work is being done 
up there in relation to community, and I think it 
is a great that you could see community relations 
being fostered between north and south and great 
to see what they're working there and what we can 
learn.  In relation to Bray area partnership which 
I see here has been involved with a lot of 
participants and groups, one thing I see there is 
how they overachieve targets.  One question I 
would like to ask Michael is I know a while back 

 
53 
 
there was a breakdown the PPN, the Bray area 
partnership in relation to the whole thing about 
funding and whichever, maybe he might be able to 
explain to me exactly what was the background to 
that and how are things going for the future?  Go 
raibh maith agat. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's it finished and Michael 
briefly as brief as you can.  We want to move on. 
Michael:  There's a few questions there. 
Yeah, I mean, I suppose the more work we do in CCSD, 
the more depend on the MD staff.  But so far, we've 
managed to do that very well.  We do have 
workshops, it was mentioned we're having workshops 
over the county where we're encouraging people to 
make applications and we have lined up speakers who 
have been through the process, so they explain how 
the process worked for them and that's proving to 
be fruitful.  Changeover the committee, we'll have 
new LCD team and when the local elections next month 
we'll have new members on the LCDC and new Chair 
as well so that will take place after the elections. 
As regards the time it takes for leader 
application, the reason why we're having workshops 
is to explain people there's no real need to be 

 
54 
 
nervous, it is straightforward but you have to go 
through metaphorically, a lot doesn't apply to 
every application and those through the process, 
while it takes time it is very, very worthwhile 
because there is serious money available for those 
who make the applications.    We don't really need 
project team as such, we have enough on the ground 
to do the applications, we did look at project team 
but with the staff of CWP make themselves available 
to go through applications and they're very well 
and sit down with anybody and go through an 
application.  But something we look at certainly 
if we see a problem, we'll revisit that.  As 
regards audit, up to now the local authority had 
no role in the audit of SICAP and that's changed 
this year, the local government auditor can now 
audit so we can be audited by the auditor ourselves 
and department and the EU.  So, I think it is fair 
to say that from audit point of view things are very 
tight and should be no problems there. 
The 50% is the quorum for meetings but we get full 
attendance. We need 50% but we get an awful lot 
more.  We're good although attending all sectors.  
Sometimes we need to ensure we get a 49/51 split 

 
55 
 
but people do attend very well.  That's all the 
questions that I can talk to individuals, regard 
to the last question with Cllr Brendan Thornhill 
we can talk to him privately.  We have a role to 
oversee SICAP and leader and we take our job very 
seriously, if we have issues, we have no problem 
raising them, but I'll talk to Cllr Brendan 
Thornhill privately if that suits you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much and thank you 
for the work you have done with regard to this, it 
is very successful department thank you very much 
indeed.  
Now we're into nine.  Progress record from the 
regional spatial strategy.  Head planner in this 
area Sorcha Walsh. 
Sorcha:  I hope you don't have presentation 
fatigue.    Thank you, OK, this is the regional 
plan for our region, as you probably all know at 
this stage, we have a larger region than we ever 
had before so it includes Dublin counties and 
ourselves and Meath and Louth and well as Longford 
Westmeath Meath Offaly and leash.  So, here's a 
diagram of the process, where we're at, on the 
right-hand-side are the various different stages 

 
56 
 
of public consultation and preparing draft plans 
and so on, and we're on the second last stage public 
Connell consultation on material amendments.  
This public consultation phase is going from the 
15th of March, to 12th of April, any submissions 
can be made to regional authority, not to be made 
to us.  So, the assembly adopted a draft regional 
plan before Christmas, and invited submissions 
between 5th of notch, and at the time we would have 
given a presentation on this, we made a submission, 
two one from the executive and one from yourselves, 
they received 315 submissions in total.  So, our 
two submissions, we'd quite a number of issues we 
raised, eye to the up, we raised 38 points in the 
executive submission and 19 in the members 
submission, but a lot of the points did overlap.  
So, the director of the Regional Assembly prepared 
a report on the submissions and issued it to the 
members of the Regional Assembly in February and 
had a meeting two days later.  They didn't have a 
lot of time to consider it in the last two days, 
we assessed it and we, there were a number of issues 
we felt the regional team hadn't addressed or had 
hadn't addressed in the way we liked, and we 

 
57 
 
provided our assessment to the regional assembly 
members.  After that meeting, on the 15th, the 
members were invited to propose motions.  So, 29 
valid motions were submitted including eight from 
our Wicklow County Council representatives which 
is a good proportion, so you can see how the 
representatives are engaged in the process.  The 
director of the Regional Assembly did a report on 
the proposed motions and the full Regional Assembly 
considered all motions and passed some and didn't 
pass others.  And those, agreed changes are what 
on public display now.  Now only the changes that 
are material are on display, which as I'll come to 
later is problematic, as you know when we do 
development plans if any of the changes are 
material, we publish the whole lot even the ones 
that aren't material so the public can see 
everything and comment on everything, in this case, 
they've decide today only publish material 
amendments so there's a few amendments that haven't 
been published but are to be made.  So, it's a bit 
challenging because it is a bit, there's gaps in 
it, but we'll do our best to get through it.  This 
terms of the motions put forward by the County 

 
58 
 
Wicklow representatives, although we had raised 30 
points when it came to that stage we realised that 
the director of the Regional Assembly and their 
team and lots of the other members weren't 
necessarily going to exceed every one of our 
requests, the representatives had to sit down and 
say what are our priority issues key issues, what 
will we put in motions for, what suggestions any 
chance of getting through the other members and 
counties so.  The focus was firstly, the issue of 
population.  As you know in the national planning 
framework revised population targets were given to 
each county but there was a sentence in the national 
planning framework that allowed that in certain 
circumstances the population growth in Bray could 
come out of the Dublin pot rather than the Wicklow 
pot.  And if that were the case, then huge changes 
wouldn't necessarily be required to the Wicklow 
population targets.  We had requested the regional 
plan sped clearly that all of Bray's growth would 
come out of the Dublin pot, however, I'll come to 
know what they decided to do in that regard, but 
we felt that was an important aspect to get in the 
regional plan.  We asked for, well your 

 
59 
 
representatives asked for additional tests and 
objectives for Wicklow and Rathnew, particularly 
in regard to public transcript and rail to both 
locations.  The third item was to ensure that the 
list of road schemes in the regional plan reflected 
our desires to include N11 and M81 in there, 
employment there's a bias on development recurring 
within the M50 even Bray Wicklow and Rathnew has 
been designated and growth towns so we were keen 
to ensure there wasn't a resumption against 
development in those towns.  Item five, was 
related to, there was a number of lists and tables 
of infrastructure and cultural heritage assets 
that we felt key places in Wicklow were missing and 
the final thing was a number of map corrections, 
there was a number of maps that didn't accurately 
represent aspects of Wicklow.  So, in terms of what 
was the outcome of those motions that your 
representatives put forward?  Priority one issues 
the population redistribution from Dublin to Bray, 
the regional didn't accept our proposal that would 
be made unequivocal the population of Bray would 
come out of Dublin pot, but this was what was 
proposed: 

 
60 
 
MASP is metropolitan regional plan.  Is our 
concern being the timing of the agreement.  So, we 
will be starting review process for the county 
development plan this year and we need to know 
urgently what our population allocation is going 
to be.  In addition, it is not clear who is going 
to be in this MASP implementation group and what 
properties, and structures will be put in.  So, it 
is pushed to later stage, to we feel we should make 
a submission on this aspect again.  The second 
item, enhanced scriptive text and objectives for 
Bray and the asked objectives have been mostly you 
had considered; however, this clearly wasn't 
teemed to be a material amendment so it is not in 
the published document so we can't say exactly what 
text scriptive text will be used for a Wicklow, 
which is a bit of a problem.  We did ask for 
objectives and texts set out that major enhancement 
of major rail infrastructure is needed for Wicklow 
and Rathnew, and this text hasn't been included, 
they do talk about ensuring that there's good 
quality public transcript but having gone as major 
enhancement of the rail line down the East Coast.  
The third item, road objectives, we had expressed 

 
61 
 
concern there's a number of road objectives in the 
draft regional plan that had lesser strategic value 
than our project so the amendment, they've kept in 
the N11 and N81.  At one stage they wanted to take 
out all objectives but through members' 
intervention the N81 is staying in the regional 
plan.  The issue of the sequential policy 
emanating out of Dublin, again, as I said, we were 
concerned that this, these policies would 
prioritise city locations over key growth towns, 
so, the changes the simple addition of the word 
"and" in the policy which ensures priority 
locations of the city and growth towns, it wasn't 
clear.  So, it looks like a small change, but it 
is important change.  With regard to green and blue 
infrastructure the projects listed in red there are 
proposed amendments, so these are assets that we 
wanted them to include in the regional plan, so 
they've agreed to make that amendment.  So, you've 
got Wicklow Town as a maritime town, wasn't listed 
in the original regional plan, we didn't have lock 
Dan, the River Slaney, Blessington Greenway, 
coastal Greenway, Avondale, Baltinglass, so a 
number of cultural and heritage assets weren't 

 
62 
 
listed so we're happy they're proposing to put them 
back in.  Priority issues, we had a good discussion 
about this about different stages from Dublin to 
Rosslare corridor so there was emphasis on Dublin 
to Belfast corridor in the report on submission did 
actually exceed to this, and say the plan will 
include new section on strategic connections, and 
Dublin to Rosslare corridor which is important or 
Wicklow but not deemed to be a material amendment 
because it doesn't appear in this document which 
is surprising because it is a whole new section and 
strategy that's added to this, so I suppose we will 
draw that to the Regional Assembly's attention and 
I understand some of our members will at the next 
meeting they have. 
Some of the second priority issues were the lack 
of references to Wicklow generally in the regional 
plan.  A am in of you brought that up at one of our 
last meetings that it is hard to distinguish 
between the counties and the region and assets are 
in and challenges in each county and we ask for 
there to be a clear piece, and introductory section 
on each county but haven't agreed to that, they 
think it should be regional plan without emphasis 

 
63 
 
on individual counties.  There was a number of 
references to the IDA site under the Bray Heading, 
so, again, that's proposed to be removed, it will 
be in the Greystones section but again not in the 
material amendments, obviously not deemed to be 
significant.  And inaccurate maps, there was green 
infrastructure map that showed green assets 
inaccurately in Wicklow and we asked for a number 
of times for it to be removed and it is now proposed 
to be removed entirely rather than fixed.  The map 
of economic assets didn't show Clermont or IDA site 
in Bray and there's no proposed material amendment 
in relation to that, although the director did say 
Claremont will be included in the final maps. 
The final map was the map of areas under urban 
influence, this is a map that's going to have to 
be generated for every county, which shows what 
rural areas are under the influence of larger 
towns, because it will affect our rural housing 
policy going forward.  In accordance with the NPF, 
areas under urban pressure to social and economic 
need play a part in rural application, if there are 
areas that aren't under urban pressure it is 
exciting and design and other criteria should be 

 
64 
 
the policy.  So, we ask the regional to prepare the 
maps because they have the assets and data to 
prepare it, and they've resisted doing that, so 
we'll keep pushing at that one and see if we can 
get that from them.  Employment in the MASP area, 
this is like earlier policies, we were concerned 
that the priority would always be Dublin city and 
inside the M50 to they have propose add new piece 
of text that, it says:    
In earlier version it more or less excluded 
everything outside the M50 to now places with high 
quality public transcript, namely Bray and 
Greystones but they're not precluded or second best 
for employment development which is important for 
Bray, and for the likes of IDA site in Greystones, 
places like that.    So, the next steps are the 
Chief Executive making a submission, reflecting 
the concerns I outlined and other issues that will 
arise following further summaries.  As you know 
the submission, we made wasn't from planning, but 
it would input from roads and development so on, 
so we need to analyse is from all those regards as 
well.  We're happy to prepare a submission on your 
behalf like we did before but of course you're 

 
65 
 
entitle today make individual submission if you so 
wish.  And again, just to note it is only the 
proposed amendments on display, and your 
submissions can only relate to the proposed 
material amendments and nothing else.  They can't 
raise new issues or issues that aren't the subject 
of material amendment as you're used to with 
development plans. 
So that's everything Cathaoirleach, happy to take 
questions. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Open it to the floor now. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks for a fairly thorough and 
summary and you're answered my questions with I is 
next steps at the end.  You said there's gaps in 
that document that we, the 30, whatever, 40 page 
document we received, and on page 34 it refers to 
the N81, but the linkage from the M9 to Baltinglass 
and Dunn laugh sarin, is that taken out or is that 
a gap they didn't include that, I'm anxious we make 
a submission that that goes back in?  And yeah, I 
think that's it.  Was there something else, give 
me a secretary.  OK, we can't introduce anything 
new at this stage.  OK thanks. 
CLLR FOX:  Thanks Chairman, thanks Sorcha and 

 
66 
 
initially say a lot of the amendments are positive 
and well done to everybody who got the additional 
amendments in, which will benefit County Wicklow.  
A couple of observations:  First of all, An Bord 
Pleanála set trends, it is disregarding county 
development plans.  I think especially in relation 
to rural one-off plans, this would probably spell 
the end of one-off plans in the north and east of 
the county.  Which is unfortunate.  But that trend 
has already started with An Bord Pleanála.  With 
the Board and in particular population 
distribution, we've seen a trend from the Board, 
where they are looking for increased densities on 
zoned land. 
Now, if councils like this are to make core 
strategies or strategic decisions on where to 
allocate population, and if we are apportioning 
population to Bray or Greystones or wherever, and 
an Bord Pleanála come at a later stage and encourage 
those densities to increase, that has to influence 
population, distribution and population 
allocation.  So, for example, if we zone a site for 
50 houses and An Bord Pleanála encourages a hundred 
houses to be put on that site, really and truly what 

 
67 
 
we're doing is a waste of time.  Because the Board 
are making the decision anyway.  I'm concerned 
there's no place for local democracy within An Bord 
Pleanála's decision-making, we can't make 
representations on an individual basis, our county 
development plan has been totally and out 
territorial dismissed and even now, when we 
allocate population to a town or village in County 
Wicklow, it has been disregarded as well.  So, for 
me, An Bord Pleanála lacks credibility and this is 
the document they move forward.  We have seen them 
already take a lot of time making decisions on 
applications to the detriment in a lot of cases, 
if An Bord Pleanála, if something is appealed or 
something goes straight to the Board over a hundred 
house, it is take as inordinate amount of time for 
the Board to make a decision and surely documents 
like this should include time frames, if not 
planning legislation, certainly should.  And if we 
take for example an appeal on the data centre in 
Arklow where if we have to wait twelve months for 
a decision, that has huge implications for 
strategic decisions made by a business.  So, I 
certainly would be concerned about this document 

 
68 
 
in so far as how it will play into An Bord Pleanála's 
decisions and in particular the population 
distribution, and maybe you can give an opinion, 
how An Bord Pleanála increases densities how it 
will alter. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thanks for the presentation and 
thanks for the original submission, it was a good 
idea to pull 32 opinions together and put it in a 
document.  The nonmaterial amendments are 
immaterial amendments, are they available 
anywhere, is it minuted from the meeting?  The 
second question is on MASP and I contacted M ox ray 
about this, is this a separate document within this 
document and at what stage will we see this detail 
that, if Bray is to be included on MASP, it is 
important we know about that.  Threes three new 
objectives have been put in that mention Bray but 
probably other areas as well, there's one on place 
making and regeneration and public realm, and I'm 
glad to see that, because IDA highlighted that to 
this meeting importance to trying to encourage 
investment in towns and pray has been doing that 
for five years, our public realm money, 
discretionary fund, we've invested that totally in 

 
69 
 
public realm, objectives and it is good to see we're 
doing at local level is reflected at regional 
level.  It is good to see that.  Number 38 concerns 
me it is Luas to Bray, and just reading through 
documentation, I mean, it is talked about for a long 
time Luas was going to be Bray and always a 
proposal, but Luas to Bray seems to be back in the 
mix with Luas to Finglas and Luas to Lucan, and 
everybody seems to be promoting to Luas to their 
own particular area, so I'm concerned that the 
decision that was made on Metro south recently how 
is that going to impact on Luas to Bray?  This is 
probably a question for the Chief Executive, we 
were told at presentation that and it is in the 
regional transport strategy, that Metro north was 
first, then Metro south to brides Glen Helen and 
then Luas to Bray, if Metro south isn't going to 
proceed and put on the long finger, Luas is at 
capacity, how is that going to affect Luas to Bray, 
the members need to bring that back and have Luas 
to Bray moved further up the list than the 
scattering of proposals from every TD and 
councillor throughout the eastern region for a Luas 
and Metro for their own area.  And sorry, number 

 
70 
 
39 as well there's a new objective to promote 
walking and psych killing and that's through all 
government document how much of our budget is spent 
on pedestrian and infrastructure, I don't need that 
answer now. 
But if I could get that at future meeting.  Just 
to find out where we are in the spend in that 
CLLR WALSH:  Comprehensive as usual.  The 
proposed population targets and pray figure, I mean 
the response you're getting there, more or less 
there's no time line and is going to be pushed out 
to a later stage and obviously that's going to have 
implications for county development plan to be 
welcomed though is the fact that the 
Dublin/Rosslare corridor has been a proposal which 
has been seen to, even though it is not material 
amendment and that should have positive 
implications on the plan, transport issues going 
south of Bray.  The references to the IDA site in 
Greystones, you say there's a reference, not again 
a material amendment.  But it might tie in there 
with the fact that the locations inside the M50 and 
mass reported indicated such as IDA site is 
included in that, but I take that's a positive 

 
71 
 
overall the two will link up.  From our 
perspective, timeline-wise, what overall 
implications, I know it is nearly improper to say, 
does this have on our county development plan going 
forward and local area plans, I know there's a 
Newtown plan in the pipeline and awaiting you to 
address a plan for the Greystones area and that's 
it thanks. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I think counsellor fox has made the 
most profound contribution on this whole issue.  
That I have heard for a long time.  And it is ironic 
he's coming to the end of his term as a councillor 
and his father was a councillor in the 7 as, when 
that issue of one-off planning for people resident 
of County Wicklow, particularly in rural areas, was 
a subject that he highlighted and championed very 
successfully, for so many years followed on by his 
centre mill dread and himself.  But what I see 
happening here is what, and he has point it out more 
clearly than I could, this whole process is 
removing the ability of the elected 
representatives in County Wicklow to set a policy, 
for how people in rural parts of this county are 
going to get planning permission in the future.  It 

 
72 
 
has been taken away from An Bord Pleanála at the 
moment as he said rightly, it is going to provide 
a document and excuse for An Bord Pleanála to finish 
it completely.  We as public representatives in 
Wicklow and in awful the other counties are 
watching this, slip away from us.  Because one of 
the things that Sorcha said when all the documents 
are prepared, we're going to be drawing up a new 
development plan and it is going to be all subject 
to this particular set of plans that are now being 
improved.  We're going to be guided in our core 
strategy by what is decided on in this process. 
Effectively it is spelling the end of local 
authority involvement, local representative 
involvement in rural planning.    And for us in 
County Wicklow, it is effectively saying that most 
development for the next eight to ten years is going 
to happen in Dublin and not in Wicklow, even in the 
urban areas.    And like, it is a very significant 
moment particularly there's election coming up 
next month, there's going to be 32 new councillors 
coming in, this will mill Tate against proper 
representation of the people that we're all going 
out to ask to give us their vote of confidence and 

 
73 
 
it is very, very serious as far as I'm concerned 
the people who are responsible for this, are the 
Government of this country, who have set this 
system up in the first place.  And they are made 
up of politicians from around the country.  And 
they are allowing the powers of local 
representatives to be taken away when it comes to 
particularly rural planning and it is a disgrace.  
I fully agree that what Cllr Christopher Fox said.  
And the other specific question, in relation to 
these amendments that are not considered for 
material.  Does that mean that all of those 
amendments are now assumed to be included?  Or are 
they assumed to be excluded?  Or who decides that?  
Or is it basically something we don't to worry about 
now, that they're morals in the plan?  Thank you. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Yes, just like to come in on one 
point there, which was raise are raised by Cllr 
Stephen Matthews the decision not to put the Metro 
to Sandyford, is likely to delay I think the Luas 
coming to Bray which the LTA hope to be designed 
by 2027, people won't get on Luas further in, and 
therefore, I think they will be reluctant to expand 
it to Bray, and Wicklow.  Now that they've actually 

 
74 
 
seem to be putting it to go somewhere else, or not 
to go somewhere to Sandyford, it needs to go 
through, it's a high-density area, as is cherry 
wood and as is Bray. 
So, somebody in here should protest the national 
transcript authority about the decision which will 
effectively delay the Luas to Bray thank you. 
  
Sorcha:  We're finished now, and I'll be coming in 
after. 
 
>>:  There's a number of questions that aren't for 
me with regard to Luas and roads projects and so 
on. 
But just in terms of the Luas to Bray, what we were 
always told was that Luas couldn't be extended to 
Bray beyond brides Glen Helen until it was upgraded 
to Metro to brides Glen Helen because there 
wouldn't be the capacity in the route between 
brides Glen Helen and Ranelagh, so once was 
upgraded there's capacity to extend to.  It is an 
issue that need to be looked into, now that the 
proposal has changed.  Just going back to the 
beginning, the N81, as we understand this is no 

 
75 
 
amendment with regard to the N81, because in the 
draft regional plan one of the projects listed was 
the N18, including link to Dunlavin.  Through the 
intervention, that proposal wasn't agreed so it 
stays as it was in the draft plan.  So, it doesn't 
appear as far as I recall, there may be references 
to it in the amendments, but it is in.  And it is 
staying in.  
>>:  Including the N9. 
>>:  Yes.  With regard to Cllr Christopher Fox's 
points An Bord Pleanála, slightly different issue 
I'm here to talk about today, but, interestingly, 
when the national planning framework was first 
published and our discussions thereafter with the 
department, they made it very clear they weren't 
going to be giving us population caps and figures.  
That everything would be qualitative, so the 
quality of the development rather than the number 
of the units.  And that would mean once land was 
zoned, well first we had to make sure you only zoned 
the best land, you didn't in each town you didn't 
say we need to zone enough land for a thousand units 
because that's what they say and you pick the best 
number of acres, they are their point is you zone 

 
76 
 
the right land first, if you you've zoned the right 
land if there's higher density that is prevailing 
in the town shouldn't be the issue if it is the right 
land and close to schools and services, perhaps 
extra density could be allowed, however after the 
national was published, last summer we received a 
supplementary document which gave us population 
caps so we have both going on at the moment so we're 
still in the world of caps or targets but the 
philosophy of the best land and getting the best 
out of the land so there's a dichotomy between the 
two, which prevails.  So, look, we're going to get 
clarity on that, when we start to prepare our new 
county development plan because you're right that 
we put targets for each town and village, and if 
the bored are expecting double density on T it 
queues our population figure and core strategy 
becomes meaningless.  We did seek this through the 
process and been seeking it from the department, 
but we still don't know the answer to that one yet.  
So hopefully it will become clearer on the next six 
months.  As soon as siege rational plan is, maybe 
six months to development plan, so that's a lot of 
time to get some answers and I think what we'll 

 
77 
 
probably have to do straightaway is to start 
looking at what core strategy might look like in 
this new world and talking to the department and 
the Regional Assembly about that, well before we 
need to start the process of reviewing the plan so 
we know where we stand.  In terms of nonmaterial 
amendments, the first director's report, report 
prepared in February once submissions came in, I'm 
not sure if they're on that website but it is an 
open document so you'll see for ever river 
submission put in, with a they proposed so there 
will be amendments in there, that would be the 
nonmaterial ones.  And there's subsequent 
documents which are the directors response to the 
proposed motion, so again, I don't think any of 
these, there's a problem being published but I'll 
circulate everything I can, and you will see the 
nonmaterial amendments, but the nonmaterial 
amendment are to be taken as accepted, that they're 
going to be in the regional plan, so affectively 
the draft regional plan was adopted let's say but 
with only some amendments to be finally agreed, so 
everything that's been done to this state that is 
nonmaterial is going to be in the plan.  The MASP, 

 
78 
 
is my understanding what we've been told is MASP 
is part of the regional plan so the chapter in the 
regional plan is the MASP, there isn't another one 
coming, there's MASP implementation plan, so that 
sets the principles so on for the MASP but there 
will be exercises to implement it.  So, one of the 
things is this piece about population.  And where 
does the population for Swords and Bray come from, 
which pot does it come out of it?  This is MASP 
implementation group, we don't know whether it is 
officials or members or other bodies, or Irish 
Water or NTA, we're jet to know what that is but 
I'm sure on the regional standing can get clarity 
on that in their next few meetings.  They do assure 
us that the right people will be on the group 
whatever that means.  And that it will be done 
quickly because it has to be done quickly because 
a number of counties are depending on t   Cllr 
Gerry Walsh came up about the development plan, we 
have 26 weeks to start the process of either varying 
review of the county development plan, as it’s time 
our proposal is to review the county development 
plan which is to kick-start the full two year 
process because we'll do it next year anyway, and 

 
79 
 
there's no sense to do a variation that could take 
a year and once that's up to start a new development 
plan all over again, so it means we do a new 
development plan this winter which is compliant 
with the regional plan and national planning 
framework so at the latest that process will start 
in November, and as you recall the initial phases 
are the public consultation and seeking 
submissions so it won't be until this time next year 
we will he' starting working on drafting a new draft 
plan. 
So that's the time line for that, but in terms how 
it affects local area plans, it puts local area 
plants in a difficult position in local plan we 
might adopt this year, within two years, once the 
county development plan is adopted it could have 
different growth parameters or objectives so that 
is a concern, and I suppose our advice is that you 
know, we should not that we should try to avoid 
that, but if local area plans that are working and 
doing what they need to do, then he we should wait 
until the county development plan is reviewed and 
we know what the new parameters have, so we do local 
area plans after the county development plan.  So, 

 
80 
 
we can move through the county plan quickly if it 
is shorter than two years, that's great but we'll 
have a number of new counsellors so they may not 
be possible and straight after we'll start our 
programme of doing local area plans. 
I think that's everything.  Cathaoirleach 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Briefly now.  Cllr Sylvestor 
Bourke, I'm disappointed about nothing was said 
about Irish Waters commitment to improving 
infrastructure.  I'm thinking, like Aughrim and 
Avoca, we've been asking them for the last number 
of years to upgrade the sewage treatment plant 
there, and they've done nothing and to plans to, 
how will that sit with this plan, when we have no 
investment in infrastructure to allow any growth 
in the small villages that are crying out for 
growth.  People are being refused planning 
permission.  That is what I would be concerned 
about, it sounds great and it is very wordy, but 
practically what is it going to deliver for the 
ordinary people of the county. 
Sorcha:  In terms of Irish Water and providers, 
their investment plans are required to be 
consistent with the regional plan.  So, anywhere 

 
81 
 
where the regional plan, identifies as a get town 
or any growth is required, Irish Water should be 
aligning their plans there.  But ... 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  They are obliged. 
>>:  But the problem is approach taken in this 
regional plan is not to identify realms and realms 
of smaller settlements, even in the last regional 
plan with he had Bray, Greystones, Arklow, 
Blessington and Newtown and two tiers of towns 
under that, the approach this time is we have Bray 
and Wicklow are two key growth towns, everything 
else is your decision subject to complying with 
criteria how you designate your towns, it will be 
up to Irish Water then, up to us to engage with Irish 
Water to ensure they deliver on our core strategy 
as well as regional plan.  The thing is we develop 
a plan that's consistent with the regional plan, 
if we don't the infrastructure providers will say 
you're doing a solo run here, you're doing 
something different, so we have to be careful and 
cautious and make sure we do the right things to 
get the right infrastructure. 
CLLR BOURKE:  It is surprising An Bord Pleanála 

 
82 
 
refused a planning permission because of lack of 
sewage infrastructure.  That was sent to us last 
week. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  In regard to this, as long as 
people don't get overboard about this, there's a 
county development plan which the members of this 
council are going to make in two years' time.  And, 
it does not go into the minutiae of going down into 
the local villages and that, that's what a county 
development plan is for.  And they've specifically 
stated that where development is expected to go 
that, infrastructure has to follow that 
development.  And particularly in the major areas 
like Bray being in the metropolitan area that 
effectively there's a legal obligation of the 
statutory bodies to provide the necessary 
facilities to facilitate that particular 
development so, in strategic sense, but it does not 
go into the smaller type of areas that a county 
development plan, that the members of the next 
council are going to have to handle in regard to 
here, and that includes one-off rural houses and 
various things like that.  There's a debate about 
that, and the rural, a lot of the rural councillors 

 
83 
 
brought this up time and time again through the 
other counties.  When this started out, there was 
major problems in regard to Wicklow and population 
and various things like that, that the members on 
this committee have been able to turn it around, 
and bring significant advantages to Wicklow, that 
other counties decided to go out and down the 
negative route and decide today to oppose 
everything, and they've ended up with practically 
very little.  Whereas Wicklow because of the fact 
that Bray was pushed into the metropolitan area it 
effectively opened up for population in regard to 
the rest of the county.  They did indicate and 
we'll get clarification in regard to population and 
that, they did indicate certainly the person who 
is going into the national planning director, that 
he did indicate that there will be a review after 
a number of years with regard to how developments 
are coming about, and it would be based on delivery 
of housing within the particular areas to see 
which, if any or in which adjustments need to be 
made to improve the population area and that type 
of thing, whereas an area where it delivered in 
population, will is a possibility of more 

 
84 
 
population going into that area, like what Cllr 
Christopher Fox was saying more zoning and that, 
so there's a flexibility in that, but I'll get that 
clarified.  The next meeting of the council is on 
Friday, Thursday and Friday week and then the final 
meeting is on the 10th of May, that's the final 
meeting where the adoption of this strategy will 
happen at that.  But from Wicklow's point of view, 
I think there's clarity that is needed in what 
Sorcha is saying there, and the members will get 
this clarity and bring it back to the council.  
Could I just before, I leave, could I acknowledge 
the help that Sorcha and her staff in the planning 
department have given us, the members of the 
region, because we couldn't do what we've done 
without particular, that expertise and 
professional help with regard to advising us and 
the terminologies and various things and that, and 
we got way, way more help than a lot of councillors 
off their officials in their particular area.  On 
all our behalf and certainly on my behalf I'd like 
to acknowledge and appreciate the work that 
particularly Sorcha as done in regard to this, your 
advice was necessary, and that brought us the 

 
85 
 
results that we have here today.  Which I think are 
very beneficial to Wicklow.  Thanks again.  
Grand, OK.    Then we're on to ten now the water 
framework.  And I want to finish the agenda today 
with your co-operation, I want to get into the 
notice of motion and clear them today if that's 
possible.  Thank you. 
  
Tomorrow:  Good afternoon, I have a presentation 
for you on the water framework directive and the 
water quality in County Wicklow.  So, it covers 
rivers, lakes, groundwater, rivers and coastal 
water and for example, in a river, what does good 
status mean? That, and also, looking at the river 
employee, and the whether that's supports the 
aquatic life and habitat in our rivers and lakes.    
We're on the stage of the second plan now.  It says 
we're in our current plan at present with engage 
with local community to see what their … 
The first plan, this is where we stood in terms of 
whether we met the criteria or not:     
(comfort break).  
…This is an example, Kilcoole Tidy Towns were 
undertaking water community project.  It is a 

 
86 
 
small amount of funding, but they were successful 
and the closing date for this year that is passed 
and hopefully we'll see more applications for 
funding, it the funding ranges from 5-15 to 25,000, 
and it is capped at 180,000.  Sustainable uplands 
agricultural environment scheme, this was the 
first of its type in Ireland and it received a fund 
of 1.95 million.  The key objective is over the 
five-year project is to address the complex 
agricultural and environment and socio-economic 
challenges that face land management in the 
uplands, and also in the areas of Wicklow.  So, 
what have we been doing Wicklow County Council, we 
have been involved in public engagement, we met 
with those community-led projects, the Suas Rivers 
Trust, and also, the updating yourselves in terms 
of progress has been made.  And in terms of 
implementation, what we'll continue to do is to 
co-ordinated through the operation and management 
committees, and we continue to take our samples in 
order to engage the progress that's been made.  
There will be local catchment assessments, farm 
surveys, licensing, of waste water discharges, 
septic tank surveys and monitoring, all this work 

 
87 
 
will continue 
You no in the priority assessment area, catchment 
team to identify the reason for the low quality, 
taking on board the outcome of their assessments, 
and refer to the matter to the local authority under 
local RD public authority responsible for the 
measure that maybe acquired, whether it is forestry 
service or EPA or others.  And the EPA will assess 
the worthwhile state suss on rolling period of 
three years to show improvement hope fly by 2021.  
These are some of the benefit of high and good quart 
quality.  Protect our drinking water supplies 
unless treatment may be required, promotes 
Ireland's green image.  And attacks environmental 
conscious tourism and industry.  And added value 
to our exports, and it meets requirements wealth 
framework directive.  There's are trends we see 
more recently in 2017, we drill down into those and 
it shows there's still a decline in the status of 
our rivers, 3% decline which leaves it at 44% are 
on that, unsatisfactory condition.  Our 
high-status rivers with pristine waters in the 
uplands, we continue to lose those rivers, and it 
is important that we maintain those. 

 
88 
 
On a positive note there's reduction in river 
bodies classified as bad quality.  Up to from, 
recently in 2014-2017, they've dropped to two 
sites. 
This is a trend over the last 30 years, we go up 
and down these terms of percentage, rivers at 
unsatisfactory condition.  But what we need to 
achieve is a sustained downward trend and that's 
the object of this new initiative of the local 
authority programmes office who identify why this 
trend is happening.  And try to understand why it's 
working or why it's happening and put in 
appropriate measures to protect and improve. 
So nationally, the future focus is going to be on 
point sources and more effort is required in terms 
of the diffuse sources.    So in 2016, biological 
surveys that were carried out on the EPA, 
three-year river cycle, show improvements and 
obviously when you have more improvements than 
disimprovements, and even the same catchments, 
both the Slaney and Liffey we can see it there, so 
we have a lot of our water bodies going from 
moderate status to good status, and in terms of a 
decline, we see it is going from good status to 

 
89 
 
moderate status and for example, in the Liffey, 
Lemontown Stream it goes from high down to good and 
that's not permitted even though it is still good, 
you have to protect existing water quality.  So, 
this is our focus over the next three years, 
basically assisting the catchment scientist, and 
community water officers, and we'll be carrying out 
local assessments outside the priority areas, to 
help achieve the overall aims of water framework 
directive.  We'll continue with our sample of 
rivers and lakes, and septic tank inspections, farm 
surveys, licensing, discharge, and monitoring 
private water supplies, bathing waters and 
investigation of pollution complaints.  And also, 
to report on planning applications for an 
environmental point of view.  The lastly, just to 
finish up, there was a query on the Avoca mines at 
last presentation, given 
MYRA:  Colleague Jonathan sex ton, and the 
department responsible for the mines, they have 
made some progress in terms of health and safety 
issues, which have an impact on water quality.  And 
small be it.  But they've capped the spoil heaps 
and reclaimed the Ore bins and mine audits have been 

 
90 
 
remediated but still more work to be done.  This 
is at a very initial stage, but it is still on the 
agenda and thank you all. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you again from Cllr Stephen 
Matthews you want to come in there. 
Briefly. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  I'll be very brief, could I just 
ask Tom is it true agricultural run-off and 
municipal waste discharges sincere the two biggest 
contributors to water pollution at the moment, and 
we're unlikely unless there's changes in intensive 
agricultural practices and investment in waste 
water treatment plants.  We're aware of the impact 
current agricultural practices is having on 
climate emissions but it is really badly affected 
our water quality as well.  Thank you. 
CLLR BLAKE:  You mention the aspect in regards to 
the farmer and level of pollution, I know farmers 
are making big impacts in terms of their 
improvements in collecting farm waste and so forth 
to ensure that no discharges are going in the river, 
but you mentioned the fact there's grants out 
there, and I know we were doing inspections in the 
past as well, and what level of inspections are 

 
91 
 
being carried out and what level of grants are being 
given out to one-off houses or farming communities 
with regards to improvements?  Secondly, it 
mightn't be directly related to you but aspect that 
leads on is the sea farm programme, and the 
consequences of their actions in where they have 
restricted planning, and drawn a map around 
particular rivers and said they were prone to 
flooding, even though local people there, people 
in the area have said it never flooded yet because 
of the fact that a map drawn around them, people 
can't get planning permission, even close to 
villages as well, that we can't develop, whether 
it be one-off off houses or villages as well, they 
can't take place because of the sea farm proposals, 
it is all linked together but may not be linked to 
our programme, but it is part of it. 
Thanks. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you Chair.  Tom thank you 
for the presentation, and just want to acknowledge 
the work that yourself and Jonathan and the rest 
of the team do in this area, but it is very difficult 
because I feel that a lot of the time you're 
firefighting and it is very difficult for you to 

 
92 
 
get to the very much proactive aspect of what you'd 
like to do, so it is good there are positive 
developments that you have, started up and between 
that @ project of the community group such as 
Wicklow rivers trust, that that actually will mean 
there will be more positive activity done on the 
ground that may help and assist with seeing a better 
picture from water quality perspective but thank 
you for the presentation.      Tom:  Yes, I 
suppose with the county council don't give out 
grants but they're still available, provided 
they're qualified the applicants qualify. 
In relation to sea farms it is an issue for 
ourselves.  But the department will continue to 
give out grants for farmers should they qualify.  
In terms of the issues and pressures, they're 
reflected by the land use and populated areas 
you're going to have urban waste water being a 
particular issue, and more rural areas, 
agricultural is more  
An issue and upland areas forestry more of an issue, 
so it depends on the situation and the catchment 
area. 
  

 
93 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK with regard to Mark Devereaux 
will answer with regard to sea farms. 
  
Mark:  First of all, the OPW manage the sea farms 
process and they've had extensive consultation 
with ourselves, and the public in the areas 
affected.  And there's opportunities for people to 
comment on or to add to the body of knowledge that 
led to the adoption of sea farms, that's the first 
thing, second thing it is guidance, so developers 
are people wishing to do developments where the sea 
farms have different a status to the area, they're 
open to do a flood risk assessment and delve into 
the local knowledge, to people have come to me in 
recent terms and it is a cyclical process, the OPW 
launched cycle two of and there will a further round 
of consultation on that, and there will be further 
expansion of the areas examined under that, and 
there will be opportunities under the OPWs, minor 
works programme to carry out improvements if 
improvements are available.  So, it is not an open 
and shut case, think I as councillor suggested but 
anybody who has against T contact OPW themselves 
near the trim office or local concerns I'll have 

 
94 
 
a look at them. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Tom and Mark thank you 
very much for that.  We're moving on to 
correspondence. 
CLLR LAWLESS:  Can we have the presentation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's fine, that's no problem 
we'll do that yeah.  We're on to correspondence 
now. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, members were circulated with 
a polling day order for the local elections, on the 
2 
Th of March as you know the polls and local 
elections will be held on the 24th of May, for a 
period from 7am until 10pm.  Cathaoirleach that's 
exciting news for everyone. 
Most people anyway!  We're going into that's the 
find correspondence, we're doing notice of motion 
at 4.30 and then I'll take suspension standing 
orders. 
>>:  Notice of with name of Cllr Jennifer Whitmore 
that Wicklow County Council install a network of 
water fountains and bottle refill stations across 
each minis pal district to help reduce the use of 
single use packages, such as plays it can water 

 
95 
 
bottles.  Greystones have installed a 
Killincarrig road, Wicklow MD have concerns about 
vandalism and soiling of tap but again, supporting 
it.  Arklow MD will consider purchasing installing 
network of refill space stations if funding is, I 
had provided for same, and Bray, supports the 
similar to the scheme introduced to the UK earlier 
this year, refill Ireland is voluntary 
environmental project that's promoting refill 
stations in businesses throughout the country, 
refill dot IE provides a map to all refill stations 
in the country. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Maybe amalgamate that and item 
number three which is similar.  If that's 
agreeable. 
MS GALLAGHER:  This motion is in the names of Cllr 
Nicola Lawless and Cllr Mary McDonald council 
recognise feasibility of installing drinking water 
fountains in areas within the county that have high 
volumes of foot fall, this ensures improved access 
to drinking water and there be reduced plays it can 
waste of bottled water.  The environmental office 
says that office installed bolt refill stations in 
three and is due to install one more in Arklow, this 

 
96 
 
project is funded as none centralisation project 
under local authority prevention network and aims 
to address the shift in drinks culture to reusable 
bottles to it goes on to talk about schools offers 
scope to engage the public more deeply in changing 
attitudes and may have your on waste that can be 
achieved through again public campaigns.  Other 
local authorities have installed refill stations 
in public places and public buildings with LAPN 
funding, concern has been expressed about 
maintenance and sanitation required in fountains 
in open spaces and this should be considered prior 
to installation.  They're lengthy. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Give a copy everybody, that's 
agreeable.  Thank you. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Just for a second.  It is a good 
opportunity for Wicklow to lead on this, no other 
county has a county-wide initiative, a few counties 
have put them in here and there, but it is a good 
idea to lead. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Grand.  Number two. 
MS GALLAGHER:  This is the names of Cllr Nicola 
Lawless, Cllr O'Brien and Cllr Mary McDonald, but 
this council recognises the landmark decision in 

 
97 
 
the European Parliament when MEPs voted 
overwhelmingly in favour of an EU wide ban on single 
use plastics in all county council buildings in 
county and Wicklow and any funded functions within 
three months of passing motion.  So, there is a 
response to this:  And again, it is coming from the 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll send out that response, it 
is lengthy to read out. 
MS GALLAGHER:  It is two paragraphs:  It is 
lengthy it is a full A4 page. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll send that out. 
MS GALLAGHER:  It gives the background and 
challenges, it is a priority for the county canteen 
that it should use reusable and as a result plastic 
cutlery not feature, there will be more challenges, 
in we'll say monitoring that or banning it for 
council funded function that is are provided by 
outside agencies, but the thrust of it is ... 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Positive. 
 
MS GALLAGHER:  I'll send it to all members. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's grand, we'll correct that. 

 
98 
 
Moving on to four. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Notice of motion number four in the 
names of Cllr Nicola Lawless, Dermot O'Brien and 
Cllr Mary McDonald - Reads out Motion - it gives 
background to 17 sustainable goals which covers all 
the work of work of Wicklow County Council, and I'll 
cut to the last paragraph, will I?  Local 
government has a crucial role to play in 
translating national policies into tangible 
practical actions, it is anticipated that Wicklow 
County Council will add to its existing work to 
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals through 
structures such as the local community development 
committee, strategic policy committees, public 
participation networks and development plans and 
local and economic community plans.  I'll 
circulate this. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Just to at this stage, maybe 
to again with the new council that we get someone 
that it is the blueprint for save the world and I 
think when the new council comes in, that would be 
... 
 

 
99 
 
MS GALLAGHER:  Climate Action Plan will be on the 
agenda next month. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  It is on the end of the month 
that's on.  Yeah right OK. 
Councillor, five, I'm going to finish the three 
motions, before getting to - I'm going to finish 
the three motions, then that's it finished. 
MS GALLAGHER:  From the motion of five ... (reads 
out motion 5) 
 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Yeah, I would as outlined they have 
a campaign where they're trying to highlight issues 
for women suffering from cervical cancer, full 
disclosure and proper starting and start date to 
the disclosure of 1800 smears to be audited and 
problems that have arisen as a result of the 
incorrect diagnosis which lead to the early death 
of a number of women.  Too so, I said I would bring 
it, it has been passed by over 25 councils in the 
country to date, we're one of the later councils 
to bring it up, Dublin, Galway, Donegal, Limerick, 
Kerry, Monday happen, Waterford, Westmeath, Sligo, 
Mayo, Cork City have passed this motion, so if I 
could pass this: 

 
100 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I want to second that, is that 
agreed?  OK.  Grand. 
That's agreed thank you. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Moving on to motion number six: 
(reads out Motion 6) 
  
CLLR THORNHILL:  Yeah thanks very much.  May I 
first of all say this is not a motion which some 
people might get the impression that I'm against 
people who are on the council for years.  There are 
many years on this council, but you see, OK, there 
are many members on this council who have a long 
continuous service, right.  Now this is the way it 
is, we can't do anything about that, that's the way 
it is at the moment.  But thinking behind this 
motion is that in the future policy should be 
introduced whereas people who are council members, 
should be limited to 15 years. 
Then, a break.  And if they go forward then and get 
re-elected well and good.  Few look at other areas, 
I mean after all you only do two terms in the 
presidential election right.  When people are in 
the council for years, they can lose interest and 

 
101 
 
be complacent. 
This also would give more people new people in 
getting involved.  And in private industry for 
example emphasis always placed on freshness and 
turnover.  When people are a long time in an 
elected role, they can sometimes become 
overfamiliar. 
Familiarity breeds contempt.  And this can lead to 
an awful lot.  It can lead on to nepotism and can 
lead to dynasties, overall, I would like to hear 
from other members as I think this proposal should 
be given that people should think about this, 
because, at the end of the day it is not a negative 
thing.  I'm thinking of the overall thing because 
I know that over the years people said to me, now 
people - I stress, not against people and there are 
people here that have been members for years and 
years, but sometimes as I just said there, it is 
stress the importance of freshness, and vision, and 
if you're there for years and years, which has 
happened in an awful lot of roles throughout the 
country.  I know that, in one organisation, 
there's one individual he's been expect for years 
and years, but I'm just thinking there's a 

 
102 
 
turnover.  And it gives people a chance to get 
involved. 
And I think that it should be put to the members 
whatever they want to vote.  But it is something 
that I always thought about. 
 
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  I disagree, it is impossible to 
become a councillor when you're very young if 
you're lucky if you're a woman and try to have 
children, it is impossible, if you get experience, 
what Cllr Brendan Thornhill is proposing you have 
leave, I cannot imagine what chaos would ensue if 
councils brought this in, it is a daft idea. 
CLLR CULLEN:  I concur can Cllr Grainne 
McLoughlin, the first thing I'd say is we're losing 
some very good members who are not seeking 
re-election for the next term. 
And at the end of the day experience in this job 
is in my opinion essential.  And you know, I would 
be delighted to see some of the members who are not 
seeking re-election to be back here in for the next 
term but obviously that's the way it is.  But, you 
know, it is very difficult at the moment to 
encourage young energetic people to run for 

 
103 
 
election for many reasons.    I suppose, first you 
know, it is hard to be a full-time councillor when 
you have a full-time job, it is all earning time, 
but certainly I would like to see if someone has 
energy and interest and making difference, I 
wouldn't see a reason for them to stand down after 
three terms.  I'd go as far to say there's quite 
a few retired people that have joined the council 
and you know, we certainly don't want to turn this 
Chamber into a retirement home, but I would be off 
the view if somebody is of sound health and mind 
and willing to make a difference for their 
community, I think they should be encouraged to 
participate and be Wicklow County Council. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Any council the better the balance 
on a council the better it is for a democracy.  So, 
there's a balance between men and women, people who 
have a lot of experience and people who are new to 
the job, people with disabilities, and you know, 
people who don't, so that is what we should be 
looking for and that's what will give us the best 
democracy we can have and ultimately, it is the 
public who will decide whether or not they believe 
their public representatives after three terms 

 
104 
 
have lost their vision or their energy or their 
interest.  Because, they are the ones who will vote 
people in and I think rather than us deciding that 
after three terms someone is sort of shall we put 
out to pasture, the public will vote as to who they 
feel is their best representative.  So, I can't, 
I wouldn't be able to agree with that motion at all. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Could we have agreement if 
necessary, to go to 5.15pm, including suspension 
orders, but I don't think we will need to do that. 
CLLR RUTTLE:  Thank you very much. 
Look, I'll be one of the fellas around a long time.  
I think that Cllr Pat Doran and myself are the last 
of the 85-91 council, I echo what Cllr Jennifer 
Whitmore said it is a decision of the people.  And 
everyone has a right to put their name forward and 
it is a decision of the people whether they elect 
you or not.  I certainly wouldn't like to be 
terminated 15 years ago, but I don't know, looking 
around me, sometimes it might be better if I did.  
It is not the in the spirit of it, you only go 
forward, you don't elect yourself, other people 
elect you and so I wouldn't see any situation like 
that, it's a free public evaluation system, 

 
105 
 
probably the biggest job interview you could go 
for, and you know, I couldn't see how we limit the 
amount of time that anyone can get in their stride 
doing a lot of good perhaps, and then you're gone 
and go for five years and get yourself relented 
again.  I don't see any value in that at all.  So, 
I wouldn't be in support of the motion at all. 
  
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you Chairman.  Like a lot of the 
members, I agree that it will be the public that 
will make the decision in seven weeks' time and 
they'll decide whether it is one term or four or 
five terms as this goes on, some people might get 
one term, following their performances in the 
council, and if you have done your job, yeah you 
will get a second, third, fourth term, so I couldn't 
agree with that motion. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  I thought he was saying a break, he 
said serve fifteen years and then take a break, I 
know there might be a guy mad get in and get the 
nod, but the other has control of the system and 
there's no fresh blood coming in and they're only 
coming in for one break and then go back in, I don't 
think it is a bad idea and I accept what people are 

 
106 
 
saying the people make the decision in the end but 
he mentioned dynasties as well and we've had a lot 
of them in our country that haven't gone well and 
he is suggesting a fresh why, he is not suggesting 
a total overthrow or change, but a break after 
fifteen years, and I don't see anything wrong in 
that, if they can't do it in fifteen years, they 
can't do it. 
CLLR BEHAN:  People having served a councillor 
have to defend their record, they have a bigger 
Chancellor edge, as a new councillor you don't have 
a record to defend, you're making commitment you're 
going to work for the piment.  If you get 
re-elected, having served as a councillor, that's 
the challenge, if people decide to elect you, 
that's means they want you there, because of your 
record.  The other point I'd make, which is a more 
immediate problem, and it is something that has 
been raised time and time again, and I think it 
continues to be a problem, one of the biggest 
disincentives of people running for election in my 
opinion is people who have 9-5 job who cannot make 
meetings during the day time.  In other local 
authorities, particularly in Dublin, they have 

 
107 
 
meetings at night.  And it is wiping out an entire 
group of people who have to work normal business 
hours, they cannot run for election, because 
they're restricted in how they would be able to do 
their job.  And I think, obviously it would be a 
matter for the new council, on the last one, when 
this began it was 2014, I proposed or Cllr John Ryan 
proposed and I seconded it, meetings times should 
be moved to 6.30 to allow others the opportunity 
to serve if that's what the people want them to do.   
And, hopefully whoever gets elected to the next 
council, will take that up again.  Because I think 
it is very important. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I thought it was adjoining, I 
thought I was reading a fairy tale when I see it.  
I'm one of the ones that couldn't go for the county 
council, I could have gone in 2004 but had a young 
family and whatever else, and I decided I was elect 
today go in 2009, and got elected and I've every 
intention of going in 2019.  And, you said it, I 
didn't say in a, but the fact is that the people 
will decide.  That's stupid thing to putted down 
on an agenda.  We're getting like, halts pictorial 
weekly with that, you must be thinking at night, 

 
108 
 
something to make up and put on the agenda.  Will 
you cop on to yourself, the people will decide who 
or when we're to come off the, when we are not 
councillors and that's t not you with a bloody hairy 
fairy, I couldn't believe it when I see tax-payers 
it is ridiculous, I have to say, it is totally waste 
of time talking about it to be honest for, I'm not 
for t 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  From my point of view, not the 
longest on the council, but came in 198 a, and I've 
seen a lot of people coming and going, and actually 
I seen a lot of people coming and going after five 
years.  That they couldn't stand the job, that 
didn't do the job and they didn't, stand again, if 
they stood again they didn't get elected because 
they didn't do a job, they came in to a certain job 
and didn't do it, I remember talking to an official, 
even from the first few weeks that you have new 
members in the Chamber, you can nearly pick out the 
people that will actually last longer than five 
years, because they want to do something for the 
community and you can know people who actually 
haven't really settled in and not capable, 
absolutely not capable of doing the job they were 

 
109 
 
elected as well.  At the end of the day, what 
everyone says, the people always have the say and 
the people are always right. 
Whether we like it or not, statements we do, 
sometimes we don't, you always, everyone loves to 
be loved.  I didn't know anyone that doesn't like 
to be, and particularly at election time, everyone 
loves to be loved.  But, to say that, say that, 
probably three quarters of this council shouldn't 
be there, because they're there fifteen years or 
longer, to say the least, that's a huge amount of 
experience that the council have.  The council's 
always about, and always about balance. 
The balance between political parties, the balance 
between individuals, the balance between different 
particular points of view as well.  And different 
age groups as well.  In regard to that.  And, good 
councils have a good balance of political thinking, 
and ages and genders and various things like that.  
And certainly, anything that would disrupt that and 
disrupt member of the public, voting for two they 
ever want to do has to be not a good thing that we 
live in the democracy, we live and die by democracy, 
we go up hoping we will get elected but we all accept 

 
110 
 
the fact that we don't make it, and are delighted 
if we do as well, so really and truly, certain 
councillor who I'm not going to name, says to me, 
a month ago when he seen this, he said that if Cllr 
Brendan Thornhill reduced that from 15 to five he'd 
vote for it.  But listen, I don't think there's 
appetite for this going further.  I'll let you in 
because it is your proposal. 
  
CLLR THORNHILL:  OK thanks Cathaoirleach, 
Cathaoirleach, I'm not overall surprised at the 
reaction.  But I would like to go back to what clown 
owe prion said, I didn't say, and as Grainne said 
about ageism, I have no problem with people, all 
I said was a break.  A break, all I said was that 
a person, people would be for 15 years and then 
there would be a break and then if people get 
re-elected so I mean, the thing about it is, and 
I gave about private industry how of emphasis is 
on fresh turnover and freshness and vision, if 
people are there year in and year out, and I have 
seen it, now, I like councillor Fitzgerald as well, 
I couldn't go into the council myself because I was 
in the Garda Siochana, so I had to go in at a later 

 
111 
 
stage as well, but after five years, and if you see 
people going through the same thing for 30 years 
whichever, so I think, as someone said to me, 
fifteen years, five years and get elected, five 
years to get bedded in, and then five years to 
polish off and as councillor O'Brien said if you 
can't do it within fifteen years, and then a break, 
I am I'm not against, I would like to emphasise 
that. 
  
CLLR MURPHY:  I came in too late.  I just want to 
say that, it is like with your other private 
employment, this employment, what we sit here, 
we're in the public eye 24/7 we are, and I mean, 
it is the public's choice, and we can't hide from 
that.  But nobody is going to tell me personally 
that what I can give up and when I can give up.  I 
won't be dictated like that.  I think that is just 
exactly what you're saying, you're saying fifteen 
years is up, get out. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm moving on, so there's no 
appropriate title for that among the members.  
Final one seven.  And then I'm going on to the 
suspension standing orders. 

 
112 
 
MS GALLAGHER:  Notice of motion number seven: 
(reads out Motion 7)    
CLLR MURPHY:  Thanks for that. 
This is a group that as is fine explanatory, adoptee 
identity rights group which was formed September 
2018.  This is to create awareness of the social 
and health challenges that is faced every day by 
people who are adopted and to lobby for allow access 
to seek their own information on health, heritage 
and history.  As we see all of us and see many 
programmes on the rights or lack of rights for 
people who are dropped, they have no rights to get 
their history or anything from the post.  Irish 
adoptees have no automatic rights for their own 
information.  They have no ownership of their own 
identity.  And this is towards international 
norms, medical best practice and right of other 
Irish citizens, and this is really what they want 
to do, is that they want to send a letter to minister 
... 
  What's her name Sapone.  Who is supportive of 
this, and this is something that a lot of people 
need to aware, public awareness and give them a 
voice, so, I would appreciate some support on this. 

 
113 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'll second that.  Agreed.  Mary 
Kavanagh seconded that.  We're on to suspension of 
standing orders, can I apologise Cllr Walsh, we've 
plenty of time now. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thank you to give background to this, 
I was prompted to make this application after 
contacted by a number of small business owners in 
recent days who received their proposed evaluation 
certificates from the evaluation authority in the 
last week or so, in some cases, in a lot of cases 
in the area I represented the Greystones area the 
bills were doubled and created confusion to say the 
least, and you know, acted as a bombshell actually 
when they saw the final figure.  And you know, 
Wicklow, I this I has been the last county to be 
revalued, I know this is going across the country, 
last to be revalued and some cases, in some 
properties, maybe last re-evaluation is done up to 
40 years ago so hence the difference in rates.  As 
business owners points out to me, this is coming 
at a time when they're come be back on their feet 
after downturn and tremendous amount of work on 
their behalf, they're hit with the increase in VAT 
and those who is employees you have wage increase, 

 
114 
 
and then he was the added threat of on-line shopping 
and also in some cases, the threat of hard Brexit 
which is becoming real now.  So, lots of things 
going on there.  As I said earlier, we have walk 
in advice clinics and there was one in our area as 
well, last Wednesday this, coincided with the time 
where people were getting these letters, and you 
know, hadn't time to absorb or digest the 
information in them, and as also pointed out the 
point the clinic was in the day during working hours 
didn't give opportunity to attend, those who did 
attend weren't satisfied with the advice they were 
getting from the people there.  And a lot of the 
advice, referred them back to Wicklow County 
Council, which I don't think would be correct. 
Well, so, what I would like to propose here after 
hearing from the directors is, we extend the 
clinics and have a rerun of them in the same areas, 
and if possible, have an evening one.  With people 
there that can go through the proposals with the 
clients. 
And advise them accordingly.  And also, there's a 
40-day appeal process there for people to make 
representations on their valuations and that's 

 
115 
 
from the date of the actual letter which in a lot 
of cases was 15th of March, I spoke to people who 
didn't get the letters until after the tot, so 
they're eating into the 40-day period, so again, 
I don't know whether I would like to explore the 
option of extending the 40 of day period and also 
one last point - I know one person who had their 
rates, increased in the value of circuits 6,000 
Euro and they were saying to absorb this huge 
increase in the first year is going to prove 
difficult, so again the question was asked could 
this, or any increase for that matter, be absorbed 
over a period of time, rather than having this, face 
this hit straight off.  I know it isn't coming into 
effect in January 2020, but that's not too far away.  
They're the main points I want to make in relation 
to the request thank you. 
  
>>:  When you read the, you got this bill or 
whatever you want to call it not of the occupier 
and there was a proposed valuation on it of saying 
5,000, it wasn't clear, and I understand from 
talking to Brian this morning, you were multiplying 
by 228, I had a chap up to my door, 14,400, and if 

 
116 
 
you multiply that by0.228 it is 3,200 which was 
increase.  But the fact this evaluation, Wicklow 
County Council, as pointed out by the people down 
there, get the same money from rates as they would 
have under the old set up.  And, but, I know it is 
difficult, you couldn't have.228 on the letter that 
went out but it cowed  huge problems, I was here 
in Wicklow County Council and there was a queue of 
people waiting to see in the evaluation office I 
found that disturbing, those people were waiting 
and waiting, I this there should be more clinics 
to be honest.  I have concerns about the valuation 
system, they went around, they looked at the 
properties, some of them but only done as I 
understand it, a percentage of the properties and 
valuation was agreed for the properties.  So that 
valuation in my opinion, in some cases, would not 
be right to be quite honest about it, but the fact 
is that, then the other one also goes up and some 
will come down, there were people whose rates have 
come down and they're delighted.  Right.  But the 
ones who went up, some of them were excessive to 
be honest, I have I've seen some, some went up a 
couple of hundred percentile and I just think it 

 
117 
 
is very, it needs to be looked at because a lot of 
people have issues and they weren't satisfied with 
the clinics held in Arklow last week, so we should 
ask for extension or for a further on that 40 days, 
and let people, let it be explained to people, the 
valuation process and everything that goes with t 
so, I just 0.228, that should be told by someone, 
to get the bottom line figure, and that may a 
allayed disturbance and annoyance to some 
shopkeepers. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Notice the are complicated, and 
I'm sure the information was simple and available, 
what was on rates and assumed number 0.30228 or 
whatever it was, and that number should be put on 
the form.  I got a sample from the office and that 
number didn't seem to be anywhere on the form, and 
people seem to think they've gone up four times the 
rates, so, I would advise any business, who is very 
concerned about a large increase to go to rates 
consultant and get their case argued. 
  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Yeah thanks very much.  Just thank 
Gerry for bringing this motion, there's confusion 
out there, I've been contacted by some businesses 

 
118 
 
as well, and people are quite worried about it.  So 
I would absolutely support the extension of the 
time frame for the 40 days, because it has taken 
people you know, a week to really understand what 
is going on, I think it is important that we seek 
that extension, I know there are extra meetings 
called, I'm not sure whether the dates for those 
are available for those yet.  As a council, we need 
to get the message out there, this is not a council 
initiative.  The one thing I see everywhere is the 
councillor putting up the rates, and we need to get 
the message out this, is a national programme, that 
the council isn't going to get additional funding 
from this.  And I think that's something we need 
to get out as quickly as possibility  
  
CLLR DUNNE:  Yeah like a lot of other councillors 
I've been contacted by a number of chaps in Wicklow 
Town and last Saturday week I went around to each 
and every one of them, what we found was that the0 
.228 they didn't know how to work it in their rate, 
some stories are horrendous, one person has 14,000 
euros rates and now it is gone up to 40,000 in a 
yard so he can't  believe it he's talking about 

 
119 
 
closing his business, he can't 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes on with that sort of hit, I 
understand that, the clinics, while they were good 
they were held at the wrong time, most of the small 
owners of shops around Wicklow Town especially 
around the area, they found it very difficult to 
get in during the  day, they can't hire somebody 
in to look after a shop for a day so what we really 
need is evening clinics that give them the 
opportunities for people to extend the opportunity 
to go in and see what they are actual rates are.  
There is an appeal process, people have to look at 
that, and understand that, I don't know if they 
understand it, the valuation of things, Cllr 
Jennifer Whitmore is dead right, there's a feeling 
out there that the councillors have done this, and 
it is not, the Valuation Office and that's needs 
to be addressed by some sort of statement from the 
council. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  Sorry I 
just wanted to say that like Cllr Gail Dunne and 
a number of councillors around the Chamber I was 
contacted by a number of people who are absolutely 
in panic stations.  And confusion is reigning 

 
120 
 
supreme, and if we're not careful there's going to 
be a mutiny because an awful lot of people are now 
talking about holding meetings, they're inviting 
councillors and people along, and if we don't 
handle this properly, I fear there could be a 
non-payment of rates if we don't deal with this 
properly.  A by eliminating the confusion, if 
people haven't been factoring in the 0.228 in 
equations that's one thing, but in some cases 
people are telling me they've had a 50% increase, 
I work in Bray, and our rates actually went up very 
little by comparison, it was almost identical so 
I thought these people were losing the plot a little 
bit, but in actual fact some people based on the 
revaluations of properties down around here, that 
haven't been done for donkeys years have a genuine 
increase of 50% and I don't know about other people, 
but they have businesses people working I grew up 
in a small family business, and I know that it is 
very, very hard at times to keep your head above 
water and something like rates, which used to 
provide service charges, and provide bin 
collections, and water, it used to provide all 
these things, is now just a tax on business, there's 

 
121 
 
nothing given in return for rates like there used 
to be, they still have to pay for their revenues 
to be collected and pay for year water and pay for 
their staff, they have to pay rates before they even 
make one cent profit.  Now, in the private sector, 
you pay this can tax on your profit.  So, if you 
don't make profit you don't pay income tax this is 
a very, unfair tax.  I think it has been ill thought 
out, it is railroaded through, and in one foul 
swoop, a big concrete block landed on top of people, 
they need this like they need a hole in the head.  
So am people are talking about having to close their 
businesses down.  So, we either have to clarify 
people who have confused ... 
  OK all right. 
CLLR RUTTLE:  Just quickly, yeah, like other 
people, I have been approached by number of small 
businesses, and they were shocked at what's 
happened, some cases they feel rates have been 
doubled and business can be borderline already and 
some businesses are very important to the fabric 
of Wicklow.  We need clarification and probably 
extension, that's all I want to say, but I'm very 
concerned over it. 

 
122 
 
  
BRIAN: Thanks.  I'll answer the questions as best 
I can, from the outset, and it has been pointed out 
by a number of people, just to make it clear, this 
is entirely an exercise carried out by the 
Valuation Office rather than Wicklow County 
Council, and while we collect the rates we do not 
set the valuations and we have avenue no input into 
the valuations and or how they're determined, so 
I suppose, that's something we want to make crystal 
clear and the fact that this is a revenue-neutral 
exercise, there's is absolutely no cent, extra cent 
generated to Wicklow County Council as part of this 
process.  There's increase, individual increases 
and individual decreases but the bottom line stays 
the same. 
Just regarding point of information, I just got 
statistics from the Valuation Office today, and in 
County Wicklow the initial information that they 
have this relation to increases decreases 
approximately 56% of rate payers had a reduction, 
in the county, 41% increases and 3% there was no 
change.  So that would be in line with the norm 
across previous valuable 500 ways that have taken 

 
123 
 
place across the country.  There are seven other 
counties that are undergoing the exact same 
revaluation process as we speak.  They would have 
had their certificates issued all at the same time, 
so it is not just Wicklow this is happening too to.  
In relation to the specific queries raised the 
phasing in that would require change in 
legislation, whereby any increase would be phased 
in over a number of years because the legislation 
states that the valuation takes place on the first 
of January the following year.  Also, there would 
be an issue in that regard as regards the people 
two received reductions, obviously wouldn't want 
their reductions phased in over a number of years, 
because it has to balance out, but I'm told that 
a change this legislation would be required to have 
a phasing in of any increases.  The appeal period 
of 40 days was raised by a number of people - that 
is also included in the valuation act so would also 
require a change in legislation.  Unfortunately 
I've raised this issue with the Valuation Office 
based on discussions already with number of 
councillors, and they've said that's not possible, 
due to a requirement of change Len slayings, but 

 
124 
 
they have pointed out there is still over three 
weeks left in order to complete the evaluation, so 
it is important that councillors get across the 
message to all rate payers to contact the Valuation 
Office, if they're dissatisfied with the 
valuation, if they don't understand it, or feel it 
is incorrect.  The only way they will be able to 
address it, is contacting them directly, applying 
on-line or getting a hard copy application form in 
order to make a representation, but the key thing 
is it has to be evidence-based appeal.  You can't 
appeal and say, my rates are too high I don't want 
to pay them, there has to be proof in the rental 
value that is on the certificate is incorrect, 
based on evidence they can show whether it's rental 
they are paying, whether it's rental that are 
similar business and premises is paying based on 
information, Valuation Office, get information 
from the property services regulatory authority.  
There's a commercial lease register there, there's 
information there, so there has to be, and square 
footage if they have the wrong square footage on 
the certainly, that's a piece of evidence that you 
can use.  But I suppose the emotional argument will 

 
125 
 
not be accepted.  In this regard it has to be 
evidence of based but I think it is important that 
when they're talking to councillors and TDs, that 
the representatives tell them to contact the 
Valuation Office because with GDPR, you're not 
going to be able to ring up and say I want to talk 
about this individual rate payer and their 
property.  They have to go back and talk to the 
valuation, we don't want a situation, and I've been 
told that's what happened in previous revalues, 
where rate payers assumed that a local 
representatives is looking into it for them and 
then it is finalised this September, and they ring 
up the Valuation Office and they say well I was 
talking to councillor X or councillor Y on this 
matter and that's totally irrelevant.  They have 
to make direct contact with the Valuation Office 
on this matter. 
In relation to extra clinics, we're hoping to 
organise extra ones in on the 17th and 18th of 
April. 
They would be day clinics, now I'll raise the issue 
with the Valuation Office about clinics in the 
evening time.  As I say I can't speak for the 

 
126 
 
Valuation Office, but I'll bring whatever asks you 
have to them.  And I'll try to relay the responses.  
Regarding the issue I suppose of confusion over the 
multiplying of the indicative ARV, first of all, 
the ARV wasn't available to put on the forms when 
they issued them.  They had to give us a total 
because global valuation for county Wicklow before 
the indicative ARV could be done.  In any event the 
attitude of the Valuation Office is they prefer to 
have a kind of a separation of functions, the actual 
bills are issued by Wicklow County Council and the 
valuations are issued by Valuation Office, so they 
like to keep the two separates.  As regards 
examples where valuations have increased by 50%, 
100%, I just re-emphasised the requirement for the 
individuals in that case to contact the Valuation 
Office. 
Immediately, if they feel they're too high. 
Also, on that, and I suppose, on the issue of 
confusion and people not knowing what to do, I 
suppose, our role in this and it is very little but 
we it is saltated the Valuation Office by making 
our offices available for the clinics, we also, 
tried to advertise and put up as much information 

 
127 
 
as we could on the website, on Facebook, on Twitter, 
there an example on the Facebook on the rates 
valuation and it states about using the 
multiemployer on it. 
But it is important for people to maybe to refer 
people to that piece on the website.  If you're 
unsure.  Anything else?  I think that's it. 
I think I've covered everything on that.  If I 
haven't, if someone would let me know. 
CLLR WINTERS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach just when the 
Valuation Office came to this Chamber to give us 
a talk on this, from what they said on the day I 
understood that they already knew what the answer 
was going to be, that the 100% money we got at the 
moment would be the 100% money we would end up 
getting.  So, any system that starts off with the 
answer before the actually done the calculation is 
fairly flawed.  And, if they have reduced the rates 
of X amount of people, they have to increase the 
others, there is a huge problem with the system, 
that has an answer before it's done the job.  
Thanks. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks Cathaoirleach and thanks Brian 

 
128 
 
for your responses there, two quick queries in 
relation to the clinics on the 17th and 18th April, 
you didn't know where they would take place, I would 
request if Greystones wasn't included you would 
question an additional clinic, there's a direct 
line number that people can contact, I think it is, 
maybe we get that out there as well.  I know, when 
we did have that presentation back in our February 
meeting, we were told that the valuations office 
typically visited 25% of the property, so the rest 
would be self-assessed and I would probably guess 
a lot of the people getting assessment letter 
didn't get the opportunity to fill them in or didn't 
know what to require.  It is a shame that at that 
time when we're trying to encourage businesses back 
in small towns and with the threats of the out of 
town shopping centres and on-line shopping, we're 
trying to reduce our vacant units and then we have 
this confuse reigning, so it doesn't help thanks. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach just as 
briefly, again, would there be intention about walk 
in clinic in west Wicklow. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll see if that's possible, 
right. 

 
129 
 
CLLR O'NEILL:  If the appeals are in before the 
23rd, the decision will be after that?  So once the 
appeal is in by the 23rd, people are OK yeah. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll keep you up-to-date if 
they're going to give extension of a week or 
something like that. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I would like to thank Brian about his 
availability, row activity in relation to this 
issue from the start, it was well flagged and well 
explained, this is a national office not local 
office, and I think he's doing a very good job to 
mitigate the as far as he can, and I would like to 
thank him and his staff. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much.  Protocol 
after this.  Thank you very much. 
  
