Special Meeting in Wicklow County Council  
25th February 2020 at 2:00pm 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon members, and just 
to say this is a special meeting as you know and 
for a very pleasant occasion, and it's not often 
I come in here knowing the entire meeting will be 
really nice and pleasant and no angst or trouble 
so that's really nice, and just one second ...  OK 
so the first item on the agenda is as a result of 
the general election where two fellow councillors 
have been elected to Dail Eireann we have a casual 
vacancy so it is the filling of a casual vacancy 
arising from the election of former Cllr Jennifer 
Whitmore to the Dail Eireann in accordance with 
section 19 of the Local Government Act. 
MS GALLAGHER:  We've received a letter from the 
Social Democrats and they're saying, advised 
following the prescribed process within the Social 
Democrats the party proposes Jodie Neary for 
co-option of the vacancy of Wicklow County Council 
for the Greystones area. 
And we've received a letter from Jodie Neary dated 
the 25th February 2020, and she has given her 

consent for the nomination as a co-optee to take 
the seat, Cllr Jennifer Whitmore's seat. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If we can have a proposer for Jodie 
Neary? 
  
CLLR CREAN:  I would like, I'm delighted to propose 
Jodie Neary for the Social Democratic vacancy so 
Jodie will be taking over from Cllr Jennifer 
Whitmore now Deputy Whitmore who is moving on to 
represent people of Wicklow at national political 
level.  Jennifer will be dearly missed; she's been 
a great local representative and I'm sure everyone 
will agree hard working and committed and I've no 
doubt Jodie will continue to do that. Jodie is 
herself local to Greystones, living with her 
husband and her twins here to celebrate their 
Mammy's special day so they're very welcome and 
Jodie is no stranger to politics, she's worked for 
many years over eight years in Leinster House in 
different capacities, as a political adviser, 
political administrator, I would have known her 
through work through Deputy Thomas Pringle and he's 
very welcome, so, she has a broad range of 

experience, she's worked on many different 
political campaigns, and I think from memory 
chatting to her, there was six general election 
campaigns, four referenda, two Seanad campaigns so 
she brings a range of direct political experience 
here.  I think that's going to hit the ground 
running and great a benefit here to the chamber and 
council but most importantly, for the Greystones 
Municipal District it will be important for the 
people because they're losing such an excellent 
local representative, it is great to have someone 
with that political expertise.  For Jodie it is a 
new journey, she's going from behind the scenes to 
the coalface, and on that note, I'd like to propose 
Jodie and, on that option, and wish her well on the 
new political journey.   
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you Cathaoirleach, I'd like to 
normally second the nomination of Jodie Neary in 
to replace Cllr Jennifer Whitmore, before I do so, 
I would like to congratulate Deputy Whitmore on her 
elevation, she was a fantastic member of Wicklow 
County Council has been here for a number of years 
and but I'm sure that she will be well replaced by 
Jodie. Cllr Mags Crean mentioned the various 

campaigns and Jodie's experience up to now, I 
actually knew Jodie quite well during my five years 
in when I was a TD in Leinster House.  When I met 
Jodie first and got to know her where we went for 
bites and walks and talks and get a break from all 
the action, and I know how dedicated that she was. 
One of her achievements, includes the drafting of 
architecting the world's first Fossil Fuel 
Diversity Acts 2018 which made Ireland the first 
one to take public money out of gas and public 
investments and that shows her passion for climate 
action.  But also, she's really, really passionate 
about social inclusion, and gender equality, I 
suppose areas that I am passionate about myself.  
So, I'm delighted to second Jodie Neary to replace 
Jennifer, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do we take a formal vote? 
MS GALLAGHER:  We invite Jodie. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Jodie Neary please take your seat. 
  
(APPLAUSE) 
 
  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  And then onto item two, to 
consider the filling up of casual vacancy arising 
from the election of former Cllr Matthews to Dail 
Eireann in accordance of section 19 of the Local 
Government Act 20001. 
MS GALLAGHER:  We received a letter from the Green 
Party and they are advising following internal 
selection process, Ericka Doyle has been selected 
as co-optee to replace Cllr Stephen Matthews on 
Wicklow County Council representing the local 
electoral area of Bray East, and we have received 
a letter from Ericka Doyle confirming her consent 
to the nomination to fill the casual victory 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  I'd like to formally propose Ericka 
Doyle to fulfil Cllr Stephen Matthew’s vacant seat.  
Before I speak about Erika, I would pass on 
congratulations to Deputy Whitmore and 
particularly to Deputy Matthews, who was a great 
addition to the chamber here, both for Wicklow 
County Council and also in Bray, and he was very 
evident for me for the first time I came in here 
how well-liked and respected he was by council 
members and staff in Wicklow as well and personally 

thanking him for his guidance since I have been 
elected, so I'm delighted to propose Erika in his 
stead, she’ll be a great replacement, she has a 
fantastic understanding how the council works and 
great range of knowledge on council matters and has 
covered Bray and Greystones in her role as a 
journalist, and this means she's hitting the ground 
running.  She has an excellent working 
relationship with council executive and political 
parties throughout the county which will be vital 
to her role going forward and again she's no 
stranger to managing political campaigns, she's 
managed several local election campaigns and two 
general election campaigns and obviously with 
great success in the last one. 
She's from Bray.  From Bray East, so she's a good 
knowledge of local issues there, and current 
working projects that's been going on that you will 
need a strong voice on.  I'm also particularly 
delighted to welcome another woman in the council 
chamber and along with Counsellor Neary we're 
growing steadily and surely here growing forward 
so I'm confident Erika will be an excellent 
addition to the workings to the council here and 

I look forward to working alongside her so I'd like 
to formally propose Ericka Doyle as the opted seat. 
 
CLLR FERRIS:  Thank you again, it gives me great 
pleasure to second the proposal for Ericka Doyle 
on to Wicklow County Council, I think I've known 
Erika for longer than I've known Deputy Matthews 
now and I know she's very involved in her community 
and in an environmental and climate change issues 
I would like to take the opportunity to 
congratulate Deputy Matthews on his elevation, I 
think he will be a great loss and is the current 
Cathaoirleach or was the Cathaoirleach of Bray 
Municipal District Council and I know how hard he 
worked in that position.  And what an excellent 
chair he was. Absolutely excellent and had the 
respect of all the members and all of all the staff 
and management team in Bray and I know as he does 
now, he will be a great loss.  But I am delighted 
that we will have another, as Cllr Scott said, we'll 
be trail blazing from the days when there was one 
or three people on it, and as I said before you're 
the third female Cathaoirleach of Wicklow County 
Council in its over hundred years history.  I know 

Erika will make a great addition, she is very, very 
good person, she works well with everybody and from 
every party and I really look forward to working 
with her for the next four-and-a-half years. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Joe Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  If I could, I would want to support 
the nomination of Ericka Doyle as councillor, in 
fact I know Erika longer than Stephen. 
Never mind anybody else, because in fact, Erika was 
a sixth class pupil of mine many years ago in St 
Fergal's and I can say a brilliant student, 
absolutely brilliant student particularly in 
English, but in many, many ways, a really excellent 
person who will be an excellent councillor in her 
work as journalist I always felt she was extremely 
fair and unbiased and objective in all of the 
stories she wrote and all the work she did, and 
she's a magnificent support to Steven in his 
campaign down through the years and she gave me a 
bit of help once upon a time too, which I was 
grateful for again before she met Stephen.  In the 
case of Erika and Jodie, Jodie Neary and Ericka 
Doyle I want to welcome them and congratulate both 

on them on their co-option today, I know they will 
make a fantastic contribution to this council and 
to their Municipal District, I want to take the 
opportunity to congratulate Deputy Matthews and 
Whitmore in their election, and commiserate with 
those of us who didn't make it on this occasion.  
There may be another chance soon though so don't 
get too comfortable would be my message.  Just want 
to congratulate the two and look forward to working 
with both of you thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  So, councillor Doyle, if you would 
like to take your seat. 
  
(APPLAUSE) 
 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  And I suppose I would like to 
welcome both of you to the chamber and officially 
congratulate you on your position, it is a great 
honour to represent the electorate.  It is also a 
great responsibility, and I know that both of you 
will take that role very seriously, and I know from 
what I have heard and how people have spoken about 
you, since your names were brought forward to the 

council that people are very excited at the 
addition of both of you to the council and 
contribution you will both be able to make, if 
there's anything I can do to assist you in any way, 
I will give you my contact number and contact me 
at any time.  Now Cllr Shay Cullen. 
  
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks, on behalf of the Fina Gael 
group I would first of all like to congratulate 
Jodie and Erika on their election to co-option to 
Wicklow County Council.  I suppose, we I think 
we've a very good working relationship here in 
Wicklow County Council, and I'd like both of you 
to enjoy your time here, and make the best of it, 
because it is a magnificent opportunity that we 
have as a group of councillors here to make Wicklow 
a better place 
I suppose, I just want to pay tribute to who is now 
Deputy Whitmore and Matthews, nice to say that, who 
join obviously Simon Harris and John Brady and 
Stephen Donnelly in the 33rd Dail and I think it 
is the time and effort by both of you to get elected 
with a huge vote, and I think that is testament to 
the work you've done, both done here in Wicklow 

County Council. I think both of you are extremely 
hard-working and very dedicated, very competent, 
I think you've both worked very well on the green 
agenda, transportation, planning all the issues 
that are relevant, housing all the issues that are 
relevant here in Wicklow and that stood to you in 
your election, and I want to congratulate both of 
you and wish you both very, all the success in the 
future as deputies.  I want to pay tribute to Cllr 
Joe Behan, Cllr John Snell and Cllr Paul O'Brien 
to put themselves forward, anyone who puts 
themselves forward deserves credit, it is not an 
easy thing do, but everything, all three of you 
performed admirably and I'm sure we haven't seen 
the last of you on national elections so I want to 
wish the three of you well and any other person who 
put their name forward that's not necessarily a 
councillor. I think as I said earlier, it is an 
honour to do something like that, and you know, you 
deserve great plaudits for anyone who did that I 
want to wish you well. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thank you on behalf of myself and 
the staff I'd like to welcome and congratulate 

Jodie Neary and Ericka Doyle as the Cathaoirleach 
said it is a great honour to represent your local 
community and we will do all we can to assist you, 
especially in the early days, our doors are always 
open, planning or housing, call to see if you want 
to see the system operates.  I want to congratulate 
Deputy Whitmore and Matthews and thank them for all 
their support and encouragement while they were 
here.  Particularly in the area of climate change 
I think they brought it to the top of the agenda 
and something that is going to be our priority for 
the next number of years 
So, I'd like to you know, it is not only that, they 
were involved in everything that happened in their 
local areas and involved in initiatives we were 
progressing, so I'd like to wish them both the very 
best of luck. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach, I know my 
colleague Cllr Anne Ferris seconded the 
nominations, on behalf of the Labour Party grouping 
I want to extend a walk well be on Erich a Jodie 
and welcome them to becoming county councillors and 
wish them well.  I want to pay tribute to deputy 
Matthews and Whitmore, although I knew them for a 

few short months it was clear to me I was in the 
presentation of a very fine upstanding dedicated 
public servants and I know they will represent the 
people in the Wicklow with distinction, don't mind 
what Cllr Joe Behan says, I hope you do get 
comfortable because I don't want to go through that 
again.  On hearing the news our two were female, 
I want to demonstrate my solidarity, purple is 
associated with spirituality the sacred, higher 
self and deed, official colour of International 
Women's Day. 
And over the last few weeks what upset me is the 
abuse public representatives have received and 
especially our female colleagues, so I stand in 
solidarity with everyone here today especially 
female colleagues. I want to wish Deputy Matthews 
and Whitmore the best, I want to not forget their 
roots and where they came from and look forward to 
working with everybody to making the lives and 
residents of County Wicklow even better again thank 
you very much. 
CLLR FORTUNE: Thanks Cathaoirleach, on behalf of 
myself and independent group I'd like to first of 
all congratulate do Deputy Whitmore and Matthews 

on their great success and I've no doubt they will 
make a serious contribution to both Dail Eireann 
and county of Wicklow and also to deputies Brady 
Harris and Donnelly on their success. I think it 
it's very hard task it is a great honour, and I think 
the situation hasn't bottomed out yet.  It is going 
to be very interesting when we've eventually formed 
a Government but I wish them well and I hope that 
they will come back here to us in the council 
chamber in a regular basis so we can work together 
to make Wicklow a better place.  Can I formally 
then welcome Jodie and Erika, to the council 
chamber and wish both of you the very best as county 
councillors, Cllr Mags Crean has given a fantastic 
resume of Jodie so I won't try and get into that, 
but, obviously with the experience you got you'll 
bring a serious skillset to the chamber and no doubt 
we'll have some arm-wrestling as well, so we look 
forward of that, it is all part and parcel of what 
goes on in local government.  I know Erika for a 
good number of years and I know her dad even for 
longer number of years, and it is a great honour 
for Erika, she's been a fantastic journalist for 
many, many years, I've had many one-to-ones with 

her, and phone calls with her on different topics 
and subjects so she has a very, very good knowledge 
of how the whole system works, so no doubt she'll 
make a serious contribution to Wicklow.  So, 
again, can I just formally say well done to both 
of you and I look forward to working with you, and 
hopefully we can all co-operate on lots of issues 
that will help the people of Wicklow. 
  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Much of what I was going to say 
has been said but on behalf of the Fianna Fail group 
I want to welcome Erika and Jodie here to the 
chamber and I have no doubt they will be huge 
additions to the chamber over the coming years 
On another front I just want to congratulate 
Jennifer Whitmore and Stephen Matthews for and 
their election to Dail Eireann, I'm delighted 
actually that Stephen got elected because for the 
last seven years I've listened to him in my left 
ear the whole time advising me here and I told him 
I wouldn't join the Green Party as much as he would 
have it, but he made huge contributions to this 
chamber, Jennifer and Stephen, and I have no doubt 
they will be successful in Dail Eireann and 

hopefully we'll have a Government shortly and we'll 
see where we go from there, so the best of luck to 
Jodie and Erika and Stephen and Jennifer. 
on their new roles thank you. 
CLLR MCMANUS: I'm at that point where I will say 
I won't repeat what has been said and then repeat 
what has been said on half of Sinn Fein I would say 
congratulations to the two new deputies, I'm 
genuinely excited what you guys will do in the new 
role, you will be missed and as Cllr Tom Fortune 
said hopefully you won't be too far away and we'll 
continue to work together.  And to our new 
business, I'm sorry I have my back to you Erika, 
but welcome to you both, it is exciting to have more 
women here. 
I'm really excited to see what you guys are 
bringing, your ideas, your passion, and I'm sure 
we'll have collaboration and debates, and I'm also 
really excited for that.  And just if I can share 
a very quick story, Jodie you won't remember this, 
but I actually ,obviously know you from my work in 
Leinster House and when I started I was so 
desperately nervous, I ran into you and we had a 
chat and you asked me how I was getting on, I said 

it was chaos, you said it was grand and if you need 
anything just ask me. Now I want to return this, 
even though I'm here for a limited time, if I can 
be of assistance, just let us know, we're happy to 
welcome you here. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can I also add congratulations to 
Deputy Matthews and Deputy Whitmore, it has been 
a pleasure to work with you both in the county 
council and I think you're both very fair, 
reasonable, constructive people and those are 
talents that I want you to continue to use in your 
work with Deputy Harris Donnelly and Brady in 
bringing forward the issues you know are important 
to the people of County Wicklow.  You know from the 
SPCs you've sat on here and the work we've tried 
to achieve as a council, what is important and 
hopefully in the coming months and in Government 
formation, and during the term of the next Dail, 
however long or short that maybe, that the five of 
you will work together for the good of County 
Wicklow as I know that you will do, thank you very 
much indeed 
So, I think we can just give all ourselves a round 
of applause.  I'll come back to you in one second 

and say well done. 
  
(APPLAUSE) 
 
And also, can I just say to the families, it is a 
lovely day. 
You've no idea how much of your family members' time 
is about to be consumed and you're all sitting here 
looking very smiley and happy and I hope in a year's 
time you're still as smiley and happy about it all. 
So, just to say to all of the family members, the 
very best of luck with it, and bear in mind that 
this is for the greater good when you're gritting 
your teeth at home saying where are they.  Now Cllr 
Joe Behan has a quick item. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Just before I do that, could I suggest 
also we write a letter from this meeting today to 
thank former Deputy Pat Casey and former Minister 
Andrew Dodd for their contribution, it is a 
difficult time for them as well.  And I know, Pat 
Casey is on the Seanad trail, I don't know about 
former Minister Doyle but to thank them, don’t 
forget about them today.  They were both long 
serving in this authority as well and thank them 

for their contribution.   
The matter I want to raise Cathaoirleach, is the 
question of the Kilcoole Secondary School debacle, 
the fact that we have so many young people in 
Kilcoole Primary School in sixth class who do not 
know yet what school they're attending on the last 
occasion when we us asked this I was proposed and 
agreed at the time unanimously we would write to 
the Department of Education and seek a meeting with 
the department to discuss what is going to happen 
with regard to those pupils. 
And I'm just wondering has there been any response 
from the department thank you? 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  I just want to obviously support 
what Councillor Behan has just said and the 
situation has gone beyond a crisis now at this stage 
and we're running out of time and there's 
frustrations on the ground so, there is urgent, 
urgent action needed on it, so, I would be 
interested to see if the department has responded 
to us, and what the response has been. 
  
 

MS GALLAGHER:  We wrote immediately after the 
council meeting, but we'll follow it up now. 
  
CLLR FERRIS:  I remember Cllr Joe Behan raising 
that and he got the total support of all the members 
here but I also added in the situation with St 
Andrew's the children in St Andrew's who can't get 
spaces in Templecarrig, even though that should be 
follow on naturally, that the pupils from St 
Andrew's would go to Templecarrig, they're in the 
same situation so a meeting with the Department of 
Education is absolutely urgent at this stage. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. 
And just, before I see there's a couple more lights 
on, if either Councillor Doyle or Councillor Neary 
want to say anything on this occasion you're more 
than welcome, just press the light in front of you, 
it is up to yourselves. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  I would like to add my voice to what 
Cllr Joe Behan said about the Kilcoole School and 
the need to sort out what is happening urgently 
thank you. 
  

CLLR SCOTT:  Just to sort of reiterate the urgency 
of the meeting that is needed we have lots of 
different sources and we're in agreement.  We 
really need to sit down and talk to the 
decision-makers in the Department of Education and 
get a solution and road map forward and that needs 
to happen now, so, appreciate you following up 
again Lorraine thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. So, if there's no other 
business, the meeting is concluded and we'll see 
you all on Monday, 2nd of March at 2pm. 
  
