MEETING ON LOCAL PROPERTY TAX 
 AT SHORELINE LEISURE CENTRE, 
GREYSTONES, CO WICKLOW  
 ON  
MONDAY 21st SEPTEMBER 2020 AT 14:00 P.M.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named 
action for communication support.   
 
 
 
Elaine McCarthy 
 
  
 
 
 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon members can you all 
hear me? You're very welcome here this afternoon, 
before I get into the agenda proper, I'd like to 
call on Cllr Edward Timmins. 
Table number 6. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Chairman just briefly, I'd 
like to congratulate teams all from the Municipal 
District who won the county finals, Baltinglass who 
won the senior and congratulations to Tinahely 
team, Dinard who won the intermediate final on 
Saturday and commiserations to Kill and Vallymount 
to won the Junior A and Saint Nicholas who won the 
minors, commiserations to Blessington. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Edward Timmins.  
Cllr Gerry O'Neill. 
  
CLLR O'NEILL:  Yeah again I'd like to echo what 
Cllr Edward Timmins said there, it has been a huge 
weekend for the west as regards Gaelic games and 
I would like to say well done to Kilmantin and the 
management on how they organise the last two weeks 
of championship football.  It was a huge 

undertaking with the Covid-19 and they've done an 
excellent job on the county.  But I'd like to add 
congratulations to Baltinglass who are now senior 
champions, Donard, a team I played with a few years 
ago, winning the intermediate, a good few years ago 
but Valleymount from the junior A and St Nicolas 
for the minor, Blessington under 14 girls our 
champions and Knocknamana, so I'd like to say well 
done it was a clean sweep for the west. I'm 
delighted for every one of them.  And can I add 
congratulations to Tipperary man Sam Bennett on the 
green Jersey in the Tour de France, thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Gerry O'Neill. 
CLLR MULLEN:  Thank you Chairman.  Again just like 
to echo my councillors' words there, and 
congratulate all involved in the Gaelic games this 
weekend, congratulations to Baltinglass, it was a 
good sporting game and Tinahely a young team will 
come again, and to Knockananna, congratulations 
and county board for organising the games in 
difficult circumstances.  Particularly to 
broadcast them live on streaming TV, was a 
fantastic achievement and the quality was 
fantastic, so fair play to all. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  OK, thank you very 
much everybody. That seems to be it.  Cllr Avril 
Cronin. 
CLLR CRONIN:  I would also like to echo the 
congratulations to the clubs in the west, there's 
no doubt the west was awake this weekend with GAA, 
my own club Saint Nicholas won the minor and ladies 
won the under 14s and there was great excitement 
and in my own parish, Dinard winning the 
intermediate championship and Baltinglass winning 
the seniors, it has been a huge weekend in west 
Wicklow. 
A tough weekend as well for the losing teams but 
you know, Dunlavin have been there many a time so 
I have no doubt that we'll see them in the final 
again in the future. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'd like to congratulate them all 
the time and my own team was losing on Sunday, 
Carnew beat us in the junior camogie final.  We'll 
get on with the meeting proper and we have one item 
on the agenda to consider the varying of the basic 
rate of the LPT and setting of the new adjustment 

factor in accordance with the finance Local 
Property Tax act 2012 as amended to apply for the 
one year for the next Local Property Tax liability 
date, first of November, 2020.  So, I'm going to 
go straight to Brian head of finance who has a 
presentation to us.  So, I hand over to you.  Thank 
you. 
  
MR GLEESON: I summarise the areas we'll go through 
in the presentation this afternoon. 
First of all, I'll outline budgetary process for 
local authorities, and then discuss the Local 
Property Tax calculation for 2021, and we'll review 
the financial position of Wicklow County Council 
and the estimated income and expenditure for next 
year, and then exam the financial effect the LPT 
has on an individual and impact it has on the local 
authority finances itself. 
I'll also highlight the LPT rates across other 
areas in the local authority sector and then 
finally we'll finish off with the recommendation, 
of the Chief Executive in relation to 2021. 
The budgetary process this, is the first stage of 
the budgetary process the Local Property Tax 

decision under section 20 of the finance act.  It 
must be made and reported to the revenue 
commissioners by the 30th of September.  And in 
order for them to do their calculations and issue 
bills in the November.  The next stage of the 
budget process is in October. 
Finance action will issue a draft budgetary plan 
which will include a general municipal allocation 
for each district, that goes out in October for 
approval. 
The main stage of the process is in November.  And 
it is the adoption of the budget that we put forward 
showing all our income and expenditure across all 
service lines.  Finally, the last stage is the 
schedule of Municipal District works, they're 
issued usually around March of the following year 
once we have received notification from the 
Department of Our roads allocation for the year.  
The expenditure that's been adopted in the budget 
along with the roads allocation is split by 
Municipal District and circulated to all parties. 
Just to go through the Local Property Tax 
allocation and the way it is calculated:  I won't 
go through this in detail, did I this at the last 

council meeting, going through how the baseline 
works and the surplus but suffice to say as was 
outlined at the last meeting I'll reiterate the 
equalisation and the self-funding element are 
still in place for 2020.  Equalisation, 3,500 
self-funding, 1.8 million self-funding, 
legislative changes are required for new builds and 
new housing valuations and additional funding is 
required to compensate for the removal of 
equalisation and the baseline increases. 
The bottom line is if the Local Property Tax rate 
is maintained at the existing 2020 level, we will 
have 13.7 million LPT for budget for next year, if 
it is not maintained, at the 2020 level, this 
reduces by 1.7 million down to 12 million. 
Just on the next slide matters which we must have 
regard to, as part of the regulations before 
deciding on it, we must look at the financial 
position of the local authority, exam the 
estimation of income expenditure for 2020 and as 
I said already the financial effect of the rate on 
the individual and the local county council budget 
and the service delivery plans stemming out of that 
budget. 

Just to go through first financial position of 
Wicklow County Council. 
At the end of last year we had a revenue deficit 
of approximately 2 million as you're aware we've 
been generating surpluses year-on-year to reduce 
the deficit, we reduced it by 300,000 in 2019 the 
ratio of current assets to liability is three to 
one this is a positive ratio and shows in the 
short-term, we can meet our liabilities, the ratio 
of loans payable to revenue income is 70% and shows 
we can support the level of debt we currently have. 
The last point there is future impact of Covid-19 
and obviously there's huge unknowns in relation to 
this but already the knowns we have which I'll be 
going through later on in the presentation will 
already have a massive impact and previous 
presentations have outlined the impact it's had on 
income such as parking, planning fees, housing 
rents, commercial rates, it is likely to impact 
that again next year, if there's another lockdown 
next year, obviously that will impact all those 
areas. 
Based on the reduced income this year, and the 
additional expenditure we've had to incur on 

Covid-19 without any commitment to date for any 
reimbursement, it is likely our deficit of 2 
million will increase at the end of 2020, as I said 
we've been reducing the deficit year-on-year and 
given the circumstances of this year it is likely 
that two million will increase unless Government 
funding is brought in. 
Furthermore, it's crucial I pose the point we're 
make something to maintain the existing income that 
we have, because of the unknown and uncertainties 
and impact of Covid-19.  One thing people may not 
be aware of other income impacted by Covid-19, 
planning, fees, parking fees, housing rents, 
commercial rates, Local Property Tax respect is the 
one source of funding that is not, guaranteed 
income, it is not impacted by Covid-19. 
We get our allocation, and we get our four-stage 
payments during the year.  So if you do maintain 
the rate at the current 2020 level, as I pointed 
out there's 13.7 million will be in the budget, that 
is guaranteed income and will not be impacted by 
Covid-19 so that's an important point people should 
take on board. 
Just in relation to I suppose known budget 

adjustments at this stage, start off with a 
positive, our IPP dividend, we're planning on 
receiving a payment of 450,000 next year, as you 
are well aware we receive no dividend this year due 
to investments performance, but, based on approval 
of performance on 2019 we've received notification 
it is in the area of 450.  The water rates 
compensation, we received one-off payment you 
might recall just before the budget day last year, 
to compensate us for loss of income from the 
department come compensation, following the change 
of Irish Water or the inclusion of Irish Water in 
the rating system so that was a one-off payment. 
That was made to Wicklow County Council only one 
of two local authorities that received such 
funding. 
That won't be in 2020, so, it is a reduced income, 
that was used to supplement the Municipal District 
discretionary funds in 2020. 
Additional pay costs, the national pay agreement, 
the last increase is 2% increase at the start of 
October for all grades, that obviously has to be 
extrapolated across a twelve month period across 
2021, the normal compensation that we get from the 

department is 80% so it still leaves us with 20% 
of our own resources to cover the balance. 
Additional pension costs, we do have an ageing 
workforce and based on increased retirements, next 
year as well as bigger gratuities, which have been 
calculated based on the individuals that can retire 
next year who have longer service or who would be 
of a higher gratuity payment will be slightly 
higher than last year, there's 800,000 of 
additional gratuity costs and further 200,000 in 
relation to annual pension costs, arising from them 
retirements. 
Public lighting, the national project for the 
replacement of the lights with LEDs, hoped to 
commence towards the end of the second quarter next 
year, however it takes at least 15 months for 
savings to materialise from this project.  In 
addition, there's a huge demand for the ongoing 
maintenance of existing lights, we're running over 
budget at the moment and if we're to keep the same 
level of works on that we could between the loan 
charges and the maintenance costs we're looking at 
up to three quarters of a million of costs required 
in the budget in November. 

There's match funding of 200,000 on top of the 
ring-fenced 452,000 that we provided for in the 
budget last year, through LPT that's another 
200,000 of match funding that's required.  You 
will be aware that turning of the sod took place 
out in Clare month in relation to the content 
creation hub so we received a grant of 1.5 million 
for that project but we still have 2 million of 
match funding to provide, so that's 200,000 over 
ten year of year period of a pay back.  Covid-19 
impact, 2.2 million, we have that's broken into 
commercial rates, approximately one million, 
there's no doubt, unfortunately based on the impact 
of Covid-19 that a number of businesses 
unfortunately won't be returning.  And we've had 
to factor in increase in vacancy also the rents 
housing rents will be impacted continuously, we're 
making adjustments at the moment.  Also, there's 
we're putting in provision for ongoing expenditure 
costs will require PPE next year and still require 
additional accommodations costs and so forth. 
And also, we've 200,000 for the leisure centres in 
Wicklow and Arklow, that will require additional 
support going forward in order to stay open. 

Finally there's a figure of 1.7 million for 
directorate costs at the outset we did say it to 
the directors that we would only take on board 
increase costs that relate to statutory 
requirements or where there's contractual 
equipment in place so bearing that in mind this 
certainly is not a wish list 1.7, one area is 
pre-letting, we've huge demands in pre-letting 
cost, we increased in the budget last year capital 
transfer provision from 700 to 2 million, 
recognising that the demands on pre-letting at the 
moment we're looking at spending over 3 million 
this year, and that likely demand will be the same 
if not more next year. 
So, we need to make provision for that increase, 
or else we'll have to I suppose roll back on the 
actual number of units that we actually do works 
on, one or the other.  Additional homeless, cost 
300, E-planning statutory requirement that project 
needs to be rolled out and costs will be 200,000, 
five service has training course they've been 
brought in, so that's 100,000, and increase in IT 
licenses and implementation of our digital 
strategy, comes to about 100,000. 

So, all in all the current expenditure estimate for 
next year is 124.6 million.  Current income 
estimate is 118.5 million which leaves a shortfall 
of 6.1, if the Local Property Tax is not retained 
at the existing 2020 rate, then this budget 
shortfall increases to 7.8 million. 
We'll now talk about the financial effect of the 
Local Property Tax has on a liable person. 
On the revenue of the local authority and of the 
service plans of the local authority. 
There's a table, it is actually in on page nine of 
the report, that was issued from the Chief 
Executive last week, you might be able to see it 
better in that, but basically outlines the 
different valuation bands. 
The standard rate for each valuation band and the 
current rate that's paid by householders in Wicklow 
so you see in the first band standard rate is 90 
where the Wicklow householders is paying 99 so the 
different of 9 Euro for the whole year.  All in all 
53,400 properties are registered, property bands 
are based on the values as of May 1, 2013, as 
mentioned already, these valuations have been to 
be updated and that requires new legislation, 

however, 60% of the properties that are valued at 
200,000 or under, the maximum impact of those of 
a 10% variation of LPT is only 61 cent per week.  
As I say 60% of properties in Wicklow are valued 
at 200,000 or under.  To revert to the standard 
rate from the 2020 rate would benefit the vast 
majority of household, 87%, by only 17 cents, to 
95 cent a week depending on the valuation band that 
they're in. 
So, the first valuation band, the benefit to a 
household would only be 17 cent a week, if we did 
not maintain the 2020 rate and revert it back to 
the baseline. 
The retention of the 2020 rate will actually see 
no increase in Local Property Tax payments made by 
householders in 2021 and I suppose that's the point 
we have been trying to get through and make to 
everyone.  There's no increase in the pocket of 
householders next year. 
And there's no extra money that will be coming into 
Wicklow County Council by retaining that amount.  
It just means us to retain the 1.7 million that was 
ring-fenced last year but also means there's no 
increase to the householder payments in 2021.  To 

go through the impact on the revenue budget in more 
detail, table there just shows the variations and 
what the impact is.  If we change from 2020 by 10%, 
we lose 1.7 million, 15, we lose 2.6 million.  
Result and implications of it - if we take 1.7 
million out by not retaining the LPT rate at the 
2020 level, it means we have 1.7 million less of 
income. 
We require to have a balanced budget, so that means 
we have to reduce our expenditure by 1.7 million 
so.  That will mean, that there will be a number 
of budget cuts that will have to be brought forward, 
as part of the budgetary process in November and 
we'll have to be voted on by the members in order 
to balance the budget. 
In relation to impact on the existing service 
delivery:  The additional 1.7 million brought into 
the budget based on the Local Property Tax decision 
last year ring-fenced for a specific areas of 
spend, nearly half a million for match funding, for 
national development projects, under URDF town and 
village, as I pointed out not all projects can be 
used, can use development levies as match funding. 
We require 9 million for match funding for current 

ongoing projects, and of that 9 million, 2.3 
million is not covered by development levies.  
Hence the reason last year we set up this provision 
format funding in the budget. 
List of schemes and funding is outlined on page 6 
of the Chief Executive report for more detail.  
There was also small element of community grant 
scheme of a top-up, that was included and I suppose, 
the big item on the 1.7 was the discretionary 
expenditure across the Municipal District of 
nearly a million Euro used by project put forward 
by the local councillors.  We had a new line item 
of expenditure in 2020, climate action and energy 
initiatives, 260,000 to cover a couple of new 
appointments and also a number of initiatives 
stemming out of the climate adaptation plan. 
Just to inform people I suppose how the voting is 
going across the country really in relation to 
Local Property Tax, 19 local authorities increased 
their Local Property Tax rates in 2020. 
That's including Wicklow County Council. 
This was done in recognition of the need to provide 
match funding for these National Development Plan 
projects.  There's a number of councils I'm aware 

of had to take out loans for the match funding 
element and the provision they've made in their 
budget is to cover the loan repayments going 
forward. 
So, this isn't knew nook to Wicklow this is across 
the board and the information that I've received 
to date, all of these local authorities that 
increase their Local Property Tax last year have 
retained to for 2021 so they've retained it at the 
2020 levels. 
If Wicklow County Council does not maintain it, at 
the 2020 level, it will reduce the budget by 1.7 
and as I said will result in budget cuts in 
November. 
And I suppose another important point I wish to make 
is that it also undermines our own case to increase 
the baseline, I've made a presentation a couple of 
weeks ago on the baseline and how we need to get 
increase on this. 
in order to generate more bottom-lying income for 
Wicklow.  By taking out 1.7 million, voting to take 
that out of our budget next year it totally 
undermines the argument when we go to the 
department and go to department looking for money, 

our argument is Wicklow is underfunded we should 
be getting more money, yet if we go and make a 
decision here this afternoon, to reduce our own 
income, and take 1.7 out of the budget, it will have 
serious implications and as I say, totally 
undermines our argument going forward in that 
regard. 
So, in conclusion, the recommendation, for Local 
Property Tax is to maintain the existing 2020 
level.  It provides a same level of funding for 
2021, as is currently the case now.  It will retain 
1.7 million of ring-fenced money for local 
projects, such as those under discretionary 
expenditure and match funding project. 
And it avoids having to implement budget cuts to 
these local projects and also for go the 
opportunity for Government grant aid.  As we've 
said throughout the week, if we don't have match 
funding, for particular projects, if we're 
successful, we'll, we won't be able to draw down 
the money, we'll have to forego that and we'll have 
to put a stop on applications that we're putting 
in under some of these schemes. 
I suppose the real as far as I'm concerned this is 

a win/win situation by maintaining the rate at the 
2020 level, there's no change to the householder 
Local Property Tax bills for 20, no increase to 
their payments.  And yet in allows Wicklow County 
Council to continue the good work it's done and 
approve on the local services and local projects 
throughout the county, I think for years and 
everyone here will admit to it, for years, there 
was complaints about we didn't apply for enough 
grants, we didn't get enough grants.  I think we've 
a very successful in the last number of years, as 
is outlined in the figures in the report of the 
number of projects that we've been next, and the 
number of projects we're applying for again.  
Unfortunately, to reduce the funding which would 
impact on our match funding will have huge 
detrimental impact and I hope the members take that 
on board when they take their decision here this 
afternoon.  Thank you very much. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian.  I'd like to 
bring in the Chief Executive. 
  
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thanks and the key points have 
been made there, but I want to people to remember 
any increase in the LPT is ring-fenced, I think 
Brian outlined that, it is ring-fenced for local 
projects, climate action spend and community grant 
scheme, we've put it through UDF, community CCTV, 
outdoor recreation, sports capital, Failte Ireland 
and we have a list of projects that we're ready to 
apply for the next round of funding and people can 
see it on the ground, you have the library in 
Wicklow Town, Arklow historic town centre, I was 
down there looking at the courthouse how to 
refurbish and if you see it, it is fantastic, the 
RRD F in Baltinglass is starting up and we have very 
exciting schemes, the Arklow a yeast regeneration 
project, we have that in with URDF and sports 
facilities including the swimming pool, Bray 
Harbour, cycle ways, throughout the county and 
there's more.  But the key message I think is, if 
we increase the Local Property Tax here, we have 
the money ring-fence today that, so we get it back 
five-fold and usually 20% contribution we have to 
make and similarly with the climate action, because 
a lot of schemes coming down, three policy, solar 

policies, EV charge and whole range of produce 
coming down in climate action that is ring-fenced 
that's the key point, irrespective what is 
happening in the budget, to make a right decision 
here today that money is ring-fenced. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Chief Executive.  I 
know Cllr Gerry Walsh has your hand up, before I 
bring in anybody, I want to have everybody to have 
time to make their contribution. 
There is a one item agenda so everybody would have 
plenty time to come in and I'm planning to give 
everybody time.  What I don't want, I'm not going 
to take any proposals from the floor until we've 
had a good discussion on this, so I'll take the 
proposals later, but I would like to people to 
engage in the discussion.  Is that all right? 
So, I'm going to go to Cllr Gerry Walsh first. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, thanks to the 
Finance Director for the presentation.  Like each 
year care lack at this meeting I've expressed my 
dissatisfaction with the process in whereby 
councillors are asked to prop up what is a lawed 
system through what they call the Local Adjustment 

Factor.  It is acknowledged wick lows baseline 
figure is 23rd lowest if the country.  It is 
outdated and badly needs to be adjusted.  RLPT 
allocation is bare minimum is not adequate to 
support our financial requirements of the local 
authority.  We have equalisation fund, we have a 
self-funding housing allocation, we're told this 
need legislation to be amended.  We have a 
revaluation process first proposed back in 
November 16, for November 19 again, and now we're 
told by the Finance Minister it is pushed out to 
November 21. 
And really, these delays, I think they say present 
to the long-term sustainability of the LPT itself.  
What's required are structural changes, to address 
the unevenness of the LPT guy graphically in a fair, 
easily understandable, and affordable manner.  
And March 19 the LPT review group proposed the 
equalisation fund be discontinued and all local 
authorities retain the LPT collected in the areas 
and that new dwellings since 2013 be brought into 
the net and a Wicklow have 53,000 houses paying LPT 
at the moment and I suggest we have at least 
4,000-5,000 properties not in the net and that 

represent a figure of approximately 1.5 million the 
local authority are losing out on.  So 
year-on-year Cathaoirleach, councils are asks to 
subsidise departments inaction, last year we threw 
a life Tyne Lyon 10% increase to restore the 
services to our communities, discretionary funds 
and et cetera, in my view it was the correct 
decision at the time. 
But it is disappointing that we're back in this same 
position again this year and I acknowledge thins 
since then and mindful we've had an election, it 
took time to form a Government and of course we're 
in the middle of a pandemic Covid-19, which I think 
we've yet to see the full impact of on our economy 
and on individual household.  So, with that, I'll 
hand you back, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, 
CLLR MULLEN:  Table 25 thanks to the staff for 
their presentation and engagement with us over the 
last few weeks.  I agree with what Cllr Gerry Walsh 
said there.  What I disagree with here today is 
that what undermines our argument with the 
department should we not increase the property tax 

I don't think is valid.  What undermines our 
argument is that this tax is not being paid by any 
property that has been built since 2013. 
It is now 2020. 
What undermines our argument is that there's been 
successive failure by the department and by 
Government to I a dress this inequality.  Tax 
should be paid on properties by the owners of all 
those properties. 
But undermines our argument is when we came to make 
this decision last year, a Government minister took 
to his Twitter page to criticise us. 
When we promised we would raise this tax for one 
year, and one year only. 
What undermines local democracy and local 
representative is in here today trying to secure 
funding for local projects and we will still have 
to argue funding for local projects at budgetary 
stage.  I understand your position and your 
statutory requirement to balance the budget but 
what undermines local democracy, or any democracy, 
is when representatives can come in here and say 
in private and in a public meeting that we will 
raise a tax for one year only to secure funding and 

we're back here one year later, and being asked to 
do the same thing again. 
I think that's what undermines our position. 
And I will not be voting for any increase in the 
property tax this year on that basis. 
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Cathaoirleach, thanks very much.  
I'd like to start by saying that I just think this 
is a totally disingenuous exercise. 
Property tax was brought in not as an income stream, 
it was product in to put added value into our local 
districts.  Now, I wrote to you Brian on the 7th 
of July and talking to you about the baseline and 
asking for our five TDs to meet with us.  Now we 
had our meeting but only one TD, Councillor 
Matthews turned up, I think that is also 
disingenuous and this meeting should be rightly to 
those who didn't think it was worth their while to 
discuss such an important item. 
I just find I'm disgusted in fact on behalf of the 
residents of this county for what is going on here. 
I'm not supported the Local Property Tax because 

I think as grossly unfair tax.  This year what I 
will be looking for and I'm not finished, I will 
be looking for 15% degree due to the difficulty 
people find themselves in.  The baseline concept 
is actually so grossly unfair to the people of 
County Wicklow that I don't see how any public 
representative could accept it. 
We've got a big number of people who do not pay for 
all kinds of reasons, that could bring in most of 
the deficit, Brian that you talked about. 
The stature question would mean cementing the so% 
put on last year, that we were told last year was 
a must and wouldn't happen this year.  Now I've got 
pensioners in my area as other reps in their areas 
who have having to pay for homes they bought many, 
many years ago and raised their families in them, 
and in some cases they can't afford to heat them 
and afford basic maintenance on them and for them 
alone this is grossly unfair. 
Now, I don't believe it is justifiable or fair, for 
us to be increasing and if we end up at the end of 
the day with 12 million or 12.5 million you were 
saying in the numbers Brian you put to us the last 
day there's three about 56 million made up of 

pensions and Covid-19 impact, we shouldn't take 
that out of our spending as a local authority.  
Directors cost 1.7 million.  I think it is come to 
the stage now and I know when we met, we get the 
veiled threat, if we don't agree to what we've been 
asked that a commissioner will be brought in.  I 
just think that's not acceptable and I don't think 
any member in this room should accept that kind of 
dialogue.  It is just, it is just way over the top 
as far as I'm concerned. 
The situation should be as far as going forward 
should be if we today decide in certain way and we 
have a shortfall I think a working group should be 
put together from the body of the meeting here, 
there's some very intelligent people here in this 
room who understand numbers and budgeting and how 
things should work and sit down with some of the 
executives and go through this, and not have 
something imposed on us, in November, depending on 
the outcome of today saying you did this members, 
you did this, therefore you only got this, here is 
how you're going to have to spend it.  If that's 
the case let us how to spend it.  This disingenuous 
exercise has got to stop.  I finish, I know 110% 

this is not the fault of the CEO or the Finance 
Director.  I fully accept that.  This has been 
imposed on us from national Government.  And it 
based on a premise of a lie where we were told to 
bring in a property tax and it was going to do the 
devil and all and put in all kinds of developments 
in our areas, and all that happened was the tax was 
taken away then from the local government fund and 
property tax collected was put in.  But the thing 
that strangling us, is the baseline. 
And I don't accept at all that trying to argue with 
the department about the baseline is anything about 
negotiation.  I don't think they want to 
negotiate. 
But I think you got to stand up and be counted here 
today.  So, I will be looking for a 15% decrease. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Tom Fortune. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  Yeah, I 
want to say I support the principle of property tax 
to fund local services, this is a tax on people to 
fund the services for the areas which those houses 
are in. 
And I think it is a reasonable, Ireland's property 

tax is relatively low compared to countries on 
either side of it, the US and the UK and I think 
most European countries.  However, as people have 
mentioned, it is ridiculous that houses built since 
2013 don't have to pay any. 
And the baseline also seems to freeze the 
expenditure at some figure to do with the subsidy 
which was paid out in about the year 2000.  And 
that, penalises counties such as Wicklow which are 
growing at a fast rate and also particularly 
penalises areas which are growing within those 
counties. 
Because the money is not being collected and not 
being paid and we badly need that and the baseline 
both sorted out. 
As quickly as possible by national Government.  I 
don't agree with the management's proposal to have 
the 10% over the baseline, which was there last 
year. 
And the reason I don't agree with that is the money 
is not being allocated fairly in my view.  The 
people of Greystones are paying the most property 
tax, basically paying Dublin levels of property tax 
here and yet the services we're getting are nowhere 

near that.  Every other area has three times as 
many staff.  And an awful lot of the stuff is spent 
in other areas. 
And people are fed up here, and the pace of 
development in Greystones is huge and people are 
concerned about that, about the various things, 
stress that puts on it and the stress on the staff 
and the council who are having to deal with all 
sorts of three to five special An Bord Pleanala 
hearings and HSDs and various matters with roads 
joining this and footpaths to various estates which 
are all new.  And which don't seem to have funded 
the footpath to the town to the estate so it is not 
good enough the money is being raised here mostly, 
the biggest amount, and it is not being spent here 
and for that I'm not prepared to go with what the 
management was wanting. 
And the management had a number of years to try and 
deal with this and has not done so and spun yarns 
as to why this is the case, saying that it is swings 
and round bees which is isn't, because I checked 
it every year for the past five years and telling 
us it was to do the number of council-owned 
properties which when you struck out the council 

house maintenance is shown to be a false 
explanation. 
So, I'm not prepared to go with that thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Derek Mitchell. 
  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and 
thank you for giving people the opportunity to 
speak because I think it is a really important 
issue. 
Firstly, I'd like to thank the officials.  I've 
worked in a number of local authorities, and I know 
how challenging it is to be able to put forward a 
budget like this.  And I understand fully the 
impact of a decision not to keep the property tax 
at the 2020 rate will have on the officials. 
For me, I represent people in the Bray, Enniskerry 
and Kilmac area and although 60% of properties are 
below 200,000, you wouldn't buy a property in those 
areas at that rate. 
So, the figures that were outlined earlier on which 
explain the increase and what that increase equated 
to are not reflective of the people that I 
represent. 

I agree Cllr Gerry Walsh I don't feel we have seen 
the full impact of the pandemic.  I've spent the 
last number of weeks speaking to people in the town 
and villages that I represent and when running for 
election, I committed to being their voice.  And 
they are really struggling.  They are really, 
really struggling. 
People are out of work.  They have additional 
expenses, and mental health is a huge issue for 
people.  I don't accept that the property tax 
should be reduced by 15% either, the system is 
flawed, and we all are aware of that. 
But the impact of a reduction of 15% from the 
baseline on the services and the people in our 
communities would be really, really severe. 
And the chances are that it would impact those that 
are most vulnerable.  And we will have a decision 
to make here in November, regardless of the outcome 
on potential cuts to services and I think we need 
to be responsible and consider the impact of cuts 
like that. 
But like some of my colleagues here with the 
pandemic that we faced I think there is a real feel 
from the communities that we need to return to 

basics. 
And we need to look at the basic services that are 
provided and for the next year focus on them. 
And with that in mind I won't be supporting any 
increase in the Local Property Tax. 
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Aoife Flynn 
Kennedy. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thanks a million. 
It feels at this stage like the Local Property Tax 
is almost like flogging a dead horse, you know that 
I imagine if a minister came in today Cathaoirleach 
with and pitched this tax as is to this group of 
people, I don't think there would be any appetite 
for it, genuinely because it doesn't serve the 
whole county equally.  I think the way today can 
Playout is possibly only two ways is that, we can 
stand by the people of Wicklow and again, when we 
say the people, it is some of the people, some of 
the people have to cough up for the LPT and others 
don't.  But we're targeting them like it or not.  
If they were to say why me and then the 5,000 that 
don't have to pay, they're happy enough to be under 

the radar, that's not fair. 
And for us to increase the LPT we're kind of 
doubling down on people who are suffering, people 
who are struggling and who are being impacted by 
Covid-19.  And I don't know how we can stand over 
something like that.  Especially with such a 
flawed model, which has been said by colleagues 
already. 
And it is almost like we're going this year to kind 
of squeeze the last bit of blood out of that dead 
horse.  And it is hard to justify that.  I think 
you know, what the ultimate insult would be is to 
say that we know better than the people of Wicklow.  
We asked them for their views, and it is pretty 
conclusive for me in the recommendations from 
submissions there's 67% of people asked for a 
reduction, 31% for no change and 2% for increase. 
So surely with the greatest respect, we can't serve 
the 2%. And stand over that. 
So, you know, I know that people made decisions last 
year, and are coming back this year, kind of 
reluctant to support an increase because of how it 
was articulated last year.  And I've no doubt that 
again in this council, we have 18 councillors who 

are in Government parties, we've three TDs and one 
senator in Government parties and I don't imagine 
they will be bystanders to the struggles ahead in 
terms of how Wicklow will manage the Covid-19 
impact.  But I certainly can't, stand over 
increase and in fact I'd be looking for a decrease 
to show that we stand with the people who have been 
targeted by this tax.  And send a signal to them 
and at the same time send a signal to dot Government 
that we won't be passive about the impact on Wicklow 
for this tax.  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Shay Cullen. 
 
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks. I suppose like other members 
here I suppose every year we seem to find ourselves 
having to vote on a the property tax and I suppose 
the word that seems to be spoken a lot is "flawed" 
obviously the system is flawed there's no doubt 
with that.  There are over 4,000 houses as has been 
said earlier that don't pay property tax that have 
been built since 2013. 
But unfortunately, the rest of us are expected to 
pay for those people who don't, who are not in the 

net. 
I suppose, it goes without saying it is a totally 
unfair tax, but the problem is that we can't change 
that. 
And unfortunately, the people who can change it are 
not choosing to change it and are taking the easy 
way out.  I would say you know; the department and 
the Government are lacking leadership on this issue 
because if there was leadership it would be solved, 
and we wouldn't be in this position. 
I have to mention the equalisation fund, almost 3.5 
million leaving this county to go to other counties 
to make up their shortfall that's totally, totally 
unfair in any walk of life. 
But on the other side, there is a onus on us as 
members of Wicklow County Council to ensure that 
we have a budget that is not going to be cutting 
services, that it, can continue to provide 
facilities to the people of Wicklow, that can 
continues to put forward project all across our 
county that can have the match funding to make sure 
these projects are completed. 
I think the discretionary fund has been a massive 
success all across the county.  It's been an 

invaluable source of revenue to get projects done, 
royalty across the county and that's efficient no 
matter where you go from the smallest village in 
Wicklow to the biggest towns, we are seeing a 
difference.  And my concern is that we may lose 
that, we may lose the credibility, we may lose our 
impetus in making sure these projects continue to 
happen.  So, for that reason, I mean, I think we 
need to look at maximising our LPT for 2021. 
Obviously, I'm reluctant to increase but, I think 
we have to seriously look at trying to retain as 
much as possible. 
For 2021, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks Chair. 
Just a couple of things - we're all probably going 
to say similar kind of things so, basically my take 
on it is that it is an inequitable tax people who 
own a house pay for services that are enjoyed for 
everybody, how is that fair? 
We give away 20% of what is collected, how is that 
fair? 

It takes no account of people's ability to pay. 
Whether you can pay or not, you have to, there are 
no exemptions for this charge, there's a deferral 
but in order to qualify for deferral you have to 
really be earning a very low income, such as 15,000 
for single person and 25,000 for a couple.  These 
people are barely keeping their heads above water 
and yet they're expect to pay a property tax if they 
own a property, so how is that fair? 
Where income tax is concerned, we have a tax credit 
system designed to be fair, which takes account of 
a person's ability to pay.  This tax doesn't. 
There's a 4% interest charge per annum on anybody 
who can't afford to pay and who qualifies for a 
deferral.  So, they end up paying more at the end 
of the day. 
How is that fair?  The Local Property Tax was 
designed and introduced to fund services, it was 
never designed to go towards propping up pay, 
salaries, pensions, and gratuity duties of staff.  
That is the role of central Government.  That's 
what people pay their taxes for. 
And I think that it is unfair that that is the 
position that councils find themselves in, having 

to fund so much of their own expenditure, but that's 
because central Government is being let off the 
hook. 
I was recently speaking to somebody who told me that 
they are quite close to the Children's Hospital 
Project and they mentioned to me that the cost of 
that particular project will never be known. 
So, there is money being squandered left right and 
centre in this country. 
And yet councils can't even afford to pay their 
staff. 
unless they get funding from other sources. 
We have no area of the impact Covid-19 will have 
on ordinary families, there's been jobs lost, there 
have been people living on pandemic unemployment 
payments, there have been employers who can't 
afford to top-up wages under the wage subsidy 
schemes, so there are people whose incomes have 
absolutely nose-dived this year. 
As Cllr Paul O'Brien referred to the public 
consultation showed quite clearly that nobody was 
in favour of Ian Capon crease.  A very small 
percentage, 2% and finally I want to say that last 
year, I take note of the budget a lot because I work 

in the area of payroll and tax and I noticed that 
there was no increase given to the old age 
pensioners in last year's budget.  Normally they 
get a derisory figure of around a fiver a week, that 
didn't happen last year, yet fuel went up and Local 
Property Tax in this area went up.  So that was a 
double whammy for those people. 
And I think that it's time that we looked at working 
for the people that represented us and did what we 
can in terms of reducing the tax thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  I want to 
incur with what everything has been said in terms 
of equalisation fund and Government's inaction on 
this topic, but Cathaoirleach, as I look around 
this hall, I can honestly say I treated every 
councillor with represent they deserve.  I don't 
look at party or non-party I see colleagues.  
However, it is clear to me by now that some of our 
colleagues don't feel or act in the same manner as 
I do.  I was not here for the vote last year, but 
I did come out in favour of the decision that was 
made by my fellow councillors.  What I was not 

prepared for was the onslaught of abuse that was 
engineered by some of my colleagues here, and some 
elective representatives from a higher house.  One 
TD went and put our names on social media that voted 
in favour of this.  Colleagues the politics of 
negativity and division are alive and well but I 
remind those that engage in this type of politics 
that you will never awe island if you divide the 
people, we now need to break our word to the people 
or place the council in a difficult position when 
it comes to the budget.  The majority of 
councillors last year took the difficult decision 
and increased the LPT for one year. 
For what never ceases to amaze me, is that how come 
councillors speak out of both sides of their mouth 
at the same time.  We know that there are those who 
just want to make the headlines and fair play to 
them and play to the gallery, it is a win/win for 
them.  And why? 
Because difficult questions are never asked of 
them.  So I say to our friends in the media, don't 
go for the easy or the populous headline, look 
beyond the blister and empty rhetoric and ask those 
who are against everything, where they will make 

the cuts or where they will find the money.  Saying 
we should abolish the LPT and replace it with 
progressive tax system is simply not credible.  
The money has to be found to provide the services 
to the people they richly deserve.  It is all time 
some colleagues started to be honest with the 
people of Wicklow.  Last year when we raise the LPT 
by 10% Dublin City Council decreased their by 15% 
so when councillors were vilified for taking the 
difficult decision, come councillors were lauded 
as heroes, but what happened next? 
It too two attempts for Dublin City Council to pass 
their budget and while billionaires like Dermot 
Desmond got a reduction of 1,100 in LPT the 
shopkeeper saw the increase and ordinary people of 
Dublin saw parking charges and toll fees increased 
and then what happened.  The Dublin City Council 
letters were vilified, to me there are some people 
person perpetrating a fraud on the people of 
Wicklow by saying the LPT is unfair, we all know 
it is unfair, but stop playing to the gallery and 
using the LPT to enhance your own political career. 
They were telling the people that they should not 
have to pay this tax while at the same time they 

were the very people up looking first in line for 
the discretionary fund.  They did not tell the 
people that 1.8 million of the LPT went on housing, 
and yet they loved to see themselves plastered all 
over social media, claiming credit for people to 
forever homes, the fact is those kind can afford 
to pay for mansions can afford to pay LPT every 
lengths leaning party backs this idea, those who 
have more should pay for.  Cathairleach, I have 
sympathy for the council officials trying to draft 
a budget this year but the reality is we made a deal 
with the people of Wicklow that it was for one year 
and one year only and I find it very hard to go back 
on that deal. 
I say this, honestly and openly and not to cause 
any rows.  But I also say to the Government, do your 
job and do it right and stop passing the buck on 
to us. 
Finally I would urge the council officials not to 
take the easy decision and punish those councillors 
that stood by you last year and scrapped the 
distortionary fund, we kept our word, and all we 
ask is for you to keep your 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 

CLLR BLAKE:  Thanks. 
And thanks for the presentation.  I never met 
anybody yet that didn't want to reduce the taxes 
whether it is income tax property tax, car tax, I 
never met anybody yet.  No doubt about it, last 
year was a once-off promise of a 10% increase, 
unfortunately, circumstances have changed and 
changed dramatically.  One of the big things in 
terms of the people out there who are not paying 
the property tax on houses since 2013, you must 
remember the argument of that particular point in 
time was the fact they had paid substantial 
development levies but however the issue should be 
resolved in the period since 2013. 
In regards to the projects that we see there in 
front of us, particularly on page 6, in terms of 
expenditure, the you are began developments, of 4 
million and regional 1 million, in areas of small 
spending as well which I'm concerned about, I'm 
concerned about the CCTV in the Blessington, of 
150,000, concerns about the Blessington Greenway 
of half a million and impact will be in regards to 
all those. 
I see in fact in the urban areas Arklow is almost 

three quarters of the way, 750 million, Wicklow, 
1.5 million and Bray 1 million I'm wondering what 
the implications for all those expenditures will 
be for the coming year in that regard. 
I certainly, from my point of view, would see the 
monies as being spent and spent well in terms of 
the community grants in terms of what we have in 
discretionary spending as well has meant a lot 
particularly in rural towns and villages 
throughout west Wicklow and I want to continue to 
see that Wicklow County Council being seen to do 
the things we promised people in that regard. 
It is difficult and undoubtedly on people to 
increase taxes of any description but certainly to 
talk about reduction in it, as I said at the outset, 
very populist and I never met anybody who didn't 
see a reduction of taxes in any description but 
nevertheless we have a responsibility to provide 
the services for the people that we actually 
represent in this council.  Thank you very much. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  As there's no more 
hands up, at this stage. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
First of all can I say I regret the fact last year 

I wasn't able to attend the meeting because of a 
family bereavement, and obviously then, you know, 
I didn't get an opportunity for that reason to 
comment on that occasion. 
But what I admire today is that a number of members 
from Government parties have indicated they're not 
willing to go with the council officials 
recommendation on this occasion. 
And to me that's a very welcome development. 
That finally members of this council are beginning 
to realise that we do have the powers to make these 
decisions and we can make our, should be making our 
own decisions. 
I understand that the Chief Executive and a number 
of senior officials were hitting the phones fairly 
heavily in the last few days, I'd like the Chief 
Executive to explain what that was all about, was 
it an attempt to some way put pressure on individual 
councillors to go along with what he wanted? 
Because I think that would be absolutely wrong if 
that's what he was trying to do.  But I would ask 
that he explain what was the purpose of those phone 
calls? 
Because at the end of the day, colleagues, it is 

our decision to make.  And I have salt through so 
many estimate meetings over many years where we're 
always presented with the doomsday scenario, that 
if we don't increase what was once and upon a time 
was water rates, if we don't increase service 
charges, or commercial rates, now if we don't 
increase the property tax the whole place is going 
to collapse around us. 
Yet every year, we seem to manage. 
And on occasions such as last year we had farcical 
situation that money that we were told on the 
morning of the estimates wasn't going to come to 
us by that afternoon, it actually did. 
So, I would certainly welcome the fact that there 
are a number of members now who are beginning to 
question the line we're getting from the top table.  
Not only on finance, but on a lot of other issues 
as well so this could be a turning point on the life 
of this council.  And I certainly welcome it. 
I would also make the point that you know the 
Government that is now in office, comprises three 
parties, Fianna Fail, Fina Gael and the Green 
Party. 
And a number of the members of Fianna Fail and Fina 

Gael have expressed concerns about the inequality, 
inequity of the property tax and yet this 
Government is insisting that I think if one of the 
members point out, insisting on just letting this 
go forward for another year, without addressing the 
inequities and I think that's very disappointing.  
That having a new Government in place we had the 
opportunity see things change and that's not what 
is happening.  The presentation last week opened 
a lot of people's eyes and particularly members of 
the public that no matter how much you increase this 
tax we don't do any better out of it anyway.  The 
more money we take from the people the more we have 
to give to other parts of the country. 
So that's inequity why a capital I and for once we 
have an opportunity to say no, do what we can to 
halt this exorable rise in demands of people.  The 
other point I'd make, and I appreciate you giving 
me the time because Covid-19 is on all our minds 
there's no doubt about that, and apart from the 
whole issue of whether people get Covid-19 or they 
don't get Covid-19 and so on there are long-term, 
looks like long-term medical impacts as well as 
long-term economic impacts.  From this disease and 

I'm thinking of people who have lost their jobs, 
gone on short time working, people who own small 
businesses who are absolutely in desperation 
because they don't know from week to week whether 
they still will have a business, a lot of the people 
pay their property tax as well.  And I think, we 
should, this year, take the opportunity to reduce 
that burden even somewhat for them in this coming 
year and I have no doubt the officials will be all 
trying to find the money that we don't allocate here 
today.  Cathaoirleach thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Gerry O'Neill. 
  
CLLR O'NEILL:  It is the issue probably of Covid-19 
that is more in mind on the challenge to the people 
of Ireland and people of Wicklow.  And I absolutely 
am serious here, I think we should grab the bull 
by the horns here.  We should put the people of 
Wicklow first here.  And you know, to listen to 
colleagues here today, talk about chastising us 
house we voted in the past and how we vote in the 
future.  I like to point out that maybe we worked 
together, not only at council level but at Dail 

level and to think that the 160 TDs in there, which 
are costing the state 250,000 a year, a wage of one 
and expenses the waste of money we have in the 
country, the huge waste we have at local level I 
believe here.  I believe we can make huge changes, 
if we lead the way here and I'd like to see you, 
not even striking a rate today, there is a signal 
to the people that we are with us, we're not with 
the powers that be, and whatever, and you know, 
issues like I heard CEO mention the swimming pool 
in Blessington might be at the bottom of the list 
if this - I mean, I don't accept that at all.  We 
have politics and playing politics, we have it from 
Simon Harris here that we have a swimming pool in 
Blessington by the end of this year, and I take 
really seriously, what we should do here today is 
maybe send a signal out there we're a caring county 
council that we want - I know the issue of 
discretionary funding, people still throw that out 
and you have to be pop already if you mention 
anything else.  I think we're heading into the 
unknown here. 
And I think that to ask the ordinary people of 
Wicklow and Ireland to dig deeper into their 

pocket, while as I say you look at Dáil Eireann with 
160 TDs, very well paid people with advisers to beat 
the band, huge amount of money, there's hundreds 
of councils in the world, dozens of countries in 
the world who have taken reductions in salaries, 
in Government salaries, public representative 
salaries.  I'm talking about, you know, we're 
talking about County Council at a level and poor 
money we're on, 17,500 a year, you know I can 
understand where the likes we would be looking for 
that extra few pound but at the same time, maybe 
it would be a good idea that with our SPCs at the 
moment which are costing maybe over 350,000 a term, 
that they will be abolished for the next five years, 
that's a way of saving some money.  They're not 
that effective at the moment and that's a way of 
saving it. 
so that's why, I urge you before we cast a vote and 
play politics, and before we slag off people, I 
think we should really think in deep, maybe this 
is a way of showing the people of Wicklow, that 
we're more caring than that. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 

  
CLLR GLENNON:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
I'm not going to say very much. 
Just like to say that I think there's a lot of 
politics played with this and it is quite a serious 
issue.  At the corporate policy group, I was the 
first one I think that asked Brian about the fact 
that we were going back on our word to the people 
last year that it was for one year and one year only.  
Having heard his explanation I have to say that he 
answered a lot of my concerns.  That was it wasn't 
their fault that 3,500 houses were brought in, that 
was a commitment that was given at that time and 
I accept the views he expressed and backed up by 
the Chief Executive on that occasion. 
Cllr Derek Mitchell mentions about Greystones, I'd 
have to say for most people from west Wicklow 
driving through Greystones it is like driving 
through a town where the streets are dripping in 
gold, visa see the towns out our side of the county 
where there's destitute and no money spent on them.  
Cllr Paul O'Brien, constantly, Dermot O'Brien 
spoke about the increase in LPT my understanding 
is that the director of finance was looking to keep 

it at the 2020 figure, not the looking for an 
increase in that.  Cllr Tom Fortune looked for 15% 
decrease, but I don't know whether it is on last 
year's figure or on the baseline, I don't know 
whether he clarified it or maybe I missed it.  Cllr 
Vincent Blake mentions how well the discretionary 
funds are spent in rural Wicklow.  Which is 
otherwise left behind and that discretionary funds 
are an important part of the infrastructure going 
into that part of the county and poorer parts of 
the county. 
And I think Cllr Joe Behan is somewhat patronising 
when he suggests people in parties are not 
independent-minded and capable of thinking from 
themselves, I am certainly capable of thinking for 
myself and I don't need him as former party men to 
come along to speak to me as condescending tone as 
that.  Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  
CLLR MIRIAM MURPHY: Hello. I've lots of things that 
probably won't get it in the right way that it will 
come out because I sit here today very emotional.  
I'm sure everybody knows from last year maybe not 

the new people that I was personally bullied, 
verbally, online, and it wasn't nice. 
I had it for a whole month, probably two months and 
to the stage that I actually was at the point of 
going to resign. 
I felt that I left my people down which I was told 
face-to-face.  But that people that I respected 
actually people that surprised me, that stopped me 
I was surprised how they felt about me voting for 
the tax.  And yes, we were promised for a one year 
only. I would not like to go through that again. 
For nobody. For nobody should have to go through 
what I went through last year. 
And I am getting emotional and I have to say, only 
for the colleagues that sit in this room and outside 
it I would not be here today. 
And the points are very valid what is being said, 
yes, we want our community work, yes we want the 
grants, yes we want the UCD funding, yes we want 
the best for everybody, but at what cost is this 
tell me what cost? 
I appreciate Brian ringing me last Friday week, 
unfortunately I wasn't able to stay long on to talk 
to Brian, Brian I apologise for not getting back 

to you.  Apologies, Frank rang me, I didn't return 
his call that's the only call I get from the 
executive, that's fine, I'll swim my own sea but, 
again, the chair rang me at 10pm, and this morning.  
And I'm still sitting here sick with of what I'm 
going to decide. 
Am I deciding for to be blackened when it comes to 
budget for things, I'm passionate about, about 
disability, mental health issues, about housing, 
getting the people that trust me to come to lobby 
on their behalf? 
Will I be probably not ignored intentionally but 
because I didn't vote for the way we were asked to 
vote will I be left aside? 
I don't want to be a sideline.  I'm a player. 
But not under this pressure.  So, I would just like 
to say, please this is a hard day, it is a hard day 
to be here.  And it is not nice. 
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks.  Cllr Peir Leonard. 
  
CLLR LEONARD:  Thanks.  I think Miriam's relayed 
everybody's relayed a lot of stuff.  I'd like to 

think I'm progressive and balanced, I'd like to 
think I can see from a young age I've been able to 
see, under people's different reasons and I can see 
the perspective of the Wicklow County Council and 
what they're trying to achieve.  I see the 
perspective of the people I represent and their 
reality on the ground.  I live in Arklow, Arklow 
has suffered a lot throughout the years, from lack 
of investment and for different reasons, it need 
investment, and I realise a lot of people are 
struggling with paying on a day to day basis, on 
a week to week basis, €20 may not be a lot when 
playing with monopoly money, looking at accounts 
in the Wicklow County Council over the last year, 
there's some days I've been completely shocked at 
the money that is available and the lack of the best 
value that is got for that money and how it is spent. 
I'd like to meet halfway, and I'd like to not 
increase the tax on local people nor would I do I 
want to decrease it on Wicklow County Council.  I 
trust the Chief Executive and Brian, I would like 
to see more effort put into coming up with more 
creative ways to create revenue for Wicklow County 
Council, within our communities. 

I suppose, the LPT is a double tax.  Going back into 
when I was growing up everybody paid out of their 
income tax and the tax, they pay on products for 
the services they get.  But throughout the last few 
years I've seen the Tidy Towns picking up the pieces 
of the resources that aren't there, residents 
associations having to pay to cut their own grass, 
and these are the things that I hear on the ground 
I suppose in my municipal and what people, their 
main concerns.  I've seen projects and areas that 
are neglected that could easily be solved and for 
the people and amenities and stuff like that.  So 
I suppose, I could go on and on but I just want to 
meet half way and say look let's not increase it, 
we've got Covid-19, on our doorstep, we also need 
things to look forward, project to create jobs for 
people, we have the harbour RDF funding for Arklow 
and I don't want to be seen as being promoting 
nimbyism but Arklow does need investment, we don't 
have a TD, we're not on the doorstep of Dublin.  So, 
we need to strike a balance and keeping the baseline 
and LPT but also ensuring that every Penny LPT and 
councillors have a say and doesn't prop up what is 
national Government. 

  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
Cllr Avril Cronin.  
CLLR CRONIN:  Thanks very much Chair and thank you 
very much Frank and Brian for all your efforts and 
the presentation that you have given.  I 
understand the struggles that you face in the 
coming year are going to be difficult and I 
appreciate all the efforts that you're making to 
date. 
Last year when I came in as a councillor, the 
property tax was one of the first major things we 
had to vote on and I was told it was, if we increase 
it, it would be for one year and one year only and 
that was a commitment I gave, I was told it was the 
right thing to do for the people, I can't turn 
around to those people who put their trust in me 
and tell them sorry we have to increase it again 
this year. 
They have put faith in me, and they have asked me 
to represent them and that's exactly what I'm going 
to do.  I can't go back to west Wicklow and ask 
people to support increase in the property tax, we 
have grass growing in the mid-of our roads, I know 

my colleagues on the east side of the county feel 
that they are underdevelopment but try and get out 
of west Wicklow to travel to Dublin, there's no bus, 
we have one route that doesn't travel through half 
of the villages, many of us don't have a bus 
service, we've no train, we've no motorway, we 
really have huge lack of services in west Wicklow.  
One thing that was mentioned today during the 
presentation was that the Covid-19, that the 
property tax isn't effected by Covid-19 and that 
was meant to be a good thing.  But the families that 
pay the property tax are the ones that are affected 
by this.  They're already struggling financially, 
and mentally and I'm not willing to add any extra 
pressures to people and for that reason, I will not 
be supporting an increase in the property tax. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks.  Cllr Mags Crean. 
  
CLLR CREAN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
I won't labour points that have already been made 
and I think previous speaker made a very valid point 
I was going to make the same point LPT not impact 
by Covid-19 whereas it is for the people paying it.  

And for me, just to put an added point rather than 
repeating what I have here that's been said, I think 
it is important not to separate what we're doing 
here today locally and local politics level from 
national Government.  Because for me, this 
response is about how, going forward we are 
responding to the second economic crisis to hit our 
country.  Because pandemic, the previous crisis 
burden was put on ordinary households and 
vulnerable group, they carry that burden and from 
2009 onwards punished the most vulnerable in our 
communities.  If we set a precedent here today by 
increasing the LPT, we basically saying at local 
level yes people are struggling locally but we're 
going to add a little bit more to that struggle 
because like last crisis, ordinary people will 
carry that burden so I don't think it is good enough 
there's no commitment for reimbursement for the 
Covid-19 expense. 
That we're facing now and, in the future, because 
it is so uncertain. 
And I think this whole process is flawed, the fact 
we come here yearly and for me as new councillor 
this is what people feels so cynical of local 

politics you come and presented with one set of 
facts, one set of figures if there's no other 
alternative, if we don't vote for the increase 
these are the cuts and has been said by other 
councillors it is hard to vote against increase 
when then you're targeted at someone who is willing 
to allow our community suffer and that's the 
complete opposite.  But there's a serious 
underfunding of local government and it was 
reassuring the other input because I'm hoping the 
Government parties represented here today their 
members can bring the strong message back that we 
at local and council level can't keep propping up 
a completely grossly underfunded local government 
system. 
And then, a third point I know one of the 
councillors commented on the paths here paved of 
gold, a lot of the work done locally, even though 
we have great staff, we have a tiny number of 
outdoor staff, value tears keep this town looking 
so good in-in-addition to council staff and we 
certainly don't get, as Cllr Derek Mitchell said 
the value for the increase in property tax last 
year. 

And finally, then, I suppose it is the overall point 
is tax is unfair we can't use this to penalise 
people when it is grossly unfairly designed.  And 
on a very final point because it does concern me, 
I've a man date here, I walked the length and 
breadth of this district to get elected but I find 
it alarming that other councillors received phone 
calls for the Chief Executive and head of finance, 
I received no phone calls so I would have a question 
as to why, I'm here on equal merit to every other 
councillor, was there a reason I wasn't phoned or 
what do I take that as 
CLLR SNELL:  I find it disheartening listening to 
some of the speeches today.  It is very tough, 
irrespective of what way members vote.  You know, 
some members are coming in here and they have no 
choice, their party will dictate to them what 
they'll have to do.  Irrespective what the people 
told them on the doorsteps, no matter what their 
gut feeling is or whatever is in their heart they're 
told what to do. 
Is and it is an very unfortunate situation.  And 
I think no public representative should be 
criticised.  For what way they vote. 

No public representative should have to go through 
what Cllr Miriam Murphy outlined there earlier.  
In regard to last year. 
And I think there has to be common courtesy here, 
within the democratically elected 32 councillors, 
will has to be a mutual respect whether you're from 
a party or non-party we all understand how it works, 
and we should give that common respect to each other 
and that goes hand-in-hand with the officials.  
And irrespective of what officials made or whether 
they made contact with members, it is irrelevant, 
it is their job, they're doing their job and I 
wouldn't criticise anybody for doing their job.  
Cathaoirleach, I would never criticise the Wicklow 
County Council for doing their job. 
Everyone has a role and we all know how to plays 
out.  And the bigger picture here is that central 
Government is drip-feeding local government.  
They're drip-feeding us down to a trickle of 
funding, which is not being raised at a national 
level which it should be.  And it would be very easy 
to sit here and criticise five TDs and it would be 
very wrong.  The reality is this is all over the 
country. 

And it is not going to change.  It is not going to 
change this year, it isn't change last year and when 
it comes down to a vote like this, I always try to 
listen to the people who I believe have a 
background, a knowledge professionalism in what is 
going on.  And that's why, last year, we had two 
members of the Audit Committee who actually voted 
against that 10% increase.  Two people who had an 
accountancy background, who felt that the money 
could be found without the 10% increase last year. 
It's not our role as individuals to decide that 
we're going to stop another public representative 
from having a say in discretionary spend or 
otherwise, we should never stoop to that type of 
politics. 
We should never think we're bigger or better than 
anyone else. 
We're all elected, we all knocked the doors, we all 
went out and got the vote.  I would just, I would 
just issue caution to members to respect one 
another because you're getting into gutter 
politics, which is unnecessary, irrespective what 
votes what way today, there's no need for it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Anne Ferris. 

CLLR FERRIS:  Cathaoirleach, thanks very much for 
letting me in here.  There's just a couple of 
things I want to say, and I don't want to repeat 
what everybody else has said.  But, you know 
there's been a lot of discussion by phone and other 
ways about this meeting today and what's the right 
thing to do and I would like to thank Frank and Brian 
for contacting me, I believe they're only doing 
their job by doing that, and I would feel that if 
they're not doing it that they weren't doing their 
job.  My issue is that I feel very let down by 
central Government.  I think successive 
governments have taken the cowardly route out with 
regard to the LPT not to tackle inadequacies of it, 
and not to bring the 3 or 4,000 houses that have 
been built here in Wicklow into the net.  This tax, 
obviously people who are quite wealthy can afford 
the tax, but it was outlined early yes, a lot of 
people living in large houses who have raised their 
families are now probably the most vulnerable 
trying to keep things going.  We understand that 
people living in council housing don't have to pay 
so they don't have this extra worry.  But, because 
of the Covid-19 situation, an awful lot of people 

have lost their jobs, or still waiting for premises 
to reopen.  If he this can reopen.  There are a lot 
of mental issues, mental health issues out there.  
And I think it is very, very important for us to 
make the decision here today by looking into our 
own hearts.  We did decide last year to raise the 
rate by but for one year only.  We went out there 
and gave our word to the people.  And I think that 
in my view I don't think we can break our word to 
the people.  Now, the fact that through no fault 
of their own the officials are asking us to increase 
a rate, I think without being critical I think 
they're breaking their word to us.  So, I want to 
say thank you to councillor Miriam to her 
contribution to the meeting I understand she had 
a terrible time last year and she did mention that 
she would hate to think that come the budget time 
and after the budget in the next year when she goes 
looking for something, that she would be blackened 
but I'd like to reassure her she won't be the only 
one because there's a number of us singing off the 
same hymn sheet.  As the Cathaoirleach of the Bray 
Municipal District council this is a hard decision 
for me to pack because I know how important we need 

the funding for our district. 
So, I've never voted against a budget.  I've never 
voted against Local Property Tax but unfortunately 
today I will be voting against it.  I think that 
we have to and I know that the five TDs were invited 
here and that's deputy Matthews arrived and I know 
that deputy Whitmore had a valid reason why she 
couldn't be here because I know she would have been 
here, I think we need to be putting pressure on our 
own five TDs and senator to do something about this, 
because them year we're going to be sitting here 
and listening the Government will be saying no they 
put it back for another year. 
And I really don't think that's acceptable. 
I think that's all Cathaoirleach but as I say it 
is with regret, I have to take this decision.  But 
I think really, it will be easier for the members 
of the Bray district council to explain to people 
why they perhaps won't be able to get the services 
for the next year they would like to see and we would 
all like to see rather than telling them that we 
broke our word to them and voted for another 
increase. Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Councillor. 

  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  I'm kind of 
torn as I'm sat here and torn the last few weeks 
as I'm deciding how to vote today and as I listened 
to the argument there's one thing that's clear 
there's a lot of agreement in the room between 
councillors, party or non-party and officials and 
the LPT is not fit for purpose and I have sympathy 
with the officials, they're not in an easy position 
and I appreciate the time they've given during the 
week and today to talk with us and to put forward 
their argument. 
Having said that there's an awful sense of Deja vu, 
last year at this meeting we were told we were in 
a unique set of circumstances and a perfect storm 
of events had required an increase. 
Yet here we are again today having the same 
discussion and I have no doubt that unless this tax 
is reformed, we will have the exact same discussion 
next September.  I won't repeat the points that 
have been made about how much reform of the LPT is 
needed.  We're again all in agreement on that.  I 
do refer to particular Cllr Patsy Glennon I love 
the comment about the streets of Greystones being 

paved with gold and in fairness if you were to take 
a spin down the new harbour development you would 
be reasonable in thinking that.  This is my big 
issues with the property tax we have new houses in 
my district a lot of new houses and developments 
since 2013, some of these properties on sale for 
up to a million euros and they're ex-settlement 
from the Local Property Tax it beggars belief.  And 
I have to ask myself is it fair to ask the same 
certain number of property owners to continuously 
shoulder this burden and thoroughly, it is not 
fair. 
And to be honest with you, I'm pretty disgusted by 
the fact that there is zero political appetite in 
central Government to bring these new properties 
in our tax net by now.  It kicked down the road, 
year after year, and I want our newly elected TDs, 
its mentioned several times we have two ministers 
and senator and I want them to come and tell us when 
they're going to stand up and take action on this 
for Wicklow?  It is not enough to turn up to 
meetings, it is not enough to say whatever on social 
media, come and tell us, tell the other elected 
representatives here, come and tell the people that 

elected you when we're going to take action on this. 
So, I'm torn.  Of course like everyone else I want 
my community groups to get funding, on the other 
hand I've had people contacting me during the 
pandemic lilt rally at the end of their tether, 
struggling financially and mentally, and it is by 
no means over.  So, where do we go? 
For me, taking all of this into account I have to 
come back to core values and the fact that I 
represent my community and I listen to our 
community.  And last year, as a newly elected 
politician I gave my word to the community that our 
raise was for one year only.  And I believe in 
keeping my word to the people I represent.  So, in 
a sense although I have been torn, my decision is 
clear-cut and because of my word I gave last year 
I can't support a rise this year.  On a separate 
note I just want to commend Cllr Miriam Murphy for 
her very honest speech she gave today, and I'm 
appalled to hear of what she went through last year. 
I have no idea and I want to say to her or anybody 
regardless of party or non-party to reach out for 
support in your fellow councillors, if needed that 
there's absolutely no cause for that to happen and 

I will always be there to support anyone that is 
subject to bullying.  Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. Cllr Sylvestor Bourke. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  Thank you Cathaoirleach.  I have to 
agree with some of the things that Cllr John Snell 
mentioned there how disgraceful it is that there 
is a drip-feed of funding from central Government.  
And I do agree with many of the statements from 
others as well about how scandalous it is the way 
we're treated.  On the one hand drip-feed in terms 
of finance, and other hand the digitalised stimulus 
money, threw money at it for projects that we 
wouldn't have dreamt it out of discretionary 
funding, footpaths all over the place for example. 
Which may or may not be absolutely necessary. 
But I disagree with Cllr John Snell's assertion 
that as a member of a party I'm told what to do.  
Nobody from the party has told me what to do.  I 
have a mind of my own and make up my own mind and 
that's outrageous statement to make. 
I before this meeting I was considering that we 
should like many other speakers have said we should 

keep this at zero rate that we promised to everybody 
last year.  And that was my line but having met with 
Brian and manager last week, they did indicate that 
councils who decreased or failed to increase the 
property tax and decreased them last year, were 
penalised by central Government when it came to sum 
member of parliamentary funding during the year.  
And on that basis if we are going to qualify for 
supplementary funding for project throughout, at 
certain times during the coming year, I would hate 
to think that by not passing on the small increase 
that we're going to fail ourselves and we'll be 
penalised and we'll not get extra funding.  
Perhaps, Brian might like to clarify that point but 
that's a big point for me, in swinging my decision 
to supporting a small increase this year. 
And on that basis only would I be prepared to do 
it.  And I am a taxpayer, I'm paying property tax 
and also income taxpayer and I do believe that 
broadening the tax base is important and keeping 
in the tax base as broad as possible is important 
because otherwise my income tax is going to rise.  
The money has to come from somewhere, it doesn't 
grow on trees, there's a certain amount of a pot 

nationally that has to be deified out and the 
raising of the money is important.  Just more 
important than spending of it, but, if my property 
tax goes down, probably my income tax is going to 
go up, I'm going to get caught one way or the other.  
So, I believe that we should all pay our fair share 
in what we can afford to do. 
CLLR WINTERS:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  I would 
like to thank Brian and Frank for their 
presentation, and I do understand the need to 
provide services within the county.  But I also 
feel that when we gave the undertaking last year 
to provide the match funding and increase the 
property tax that we did so on the understanding 
it was a one-year only.  I think it is wrong that 
there's still 4,000 plus houses in the county that 
don't pay property tax and in order to provide 
services for a growing population we would be 
expected to charge additional money to the people 
who do pay property tax to subsidise the people who 
are outside of the net due to a lack of 
responsibility I suppose on behalf of the 
Government since 2013. 
I did give a commitment last year to my constituents 

that I would do this for one year, and one year only 
and that's the way I'll be voting today.  Thank 
you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
Brian I'll bring you back in if there's some of the 
questions you would like to take.  Thank you. 
  
BRIAN:  Thanks Cathaoirleach, this was general 
statements rather than specific questions and Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke specifically asked me to go 
through the issue of whether we will be penalised 
and I know a few other councillors questioned the 
suggestion that by not maintaining the Local 
Property Tax at our existing rate that it wouldn't 
undermine our argument on the baseline.  Well I 
suppose the proof of the pudding is in the eating.  
It was already mentioned earlier about the 
situation that arose last year with Dublin City 
Council, who refused to approve their budget on the 
basis that there was a funding gap of I think it 
was up to 8 million as a result of Irish Water being 
rated and loss of compensation funding from the 
department. 

They met with the minister, and were told to go back 
approve their budget because they were getting no 
more money and the reason for that was because they 
made the decision to reduce Local Property Tax by 
15%.  And the argument was that they controlled 
their own funding, whether that's right or wrong 
that's the way the system is. 
And what they had to do is go back and increase 
parking charges, across the city, increase toll 
charges and so forth. 
In contrast, Wicklow County Council and Waterford 
council also applied for additional funding for 
this very same reason and we both got funding, we 
were the two local authorities in this particular 
situation that got funding in that regard. 
And the reason was and it was clearly stated it was 
at the time that we increased our Local Property 
Tax by 10%, that we recognised the I suppose the 
funding issues that we had and we did something 
ourselves to improve on that. 
So, that's one example, one specific example, 
whereby a county council was punished in relation 
to the LPT decision because just being 
straightforward about it, it is very hard if you 

reduce your income by 1.7 million due to a decision 
to go cap in hand looking for additional money from 
Government. 
And I don't think anyone can dispute that.  We can 
get in the nuances and grey areas about baselines 
and self-funding options but the bottom line is and 
with a deeper level they'll see Wicklow County 
Council voted to remove 1.7 million out of their 
budget, reduce their income and now they're moaning 
and groaning looking for more money from us. 
Now people can disagree with me on that, that's the 
way it is. 
Just a few other points - it is also, and number 
of general points made by council councillors by 
unfairness of system, not fit for purpose, LPT 
whether it is or isn't that's the system we have.  
There are amendments brought in, hopefully next 
year, as we say bringing in the new bills, 
revaluations, but that's the system we have.  To 
say it shouldn't be in place we don't recognise it, 
or we should be funded by central Government, to 
be honest, it's just head in the stand stuff. 
If it were abolished in the morning, it would be 
replaced by another funding scheme. 

And another taxation, Cllr Sylvestor Bourke made 
references to that.    Another couple of 
things - there was a proposal put forward by a few 
people mentioning a 15% increase or decrease, I'm 
assuming that's from the baseline.  That would 
mean we would have to reduce budget by 4.3 million 
just to people are aware of that, that's the 
implications. 
4.3 million out of our budget. 
So that would be an interesting budget meeting in 
November.  Now trying to find 3.4 million. 
And like that, Cllr Joe Behan made the point about 
being entitled to make decisions and councillors 
you are entitle today make decisions it is a 
democratic right here.  But, every councillor here 
must own that decision and come November time when 
there are budget cuts to be made and the budget has 
to be balanced, which is a statutory requirement, 
the decisions here today have to be owned so when 
the requirement is to vote in the budget in November 
with these budget cuts, people have to take 
responsibility for that. 
The I suppose just one thing everyone keeps 
mentioning about increasing and impact on people 

if I suppose if an alien walked in the door, they 
would think that we're actually going to cause 
people to pay more money next year. 
I think it is just important to get it, make that 
statement, we are not looking for people in Wicklow 
to make one cent extra, in 2021, all we're doing 
is asking to maintain the Local Property Tax rate 
at the existing level. 
So, there will not be one cent extra paid by the 
householder in 2021 and protects the funding, that 
was ring-fenced last year the 1.7 million for 
discretionary funding for match funding and 
projects.  Which are crucial I suppose for the 
development of our local areas. 
It was also mentioned about, last year, it was a 
one-year only, due to unique set of circumstances, 
broken promises the transport states it was an 
option of a one-year decision. 
On the expectation that additional money would be 
forthcoming following the implementation of the 
LPT review recommendations. 
So that is what the actual transcript states, 
unfortunately as we know, that legislation wasn't 
brought forward for all various reasons, we're very 

well aware of, and hopefully that will change over 
the next while.  What is apart from that it was a 
unique set of circumstances last year; we couldn't 
raise our commercial rates. 
Due to the rates revaluation process, this year we 
can. 
So that is an option from a member now in November, 
if they want to fill that funding gap, they can 
increase commercial rates.  In the current 
environment, that will be very difficult but that 
is an option. 
And I think that's probably most of the issues that 
were raised Cathaoirleach.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian.  At this stage 
I'm going to ask the Chief Executive if he can come 
back in. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Just remember, as Brian said 
there, one year would be fine if the LPT legislation 
had changed, if equalisation, baseline, inclusion 
of new towns et cetera but that didn't happen.  And 
this is why we had zoom meetings during the week 
and conversations with councillors it is important 
to understand that that didn't happen so there's 
no change there.  We also have Covid-19.  So, 

we've a big hit now in rates write-off Covid-19 
direct expenditure, public lighting, pay mention 
pensions all outside of our control that is on top 
of despite the usual constraints we have, so it is 
important to remember that.  And, we want you know, 
we have an opportunity here to get funding to 
ring-fence it without anybody in the county without 
anybody in the county paying anything extra, we 
have ring-fenced for a range of projects, increase 
for discretionary spend which has been useful for 
climate action and for the community grant scheme.  
So, I think that's what people need to understand, 
we have an opportunity now to ring-fence that money 
despite the hits we got and the legislation not 
changing. Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I know Cllr Tom Fortune has 
indicated he wants to come back in, so I'll let him 
back in. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I won't be long.  I just want to 
take Brian up on a one or two things he said. 
I don't think it is fair and right to say that 
there's no point moaning and groaning.  I don't 
think there's nobody in this room moaning and 
groaning, we're here to represent the people who 

elected us.  I mean, I pay my property tax because 
I get charged it every year but there's loads and 
loads of people in my area who cannot afford to pay 
property tax and increases, and I think making a 
comment, no point moaning and groaning, it is like 
the recent trampoline remark at national level.  
You're saying we will have an interest meeting in 
November, if we increase, decreased it by 15%, but 
Brian what I say to you is, we're not children. 
We're all grown adult here.  And you know, we live 
in changed times and there's going to be changes 
as we go forward so we can't be doing meetings like 
we always did it.  So perhaps the meeting on the 
19th of November is whatever we have, whatever the 
figure is, if it is 10 million, 11 million, 13 
million whatever the figure is, let us get involved 
in it and decide how it will be spent rather than 
being dictated to how it will be spent and stick 
waved at us and threats made that Mrs Commissioners 
coming in and all that rubbish.  We got to stop all 
that carry on and treat us with respect.  There is 
a, I've said this at two previous council meetings, 
in my opinion, I don't know whether I have support 
or not, but in my opinion, the respect for public 

representatives is at an all-time low as regard 
councillors and from my perspective it has to stop. 
It is just ridiculous.  And making remarks to us 
as if we're children is not acceptable to me anyway. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Tom Fortune. 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  I hope I will be still treated 
equally and don't get mistreated because I speak 
out on certain things.  And I'm not looking for the 
publicity of it, as one councillor remembered Ed 
referred to earlier. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Shay Cullen 
table 14. 
  
CLLR CULLEN:  Yeah Chairman I will be brief. 
I suppose, listening to the arguments my concern 
is we can't have this both ways.  If we reduce our 
budget by 1.7 million, there is going to have to 
be cuts to services discretionary fund, projects 
match funding, whether is that going to come from 
as if there's an appropriate piety from people here 
to say yes, we're going to reduce our property tax 

but there's consequences to this and my concerns 
around this is where are the cuts going to come 
from? 
We have to be realistic about it.  You know I don't 
like paying property tax no more than anybody and 
I would love to continue to reduce T but the fact 
is we have an obligation as county council letters 
to do what is right by the council and the residents 
of County Wicklow. 
It is not to take the easy approach out of this, 
but I firmly want to know if we're going to cut by 
1.7 million where is that money, where is the cuts 
going to come from, in terms of our budget in 
November? 
I know it is possibly difficult for Brian to answer 
at the moment, but we all have to be realistic to 
that, that is what is going to happen, cuts to 1.7 
million in the budget and that's not easy to do. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Sylvestor 
Bourke, 13. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  Cathaoirleach I forgot to ask Brian 
in relation to the July stimulus money which was 

over 3.5 million, it was a nice windfall could some 
of that be used to displace next year's expenditure 
on certain project to help us balance books? 
MR GLEESON:  July stimulus package included 
capital works and have to be spent before a certain 
period before October and that was commercial rates 
levy also, that was a six-month waiver for 
commercial rates for this year only. 
So, as far as I'm aware all the inclusions in 
stimulus package is for this year only so it 
wouldn't have any benefit for next year.  
Obviously, we're still working with the department 
in relation to next year, as a sector to try and 
get as much support as we can, but we're still 
waiting on commitment in that regard.  With regard 
to Cllr Shay Cullen's point about where the cuts 
are going to happen, I suppose that will be decided 
in November.  However, if we just look at the fact 
that the 1.7 million did pay for a specific items 
of match funding half-a-million community grant 
scheme, millions of discretionary expenditure and 
climate action initiatives, they would be the 
obvious places to look. 
If the members don't agree with those areas and we 

should retain those areas, then we have to find 1.7 
million somewhere else, whether it is housing 
repairs or local roads maintenance, that will be 
decided in November.  Or it is a case of increasing 
our commercial rates, increase commercial rates by 
5.5% that will cover the 1.7 million are councils 
willing to increase parking charges, introduce 
charging for recycling centres, we have a myriad 
of options, put forward.  Ultimately it will be the 
councillors who decide. 
We'll put forward suggestions if they're not happy 
with it, they can make changes themselves. 
But we're few and far between areas of 
discretionary expenditure within our budget.  A 
lot of our budget is paying pensions, probably 50%, 
at the will of the other expenditure and income is 
Contra, as we call it, because it is basically in 
and out. 
We get grants for specific items and we have to 
spend it in specific items. 
If we don't spend it, we don't get the money in so 
we can't cut those areas so, there's a very limit 
pot that we can tap into in order to fill the funding 
gap unfortunately.  And I suppose, the 

discretionary fund by its name and by its nature, 
it's future projects that we have to actually pick 
so it would be the obvious choice obviously the 
match funding, they're for future projects that we 
are to apply for that we haven't drawn down so 
there's no considerate actual commitment in place 
so that's why they're the obvious areas that will 
be vulnerable for reductions and cuts 
unfortunately and coming as a district manager of 
Municipal District that would sadden me because I 
see the benefit of RDF funding in Wicklow Town the 
library, Fitzwilliam Square and the benefit that 
will have to the town itself and there's a number 
of projects set up and funded through the 
discretionary expenditure that will be coming on 
stream before the end of the year as well.  So, as 
I say from just the district manager, hat on my head 
I would be very disappointed having to cut that 
expenditure but as I say there aren't too many 
options available to us. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Paul O'Brien. 
  
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Yeah thank you.  I'm not going to 

apologise for what I had to say but I hope 
councillors didn't take offence what I had to say, 
it certainly wasn't personal.  It is only how I 
feel, and I'm entitled to my opinion. 
This has been a lively debate and it is very 
passionate and you can see the passion around the 
room here and I think we all have one common 
goal - that's what is in the best interests of the 
people of Wicklow.  Before you conclude this 
meeting care lack can I remind councillors what 
Cllr Miriam Murphy, myself, Councillor Matthews 
and Whitmore and a lot more of us went through last 
year because of some councillors in this room and 
some TDs, all I'm asking for this year is a little 
billet of respect please, myself and Cllr John 
Mullen had a motion in for some months now in terms 
of social media how councillors' behaviour on 
social media, including their supporters.  So, 
before we leave here today, I would like to ask I'm 
actually begging because some of my family members 
were attacked last year and I wasn't even here for 
the vote.  So, I'm asking for a little bit of 
respect this year.  I'm asking councillors to 
leave here and respect we have differences of 

opinion.  But don't run out of here this evening 
and go on social media and run down some of us for 
our beliefs we're entitled to them.  So, I'll leave 
it at that thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Joe Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Thanks point of information, would it 
be correct in assuming that the Department of the 
Environment have indicated that we are one of the 
councils who have enough finances within our budget 
to reduce the property tax by 15% if we so decided? 
And secondly, are we within our rights if we do make 
a decision to reduce it by 15% which I certainly 
hope we will, are we within our right Cathaoirleach 
to set up a budget committee, not an Audit 
Committee, but budget committee where members of 
this council would be nominated to work through the 
proposed budget, line by line as has already been 
suggested and there are a number of highly 
competent members from all sides of the House, in 
this room today, who could assist in that process 
and help us to find the figures that we need to find 
when we come to make our decisions in November? 
Thank you. 
  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  I suppose there's two 
questions there, maybe Brian you would take the 
first one in relation to the department. 
MR GLEESON:  I didn't follow the question for the 
department. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Every year the department produced a 
list of councils within their budgetary system they 
are entitled if they wish to reduce the property 
tax by up to the maximum of 15%. 
And every year Wicklow has been on that list.  Some 
councils aren't on the list. 
Are we on that list this year? 
MR GLEESON:  Every council is entitled to reduce 
their property tax by 15%. 
CLLR BEHAN:  With respect, every year the 
department indicates a number of councils whose 
basic finances I can like who are not sufficient, 
to enable them to go for the maximum decrease I 
thought. 
MR GLEESON:  No.  I'm not aware of any list. 
OK.  That you're speaking about, 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Second point was, is it possible 
to put a group together to work with management I 
suppose to look at the budget when it comes, that 

was your second point wasn't that right? 
I didn't see any difficulty with a group coming 
together and with the director in relation to 
finance coming up to the budget.  There would be 
no problem with that. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  CPG, obviously there's a lot of 
work in preparing the thing, we can have workshops 
with councillors and similarly the full budget 
meeting is the decision. 
CLLR BEHAN:  There was in the past, in local 
government legislation provision for a committee 
called estimates committee it is now called the 
budget.  It used to be the estimates and members 
of the council were statutorily entitled to be part 
of the process of preparing the shipments now the 
budget.  Is the Chief Executive saying that that 
is no longer legally permissible? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  No I'm not saying that, I'm 
saying the process we have used here for the last 
number of years is we prepare the budget, we can 
have a committee or group or working group or 
whatever to work through it.  But ultimately comes 
back to the council here to make adopt the budget 

in November. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK thank you.  Cllr Erika Doyle. 
CLLR ERIKA DOYLE: Thank you just one small point 
and it's too late for this year I think, but, I would 
like to suggest some kind of public information 
attempts by the council next year in advance of the 
vote, a lot of people are speaking here about 
representing their constituents, so, almost 
anybody I spoke to over the last few weeks I 
mentioned the Local Property Tax and very few 
people had any real idea as to what it is, what it 
is spent on, what the implications are for a 
reduction or increase and actually, quite a few of 
them when I explained the figures and the thinking 
behind it changed their approach to it.  So I think 
to truly represent our constituency we need to 
empower them with a full knowledge of exactly what 
this S it is easy if you ask anybody to reduce a 
tax of course everybody is going to say yes, very 
few people are in a position of choosing to spend 
more.  However, I think maybe we need to put more 
attempts into making sure that people are fully 
informed before giving their opinion to their local 
representative.  That's all, thank you. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
Members, we started the meeting at 2.00.  I have 
sat here in the chair, listening to all of the 
heartfelt contributions from the floor. 
And I know each and every one of you spoke from the 
heart here today. 
You would hear a pin drop, we will all remember back 
to June when we had our AGM it was noisy in here 
but today you could hear a pin drop so what I'm going 
to do, I'm going to take a fifteen minute break and 
we'll come back, it is now, just quarter past four 
so come back at half past four, and we'll take 
proposals from the floor.  I just want to thank 
each and every for their contributions. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH OK members thank you. 
We'll come back to our meeting.  So, just before 
I kick-off I want to thank you everybody for taking 
part in this meeting today.  I hope I've given 
everybody enough time to make their contributions, 
and as I said in the beginning, I want to thank 
everybody who spoke from the heart here today we 
all know where you're coming from.  But so, I'm 
going to come now and look for proposals from the 

floor and we'll take it from there.  So, table 
number one. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  It was interesting today to 
listen to you will a the contributions and I am 
fully aware of the difficulties that Wicklow County 
Council will experience in the next year but what 
I'm going to propose but that's it, so I'm proposing 
that we reduce the LPT basic rate by 10%.  So, 
bringing it back to what we started, bring it back 
to the 100% it was last year.  So, I'm asking the 
members to support that? 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Gerry Walsh. 
CLLR WALSH:  I want to come in with Cllr’s 
proposal.  Is the proposal we go back to base rate?  
Yeah. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  You're proposing that we go back 
to hold it at the base rate for the coming year is 
that right? 
>>:  Yeah. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Do I have a seconder for that?  Cllr 
Shay Cullen.  Just one second.  So that proposal 

is proposed by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  Seconded by 
Cllr Shay Cullen, 
>>:  Just for the purpose of clarification, today 
we are voting on raising our lowering the base rate. 
We're not voting on raising or lowering the 2020 
rate.  We're back, every year we go back to the base 
rate, we either raise it lower or leave it to the 
same.  Is Cllr Pat Fitzgerald proposing that we 
neither raise nor lower. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  We're preparing to lower the 
base rate by 10%. The basic rate. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  The director here for 
clarification. 
MR GLEESON:  What Cllr Pat Fitzgerald is 
references is he is reducing 10% from the level it 
is currently in 2020, which was 10% increase.  My 
understanding is that the proposal now is to keep 
it at the basic rate for 2021. 
Is that correct? 
 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  That's correct. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's proposed a seconded.  Cllr 
Shay Cullen I need to find, table 14. 

CLLR CULLEN:  Yeah, Chairman I would like to 
formally second Cllr Pat Fitzgerald' proposal to 
go back to the base rate, which is a reduction of 
10% on the 2020 rate. 
I suppose this reduction will benefit the 
householders of Wicklow up to about 60 Euro per 
annum depending on the price of your property.  It 
is a difficult decision and I'm conscious that the 
council is losing out by about 1.7 million which 
will obviously have to be found to try and make sure 
that we have the services that are required into 
the future of 2021.  But I think listening to all 
the arguments here and there was a lot of compelling 
arguments I think it is the right thing to do on 
this particular occasion. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  So, we have a proposer and 
seconder, Cllr Tom Fortune. 
 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I would propose that we reduce it 
by a further 5%, on top of the ten, 15%. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  I'm going to bring in, so do 
you have a seconder there for Cllr Tom Fortune.  

Cllr Joe Behan seconds that.  So, we have two 
proposals, two seconders, I'm going to bring in 
Lorraine. 
MS GALLAGHER:  To be clear the proposal has been 
proposed by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and seconded by 
Cllr Shay Cullen, is in essence is that the council 
not vary the basic rate for 2021, that's in essence 
what you say which is represents reduction of 10% 
for the householder last year, so, what you're 
saying is that you're reducing, you can't reduce 
his 10%, by a further 5%, are you ... 
 
CLLR FORTUNE:  What I'm saying, reducing the last 
year's rate by 15%. 
MS GALLAGHER:  By 15%. 
By 5% yeah, so base rate by 5% and that's seconded 
by Cllr Joe Behan. 
Any other proposals? 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Excuse me, Cllr Dermot O'Brien. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, I propose we 
reduce by 15%. Below the base rate. 
  
 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK do you have a seconder for that? 
Seconded by Cllr Grace McManus. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  OK. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We have three proposals; Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald's proposal was first so that's what I'm 
going to take first.  Cllr John Snell. 
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach it is not a 
proposal it is just to get clarification; we know 
the monetary loss of a reduction of 15%.  From the 
budget, could I have clarification on a 5% 
reduction on the base rate? 
MR GLEESON:  Three proposals put forward the first 
one we're aware of is 1.7 loss, the second one which 
was 5% reduction from the base, that's a 2.6 million 
loss in total.  And the last proposal put forward 
would result in a loss of income of 4.3 million. 
to the budget next year. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Does that answer your question 
Cllr John Snell.  No problem.  So, I'm going to go 
for a vote on Cllr Pat Fitzgerald's proposal. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Propose by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and 
seconded by Cllr Shay Cullen. 

(Votes counted) 
So that's 24 for, 7 against and one abstaining. 
Motion carried. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Motion carried. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Sorry one not present. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Joe Behan wants to come in 
there, table 15. 
 
CLLR BEHAN:  Could I just propose that we go ahead 
now with the setting up of a budget committee, of 
the members of this council to ascertain where the 
savings can be made and present a new budget for 
the members in November? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Joe Behan just as a point of 
clarification, we have one item on the agenda today 
which is the variation of the property tax and all 
I'm taking for this meeting, thank that's all I've 
been taking today and I have been fair to every 
member to say what they needed I'm only dealing what 
is on the agenda, that's what I'm doing.  Cllr Tom 
Fortune you wanted to come in. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  A proposal on today's meeting 

coming from Cllr Joe Behan which I'll second. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm not taking that today I'm 
dealing with the variation.  I'm only dealing with 
the variation of what we were dealing with on the 
agenda.  I'm sorry, I'm not taking that now at the 
moment.   
CLLR FORTUNE: It is part of the meeting. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm not taking it now.  Has 
anybody else got thinking to bring in with.  With 
the vote taken, I now conclude the meeting so thank 
you very much for being here. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Just before you go, remind elected 
members we're not having a statutory October 
meeting we're going to meet the elected members of 
32 with online platform and e-mail will circulate. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Thanks everybody. 
  
