 
1
 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 2nd DAY OF MARCH 2020 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
 
J SINNAMON 
J SINNAMON 
 

 
2
 
 
NON-VERBATIM TRANSCRIPT OF COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 
MONDAY, MARCH 2nd 2020:  
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon. Afternoon, members. It's only, it's less 
than a week since we all saw one another. We have a very long agenda, 
because we have, because it's such a long agenda, I would really ask people 
to be mindful of not repeating what previous speakers have said. If you want 
to you can come in and say I endorse the comments of, but please don't 
repeat it all. Okay, so item one, to confirm.  
ADMINISTRATOR: For Margaret Butler, for Gillian Stanley. For Oliver Martin, 
father of our colleague Ruairi Martin and for Eddie Young.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Any other votes of sympathy?  Okay, we will stand for a 
moment. Okay, to confirm and sign the minutes of the ordinary meeting of 
Wicklow County Council, held on Monday the 3rd of February. Can I have a 
proposer?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Councillor Ferris. Is that agreed?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: To consider the disposal, item number two, the disposal 
of 1.223 acres of land and in the townland of Tinakilly by way of a 
three-year lease. As previously circulated, can I have a proposer?   
Cllr Fitzgerald. Seconded by?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Tommy Annesley, is that agreed?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 3, to consider the disposal of 0.13 acres, situated in 
the townland of Drummin, as previously circulated. Proposed by Cllr Cullen 
and Pat Kennedy.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?  Agreed, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I know that item 4 and 5, we have to take them 
individually, but it's all tied up in the same parcel of land. To consider the 
disposal of 0.2 eye acres or thereabouts of land in Drummin, to Patrick 
Roche and Breda Roche, as previously circulated. Proposed by Cllr Cullen.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Seconded by Cllr Kennedy. Agreed?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 5 to consider the disposal of 0.62 acres to Yvonne 
Roche, Annamoe, County Wicklow as circulated. Cllr Cullen and Kennedy.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?  Agreed. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, item 6 to consider the disposal of 0.485623 
hectares or thereabouts of land situated at Dr Ryan Park in Greystones to 
Sporting Greystones for a period of 30 years as previously circulated. 
Proposed by Cllr Walsh and seconded by Cllr Fortune.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 7 to consider the freehold interest in the property 
known as Seapoint House. As previously circulated. Cllr Ferris. Cllr Aoife 
Flynn Kennedy, is that agreed?  Thank you. Item 8 to consider the disposal 
of the freehold interest in the property known as 34 Connolly Square Bray to 
Ms Sharon Fannin.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposed by Aoife Flynn Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Ferris. 
Agreed?  Agreed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 9 to consider the disposal of 0.0044 hectares in the 
townland of Enniskerry to Mr. David Messit and Helen Messit, as previously 
circulated.  

 
3
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposed by Cllr O'Connor. Is that agreed?  Agreed. 
Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 10 to consider the disposal of the council's interest 
and equity in 0.040 hectares of land at Clonpadden, Arklow to Mr Derek 
Byrne.  Do I have a proposer?  Cllr Pat Fitzgerald. Is that agreed?  Agreed? .  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 11 to consider the disposal interest and equity of 
0.37 hectares to Mr. David Johnson, Penrose house, as previously circulated.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposed by Cllr Burke seconded by Cllr Kennedy.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Number 12 to consider the disposal of the Council's 
interest and equity in 0.53 hectares at Ballinacor East, Kilbride, to Mr David 
Johnson, Penrose House, Redcross, County Wicklow.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposed by Cllr Kennedy and seconded by Sylvestor 
Bourke.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item number 13, to consider the Chief Executive's 
Monthly Management Report.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, I will take it as read, but just one or two 
items. We received our NTA allocation for this year, it's slightly higher than 
last year, 2.69 million, it's up from 2.5 last year and 1.1 the year before, can 
you hear me?  So, the, it covers the likes of the aquarium project in Bray, 
the Bray dart interchange, design fees for the Arklow Shillelagh Greenway, 
design for the Wicklow access to Station Road and it includes the ark low 
traffic management plan. Those are what we are going do anyway and there 
is a lot of smaller ones then.  
 
There is a lot of smaller ones that are included in the capital plan that you 
can see later. Receipt funding also under the outdoor recreation for the 
construction of new paths at Bray head linking the Cliff Walk to Bray Head 
Loop. Linking it to Belmont way and construction of a new path at the sugar 
way. It's a 200,000 project that will be part of the link from Bray to 
Woodenbridge to again that project will go ahead this year. And we did apply 
on Friday for three screams under the rural recreation, or the RRDF, the 
Rural Development Programme, now the three schemes are Rathdrum is for 
the development of a new street to the east of the existing main street 
linking the two gateway sites.  
 
Redevelopment of two gateway sites south of St Saviour's Church, the 
design of a new enterprise and the enhancement of the public realm and 
main street providing links to the new street. This is what is called category 
2 funding. It's for design fees for this project, there is another one we 
submitted for Newtownmountkennedy, the provision of main street works 
addressing issues in the town centre. Provision and safe access to the 
centre. Provision of a pocket park in the town centre again and the 
refurbishment of the existing community centre, including a ports and 
recreation hub, all-weather pitch and the third one submitted was for 
Blessington in relation to public realm improvements in the town centre, 
removal of parking from the square, overhead cables, acquisition taking 
advantage of the network, connecting to the proposed Blessington inner 
relief road, enhancement of the approach road into Blessington and electric 
charging points for commuters and car poolers.  
 

 
4
So they are gone in so we will have to wait until those applications go. 
Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: John Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you, again, Cathaoirleach, for your detailed report. I 
like to welcome the fact that the Arklow Shillelagh Greenway is progressing. 
It's essential it's ready for the planning process if there is an additional 
Greenway fund announced towards the end of the year. I presume we are 
still on track for the Arklow Shillelagh Greenway to be the proposal for this 
year's greenway fund. Secondly I was wondering on the west Wicklow 
swimming pool project where we are trying to rescue where that is at the 
moment. It's stream one, we need to keep that project going. Thank you 
very much.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: Cathaoirleach, I would just first of all support Cllr Mullen's 
point with regard to the west Wicklow swimming pool. Certainly any of us 
contested the election at a public meeting were left in no doubt by the 
community how important that project is to the community in west Wicklow. 
Obviously anything that the Chief Executive can do to support that, I am 
supportive of it, I certainly would welcome. I am not sure whether the Chief 
Executive wants to comment on this, but I think it's an important time to 
raise this issue.  
 
As we know, there are negotiations in progress at the moment for the 
formation of a new Government. The Green Party are central to those 
negotiations at the moment. And the leader of the Green Party made a 
statement in the Dail with regard to the N11 and works that may be 
happening with regard to the N11/M11. It was to the effect that if they get 
into Government they are going to stop those works and I think there is a 
very serious threat to improvement works on the N11 if that particular 
threat is carried out and I remember when we discussed this, I raised this 
before the election and I remember the one issue that I think most people 
were agreed on at the time is there needs to be a combination of works 
done there, not just widening a road, but there has to be public transport 
options given to people and we all agree with that, but if I recall correctly 
the Chief Executive at the time said we are on a particular funding track for 
that work, having got to this stage, I am concerned that that particular 
funding track will be taken off it again, because of the fact that negotiations 
might say, well, we don't want this work to proceed.  
 
I think, as a body, as Wicklow County Council, we should be indicating very 
clearly to the Department of Transport and the Department of Local 
Government that we do not want to see the priority of that particular road 
being removed by a future Government and we should make our views very 
clearly known on that subject. And I don't know whether, as I say, the Chief 
Executive can say any more about it publicly, but I think he did express 
concerns about the funding being withdrawn, whatever it was decided and I 
think what is very important and I am sure we would all agree, that 
whatever else would happen we don't lose the funding. We have to do 
something for the tens of thousands of people stuck in this misery morning 
and night, who are still stuck in it three weeks after an election with very 

 
5
little hope of things improving in the short-term, Cathaoirleach.  
 
So I would ask the councillor, maybe consider sending a letter, as a body to 
the Department of transport on this.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Bourke.  
CLLR BOURKE: Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank you for the excellent 
report. There was some good news on the funding as mentioned, the 
greenway and the other projects but there was a disappointment in the 
Arklow Municipal District that the fund you mentioned the outdoor recreation 
scheme which we had applied for the reinstitution of the sea front 
promenade and associated trails of refused and failed to gain funding and it's 
a huge issue for us in the district and I am hoping that your good office 
would liaise with Colm Lavery funding through whatever means you have, as 
soon as possible to deliver that until Arklow. Paul O'Brien, thank you for the 
Chief Executive for his comprehensive report again. I want to echo Cllr 
Behan and Cllr Mullen's call for the swimming pool in the west. I won't 
repeat it, but I want to offer my support, I also want to welcome the news 
that the new library is on schedule and due to open later in the year, along 
with Fitzwilliam Square.  
 
It's great to see the county town catching on, I notice in the report about 
the greenway, as we have all experienced the north easterlies are hitting 
them hard and the greenway, although it's needed we need to know when 
it's going to come and I know reports have to be done and I am looking for 
an update on that, in terms of tourism, again the county town is without a 
hotel and I notice that there is funding going to be available from Bord Failte 
up to half a million and I am fearful that the county town is because and I 
am wondering is there anything.  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Cllr Bourke has spoken about this, but I couldn't hide 
my disappointment and the disappointment of hundreds of people when I 
received the news that we didn't get funding under the Aras Project. There 
was an excellent application done, by the council staff here and it just makes 
me think when we see that our funding compared to other counties and 
particular the county of Mayo, where they can put two and two together 
there and hopefully we won't have a Mayo minister again, but I think there 
is a health issue over here and it has to be look at by some manner of 
funding. If we don't get it, we need to get it from the council, there was a 
part of that funding we applied for, I think there was a figure of nearly 
40,000 to do some works over there and hundreds of people used that walk 
and in fact at this moment it's dangerous to be on the walk. So I think there 
has to be, as Cllr Bourke alluded to it, there has to be some means for 
getting the work repaired and getting it done quickly, because we are 
coming into the summer months, but we are coming into the summer and I 
think that walk has to be done, quickly and speedily for the safety of the 
people who are in the area.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Lourda Scott.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, and thank you to the Chief 
Executive again for his report. I just want to make the comment that I am 
delighted to see in the report there is a report of the climate action officer, 
this is really welcome news, delighted to have seen that progress so quickly 

 
6
and look forward to working with them through the climate SPC. I also 
supporting Cllr Mullen's proposal about the swimming pool being contacted 
by people of west Wicklow today and add my support to that and the other 
councillors that also supported it. Briefly in reference to Cllr Behan's 
comment we will be discussing the N11, until the Government is formed it's 
a moot point as to what we can demand from a council point of view. I have 
one query as regard the children in homelessness figures and Chief 
Executive, again, I am, every month I struggle a little bit in understanding 
the breakdown and I suppose I am just querying the figures. I understand 
that 73 children presented as homeless this, in January 2020, 33 were 
accommodated in their own door accommodation and 33 in bed and 
breakfast accommodation and noting that 7 children were in B&Bs for is it 
months which is horrendous, but going on that, I think that leaves ten 
children unaccounted for if I have looked at the figures correctly, if you could 
comment on that, that would be great, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Annesley.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I would like to endorse Cllr 
Bourke and Cllr Fitzgerald's comments about Arklow. There is serious rate 
payers in that part of the town. We are lucky to have one of a four star, I 
would like to congratulate the Hudson's on the Arklow Bay getting four stars 
so we have a four star hotel in our town and I am sure this walkway has 
benefitted the Arklow Bay Hotel. These are serious rate payers. These all 
back on this walkway and for us to say we do not have the funding, I was 
approached by a local developer who said, "he would do the footpath." When 
I approached the local developers they wanted him to tender free of charge 
and anyone who puts a tender in knows the cost of putting a tender in.  
 
The local developer said I am not going to do that, not going there. I can 
understand the engineer's frustration by not getting the funding so he could 
do the footpath, so I am endorsing Cllr Bourke's and Cllr Fitzgerald's 
comments on this: 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gerry Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you to for the report. Just a query in relation to the 
social housing support section and the number of people availing of the 
rental assistance scheme. I have had representations from some of those 
with concerns as to where they stand in relation to the actual housing list, 
they are deemed not to be on the list once they were accommodated under 
RAS. If you go forward and look at the homelessness section, there is a 
section with the number of people asked to leave and where landlords are 
selling their properties. 23 last year and 27 this year, so these people an 
RAS feel they are falling through the cracks in their security of tenure is not 
what it should be.  
 
Just if there is any plan to put them back, reinstate them on to the list, that 
is a thank you. Just one more question in relation to the part 5s. We have 
had two significant decisions there with An Bord Pleanála in the Greystones 
area there with Cairn Homes. I think we had 750 units approved. So are 
those the part 5s in connection with those decisions, included in the part 5 
figures here, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Blake.  

 
7
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you I would like to thank you the CEO for his 
presentation there. And John's comments with the Arklow Shillelagh 
greenway. We asked this week, when the issue of funding for our roads 
programme came up for the year, obviously I see an increase in it, which is 
welcome in that regard, but nevertheless we were here doing our own 
budgets and we talked about the need for maintaining service in the county 
and we did approve a 10% increase in the property tax, just for that purpose 
alone, but certainly the comments I have been hearing and the phone calls 
from people, particularly with regard the local road and county roads as well 
and the regional roads, the state of them at the moment, certainly leaves a 
lot to be desired. They are coming in on a daily basis in terms of phone calls.  
 
Had a phone call from an individual who lost a day's work, two cars bursted 
on it, so it's a concern out there to the public that the winter hasn't been as 
bad as other winters. We got another rain, but we hadn't a frost, but 
nevertheless there is an awful lot of work out there, it in doing the repairs on 
the local roads and the regional roads, it's one of the concerns of the general 
public out there and it needs to be addressed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Glennon.  
CLLR GLENNON: Good afternoon, Cathaoirleach, I would like to thank the 
Chief Executive for his report and I would like to join with my colleagues in 
welcoming the support for the swimming pool in Blessington. The support of 
Cllr Behan Scott and O'Brien.  
 
I would like then to move on to the completion of the ring road in 
Blessington. That is a welcome development and it's been greatly advanced 
by our new director of planning who is our Municipal District manager and 
that is a very welcomed first step and hopefully it will be completed, it will 
bring great relief to the town and it will allow for other things to be done in 
the town that are badly done and the Chief Executive has already 
mentioned. However, I think it needs to be emphasised that that is only a 
stop gap measure, we need our new N81, it's our number one priority in the 
west, as far as I am concerned and while the swimming pool is important, it 
falls into second place to the new N81, in my view.  
 
Now, the N81 gets great traction in the chamber, always. But the N81 
appears to be totally forgotten about and people in west Wicklow find that 
difficult to understand, considering you have a dual carriageway that takes 
you into Dublin. We are the only national secondary route that isn't, hasn't 
been upgraded, that goes to the capital and I think it's really something that 
you need to focus on, because I do honestly believe that our side of the 
county is forgotten about. I conclude by giving you this example on a lighter 
note. That is since we, for the last six months since we were elected, it's 
been mentioned at almost every Municipal District meeting that the white 
line stops at the top of the Wicklow Gap. Wicklow seems to stop at the top of 
the hill as far as the council is concerned. I think we need to be looked after 
better out west.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: I would like to thank the Chief Executive for his report and 
comment on a few things. I would like to support my west Wicklow 

 
8
councillors with both the Arklow to Shillelagh greenway, but also the 
swimming pool as well. I think west Wicklow is neglected an awful lot of time 
and it's much needed over there. In relation to Arklow, I want to support my 
fellow councillor in Arklow about my disappointment with the funding, not 
being successful for the walkway on not only do we have substantial rate 
payers in that area, but we have invested Wicklow money in that area as a 
tourist attraction with outdoor recreational equipment, sports equipment and 
stuff like that. Hopefully we do do that. I was wonder figure we could have 
an update on the harbour master position and when that will be advertised 
for Arklow.  
 
In relation to the flood relief. I was wondering, could it be given an update 
on the drawings before it goes to planning. Almost all aspects, for this 
meeting, my comment is basically support, or add on to Cllr Behan 
mentioned we have a massive infrastructure deficit at the moment, 
particularly in the north Wicklow area, obviously we are struggling big time, 
for example, for school places and we have discussed that here in the 
chamber over the last number of weeks. But, if you take whether the road 
proposed for the N11 happens or doesn't happen. At best it's not going to 
happen for a good number of year, but the real challenge and I would be 
interested for the Chief Executive's stance on it, as we speak, there is about 
2,300 houses either have been, some have been constructed, others are 
under construction and others will be built, so that, is will come to roughly 
3,000 houses.  
 
Now, when they come up to the existing network you have got, a bunch of 
them have to come out of Greystones harbour into a town that is bursting at 
the seams already. I would be interested to see what the plans are going 
forward to deal with that, because it's a serious issue. I think one of the 
major problems we have and Cllr Behan made reference to the ongoing 
negotiations at the moment, but the lack of infrastructure and the lack of 
joined up think, and the amount of talk going on department to department 
really is penalising most of our constituents and I would like to get a handle 
on how we are going with all of that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Shay Cullen.  
CLLR S CULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I thank the CEO for the 
comprehensive report as usual. I just want to welcome the application under 
the RRDF for Newtownmountkennedy and I want to thank director Nicholson 
for the staff for the spot are that is given. In terms of any town and this 
would feed into Cllr Behan’s concern. Newtown is one of the fastest growing 
towns, but unfortunately there is a lack of recreation facilities. Sporting and 
for families and sporting organisations in the area are basically ham strung 
because they have no where to go with regards to providing facilities. As we 
are aware the N11 is a major problem, there is over 1,000 houses being 
built in the Newtown area at the moment. We are building houses but with 
no facilities or amenities to go along with those. So I think there is an onus 
on us, I do welcome the funding that is being sought after and I hopefully 
that will be successful on that, but I do feel that the community groups and 
all the good work they are doing in the area need our support. Thank you. 
Cllr Cronin.  

 
9
CLLR CRONIN: Firstly can I welcome the new colleagues,  
Cllr Neary and Cllr Doyle and thank the manager for that report. Would it be 
possible to get a report on the funding that was applied for the swimming 
pool. It would be great to see the areas that were unsuccessful and why 
they were unsuccessful in that application, if a report could be provided it 
might help for future applications. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Gerry O'Neill.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank you to the CEO for the 
report. I again, we are all part of a group there that want to see things 
moving and see infrastructure and new swimming pools and a lot of things, 
but unfortunately the Blessington town development plan has been put on 
hold, it was to be implemented in 2019 and nothing, it's put off, I think for 
the input of the spatial strategy plan, so it's all up in the air, but the sooner 
the better we get our own plan for Blessington, I can see the swimming pool 
being part maybe of a complex, a leisure complex or whatever.  
 
Also, the, as my colleague Patsy Glennon said, the ringroad is of utmost 
importance, there is probably a bigger issue and as I mentioned here before, 
the amount of houses that are being built in the county of Kildare, my 
daughter lives in an estate in Blessington county Wicklow and the road in 
front of here is 16 foot wide and the houses in front of her are in Kildare and 
there are proposals for another 365 houses in similar circumstances where 
on one side of the road the houses are in Kildare, where as the other ones 
are in Wicklow.  
 
And, if, you know, there is talk now at the moment that of the 365 houses to 
be built, the social, the 10% for social need, according to what we hear now, 
coming from Kildare County Council and that being that, that 36 social 
houses will be going to people on the housing list in Kildare. I had asked for 
an urgent clarification on this, not alone do we have the 365 houses at that 
part on that road, but we have another up to 600 houses being built in 
another part of Blessington which is in Kildare as well. It would be a lot of 
houses that we have, I think it's 280 people on the housing list in 
Blessington and out of all of these new houses that are going to be built 
around us we won't get one house.  
 
It's a mad serious issue, because every one of these houses are being built, 
there is over 14,000 development levies will be going to Kildare County 
Council, the property tax will be going to Kildare County Council and we 
have to provide everything in Wicklow, water sewage, schools the whole lot. 
We have to get our head around this.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Time.  
CLLR O'NEILL: We have to look at Blessington urgently and get a 
development plan up and running as soon as possible.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Miriam Murphy.  
CLLR MURPHY: Thank you. First I would like to thank our two new 
councillors great to see two strong women. Also, I am just querying maybe 
or requesting a report on the GPGs. I see they are advertised again, but I 
am just always concerned about the waiting list and their priorities the way 
these are given out and if that is possible, because I know that there is quite 

 
10
a long list and I know that the funding can run out sometimes as well. But I 
would just think that the way, the GPGs are done, that maybe a review of 
housing maybe, I welcome that report. Also I like to echo what Cllr Blake 
has said about the roads. People need to realise that nowadays there is rural 
country roads in dire straits, these people are paying their taxes, in all 
sections of life, the road, their car insurance, tax and insurance and the 
roads are just not standard enough, it's just not safe and we as a County 
Council need to look at that and I think we need to realise it's not just the 
main road people are using, they are using every road in the country, be it 
side roads, secondary roads as well and these are the people that are 
coming to us look for us and Young we need to up our game on this.... and I 
also echo the strong lobbying that the other five councillors, the Municipal 
District has done on a very disappointment, on our no funding on the 
general amenity in Arklow. I mean what else can be done from or engineer 
who has done it, report and application three or four times and in very much 
detail, so it's beyond our responsibility at this stage and I think the new five 
TDs, we need to lobby as Arklow Municipal District, but also Wicklow County 
Council, it just has gone on too long, it's gone on too long. We are getting 
this every day from the public who are using it as well and it's not just 
Arklow public, people are coming in from surrounding areas to use the 
facility. The gym equipment is there, the other thing, what do they call it, 
the bike thing, I can't think of it now, the cycle skate park. I mean the 
amount of use that is, the leisure centre is there, people are dropping their 
kids off to swimming lesson and the family, other family going for a walk 
around the area. As Cllr Pat Fitzgerald said, it’s a major health and safety 
issue. I can't even go up it at the moment on my own. So I think we really, 
really need to get this report done, we need funding, whoever's door we 
need to knock on, we need to knock on it now.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Cllr Ferris.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Thank you very much, 
Cathaoirleach. Just the, I would like to thank the Chief Executive for his 
report. In the beginning when he was speaking his microphone wasn't 
working correctly and I know he mentioned a number of projects, including 
the aquarium in Bray, around that area, I wasn't sure whether he had said 
that funding had been applied for, those projects or whether funding had 
been received?  So he might just clarify that for me. Thank you, 
Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR M KAVANAGH:. Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I was just reading through 
this last night and I am blocking my own path here. It's just on the climate 
change, there was great talk last year we set up a new SPC and we were 
going to do everything and all the rest of it, there wasn't very much said in 
this report and it's the time of year when we should be thinking about things 
lake planting verges with wild flowers and stuff like that. I know the 
hedgerow band has started, but as regards new initiatives I really was under 
the impression that this new SPC was going to do an awful lot in terms of 
climate change and I am disappointed to see that there doesn't seem to be 
anything really on the agenda, so I don't even know how much they meet, 
but I would hope that by the next meeting, we have some kind of report to 
show some positive action being taken, it's all I want to say.  

 
11
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just in relation to Arklow 
Shillelagh, I mentioned there we received funding from the NTA in relation to 
the design of it. That will bring it up to the environmental impact assessment 
report, which goes to An Bord Pleanála, but the funding for the scheme, we 
would expect to be funding from DTDS, so I suppose the next phase is to 
bring it to design phase, get the planning consent and look for funding in the 
next round that comes out. In relation to the West Wicklow swimming pool 
we applied for fees which was around 5,000. I was surprised they didn't 
come back for it, because they come back looking for information, looking 
for us to provide extra information in the application, but it didn't come 
through. So the large scale information team will be coming around again, 
we need to focus on it, see where it went wrong, but we can't go on, 
because it's such an amount of money. We will keep working on that. In 
relation to the N11, what we were referring to is this scheme was mentioned 
in the national development plan. So that has schemes that are going 
ahead. The second category of schemes will progress to design phase 
between now and 2017 and some of those, depending on Government 
decision will go ahead. That one is what our has mentioned in. With people 
working on it, we have the TI. Regional design office, focus on it, so 
obviously we don't want to delay it, because we are in with a chance of it 
progressing, so any delay we want to stay in that category and complete the 
design work. Sylvester Bourke, yes the Arklow Coastal Walk, that was 
disappointing. I mentioned the one we have in Bray, St Kevin's Way is under 
construction and we have the car park and the work of the factory there. We 
are doing okay out of the infrastructure scheme, but we will have a look at 
and we will certainly apply for it again, but we will have a look at other 
sources of funding as well.  
 
Cllr O'Brien, mentioned the West Wicklow Swimming Pool and the greenway, 
the greenway between Wicklow Town and Greystones. The biggest issue 
there is the ecology as you go through the sand dunes. Coastal erosion will 
happen anyway and in fairness to Irish Rail they couldn't be more helpful, 
but the big one is the ecology, so there is a lot of work which has got to be 
done to prepare that environmental impact assessment report. There is a 
funding stream from DTTS for those design fees and they have applied for. 
They have come back looking for extra information and we would be hopeful 
for that.  
 
As soon as we get that we will progress the remainder of the design. In 
relation to tourism, Failte Ireland did do a study in the county looking at the 
demand and the tours coming into the country. They are increasing at 4% 
per annum and it looks at all accommodation, hotels, guest houses, hostels 
and they have identified a demand, a shortage of 175 beds that goes up to 
250 until 2025 and they have gone further in that they have looked at a 
model on someone who is interested in building a hotel, how much it will 
cost per room, with 70% occupancy, what the repayment will be and what 
the profits will be made. So it's a useful document we can give to 
prospective investors and a few have approached us. It's available for 
councillors if they wish as well.  

 
12
 
In relation to Cllr Scott and the homeless, the open door and emergency 
accommodation, which is fine, you see the 73-year presentations, the 
remainder then would have been accommodated at home or with relatives 
and obviously every support is made to deal with any situations in relation to 
rent, etc and leasing and will work with people in as much as possible so 
they don't become homeless in the first place. In relation to the Cllr Walsh, 
the RAS numbers are decreasing because HAP is increasing and people on 
the HAP scheme can put themselves in a transfer list for permanent social 
housing, if you like, so we will have a look at the RAS and see what we can 
do. Just in relation to part 5 on the two SHDs that were granted. Yes, 10% 
of those will be social housing. They are phased as the schemes are being 
developed. They are not, so they are social housing through a voluntary 
body. In relation to Cllr Blake, the roads programme will be discussed at 
each Municipal District, either during the month we, will have our annual 
service plan again at the next month's meeting, but our roads allocation 
from the Department was up, we had put more money into it from the 
budget, but look, we will keep trying with the Department in terms if there is 
any funding available it may be that we look for that.  
 
Cllr Glennon, they mentioned the N81 we have in the RRDF application now 
for Blessington. With very looked for design fees for that, we have looked 
also, we are working with Kildare County Council to establish a special 
contributions scheme for development levies for the private housing to fund 
a section of the relief road, the large scheme, as I mentioned we will keep 
lobbying in relation to that. Cllr Leonard mentioned the flood relief scheme. 
We can certainly arrange for a presentation in relation to that. The harbour 
master position, I think we had, we had allowed for a general service 
supervisor to assist the harbour master and we will look for that post to be 
filled. Cllr Fortune, just in relation to housing, we have our existing 
development plan and our core strategy which was developed and 
developers can apply in relation to the existing population targets and the 
existing zoned land. We will, we have received from the regional spatial and 
economic strategy, population targets for the next county development plan 
and we have started that process. Again that will be looking at land that can 
be serviced over the period of the plan and we will have a new core strategy 
and have new population targets and zoning and that will all play out here in 
time over the next year, year-and-a-half.  
 
Cllr Cullen, just in relation to the recreational facilities in Newtown mount 
Kennedy, we will certainly look at sports capital and every scheme comes 
our way. Cllr Cronin, yes we can have a report on the Swimming Pool and 
we will certainly be talking to the Department about what is coming down 
the track and what we can do about that. Cllr Gerry O'Neill's comment about 
the leisure complex, maybe that is the way we should go and have it part of 
a bigger development, maybe they are more interested in that. We have 
made contact with Kildare, they are telling us they have enough social 
housing applicants for the 10% of houses coming on stream in Kildare, but 
again it's something we will follow up with them. Cllr Murphy question get a 
report on the DPGs we can certainly send that out to you. Just in relation to 

 
13
Cllr Ferris, what I was talking about earlier was the National Transport 
Authority have given us their allocation. It's 2.69 million, it's up from last 
year, they have included in that funding for the project at the aquarium, 
funding for the project at the Bray dart interchange, that will start again in 
September. Design work for the Arklow Shillelagh, design for the Wicklow 
port access for Station Road, design for the Bray footbridge and the Arklow 
traffic management plan and Greystones traffic management plan and there 
is a whole range of smaller schemes around North Wicklow in particular 
Greystones in particular that will proceed to design stage. Cllr Kavanagh, in 
relation to the climate change SPC, there is a programme of works being 
developed for this year and it will be discussed at the next meeting of the 
SPC, but there has been a lot done I would say in terms of the car charging 
points, that is something that will be coming forward. We will have the 
public lights replacement, that is something we will be looking at in term 
was our carbon emissions and we have done a lot of work with Bray public 
library, Greystones depot, Civic Offices, Clermont House, Bray Fire Station.  
 
We have done a lot of work in improving our own energy efficiency, we will 
be look at solar panels and the part 8 was approved so that project will 
hopefully be going ahead this year. But the plan that will be approved by the 
SPC then will, needless to say be looking at car charging points, planting 
schemes and various issues around biodiversity and business continuity how 
we operate in terms of severe weather response, but I am sure once that 
has been approved we will share it with the other councillors.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Okay, to item 14 and I would like to welcome 
from SSE Airtricity Patrick Rooney and Keith Bardon. And I know over the 
last couple of months, longer and actually we have had questions and 
concerns about public lighting and I would like to thank the SSE Airtricity for 
coming down to us and for agreeing to listening to some of our concerns.  
PATRICK: Good afternoon, all, my name is Patrick Rooney, I am the regional 
and director of head of operations. I am here today with my new colleague, I 
have with me Keith Barden, the contract manager for Wicklow County 
Council and I have Vicky Boden who is somewhere here, Vicki Boden from 
our corporate affairs team. First off, I would like to thank you for inviting us 
here and giving you a chance to address the concerns raised in these 
chambers and the media more recently. I would like to start, if I could with 
some boring statistics. So, the current situation in inventory wise, so in 
Wicklow County Council you have over 15,000 lights at the moment. Of 
those over 6,000, about 43% are what you call SOX lanterns. These, I have 
a further slide on this, but we will be looking to replace out over the next 
few years. The next is Lanterns, they are about 30%, you have about 2700, 
about 19% of your inventory. The SOX lanterns make up 33% of your 
inventory. These were manufactured previously by Phillips lighting and 
communication was sent out internationally to all customers, lighting 
installers, about three years ago, explaining that those were not going to be 
manufactured anymore.  
 
So we are looking to replace these out with LED. The agreement we have is 
we have ordered in 1,000 lanterns at this moment and basically we install 
them as they are required which then the low cost County Council until they 

 
14
are installed and operating. The current replacement rate for those new 
lanterns is 7 lanterns per crew per day and we currently have five crews 
working in Wicklow County Council, so we are doing LED lantern refit. The 
national upgrade programme was mentioned there, at this stage. If we keep 
going as we are, by the time you bid for that work you are probably going to 
be in the region of 27-30% of lights will be LED which will put you ahead of 
the rest of the country at this stage. The challenges, now obviously I am 
here to, I was invited here after the number that was mentioned in the 
media, was of 700 lights. Firstly I want to address I do not believe it was 
700 faults outstanding at this stage.  
 
There were several items that went into that number. Probably one of the 
key things to call out is the age of your public inventory. At the moment the 
SOX lanterns are out for 45 years plus. They would have a life of 25 years, 
obviously as they are breaking down and failing. Hang on, my beautiful 
assistant will hand me, very slowly. This here is a 5 watt SOX lamp. As you 
can imagine our guys pull up to replace this, they get set up, they do the 
traffic management they, basically screw out the old one and replace it with 
a new one, this is what the 55 SOX land, these are not available, not just 
Wicklow, we have to replace these with LED lanterns, this is a lot more work. 
Obviously taking down the lantern and doing the adjustments to the table 
and putting the lantern up and coming back down again. We are probably 
talking in the region you will do 10-15 lamp replacements on a good day, 
with the lamp replacements you can do 7, depending on the type of network 
and road you are working on. This results in a slowdown in how many lights 
and faults you can replace per day.  
 
The other point is there is obviously issues with stakeholders outside just 
SSE Airtricity and account holders. We are out there working on a live 
electricity situation every day, these stakeholders we have meetings every 
single engagement, obviously they do delay and can delay our works. So we 
just need to call that out. Another thing that has come to light, since the 
days of using websites and apps and all sorts to log faults is the duplication 
of fault reporting. Particularly when we went digging into Wicklow numbers 
we notice add duplication on faults being reported: 
 
We have obviously worked officials in the council to identify a single point of 
contact and we are also on a technological phrase, we are with the website, 
takes faults through a system called Deadsure and I won't bore you with the 
details of that, but it's a third party inventory management system and we 
have worked with the developers, along with the officials in your council to 
improve this and we have improved the system over the last few year, but 
one of the key call outs for our next phase, what we are looking to do is at 
the moment when a fault gets logged you cannot put a secondary fault on 
that light or an escalation, so we are going to do, working with the develops 
are once again so we can put, remember a member of the public can put an 
escalate through that on the website.  
 
So they can see the faults being put up originally and they can escalate any 
concerns about that. Which will prompt for us to come back to them directly. 

 
15
Probably just come back here to the current situation, so as of the moment, 
right now the number of lights that are not working in Wicklow County 
Council area, 310 lights. That includes about 56 lights that are outside our 
control, be it that there is no energy to the lights and then what we are 
going to come back to is 254 lights within our control that are not, that are 
in our control that are not working right now. That comes to about 1.7% of 
your inventory which is well below the 2% average we see around the 
country. Now, just to give you background information, you get about 20 
faults that spikes around winter and drops in the summer. We generally see 
20 faults a day. At the moment we get to 55 faults a day. We have seen 
4600 lights come through the system. Of those about 2900 were related 
directly to the SOCS lantern issue I called out. Out of those 4600 lamps, 
2600 of those were related directly to the SOCS lanterns, so going back to 
that old inventory. Just to give you an idea of those 4600 that we have seen 
come through, we repaired 4300 of them. I appreciate I sped through that, 
but I am happy to take any questions or queries.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gail Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank you for coming to make 
the presentation for us today. I was the one who raised at the council 
meeting and I would like to thank the members for suspending standing 
orders. At that stage Wicklow is in darkness as far as I am concerned. I can 
talk, especially about my own area, that light are being reported, sometimes 
over three months and weren't being fixed. Some of the lights that are being 
reported are still not fixed. Especially where I live, Fitzwilliam road, high 
street, places like that, the lights are still out. The figure came over 700 
lights came from our director and the figure also came back that after us 
raising this at the meeting the last time, that there was 300 lights fixed 
within a month. Do I have to suspend standing orders every time to get 
lights fixed in this county because that is the only time as far as I can see 
you are reacting. The other thing I will say is that lights, when they are 
reporting there is no tracking system and no one knows when they are going 
to be fixed. There is lights at the moment, easily out in Wicklow town easily 
over three months and nobody can track them. I would like to see a new 
system put in place as we have with Irish Water, where we have a 
councillor's helpline, call in lights some maybe are more important than 
others and maybe you prioritising them and getting them fixed. In one area 
of the town I went down and there wasn't a light on in the whole town down 
there. So you can blame who you want and blame this and that, but as far 
as I am concerned there is reason why Wicklow County Council didn't renew 
your contract, because I don't think you were doing your job and I tell you, 
it's been a very poor effort, to what I have seen in my time as a councillor 
and just this winter, other winters as well, it's only when someone brings it 
into the public domain, you act. I am hugely disappointed with SSE Airtricity, 
I thought you were a better company than that, thank you, chairman.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: John Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you for the presentation. 
I suppose just on the data our own area engineering and Municipal 
administrator, in fairness at last week's meeting sourced some data from us 
and in my engineering area there were 99 lights out, which is, according to 
your data, just under a third in one engineering area which is only half my 

 
16
Municipal District, now it's quite a rural area, so whether there has been a 
massive improvement in 7 days I don't know, I don't think so, and a couple 
of issues arise out of that, one is some of these lights have been out since 
2018 and the engineer, it's a minority, it's a tiny part of, but still there is no 
way of tracking when a light has gone out and when a light gets repaired. As 
you said, the escalation of it needs to be addressed, because at the moment 
you don't know when it has been addressed. There was new lights put in in 
Carnew in 2019 and were only turned on in January. They were put up in 
April 2019 and only turned on in January 2020. Now, I heard there was an 
issue between SSE Airtricity and ESB on this, over a connection, I don't 
know if that is true or not, but those type of issue, how are they being dealt 
with, as regards your company and the ESB networks. The third item is 
when your views have been out, they have been repairing a light, or two 
lights and there might be three or four lights out in the group and yet, 
because it's in the on their work list, they are not addressing, so they are 
doing the traffic management, they have got the crew there, they are 
repairing one or two lights and the light beside him that is not working they 
can't address because it's not on their worklist, I accept there might be 
technical issues but I find that completely illogical or bad management.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Paul O'Brien.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: I want to welcome you to Wicklow. I am not going to jump 
up and down, I think I just want to re-emphasise and I have been warned 
not to be repetitious here today, you are going to get a sense of anger and 
frustration and the reason you are getting that is because that is what we 
are getting from the public. Cllr Dunne has been on about this for a long 
time, bachelor agency walk where the Garda station is located in Wicklow 
Town hasn't been working since September. We had an elderly man fall 
down the step because of the lack of lighting, so I want to emphasise and 
say again it's the not knowing factor that is killing us. If we can go back to 
you are constituents and say this is what is happen, at least knowledge is 
power.  
 
If we can give knowledge back to the people we can pacify them until the 
new lights are installed. I am not sure about yourselves or the ESB, but 
maybe the director can help me on this one. I received pictures over the 
weekend, as you can see yourself, you have come into a beautiful town, 
built on a hill and we have in the town here a scenic car park and whoever's 
idea it was to plant the ESB pole right smack ban in the middle of the 
scenery, not you, well I will let you off that one, maybe you will have a chat 
to your colleagues in the ESB, for whoever planted an ESB pole in the middle 
of the scenic car park over the town needs their head examined because the 
light aren't switched ed on up there and I am talking about the ESB there.  
 
One of you might look at that, because it's bad timing for us, as councillors 
in the sense that we voted in favour last Monday for new houses up that way 
and now it looks like we are riding roughshod by not listening to the 
residents. Whoever's bright idea will you ask them to look at it again.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Lourda Scott.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you for coming in and your presentation. I suppose this 
is my first winter as a councillor and I have been amazed at how many 

 
17
complaints I am getting about street lights not being repaired and 
particularly, complaints coming in from elderly people who are feeling unsafe 
leaving their own house and not being able to walk down their own 
cul-de-sac because of lack of lighting.  
 
Recently I had a constituent from Kilcoole contact me, concerned about his 
wife's safety, there was a recent knife attack on a group of females in 
Greystones, he was concerned because of the darkness and lights out which 
had been reported into SSE Airtricity on the 9th of December and they were 
only repaired after I contacted Declan O'Brien in Wicklow County Council, 
repaired on the 25th, so that is two-and-a-half months which seems an 
extraordinary length of time. My specific questions for you are, can you 
confirm that within your contract with Wicklow County Council that there is 
specified time under which lights should be repaired. My understanding is 
that there is a ten-day turn around, neighbour is not correct. If there is a 
specified time, is the report then given to your customer, to Wicklow County 
Council on an all basis for the average time that you are taking to repair 
lights as part of that. Again, if not, can one be provided going forward. Again 
I am just questioning who monitors the performance, is this the work of 
WCC, do they need to monitor the turnaround times, is it the roll of the 
commission for regulation of utilities, where is the responsibility?  You are 
providing a service, where is the follow-up on that. I would also like to 
comment, you were saying about IT improvements. It's not clear on the 
website how complaints can be lodged. There is a detailed description of how 
to lodge complaints but it seems to be more in line with your actual gas and 
merge provides to customers, so with regard to street light and repair, like 
the person I was saying in Kilcoole who is waiting for two-and-a-half months 
does he lodge an official complaint through your complaint system through 
the website, should that come in through Wicklow County Council, whose 
responsibility is it to be following up and holding you to account basically.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, thank you for coming down to 
meet with us. Again my comments will be similar to those made already. 
I will make four specific points.  
 
The 56 lights you say with no energy going to them. In my own area, I am a 
councillor in the Greystones district and I live in Kilcoole and there is a 
number of lights in Kilcoole as you come into the village that have no power 
going to them for three-and-a-half years at this stage, I am wondering is 
there no rapport between yourselves and the ESB, because we tend to get 
passed from one to another.  
 
Also in one of the housing estates in Kilcoole there is a light that there is no 
connection going to it, obviously the residents are getting frustrated that 
nothing is happening with it. Just to give you an example. In order to help, 
could we review the reporting system, in other words is it possible that we 
as public reps can have an email point that we can send an email into you 
and we get a response back and I think that might improve things, so I 
would welcome your comment on that.  
 

 
18
Also, the reason, the frustration from a lot of us is that it's the whole 
communication area and the uncertainty of how we should be operating and 
finally can I say that I had reason to talk to Keith on a problem and I have 
to say that he dealt with it very well and my experience with him was 
excellent.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can you deal with those six and then go back to the next 
six.  
PATRICK: Okay, I have my notes here. He wrote the compliment down, I 
can't see the question. Okay. I suppose going back to some of the specific 
call outs and some of the areas, where there is issues, I suppose once again 
to go back to our key thing here where we go back to what is going on with 
the issues. Some of these, like before when there was an issue with a light, 
there was a sense of getting an electrician to go down there and replace a 
bulb. We are now moving towards LEDs and energy efficiency was 
mentioned earlier on. We are now replacing lanterns, this will take longer, 
there also has been issues where there has been severe cable faults. It 
involves us discovering it, doing a lot of civil work and replacing the cable.  
 
These things take time, I am afraid and there will be delayed. It was 
mentioned a couple of times about working with the ESB, ESB Networks 
were mentioned a couple of times. We have a good working relationship and 
we are meeting with them on a weekly base us to escalate issues from 
across the country and not just Wicklow County Council, obviously about 
getting up on 30% of your lights are on ESB Network poles which is slightly 
above where we would be nationwide. There is also issues with the 
connections, where lanterns have not been energised. This sits again with 
ESB. We are escalating to them, we deal with them on a weekly basis and 
we are speaking to their new public lighting interface manager, Sean 
Scannell. We are meeting with him this Thursday to escalate this point with 
him.  
 
I have a couple of other bits and pieces I was writing down as I went. The 
SLA. Regarding what we are talking about the ten days or 28 days, the 
contract lays out for a major fault, 28 days and we believe when we are 
talking about lantern replacements they would be considered major faults, 
but we are in regular contact with the officials in your council, the database 
system all of those faults and stats I have quoted are the same system used 
within this council and has been used across the country, so we are all 
pulling from the same data source. That is what we do and work through 
with the officials in your councillor, to see the faults and understand why 
they are there, to look out for patterns and identify potential places that 
need to be upgraded and to identify any ongoing issues and we prioritise 
where we need to move and what has to happen with those lights.  
 
The mention of the website with escalating issues as well, the website is SSE 
Airtricity Solutions, so through that there is an escalation point, but working 
with the officials in your council, they are going to put forward a single point 
for escalation as well. So once again, any issues from yourselves directly can 
be issues directly to us and then we can take, come back to you with direct 
feedback and what, if there is and what is the plan. A call out there, was 

 
19
obviously the safety, we are very aware of what these lights are and mean 
to people across Wicklow. Safety is our number one and we understand that, 
so we take our job seriously. We fix nearly 4,500 lights for you every single 
year, every single day our teams are out there across the country, out there 
reporting faults and out there repairing them, we are very aware of the 
safety implication.  
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you for the presentation, I would also like to thank, 
deck lab O'Brien. You have been very helpful in that regard. The duplication, 
my understanding is that you can't report a duplication, the light report 
them once and it comes up on the system that has already been reported so 
I don't understand the actual duplication that we are responsible for in that 
regard. The second thing is, that is in relation to the problem we have out 
there, it's been alluded to, we have maybe a cluster of lights out in an area 
and that is certainly, it certainly brings to light the fact that people do make 
greater complaints as well. One light on it has minor complaints. When we 
get a cluster out in a small location it highlights the whole aspect of it. In the 
past we had a great relationship with lads doing the work and in certain 
circumstances you could approach the repair men themselves and tell them 
about lights being out in a certain area, I just wonder if that facility is still 
there with the new crew, can we, as public representatives, make contact 
with him. On an individual basis, we did do it in the past and I just wonder is 
it, a facility there for the future in that regard. And, obviously the LED lights, 
they are so much better and they are far more efficient. So we have a 
difficulty out there at the moment and probably the main thing for the public 
out there is so many little lights, less lights being done, but what kind of a 
timeframe do you have for the completion of the LED lights over the whole 
county. Thank you very much.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I want to welcome the representatives from SSE 
Airtricity today, but just maybe it's coincidental but in the last four to six 
weeks there has been a huge improvement in the lights out situation in 
Arklow. I am probably, it probably is coincidental, I suppose, but before 
that, we had huge gaps, I mean I don't want to go into the, all of the 
incidents but we got a new pole on the Wexford road there for good reasons 
and the ball went up, the head went on it and that is it, that is about six 
weeks ago. We were waiting out in Avoca. I don't know where it falls 
between we were waiting, that went on last night. I switched it on myself I 
was so delighted. So three years ago we cut that. But, there has... there has 
been a huge improvement in the Arklow area, as I say in the last month or 
so and we you seem to have more staff in the Arklow area, but the difficulty 
is, I know on the main street we have six lights out at the moment, but you 
need to do them early in the morning with traffic and you have to have 
traffic control, I understand that but prior to the middle of last year, the 
situation was horrific in Arklow, there was lights out all over the place. We 
have two of them on the bridge there in the last month in Arklow two at the 
moment and two more out in Ferrybank. I do think you are lacking in night 
patrols, because previously lights being out were picked up at night time, I 
don't think you do many, I don't see too many around doing light patrol, so 
previously you would pick them up, because a lot of people were the lights 
were out, they don't use computers they ring the councillors or the 1850 

 
20
number and they report them and that is it, but Cllr Blake, if you report a 
light out and you go back in again, it tells you the light is out. But you don't 
know you know it's not fixed. I think, myself there has been improvement.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Time.  
>>: That was a quick three minutes. I must be on American time there. I 
just want to thank, Declan O'Brien for his input at times because he seems 
to be able to get down quicker than me at times. But we need further 
improvement.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you for the 
presentation, gentlemen. Just a few things, I won't go over anything which 
has already been said, one the first thing I would like to say is our district 
manager have done a huge amount of work in relation to trying to get lights 
fixed and liaising with yourselves to try and get it done. But we still do have 
a lot of lights out and when you look at the numbers from last month, I 
know you said you didn't think they were accurate, but I suppose for a 
councillor, in Green Anne, there was a new light that went up, one light went 
up two years ago, it never lit, never once.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: There seems to be a huge discrepancy between the 
figures we are reading back to you. The amount of lights that are been out 
there, I concur with Cllr Dunne by the way, I would say that some of the 
lights he refers to, aren't only out for up to three month, some of them are 
out for up to six months, it's not acceptable, it's got to the stage where it's 
the one thing that I dread dealing with, from the public, because it looks like 
I am not doing my job and three months later it's still out, it just looks like 
we are not doing our job and that is it. It's embarrassing. I know they are on 
LED changeover and it takes time to implement new systems and I 
understand that. I also know that the record time for some of the new 
lanterns and lights is a longer timeframe than just the ordinary, the old SOX 
lanterns and whatever they are called.  
 
So, I appreciate all of that, but at the end of the day, such as the 
timeframes, I don't know if there is anything within your contract that sighs, 
we are entitled, a lot of attacks on women and it's just not feasible. I had to 
walk along bachelor's walk on the footpath and I have a very dodgy ankle 
because I have sprained. I was literally feeling my way along to see if there 
was anything on the path in case I went over again, it's just not acceptable, 
those lights have been out for a month. Just to reiterate, again what Cllr 
Dunne has said, the service, I know you say you are doing as much as you 
can, but to me it could be an awful lot better.  
 
Thank you for being here. For duplication for both of the issues just on a 
point of clarification, as Patrick said, you have identified so many lights not 
working and then you said you have 7 crews, or you have five crews out, 
Replacing 7 lanterns per day per crew.  
COUNCIL MEMBER: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, as a new councillor it's helpful 
to get some background and information my question is not for yourselves, 
but for the officials and it's the reference you made to the report that you 
give into the council officials here and that both are acting off the same 
database and same information. I suppose my query is, as to why, the 

 
21
figures coming from some of us to some of our local areas are different in 
the figure is coming from the same database. I think it's important that we 
are appropriate data and we are all working off the same data. Because we 
are all working together to try and resolve these issues for people, so it just 
maybe if the officials could confirm why engineer figures are different to 
that, that is being sourced from the same data, data source. That would be 
great.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Murphy.  
CLLR MURPHY: Just as I am sitting here listening to the report, I have got a 
report in, so I am going to deliver it to the two men at the top table. There 
is a light out at the court house in Arklow and at the old church just as I sit 
here, but again, as people have said, it is a major feature and also, I think 
that, our public are paying a lot of property tax for these services and we 
are not getting them and I think again, the next time your contract is 
reviewed I think we all should have an input into that, we sat here, this is 
our third or fourth, fourth year coming on, this is the light of always, all the 
issues of the light, so, I mean, they, that the workers here have done their 
best and just communication breakdown somewhere and it would be great 
to get that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Gerry O'Neill.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Thank you, for the presentation. Just briefly there is, we have 
seven lights in Deerpark in Baltinglass, these were corrected by the they 
were paid by a discretionary funding from the councillors in west Wicklow, 
those 7 lights are still, the lanterns or the poles are up, but they are not 
switched on. That is going on 18 months.  
 
So, maybe you would have look at that to see why, 18 months have gone 
by, there is another light Ballinascollogue on the lakeside in Blessington. 
That again is April from the discretionary funding for almost two years and 
still no light. The third one is is there a policy change as regards using 
existing timber poles for the holding of the lanterns, or in other words, are 
you changing to the that there has to be a separate pole for every rural 
light. You know what I mean?  Usually the lantern is fixed, up to now, it's 
fixed in the existing timber poles, but there is some talk there lately that 
with the change of plan there, if you could check?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Erica Doyle.  
CLLR DOYLE:  Just because it's my first time to speak, I would like to thank 
everyone for the warm welcome last week. How are the calls prioritised?  It 
according to importance, how is that assessed or is it the louder the noise, 
the quicker they get seen to, what process is used to report in which 
province will be used first?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Cronin.  
CLLR CRONIN: I want to support my colleague Cllr O'Neill it's ongoing before 
I sat on the county council, it is something that is an urgent need. Also there 
is a number of lights out in Dunlavin they have been reported since well 
before Christmas, October, there was some report put in and we are still 
waiting on them to be repaired. Just wondering if you have a timeframe as 
to when the report is made, like a timeframe of when the lights should be 
repaired, I think that would be good to know if that is possible.  
PATRICK: Thank you. The first thing was mention was the duplications. Were 

 
22
they won't allow you to put a single duplication to put a fault in against it, 
the duplication, the system won't allow you to put a second fault on that 
light, but what we have noticed and this what is we believe was causing a 
spike in the numbers, was people were going on and logging faults for the 
lights along the same street so, we found a significant number of those 
being dug into the numbers a bit first and we have been in action 
throughout the last six months.  
 
Asking about the new crews whether we could, us or yourself could access 
them directly, my preference would be that old contact and management 
works go through our own management team, obviously for safety teams 
and efficiency, but we will discuss that and issue out that direct contact 
details a couple of times, so you will have access to that and via your own 
internal team there and through our management team on the ground to 
see who is given and what faults are being prioritised and why. There is a 
call out there for bringing us back in three months’ time. Absolutely up for 
that. Absolutely, happily sit here again and go through what we have done. 
That was Keith saying he is coming too. Absolutely. I think you will be 
impressed guys, we will get the numbers right down, three more months. 
We don't take breaks in public lighting all year out. We are into the same 
source of data as your  own officials inside.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: It's more for the council to decide that.  
PATRICK: The wooden poles belong to the ESB network, we are not allowed 
to put up new lights on those poles. So if there is a wooden one, a new 
column, a steel column has to be erected. There was a call out at Batchelor's 
Walk that was causing a concern, particularly a connection issue with ESB 
networks we are working on and bringing up at our, escalating now since we 
have known about it and we are bringing up some priority in our meeting 
with the ESB on Thursday.  
 
The prioritisation, how they are doing that, so it's obviously each light 
getting replaced in ten days, obviously these major ones is 28 working days 
but any time we do, obviously they are done by time depending on when 
they come into us, but if we could escalate them if we see more than one 
light out in the street. There was a lot of lights mentioned there by name, 
just asking for an update on, Keith here has taken them note of and I will 
come back with those in 48 hours if that works. So I will come back to you 
with an update on where the faults are, if they have been rectified and if 
not, why not and what our plan date is to get them rectified? .  
CLLR SCOTT: Sorry.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, Cllr Dunne is this a question or point of 
clarification.  
CLLR DUNNE: A point of clarification, I asked the question about whether 
you could, ask we ring into someone like Irish Water where you have that 
connect with them. We are finding it hard to track lights when they are out 
for a certain amount of time. Unless I understood you thought you had them 
out within 28 days we are going into three or four months. If there is a light 
out for a long time, could we have, we want to contact someone within SSE 
Airtricity to move it along. That is what I am looking for, because at the 
moment we are contacting through Declan and I disagree with everyone in 

 
23
the council chamber Declan has been magnificent. When a light has been out 
for a long time, after it's been out for three or four months we find it hard to 
contact someone. Can we have someone we can contact through my 
telephone, like Irish Water, send us an email.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You have made your point, Cllr Dunne. Lourda Scott, a 
clarification.  
CLLR SCOTT: A clarification, I had asked whose responsibility it is to hold 
you to account for that turnaround time, that 10 days or 28 days from the 
time it's reported to the time it's fixed. Is that up to the council officials to 
draw up the report or up to yes?  Tend of every year to do a report saying 6 
..... 
 
KEITH: Just to come back on that you were saying, it's a timing we do all 
pull off the same data set. At the last meeting that was here, there was over 
700 faults on our system. That was the correct figure at the final and the 
figure that SSE Airtricity were working to, as of this morning there was 310, 
indeed within an hour or so of that, another ten I believe had been cut from 
that, so the data is constantly changing as the works are carried out and just 
to give you an idea of the number of faults across the various districts, as of 
this morning in the Arklow district there were 52 faults and these are faults 
both that are in, within the control of SSE Airtricity to fix and also faults that 
are outside of the control, that need ESB or whatever out to fix or to deal 
with cable faults etc. In Arklow there were 52 in Baltinglass there were 59, 
in Bray there were 55, Greystones was 39 and Wicklow was the highest, I 
suppose at 105. I would point out that 33 of those were outside of the 
control of SSE Airtricity to issue. I think it's more a timing issue, we are 
working off the same data set.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: That pole will be removed...  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: I was going to nab you on the way.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you very much members, we are going to take the 
presentation from, we are going to take the presentation from the Wicklow, 
sorry the county Wicklow County Council Age Friendly Strategy, so it's item 
20 on your agenda. Sorry and before you start, I would like to welcome the 
national people from the National Broadband Ireland.  This shouldn't be a 
long presentation.  
>>: I was going to suggest we take the presentation and then we take the 
ash presentation and keep the questions for both until after, so keep going.  
[>>]: Okay, first of all thank you very much for having me here today. 
Finally! I know, it's been worth waiting for, I believe you, all I wanted to give 
you was an update on what the strategy and how far we have come since 
May 2017. For the new councillors, County Wicklow have an age friendly 
strategy in place from 2017 and it runs until 2022. So back in February we 
were midway through it, but we are coming up nearly three years now so 
this is just a snapshot of where we are and the reason we have an age 
friendly strategy is because we are all fortunately getting older. The 
population is living a lot longer, but with that comes a certain amount of 
challenges we are we are trying to face and prepare for. The World Health 
Organisation and we are involved with this from the beginning. Wicklow 
signed a declaration in 2014 and we are now the first country in the entire 
world to have an Age Friendly Status.  

 
24
 
In Slane Castle in December we got appointed as the first country ever to 
have the first country age friendly, so it's quite an achievement and we are 
proud of it. This, basically what the age friendly is, a lot of you know there is 
nine themes within it, within each of those nine themes there were a number 
of actions, there were 62 or 64 in total in the strategy and so far we have 
made a lot of strides in a few of them. Just to give you a quick overview, 
you have the World Health Organisation, the Age Friendly which is a shared 
service which sits in county Meath. We have an age friendly alliance of which 
Frank, the Chief Executive is the chair. That is made up of the heads of the 
guards, the HSE, we have councillors, the older person's council involved in 
it, so it's quite a strategic group, that meet maybe four times a year. That 
feedback is all given back here to the council when given the opportunity. 
So, 62 actions and 60 have been started or finished. One of greatest ones in 
it is the Walkability Surveys that we do. That involves us, myself the 
engineer and some of the councillors, we take a group of people with 
disability, you take them on a walk that people wouldn't normally go to, you 
point out all that is good in the area, it's things that may be improved in the 
area.  
 
We have done Arklow, Blessington, and Rathdrum. For example, in Wicklow 
thank you to Paul and Gail who have put in funding to implement some of 
the recommendations who have been done in the survey itself. Arklow Town 
is the first age friendly town in the county, so to that end, what we did was 
there was an age friendly business programme signed up to it. We put in the 
new age friendly benches which have backs and arm rests for people to 
move. We have the age friendly parking, which I am not sure if all of you are 
aware, they are a goodwill gesture, if young people want to park in them, 
we can't stop them, we like to see them reserved for older people. There are 
three in the count buildings and over the next few months three of the four 
buildings will have age friendly parking. We are trying to roll it out through 
the facilities we own ourselves.  
 
When Arklow became an age friendly town, a lot of it was infrastructurally 
based but now we are going to work on the wrap around services that need 
to be put in place and to that end, we have started, we have initiated a 
befriending service in Arklow and I am working with a lady called Hilary 
Sharp who belongs to the volunteering centre. What a befriending service 
does is it requires people to call into people once a week. You used to call 
good neighbours but they have waned slightly. They visit some of the older 
members who might be isolated. They might live in an estate with a lot of 
children in it, so they are going to start slow and grow. Also, once that is up 
and running we hope to do a care and repair service, there used to be one in 
Bray that was run through the partnership, but unfortunately that has since 
gone by the wayside, again we are looking for volunteers who will go to 
someone's house, change the light bulb, fix the handle on the door, small 
little jobs that would make a huge difference. You can't find someone to do 
these jobs. We have incorporated Age Friendly Strategy into the corporate 
plan which is very important that we are always trying to be age friendly in 
whatever we are trying to do. We have put in a lot of tone zones, an age 

 
25
friendly exercise equipment. We were talking about Arklow in particular 
where the skateboard park is, there is equipment for everyone to use, free 
to use and they are easily maintained. The Wicklow hills we have been 
putting them into their new development and in the most recent town and 
village that we were successful within Aughrim, we are working on an age 
friendly which involves upgrading the tennis courts. So, what else have we 
done?  We have put the benches into Rathdrum, Pat Kennedy was good 
enough to come on the survey with us one day, we took a lovely walk all 
around Rathdrum and there was quite a bit to be done, there is a lot can't be 
done, that is the unfortunate thing in a place like Rathdrum with narrow 
footpaths, there is little you can do, but what we can do, we will try and do 
the local ones that run there is Wicklow to Glendalough, initially they weren't 
going to stop by the primary healthcare centre but they saw the benefit of it 
and they now have an actual stop up at the Wicklow centre, so that is great. 
The 2009CDC scheme, the community enhancement scheme, that is for 
capital projects, we set aside 100,000 for bus shelters, that was back in 
2019 and they are a bit like SSE Airtricity, they are not there yet, they will 
be arriving shortly, there was a bit of a design issue we call it, but they 
seem to be on their way and should be installed shortly. Another action to 
promote the winter booklets that we will do for anything that son the cards.  
 
The personal alarm schemes are promoted when we do our AGM or seminar 
that takes place in November. Myself, as the age friendly programme 
manager for Wicklow and Alice Corbett the manager for Kildare, we are 
working on the national primary care centre guidelines. That involves 
working with the occupational therapists and the HSE closely and some of 
the user groups. It's all about going into the one of the primary healthcare 
centres as easy as possible. So less signage, more age friendly parking, 
even down to the colouring for dementia, to make it more dementia friendly.  
 
So Athy and Baltinglass will be the first age friendly centres. I am fortunate 
in that I work in the community section to while I am age friendly I work 
with some of grants and we do try and incorporate age friendly into any 
grants where it would apply, so for example, Aughrim tennis courts, we have 
a lovely community field but they wanted older people to be able to when 
they were bringing the grandchildren and to walk around the field, simply 
putting the lights around the field. Blessington, did a huge amount for the 
age friendly and we did an accessibility survey up there.  
 
So, now the next one that we had done through the age friendly was the 
imagination tables and they are called. Tovertafel. One is in Arklow, Bray 
and one is in Baltinglass or Bessington. Blessington. These are literally 
interactive games for people who have advanced dementia, they shine down 
on to the table and they can play these games. Very easy to use very 
friendly. What we found is they are great for children who may have special 
needs in Baltinglass you take away the table, let the game shine down to the 
floor and the toddlers use those and they are fantastic pieces of equipment 
and they are age friendly. Our local sports partnership, do a huge amount of 
work with the older people. The most recent project was with the active age 
poles, they are almost like ski sticks and rerun a series courses and the 

 
26
people involved can purchase these poles if they would. It fixes their 
posture. That programme started in Newcastle and I believe it's coming to 
Wicklow Town shortly. We work then with the county Wicklow Older Person's 
Council. They are a consultative body, the Chairperson is a lady called Maeve 
Quaid will know and the east. They produce the information services for 
older people, which is great. Another age friendly initiative we took was to 
produce the Eircode friendly for older people to write their Eircode on, if 
there was an accident it's there for them to see. We still have them, just get 
in contact with the office. The Garda work closely with us again and they 
started under a Chief Executive John Burke at the time and they did the 
vulnerable person's register, so they were encouraging older people to 
register with them in the case of the management. If there was a huge 
snowfall they would ring them and see if they need anything or need 
medication or a lift anywhere. They have done the rural liaison initiative 
under the age friendly and there is three Gardaí in particular, I think I sent 
out the information before, it just tightened up a lot. So the next step before 
the presentation is through the alliance or the stakeholders on Wednesday, I 
am hoping are going to bring their action items for this year, they are going 
to work on and as for myself, I am going to be working with Dermot for the 
intergenerational event, which I think we talk about for a while, Dermot, we 
will have to do. The wrap around services I mentioned, care and repair and 
then carbon monoxide's alarms for the fire service. Wicklow has been chosen 
to become the next age friendly town and the older person's council and 
myself I am going to be doing a series of workshops with the Gardaí and the 
fire service. Finally the air friendly primary care centres guidelines an as I 
said new age friendly car spaces throughout the county. So that is the 
update for age friendly. It was worth waiting for.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: It was.  
>>: Now, Jenny if you would like to come up and give your presentation for 
the arts strategy.  
>>: They are divided up there, you will see into six key action areas, so that 
the first three are clustered around what we will actually roll out and offer 
and deliver ourselves in terms of our artistic practice, public access 
programmes and for children and young people specifically and then the 
other side is these structural part of that, so how we do it and who we do it 
with. So that reflects our external partnerships, internal connections within 
the council and our own capacity to deliver. Now I am going to give you a 
decision hear, we have provided the slides and there is 38 slides and we are 
pressed for time, so at this stage I can open it up to questions from the floor 
around the policy or any detail you have, or I can go through slide by slide 
and I am happy to could that and go through each point individually, but it's 
up to yourself. It's really for adoption today, so what we would need to is 
someone to propose and second it, I am happy to work with you, to inform 
you, to make that decision, but I just want to give you the choice at this 
stage, because there are quite a number of points.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gail Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: I am happy to propose to adapt the arts strategy. I am, thank 
you very much for the presentation, we have had this at CCSD meetings, so 
I am happy to propose this.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Anne Ferris.  

 
27
CLLR FERRIS: Yes, I am very happy to second Cllr Dunne's proposal on this 
and thank you, Jen Jenny for your presentation, I think it's been very 
worthwhile. Are we speaking about the other presentation now as well?   
ADMINISTRATOR: This was for the reserve function, it's great to get the 
second proposal. That is all agreed, is it, thank you?   
CLLR FERRIS: Sorry, I just wanted to say thank you to Rochelle for the 
presentation on the county Wicklow Age Friendly Strategy, I think I am 
probably at that age now, when it went on the agenda first I was under the 
age, but now... and my good colleague here Cllr O'Brien thinks there are 
plenty of things I could apply for in the strategy so I will be talking to 
Rochelle about it. Thank you both for it, it's a wonderful presentation and it 
is an awful pity that presentations like that, which are of great interest to 
ourselves and the community often don't make it on time, that there is such 
a delay, so I really appreciate hearing them today. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Peir Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: I just want to commend Rochelle and whole crew there, 
with the Age Friendly Strategy. I was wondering, maybe as part of going 
forward, I know there would be a lot of festival funding applied for, maybe 
the intergenerational aspect could be recovered into a company for the 
festival funding and groups going forward. I was involved with a great 
festival last summer, we had a grannies and four-year-olds as well as middle 
aged people all getting involved in sports together, at an outdoor event. So 
more things like that would be great. In relation to the arts strategy I want 
to commend Jenny, I haven't had a chance to talk to you yet, but art is close 
to my heart. I would love to see more partnerships or potential for external 
partnerships and I am wondering maybe if that can, the geographical sort 
of, maybe a geographical plan to make extend the arts out into the 
communities more, I find that there is an awful lot of pieces of the jigsaw 
around Arklow Municipal District and that, there is no platform to connect 
and there is no spaces, you could run these places themselves if you could 
create more spaces for them to tie in and affordable spaces, vacant buildings 
down there that could be used and there is a real need for it in the 
community, so maybe I could chat to you later at some stage about that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: Sorry, just the strategy, I want to thank Rochelle for her 
presentation here today. It's amazing the work that has been done through 
on county. I was pleased she took the time to walk through some of the 
citizens with our older citizens and looked at the footpath and with Kevin 
scan London hopefully we will look at that in the next 48 hours. Thank you, I 
know it's your day off and coming in on a Monday, it shows your 
commitment to the strategy. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: I would like to thank Jenny. Thank you for the work you 
do for the arts in the county and it's great to see that there are lovely piece 
of artwork and sculpture being brought out to the rural areas and I know 
have done a lot work on that and I want to recognise that in relation to 
bringing art right out, not just in the urban areas but in the country areas as 
well. Well done on that, I want to recognise that and put it on the record. 
For Rochelle, the work you do, you are a huge ambassador for the county 
and to recognise the elderly and the work that the, the contribution they 

 
28
have made to society over their lifetime and you have brought to a new level 
and I want to recognise that work, you are an ambassador and I think you 
have brought the council as an organisation to a new place and that they 
also recognise the elderly now and what they do and well done.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr D O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. These are two strategies that, 
when we hear the word strategies there is a big document with 100 million 
pages on a shelf. The two examples and if Jenny had the time she would 
illustrate, I think both strategies are responsive and dynamic and creative 
and when we hear the stories of what they do they inspire us and I think we 
should really appreciate that. For Rochelle, I don't know if it's design or 
accidental that she is also the Comhairle link person, so to have that space 
between the council is a huge asset to the young people on the youth 
council. It's important I know you have been on the agenda and bumped off 
the agenda, but I think you both and both strategies deserve huge credit for 
what you are delivering day after day.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Grace McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: I am basically going to say the same thing, something 
similar, I had an observation on both, so Rochelle, like, what came through 
so much is you are so mindful of the people you are working for. For 
someone who, I haven't really thought about what it might like to be older in 
the county, so to see that you see all of these avenues where there is 
opportunities and you are taking advantage of every opportunity there is to 
improve the lives of those who are getting older.  
 
I really appreciate that and that came through so clearly, so thank you for 
your work and for Jenny I think the arts for me is, does two things. It can 
sometimes bring a new language to some of the topics that are difficult to 
talk about and we talk about them here in political language, but I love to 
see them in the arts. Things like climate action and homelessness are often 
talked about, when the art isn't doing that it's a soothing balm for us to 
drink from the well and feel good about the world, so both of your work is 
appreciated and I wanted to say thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Mags Crean.  
CLLR CREAN: Thank you for both presentations they were great. I have a big 
interest in both areas but in relation to the older person piece, I wanted to 
check if there is representatives from Greystones on the older person 
council.  
>>: There is.  
CLLR CREAN: Brilliant. How do you go about it?  Is there a process to 
become an age friendly town?   
>>: Thus far it was only ever chosen by myself so ark was first and Wicklow 
was next. I was hoping to do Baltinglass next year simply because the rest 
of the county is kind of neglected to a certain degree, so I was hoping for 
Baltinglass next, but because we have done the first one, the second one 
should be easier, there would be no reason why it wouldn't be able to bring 
a third on board or the second one for next year.  
CLLR CREAN: I know definitely in Greystones they say this is a town for 
young people and young families which is sad to hear. This would be great 
to work on initiatives like this.  

 
29
>>: I can be in contact with you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Corrigan.  
CLLR CORRIGAN: I agree with Cllr Dunne, I saw on the presentation that 
Jenny put together and it was an amazing piece of work, it's a pity we don't 
have time to see it today, but it was well put together and beautifully 
presented and well done to Jenny. Rochella well done, thank you for your 
presentation, I look forward to when Bray is included in on walkability study 
and the age friendly town. It has huge benefits for older people, for people 
with disabilities, tourism benefits, that our town has included in it and very 
much look forward to you coming out and we will all give you or support.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Shay Cullen.  
CLLR S CULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, first of all well done to both 
Jenny and Rochella. In terms of, I suppose what I would like to say about 
the age friendly strategy, we have very strong active retirement groups 
across the county and there is a lot of work being done and I suppose the 
most important word of that is the active part, because there is so many 
older people who are active in our communities and have a wealth of 
knowledge and experience in our communities and I suppose we have to try 
and link in with those people to make things better for ourselves and the 
people who live in our communities, but in terms of the Town Teams and the 
forums and the district councils right across our county, I am just wondering 
can we put out the message more through those and maybe have 
presentations through the likes of our active Town Teams to spread the word 
of the strategy.  
 
We may gain more interest by reaching out to those groups, but look, I want 
to congratulate you on the work you are doing, it's fantastic. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you very much indeed. Can I just say I had no idea 
that Monday was your day off, you have sat here for four months in a row I 
am so sorry! Thank you very much. Now, the national broadband plan, I 
think we have Billy Miley, Jeff Shakespeare and Hazel Casanova. If you want 
to come up and take your seats.  
>>: Okay, Cathaoirleach, thank you very much for the invitation to come 
and talk and brief you on a project that some of us have been working on for 
a very long time, it's finally coming to fruition, my name is Jeff Shakespeare, 
I am chief operations of NBI, National Broadand Plan, or what does that 
mean, I am responsible for getting the network built and then for running it 
and the actual contract is, the contract to build and operate the network for 
25 years with an option for another ten years.  
 
Joining us is Hazel Casanova and Billy Manley from our council liaison office. 
Billy has skill in the game because he is from Arklow so he is keeping an eye 
on the project on behalf of county Wicklow. I will say a bit about the project 
in general and then about the project as it relates to Wicklow and hopefully I 
will snap through it quickly and leave some time for questions which we will 
hopefully have at the end of it, or maybe I will be really clear and. So the 
National Broadand Plan basically is a plan to deliver universal access to 
broadbrand across the country. It's in line with an EU requirement to have 
100 megabits available in every home across the EU by 2025. It's an initial 
active that really started back in the 2008/2009 and has grown momentum 

 
30
over the last ten years.  
 
So, and basically it focuses on the premises that aren't being built by the 
commercial operators, and the people who mainly build fibre and broadband 
infrastructure in the country are Eircom, Virgin Media and.... roughly 
speaking they will build to 1.5 million of the 2 million premises in the 
country and we have a contract to build the other 536 homes that are in the 
mapping exercise and consultation that were done by the Government 
before Christmas.  
 
So the intervention area, if I talk to Wicklow, what you can see is in dark 
blue are the areas that currently have greater than 30 megabit broadband. 
In light blue are the areas that are commercially committed to having 30 
megabits. All the yellow area is the area that will, would not have a 
commercial offer of broadband for 2025. So that is the area which we will 
connect all the premises in there and that is at a national level. I will go into 
Wicklow more specifically later on. Effectively the key thing to understand 
here is that no one will be left behind. Every premises in the country, both 
existing and new premises will be connected to this network. So maybe I will 
just say a little bit about why broadband matters. Maybe I will frame it in the 
context and linking back to something that one of our previous presenters 
talked about, she talked about an Age Friendly Strategy or strategy, one of 
the key technologies that gets enabled by broadband is the ability to 
remotely monitor our population and deliver healthcare to our population 
and that needs to be possible not just in urban areas, it needs to be possible 
in rural areas, so instead of people having to drive 100km to see a doctor 
they can see a doctor online and as you move, as we looked for to how as a 
society we are going to have to manage an ever ageing population, 
something close to my heart, that really we want to make it as easy as 
possible for people to access at least first line healthcare services and 
broadband is a key enabler of that.  
 
I guess focussing on another thing that is looking back at the election that 
has just happened. Housing is a key issue and the fact that housing is 
expensive to build in urban areas, really a decentralisation of the population 
really anyone sees as desirable, again a key plank of that is that the 
communications infrastructure is in rural areas to allow businesses and 
employees who can work remotely to thrive in rural areas without having to 
jump in a car and drive to the local, the nearest local town to work. And 
then, again that is linked to climate and the desire to reduce the impact on 
the climate.  
 
Effectively if we want people to work remotely a key enabler in a digital 
society of that is the bedrock broadband infrastructure network and I think 
that is a key part of this strategy, that we enable that. Other things that we 
enable obviously are jobs and job creation in rural areas and some of the 
internet of things applications that require higher bandwidth, so the internet 
of things are technologies that allow, let's say, for, if you call next 
generation farming so you can remotely monitor your cattle and upload your 
data to central service, to central services that then lets you do big data 

 
31
analytics on.  
 
So effectively really delivery high speed broadband to rural areas is about 
removing a digital divide and enabling decentralisation of service delivery 
and provision. This is actually quite a massive project, who we can see is 
that effectively there is of the order of 90,000km of overheads infrastructure 
required and 15,000km of infrastructure required. Basically the cabling that 
will run across that is enough to go three-and-a-half times around the globe. 
So we are putting in a massive amount of fibre infrastructure out into the 
rural hinterland and why are we doing that?  It's because it's the most 
future-proof technology we have. So we are going to do this and change the 
electronics on either end of the technology as opposed to having to go back 
and redo it several times. 
 
Key principles, as we look at the project, as I said, was to future-proof 
internet access in rural Ireland, so the infrastructure we are putting out will, 
is of a generation that delivers 10gb across 25 customers dynamically 
allocated across 25 customers it will grow to 50gb and 100gb with the 
generation of the technology we are see today. But the nature of the fibre 
technology that is being built is that we change the optics on either end of 
the fibre deliver faster speeds we don't have to go back and change the 
underlying fibre unless it breaks. The technology is being developed so that 
in 40, 50 years’ time, that fibre will still be able to carry the optics that will 
be being developed at that stage. The other key tenet principle here is that 
we are a whole sale operator, we won't be the ones that will come and sell it 
to your door, we will sell it through the retail operators, but the large ones 
like Vodafone and Sky and some of the smaller ones like Imagine or Westel 
we will basically charge everyone the same on a monthly bases and charge 
them a connection fee. Those wholesale prices are in the wholesale prices 
that apply in urban areas.  
 
So there will be no economic disadvantage either. It will be genuine 
technology and economic parity by the time we finish the programme. As 
said, this is about inclusion, this is nobody left behind, no one gets service 
on this network. Take another look at the network map. Effectively we have 
227 exchanges spread across the country. In copper world, which is, I guess 
where I grew up, the signal goes about 8km for a voice call, one of the 
reasons copper based broadband had limitations was the copper was never 
built to carry broadband because it can't go far enough down the copper 
line, but the network infrastructure of let's say the previous century was 
built around voice and dial tone that let you, you needed an 8km radius 
around an exchange and that drove you to need 1200 exchanges to cover 
the country. With fibre it goes 20km so we need 227 exchanges around the 
country to deliver service.  
 
So the green exchanges on the map are the first exchanges had that are 
going to be built. Why have they been picked?  When you look at a 
broadband network you need to think like the motorway network, in other 
words it makes sense to build, or a road network, it makes sense to build 
the motorways before you build bigger roads in the residential area, so you 

 
32
have to build the central highways, there is no point in having traffic in the 
residential areas that come on to an ordinary dual carriageway so they are 
built around our high speed core network. So we have started in Carrigaline. 
Those are the first 35 initial exchanges. Then we go to the white dots which 
show you where the other local exchanges are going to be at a national 
level. So, it's a 7-year build programme, with most of the premises being 
built by the end of year 5. So it takes us a while, it will take us a while to get 
started, we will hit a high run rate as we go through year 3, 4, 5 and 6 and 
it will taper down in year 7. Now, if I turn to Wicklow and the infrastructure 
in Wicklow. This is basically what Wicklow looks like from the point of view of 
our high level design of serving the premises in the National Broadband 
Scheme. There are over 7,000 houses in Wicklow without access to high 
speed broadband. That is about 23% of the services in the county. The 
Government is putting 59 million of subsidy into delivering service in 
Wicklow. NBI will spend an additional 80 million to deliver that service over 
the next 25 years. If you take a look at where we are going to go in the first 
years build, two-years build will focus on building the core network, so the 
core network exchanges in Wicklow are Blessington and Kilcoole, so the 
areas around those, you will see these yellow capillaries, that is the area 
where we will have surveyors out walking to check the high level designs 
they will have and they will identify which poles we are going to use, which 
ducts we are going to use, which poles need to be replaced and then we will 
buy service off Eircom to buy those. Basically a detailed plan for every 
premise in the area. We have a requirement once we have passed your 
home we have a requirement to deliver a connection to you within ten days, 
even if I have to build poles up the side of the road. What that means is I 
have to plan as though an order is going to come to every, from every 
premises in Wicklow. So that I can despatch on order and have a good shot 
hitting that ten-day SLA. So literally we will know what it's going to, how we 
are going to connect to you and what it's going to cost to connect to you 
when we do our detailed survey.  
 
The survey team, as I said they are active in Carrigaline in the last five 
weeks and they started in Galway and they will be in Carlow shortly. In the 
two areas here, we start surveying made it this year and the build will be 
completed in the first half of 2021. That is subject to the results of the 
survey. Obviously if you find some massive problems in there, we will 
rearrange, but right now that is the high level design for county Wicklow. 
Then, as we move forward, into the later years, we basically will connect our 
regional exchanges in Wicklow to rings. That to make sure it's a resilient 
service, so that if there is a break it can work the other way around, so 
basically Enniskerry, Glendalough and Redcross will be served out of 
Kilcoole. The Curragh Camp and Blessington will be served out of 
Blessington and Baltinglass and Aughrim will be served out of Carlow but 
you can see there, what you can see are the blue rings and those blue rings 
mean that it's a very resilient service, it will be more resilient than the other 
services that are being put out there and it will be very high capacity.  
 
To the network we are building has enough capacity in it for the initial ten 
years and then we will go back and put capacity in it for the next 15 years. 

 
33
So in will be one technology refresh, all we will be doing when doing that 
new technology refresh is change the electronics in your house and your 
exchange. The fibre will be the same. When my grandson or someone 
similar comes into this chamber and more likely comes in on a virtual reality 
session and doesn't have to jump in the car and come down and do it and 
we will all be sitting at home with our advisors on our head and no one has 
to travel, he will be explaining how long we are putting 1gb lasers on to the 
same fibre.  
 
So then, maybe just a little, a final piece around the BCP, or broadband 
connection plans. So this is a process that is going to take seven years that 
will start delivering for county Wicklow in real terms early next year. In 
advance of that, we are connecting broadband community points which will 
be wirelessly connected by microwave that will provide wi-fi in buildings like 
this. The plan was launched in Laragh in November and there is number of 
other areas, I am reluctant to put this up, because it rendered, it politicises 
it slightly but the important thing is the list of the homes, but the areas that 
are going to be connected.  
 
Now, I have been involved in the National Broadand Plan since 2018 so I can 
say that there has been cross-party support for this initiative ranging from 
Minister Dempsey through Minister Rabbite, through Minister White, to 
Minister Naughton and Bruton, so these guys are standing on the shoulders 
of lot of work which has been done by politicians of all parties, so don't stone 
me for the picture, the key message here is that those PCPs are going to 
start getting turned up very soon across this year to deliver value for the 
people of county Wicklow, this year, while we come back and these won't be 
left behind, as we pass these with our fibre network, these will be converted 
into fibre as well.  
 
Then, I guesses the other piece, we are doing a lot of roadshows, I won't go 
through all of the stakeholders but all of the communities and all of the 
representative bodies. I guess my key message for you guys is we need 
your support in making this happen, because we need things like wayleaves 
and things like road openings and various things so that we can hit the 
timelines. So we need your support, we can't do this on our own and I say 
that to both the council staff and the councillors. We want to get this done, 
we have a business case to get it done and we are investing a huge amount 
of money in getting it done. So thank you for listening. Hopefully you will 
have some questions or maybe it's totally clear to everyone. So I will knock 
it on the head there. Thank you very much.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: John Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you for your presentation. Just a few queries. Again I 
agree that broadband roll out is as important as roads and water when it 
comes to the economic and social development planning of the county. The 
absence of broadband is as critical as any other piece of infrastructure. On 
your maps I see and this is why I am sometimes puddled by the broadband 
plan, you take a village like Tinahely which has a blue dot and yet the 
industrial and commercial element of Tinahely which would be an the 
Aughrim road where there are two factories employing about 250 people 

 
34
between them. They have a broadband download speed of 8.of and an 
upload of 4.7 and yet it's regarded as having broadband.  
>>: Well the evolving situation that was done by the Government isn't as a 
village level, it's at a premises level, so those premises should be in this 
plan, if they are not they need to register and say we are into the here and 
they will add to this list and then I will connect it.  
CLLR MULLEN: This type of anomaly crept up with us outside the village, 
whereby and forgive me where the boxes don't fully connect every premises 
within the village, so I think Laragh and Glendalough had an issue and I 
know areas of Arklow had an issue and I know, for a fact, because I live in 
Tinahely, Tinahely has an issue, just on the rural broadband roll out, like 
obviously tourism is an extremely important part of the economy of county 
Wicklow and for the rural area, particularly areas that may have just a 
couple of accommodation routes their lack of broadband is deeply 
anti-competitive part of their make up. When can you give an estimate of 
when broadband can be guaranteed to rural Wicklow. When is the end point 
of this?   
>>: As I say, it's a seven-year project in planning. The first two sites have 
been identified. Those in, by June of 2021 the areas around Kilcoole and 
around Blessington will be connected and then we will be dropping the other 
exchanges in after that, but that is an active piece of planning that is going 
on at the moment.  
CLLR MULLEN: Okay, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: What I will is I will take questions from several councillors 
and then you can come back to them rather than having an exchange. Cllr 
Glennon.  
CLLR GLENNON: Thank you for your presentation. I am not really a techie so 
I can't go into the tech element of it. The area I am concerned about is 
Blessington, I am from that area and Baltinglass, one is going to be provided 
from Carlow base on your structure and one is from Blessington. I notice you 
brought fibre down as far as Poulaphouca Bridge. I am wondering how is the 
plan to get it to the likes of Dunlavin and towns that are not directly 
connected with either Blessington or Baltinglass which are the bigger towns 
which you have, is there going to be fibre laid out further?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Kavanagh.   
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Just a general query here. Is this technology all 
fibre-based broadband only or does it morph into 5G in any shape or form?  
It's just you mention things like wireless, microwave and I was under the 
impression that the National Broadand Plan was a fibre-based system only.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gerry Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you for the presentation. My query is in relation to the 
urban areas that are deemed to be connected with high speed broadband 
but are not, giving you Greystones for example, something that came to 
light acutely during our local election campaign in May. Where a number of 
the estates were bypassed by the main operators and they are still reliant on 
the old copper systems, I know what it's like, the economic effect of it, 
without going into it, people can't work from home and listening this 
morning about the response to the Coronavirus, they are talking about 
remote working and education and so it's all dependent on having the 
broadband services fit for purpose. So it's just wondering does your plan 

 
35
incorporate look at those areas and I know I have worked with the 
broadband officer here, and we have made contact with the likes of them 
and they are acutely aware of it, but for whatever reason have not taken up 
the challenge to come back into the areas, so I am wondering is your plan, 
have you any plan to address those issues and those types of areas thanks.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr O'Connor.  
CLLR O'CONNOR: I was wondering I saw as one of your aims of your plan 
was to reduce emissions I am wondering with this plan will there be 
chopping of trees in the process and will there be a replanting scheme if 
there is.  
CLLR SCOTT: I had the same question as Cllr Walsh in regards to 
Greystones and also when you start rolling art from Kilcoole will that mean 
there will be broadband connection points particularly in the Greystones 
area, I see there is none there at the moment.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Vincent Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you for the presentation and John has alluded to 
Tinahely there and maybe if he could go back to the regional map that he 
showed first that there is a number of villages in Tinahely, so yeah, John has 
said that there is the impression that broadband in the area, but just like 
Greystones and other areas around the county there is pockets of individuals 
and companies out there that do not have broadband, so there is an 
assumption that they do have, but certainly in their point of view and as far 
as I am concerned we have a very poor reception of the system, so if you 
can go back to the original map I would like to have another look at it and 
see that there isn't blue on certain towns. The first map you showed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Cathaoirleach, my question is on the lines of Cllr Kavanagh, 
you talk about the fibre based, but is every home, two questions really, is 
every home only going to have broadband?  Because right now, it's very 
scattered what people can get in different areas, like, where I live it's very 
strong in some areas and then I live a few hundred metres away and it's not 
so strong. Again the 5G element, you had two maps that looked busy from 
the point of view of infrastructure that you are going to have to put in. It 
looks like there is going to be one in every town and village and I am 
wondering is there 5G involved and if there is what investigations have gone 
into that, because there have been serious questions raised about it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sylvester Bourke.  
CLLR BOURKE: Thank you for the presentation. Also to say that I have quite 
a lot of constituents who are anxiously waiting for this roll out, they missed 
out on the last roll out and they are very anxious that this be done as soon 
as possible in the Arklow Municipal District. I am delighted to see you have a 
good Arklow man, I can rest assured you have been hearing these 
presentations for the last 12 years, promises and promises were made and 
promises were never kept, it wasn't your fault, but I am delighted to see 
Billy Manly there and I am sure it will be delivered on time.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Murphy.   
CLLR MURPHY: I would like to clarify what you mean, if people are not 
getting on the map they have to register, can you clarify that for me.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You can come back to all of them now.  
>>: So basically maybe I will take that one first, so the reality is the 

 
36
absolute political and strategic intention here is that everyone has access to, 
in the first, our first roll out will be 150 megabits a second and everyone has 
access to it, so when you check the map and there is an online map that the 
Department of Communications and Climate Action have and you basically 
put your address or Eircode in and it will come back and tell you whether 
you are included or not. If you are included in the map, in dark blue, it's that 
someone has said, one of the operators and I won't go through the list of 
what someone has said, that there will be at least 30 megabits a second 
available at these premises this year. If you are in light blue, someone has 
said there will be 30 megabits available in the next year or two. So the 
whole point about state aid and EU rules are that if someone has said they 
will invest there, the Government cannot invest into offset what is seen as a 
market failure because by definition there isn't because someone is prepared 
to invest. And if it comes back and says you are in the yellow area then you 
are in my plan already. If you are, particularly if you are in the dark blue 
area, as in someone is saying you can absolutely have 30 megabits today 
and you are sitting looking at an 8 megabits speed test, there is an email 
address and I think we will probably provide, there is an email address at 
the department of communications and climate action and you basically go 
in, prove that you don't have coverage and they will add to the map and I 
will get an updated file on a monthly basis that says this Eircode is now 
deemed to be in the plan even though the last time it wasn't. It's as 
straightforward as that. You will have read a little bit, if you have been 
tracking it in the papers, that there has been a bit of an Lanigan's ball, that 
some houses are in and some are out. That is because there has been 
genuine movement, Eircom said, they built in 35,000 places they hadn't said 
they would, but they missed 28,000 they said they would, so the number 
dropped by 7,000. A close cousin of that question is also in urban areas 
which have been left behind. Exactly the same applies, you go in, you flag 
that if it's not check the Eircodes and if you have a website, they are 
expecting people to come back and we will get update on the map on a 
monthly basis and then we adjust the plan accordingly.  
 
The question is, is the technology old fibre or is there 5G involvement?  The 
commitment is we will deliver fibre to at least 98% of the base. There is no 
5G in it right now and I don't see why there would be, it's at not a 
technology that is sufficiently capacity rich to deliver on the proposition. 
Apologies if I misled when I talked about the broadband connection points 
effectively you can look at them as we deliver a high capacity dish, like here 
is one side of the dish and the other, it's a pencil beam about this size, it 
goes to the, let's say the roof of this building and then it gets behind off with 
an ethernet cable to a wi-fi router and it provides wi-fi in the building. It's 
not a way of getting buildings like this in a rural resource centre like in 
Laragh, getting it up and providing broadband while it take us a year or two 
to get fibre into them.  
 
The question is it going to reduce emissions but are we going to chop trees?  
We will tree trim in the same way that other users of the polling on the 
roads do, but we won't other than really by exception we won't be taking 
any trees down, because we are reusing the existing Eircom poles. I could, I 

 
37
can imagine there will be exceptions, where we may have to take a tree 
down, but there is certainly no blanket proposal to take it down other than in 
the normal engaging in the normal seasonal tree trimming, so that he with 
can run the fibres across the existing infrastructure.  
 
There was a question about, how we are getting the smaller towns 
connected. As we build the access fibre out from two areas they dovetail in, 
as we are building that access fine are out they dovetail and we can use it as 
trunk fibre to we can enable the town in the middle.  
 
But, yeah, that is, so effectively we are putting a huge amount of fibre out 
into the hinterland and that is on the base us I think we are over 
provisioning by 20% so we can take in other applications we don't know 
about today and prepare for a premises growth.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you very much indeed. That was very interesting. 
Best of luck with it.  
 
Okay I am going to take item 17 to consider entering into a section 85... 
sorry... item 16 to consider the Wicklow County Council three-year capital 
programme 20-22 which you all had attached.  
BRIAN GLEESON: The capital plan presented to you is the three-year capital 
plant for the next years in the amount of 582 million. It's broken down in 
roads... economic development 7 million, environmental services 9 million, 
recreational services 34 million, agricultural health and welfare 26 million 
and miscellaneous which would include energy projects 7 million. This would 
be financed by mainly grant aid, 490 million, development levies 25 million, 
loans 22 and other income would be 46, other income would include sale of 
land, revenue, account capital transfers and also local contributions and 
private developer contributions. This year's capital plan represents an 
increase of approximately 100 million on last year's submission. This mainly 
relates to an increase in housing for the provision of extra units. We also 
have included projects where funding has been secured under the URDF or 
RRDF and ERDF schemes such as Wicklow library, Fitzwilliam Square, Arklow 
and the enterprise hub in Clermont. We have also applied for funding under 
anaesthetise schemes which the Chief Executive outlined at the start of the 
meeting here today.  
 
So, I suppose the key to note is that this plan, it's a rolling plan, it is 
changing all the time and I suppose the implementation of the project are 
dependent on available funding. It’s an aspirational plan, it doesn't mean 
everything is going to be implemented but it's what our strategy is and 
subject to available funding we will try and implement those projects over 
the next few years. That is the main synopsis, if anyone has any questions.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Flynn Kennedy.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Someone small question in relation to the provision 
of funding for affordable housing schemes that is in it while I appreciate it's 
an aspirational plan I am assuming that is been some thoughts or 
considerations given to affordable housing in the county and that is basis of 
putting in a provisional sum. I am wondering is that the case?   
BRIAN GLEESON: That would be on the number of units we hope to sell on 

 
38
under a particular scheme, so it would be based on what housing has put 
forward.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: So there is the intentional scheme there.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: We had two affordable housing schemes we were 
working on, one in Kilcoole and the other in Greystones. So they were mixed 
tenure social private and affordable. So the way they become affordable 
obviously is that council land is subsidising it, but there may be a 
Government scheme, it depend on the formation of the Government, but it 
may be a Government scheme, the way they subsidise it, so I think over the 
next few years we will be building affordable homes.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Cronin.  
CLLR CRONIN: Thank you, just a question under the recreational amenity. Is 
that just, I just want some clarification on the figure, is that a commitment 
to fund the feasibility study and a build over next number of years?   
BRIAN GLEESON: Obviously we would be looking for funding for the 
feasibility study. The build of the Swimming Pool would be subject to the 
feasibility study and the securing grant aid for that, it's a big project, you 
are talking about ten million, but the first step will be undertaking a 
feasibility study in relation to it. So if we can't secure funding we will have to 
look at our own resources and see if we can use some of our own funding 
towards that obviously the first port of call would be to try and see if we can 
get any funding towards it from different sources.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: That is what I was saying earlier, we need them on 
board really because we did pay for initial study for the preliminary study to 
see if it was cost effective, if there was a cost benefit there and if it could 
wash its face and we did submit it, but we really need the Department on 
board, in order for them to come on board we need them to fund the design 
cost initially at 600,000. That isn't what we got initially so we are going to 
keep looking for that. 
CLLR CRONIN: Sorry to keep go going on, if it comes about we are 
unsuccessful again next year, will the council commit to funding part of the 
project?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: We will have a look at t but we are going to be funding 
part of it anyway even if we get the full grant. There is not point in us 
spending unless they are on board with following it through, because it can't 
happen without them. So I think if they are serious about it they will fund 
the design of it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: I want to query the abbey quarter in Arklow, the 2.9 
million. Will that, is that funding secured or?   
BRIAN GLEESON: No there is an application going in under the URDF 
scheme, so we will, we are putting it in anyway.  
CLLR LEONARD: Will that include the pottery museum?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Yes.  
CLLR LEONARD: Then also in relation to the URDF, the operational 
maintenance and piers and harbours, the 10 million for the harbours and 
piers, how will that be, where is that for?   
BRIAN GLEESON: That is covering Arklow, Wicklow and Bray.  
CLLR LEONARD: Equally?   
BRIAN GLEESON: There will be applications going in for the three harbours. 

 
39
Obviously which don't know at this stage who is going to be successful, 
there has to be a design phase as well. That is, I suppose it's an estimated 
figure, it's very provisional.  
CLLR LEONARD: So it's an application for funding.  
BRIAN GLEESON: Just to show that is our plan down the line.  
CLLR LEONARD: Just the Avoca Flood Relief Scheme, I think that is, what 
work is that to consider, it's separate to the Arklow Flood Relief.  
BRIAN GLEESON: It is, I don't have the details of the actual work, but it is a 
separate provision.  
CLLR LEONARD: Is that secured funding from the OPW.  
BRIAN GLEESON: As far as I am aware that is secured funding, that 
particular scheme is, yeah.  
CLLR LEONARD: Just the last thing is the coastal erosion funding, I think it's 
600,000 over the space of three years seems very small amount of funding 
for something that is very important, will there be other streams of funding.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: It's our correct, contribution, it will be funded by the 
OPW and the Department of transport and it runs the whole way you were 
from Arklow to Greystones.  
CLLR LEONARD: It's very important.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, John Mullen.  
CLLR MULLEN: Just a quick question on why I welcome the provision of 1.5 
million in 2021. It's presuming that is 100% funded from the State or is that 
the total cost?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: It's usually 100% funded. So we contacted them before 
Christmas to ensure we are doing the new programme for Government that 
we will get this capital programme. It's the one we are going to have to push 
now, we will have to wait and see.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Kennedy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Just I am delighted to see there is funding in there for the 
Arklow Transport Study. I know Cllr Fitzgerald is coming in on this in a 
second so I am going to let him speak. Just in relation to the Rathdrum 
transport study. I was told that that would be done this year in March of this 
year, now I know it's included in the URDF funding, application, but if that is, 
if that application is not successful, is that transport study still going to be 
done for Rathdrum because the bulk of the properties in Rathdrum live on 
the west side of the town. That is where the hospital and it's, if the 
emergency services need to get to the hospital or the residential properties 
it's impossible. I was told that the funding would be made available in March 
for that study to be done and I want a guarantee from the top table that 
that will be done this year.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: We will definitely do the study. We have looked for 
funding under the category 2 under the RRDF which provides full design fees 
for the whole western bypass, including the health centre sight and the other 
one, so we have applied for funding for that, so if not, we will certainly fund 
the traffic revenue budget, no question.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Vincent Blake.  
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Thank you for the presentation as 
well. I may go off on a tangent here, we talk about five million here and 
studies here and there, but we out there, when we Irish Water and we are 
looking at maybe half a million or a quart of a million of investment in places 

 
40
like Tinahely, Shillelagh, Aughrim and Avoca and looking for an upgrade of a 
storage system and we are getting nowhere with it, nowhere with Irish 
Water it's on the long finger, no proposals and here we are talking about five 
million ten million here of a capital programme.  
 
It's certainly special as far as we are concerned in it anything we have asked 
to be done with Irish Water and I am disappointed with the support we are 
getting from the County Council to deal with these issues. Frustrated with 
the meetings we have had with Irish Water, not today or yesterday but the 
last number of years and I am frustrated with the support we are getting in 
the County Council as well.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gerry Walsh.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you, just a query in relation to the figures for the 
electric vehicle charges points we have committed 2.5 million over three 
years. 1.25 million is department grant aid and the other is match funding I 
am not sure about that. I am wondering, we have 500,000 for 220 factored 
in, I wondered where we are at with that overall plan for the provision of 
electric vehicle charging points. If you are in a position to comment as well. 
Thank you.  
BRIAN GLEESON: I think we are at an early stage and there has to be a lot 
of discussion with ESB networks a well in relation to the points, but I 
suppose it's something that we are aspiring to and we have plans, but it is at 
a very early stage and I suppose the provision in there is an estimate at the 
moment, with regard to that. But we would hope to, there is a climate action 
fund, so we would hope to secure 50% funding under that particular scheme 
and then, obviously from our own resources we would look to, we have a 
revenue provision in relation to energy projects and also any savings that we 
would generate through our other energy projects, we would look towards 
putting that towards these types of projects.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: And the area engineers are looking at locations that will 
comply with the Department grant scheme, we will probably start with 
Greystones because there isn't any there at the moment. So that will be part 
of climate action plan that will go to the SPC.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Just the Arklow transport study, the figure is 70,000, I 
think there was a higher figure than that. Has it gone out for tender that we 
can come out with a figure of 70,000. On the Arklow historic town, 3 million 
and 50,000. I thought that was gone out to tender?  I think I heard Brian 
said we haven't got the funding for that. The land in Arklow 150,000 
expected outlay, what are we outlaying on?   
BRIAN GLEESON: There is nothing we can see in the ones under the enter 
prides, most of the expenditure is 2021 onwards. There is no specific plans 
at this stage, but, I suppose it's something that it's still in our overall plans 
so we wanted to make reference to that.  
>>: Which one are you talking about?   
BRIAN GLEESON: Kish.  
ADMINISTRATOR: They are the lands that are zoned employment and joint 
survey on either side of the road as you are heading south.  
>>: Is that for next year?   
ADMINISTRATOR: They are zoned employment, if for example, industry 

 
41
expressed an interest.  
>>: But there is an agreement there for another data centre in that area.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: That is a specific area, maybe you can talk about 
afterwards.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I am more interested in the historic area of 3 million and 
50,000, I thought that was out for tenure.  
BRIAN GLEESON: That is a separate project for the quarter.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I understand that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If I hit your mic, I would be... able to hear you.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I turned it off because I wanted more than three months 
turn it off when you don't want to be heard. I wanted, is the 3 million gone 
out for secure.  
BRIAN GLEESON: We have grant aid of 2.7 million for that and the project is 
commenced.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: What Cllr Leonard was talking about was the pottery 
scheme.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I understand that one, there is no funding for that. The 
three million is secure, the 70,000 seems little for transport study.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: We will have to go to tender for it. That is 70,000 we 
have got for NTA, which is plus.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I will turn my light back off now.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: So, then, item 17 and 18, to consider entering into a 
Section 85 agreement with Kilkenny County Council for the carrying out of 
the local authority public lighting energy efficiency project, the LED project. I 
know you have a copy of it but from hearing what SSE Airtricity said earlier 
on, these LED lights are going to, obviously the old light bulbs aren't there 
and the LED project will also help our energy efficiency and our contribution 
towards climate control, so if there is no questions can I have a proposer 
and second?   
CLLR FORTUNE: I have a question. I know what LED is and how all of that 
works, I am curious, is the intention to roll out 5G in tandem with this 
project?  I am curious what is happening that is why I ask the question of 
the broadband people about 5G because we passed a motion recently that 
we would look into 5G and get an explanation of questions asked. Ten other 
counsels around the country have done that and we have heard nothing 
back, when I read this and looked it he roll out, I am wondering is part of 
the plan to include the 5G network as part of this and if it is, I think we need 
to, I certainly will have issues with it based on, there is a group that I have 
done some work with this Greystones who have serious issues about the 
whole thing and there has been a lot of research into it and we need, no one 
came back to us, it's like as if we put a motion through and it was thanks for 
the motion, but so what.  
>>: The project is to replace 100% of the lights in the county with LEDs, it 
has no implications. For 5G has no implications for the project, it's no 
connection with broadband, it's just solely to replace all the lanterns in the 
county with LEDs.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gail Dunne.  
CLLR DUNNE: I would like to propose this Cathaoirleach and hopefully it 
won't take three months to fix the new LED lights. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Lourda Scott.  

 
42
CLLR SCOTT: Just could you comment on the driver replacement costs, it's 
listed as 0.8 million, it seems to be quite low, the second question was, my 
understanding is and I am not an electrical expert, as we freeing up capacity 
on the circuits by switching from sodium to the LEDs is there any scope for 
developing in pole charging, I brought it up at a Municipal District level 
previously, just, is it possible to look at that or pick a spot for a pilot scheme 
on that?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Grace McManus.  
CLLR McMANUS: I am no expert either and it looks great and it looks like 
there will be a lot of benefits to it, the four local authorities that aren't 
participating do you know why, I know it's not about Wicklow, but do you 
know why they aren't?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Pat Fitzgerald.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I want to second Gail Dunne's motion please.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If you want to answer those.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  
>>: I will deal with the easier one first, the four counties that are not 
participating in the project have decided to move ahead themselves. In 
Wexford, for example, they have a project currently ongoing, that is 
replacing the lights with LEDs, it doesn't mean they are not doing it, it's just 
that they have decided to do it on their own or to move ahead of the rest of 
the local authorities. In relation to the EV charging points, look, we are going 
to be, we are in the eastern region project, we have a lead local authority 
and this is what the Section 85 is to do.  
 
The lead local authority will put out the request for tender for the project 
and at this stage, while it hasn't come up, I don't think in our meetings to 
date, about the EV charging points we can bring it up and see if that is 
something that could be included in the request for tender.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I have a proposer and is seconder. Is that agreed?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Okay so we have a proposer and seconder to enter into 
the Section 85. Can we have a proposer and seconder for passing of the.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We need to borrow 7.95 million in respect of the public 
lighting and energy efficiency project. Proposed by Pat Fitzgerald and 
seconded by Cllr Paul O'Brien. Is that agreed?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, thank you very much. Thank you, Brian and Colm. 
Item 21, to discuss the proposal circulated by Cllr Stephen Matthews at the 
council meeting held on the 13th of January. Lourda Scott, do you want to.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you, as Cllr Matthews is now deputy Matthews I will 
step into his shoes for a moment. I know we discussed this motion at length 
in January and I am aware that we are coming up to nearly 5.00pm. I think 
it's probably fair to say there has been a lot of consensus about this proposal 
with the elected members and also outside the chamber within the 
community. I think the recent General Election campaign really showed that 
consensus with the proposal and there was a lot of discussion across all 
parties for the need to look at alternatives to cars and be mindful of 
potential environmental impact of this study.  
 
However, at the same time, and I acknowledge what the Chief Executive and 

 
43
Cllr Behan was saying earlier on, I understand the concerns about delaying a 
major road project and losing funding or our position in the queue for want 
of a better word. So, could I suggest that the motion stands as it is, but if 
we reworded the beginning of it and if was agreeable for everyone, instead 
of saying that we request that phase 2 is postponed until a meeting is 
convened but if we could agree if we stated that we request that a preferred 
route wouldn't be selected until we meet with the relevant stakeholders, if 
that would be a preferable way of wording the motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If you want to submit that as a motion and it will go on 
the agenda for next month. Okay.  
ADMINISTRATOR: The motion is in six parts really when you read it down 
isn't it?  Are you referring to part 1.  
CLLR SCOTT: It's referring to the beginning where we have originally said 
that we would, it would be postponed. I think that was what was causing 
concern, that it would imply a delay, so if we rephrase that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: You are proposing an amendment to that.  
CLLR SCOTT: It's to change that first sentence, Lorraine, if we could say that 
a preferred route won't be selected until we convene a meeting, just 
changing the language slightly.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is there a seconder for that?   
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: Does that mean the same thing?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: There is a few things there, as I mentioned earlier, we 
don't want to delay it, because there is a lot of other schemes right around 
the country that would like to bypass us on the queue. So, anything that 
would delay it, I think we should steer clear of. It is, there is the whole 
process is ongoing at the moment between the NTA and the route options 
and they are looking at the middle of this year for having a preferred option. 
In relation to the transport study we saw the NTA at the last meeting with 
the proposals they have, in terms of improving the dart times to Greystones 
and the shuttle bus to Wicklow town, it looks like they are not going to do 
whole lot else, they are going to look at protecting the line in terms of 
coastal protection which is an a big one as well.  
 
In terms of the environment service, the TIA have a procedure for doling 
with the environment side of it, at every stage of the process, at stage one 
which involves developing a number of feasible options and this is done and 
the carry out a primary options assessment using a framework metrics 
under the headline of engineering, environment and economy. They end up 
going to stage two which is what they are at, at the moment. This that carry 
out an appraisal matrix under 6 headline criteria in the common appraisal 
framework, accessibility and social inclusion, integration and physical 
activity.  
 
Stage 3 of the process involves a selection of the preferred option and the 
project appraisal balance sheet to summarise the benefit of the preferred 
option. Throughout the entire process the environmental assessment of each 
option will be undertaken under a broad range of topics. At a conclusion of 
phase 2, each stage of the process will be documented in the options 
selection report which will recommend the preferred option for the scheme. 
Then, the environmental impact assessment report will subsequently be 

 
44
carried out under the preferred option during phase 3.  
 
So the EIA forms part of the planning application that will be submitted to 
the An Bord Pleanála and is prepared in accordance with requirements of 
Section 50 of the roads act and annex 4 of our Directive 201192EU so that is 
how they have it set out in their capital appraisal framework. So they are 
not going to change, but there is a detailed assessment of everything that is 
mentioned there, appropriate assessment, NIS, etc. So you can be sure that 
all of that going to be done in any case.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Rather than us just, it says to discuss a proposal, should 
it go to the SPC?  Like the transport SPC to actually be discussed by rather 
than us voting on it today?   
CLLR SCOTT: I would say to be discussed by climate SPC as well, because 
there is the whole issue of the carbon footprint and it's to get a cohesive 
discussion between the chairs of both of those SPCs which was part of the 
motion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: What do members feel?   
>>: Yes.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: So go to the transport and the climate action SPC. Sorry, 
Dermot O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: The challenge I think is in terms of all of the checks and 
balances and all of the criteria that they look at, if the start pound is that we 
are offering a roads-based solution of course they will find a way to navigate 
the issues. It fascinates me how the prework before any proposal is made 
doesn't involve everyone looking at a dynamic solution, I would be worried 
we tell our children in the future we declared a climate emergency in 2019 
and we spent ten years building roads after that. If we listen to the National 
Broadand Plan that is a mitigating factor, so I think it's that art of, to just 
fire ahead and presume in phase 2 or 3 that these things will be revisited, 
there is a point of no return I would be worried that we would cross without 
being mindful.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, so, but it's going to go to the transport SPC and the 
climate action SPC and then we can tease it out and maybe rather than just 
plough ahead we can come back with a proposal. Okay. Is everyone agreed?  
Okay. Correspondence.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just a couple of thing, Cathaoirleach. As you know the 
Seanad elections are taking place in 2020. Ballot papers will issue from the 
returning officer on the 16th of March. The poll closes at 11.00am on the 
30th of March. I am on authorised officer along with Seanad returning 
officers, clerk of the Dail, county registrar, Superintendent, etc, if you wish 
to have your ballot papers, the signing and sealing witnesses you are very 
welcome to contact me by email to make an appointment or visit the other 
registered officers. Just to say also that works to the council chamber and 
the members room will commence now on the 9th of March. So effectively 
this is your last meeting in the council chamber as we sit in it now. So that 
effects the council Chambers, the member rooms and the elected rooms and 
the foyer and the hub. So your next meeting will take place on the 6th of 
April in Clermont. Gemma has been appointed. We have set up a booking 
system where rooms can be booked there and we will reserve some 
classrooms for members who want to meet before the meeting next week, 

 
45
so, but Gemma we will be communicating on you on email in respect of that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Peir Leonard.  
CLLR LEONARD: I wanted to ask what is happening to the interior fit out of 
the existing chamber?   
ADMINISTRATOR: What is happening to it?  As in?   
CLLR LEONARD: Could we find it a new home somewhere?   
ADMINISTRATOR: The mics and the electoral system that is all being used 
again.  
CLLR LEONARD: But the furniture.  
ADMINISTRATOR: The furniture will be going out to Wicklow county campus. 
I am not sure how useful, we will find a home for the screens.  
CLLR LEONARD: This might tie in with...  
ADMINISTRATOR: Perfect.  
CLLR LEONARD: Maybe they wouldn't want it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: I will get them that to give you an email.  
CLLR LEONARD: They won't have money to put stuff into.  
>>: Unknown Cllr. At the next CPC. Are we going to meet them as well.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Yes, I know there it's a meeting of the, meeting and 
Gerry Walsh is the chairman, but any elected member is welcome to attend 
as an observer.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: We don't want to end up like a circumstances like what 
happened in Kerry where they were slandering a councillor because he had 
an assault charge, this is a serious meeting, needless for me to say, I was 
concerned about the surroundings in Clermont, but I am sure it's all under 
control.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Gerry Walsh. Just to clarify the purpose of this meeting 
and the request was to provide clarification for us, at our JPC in Wicklow on 
the proposed new model and the impact it envisaged to have on us, because 
as we know we have been amalgamated Wexford and it had implications on 
resources so we need to, the commissioner to come out and explain to us 
how this model is going to benefit us as a county. That is the reason for his 
appearance here and there should be no issues discussed apart from policing 
matters that affect the county per se, thank you.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: I welcome the commissioner coming, I wasn't being 
slanderous but I was being mindful of what happens in Kerry when we did 
arrive down there.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I would hope we would behave ourselves properly. Thank 
you very much we will see you an April 6th.  
 
 
 
End of meeting  
 
