 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 4th DAY OF FEBRUARY 2019 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named meeting for 
communication support.  
Elaine McCarthy 
Elaine McCarthy 

 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Members take a seat please. 
Just before we start votes of sympathy. 
MS. GALLAGHER:  Yes, for Anne Byrne, former 
colleague, she looked after us for many years in 
the canteen and Michael Lennon former supervisor 
in the FAS scheme in the Tinahely area. 
CLLR WALSH:  Late Claire Dumphy from Greystones. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Who was that, Claire Dumphy? 
CLLR BLAKE:  Just to join with the members as well 
regarding Michael Lennon, he worked for Wicklow 
County Council for a couple of years and I worked 
with him in Arklow for a lot of years as well, for 
a young man enough who passed away, our deepest 
sympathy. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  I'd like to offer a vote of sympathy 
for Eddie Boylan of Blessington, Eddie died fairly 
sudden last night, and he was an employee for 
Wicklow County Council for many a year. 
CLLR BOURKE:  I'd like to add the family of John 
Hogan, his aunt worked for us in the Arklow district 
for a while. 
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you Chairman, I'd like 
condolences to Anne Byrne.  She worked for a long 

number of years, most people around this table 
would have known her, I know the family very well 
with, so I'd like to be associate with those 
remarks, thank you. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Originally from Wexford, done a huge 
amount of work Michael Sinnott originally a Wexford 
man. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK, will we stand.   
(one minute’s silence) 
Thank you. Members item one on the agenda. Could 
I have a proposer and seconder? 
MS. GALLAGHER: Site was for Ms Geraldine Kelly, 37 
Roasanna Close proposer and seconder.  Is that 
agreed, right, fine.  Item two. Freehold interest 
property known as 49 St Peters Place to Mr Paul 
Costello and Ms Gabriele Shalan, 49 St Peters Place 
Arklow.  Propose and seconder. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Tommy Annesley agreed?  OK 
yeah. Three. 
FRANK CURRAN:  We were talking at the December 
meeting around customer relationship management 
and it is relevant to item number four as well.  But 
CRM is about getting as much as the customer’s 
business as possible dealt with a single point of 

contact whereby we get customer's contact, it is 
audit trail if the customer comes back.  So, what 
I might do, if you don't mind is have a presentation 
on that, because you really need to see how it would 
work.  This will apply to councillors’ queries, 
and people who ring and go to the front desk, 
everything is logged on the front desk and we'll 
have staff working on-line and remotely to close 
some of the queries off, so we'll get a 
demonstration on both of those at work.  So, I'll 
hand you over to Emer O'Donavan and Paddy 
O'Flaherty. 
MR O’FLAHERTY:  We've released, sorry, I'll have 
to have interactive touch screen to have in the 
foyer, it is a portal for the public to use, that 
provide information from all the different 
departments, I won't go through every menu, but, 
it is just information from all our different 
section, like housing, planning, and also have the 
website, we got funding from this from the regional 
innovation programme and it is developed inhouse 
from our application section.  So, member of the 
public will come in the foyer, come touch the 
screen, we have live Twitter feed here, they can 

go through different sections, as I say, here is 
our website and on the wall a concept what we're 
hoping it would look like, so it is nicely seeing 
as integrated in the foyer, so they can come in, 
hit planning, if they want do a map search or a G.I.S 
planning application, so I hope we will take away 
some traffic perhaps from the counter, come up and 
start application number, start application name 
this, is an example of the things that will come 
up twice.  And that will search our database that 
has applications in the county.  You can delve down 
to christian name or you can actually go and search 
through the maps, so that's one initiative of the 
planning.   
So, then you can do text search either, say their 
planning documents, we thought this might be a nice 
area to display local area plans, here, can you 
choose any of - I'm choosing, Carnew, they can 
browse each development plan and get a bit of 
information for themselves rather than going up to 
someone on the planning counter they have to go in 
behind the office, pull the relevant document and 
come out with them arcs then we have local area 
plan.   

So, it is a simple interface and that's divided up 
into different categories.  We're trying to make 
it as user friendly as possible and provide, we 
don't want to bombard with a lot of information, 
about you simple information that people will find 
helpful.  So again, the difference that going 
home, we have tourism heritage on it, which we're 
working on at the moment so we're hoping to have 
a heritage gallery, pictures from over the years 
from Wicklow with he was linkage to the heritage 
website and documents on it, and then probably a 
popular one will be, news and events, where public 
will come in, see what the latest news and events 
are happening around the county.  This will be 
constantly updated, what is up for discussion is 
one of these, instead of discussing simple A4 
happen on the wall, they can come out pull out the 
plan of the they have the relevant information if 
they want to make a submission, they can turn it 
around, size it and pull it up if they want to look 
at the foyer, they can take it out, we're not just 
doing this for Part 8s but any documentation that 
the department feel relevant to the touch screen.  
So, it is just a nice, simple, easy portal for the 

public to access and view, important local 
information. 
And we have pictures here also of we will be 
discussing later about Dun Laoghaire and Rathdown 
hub, that's an idea what they have for their 
customer care hub.  A lot of what Emer will talk 
about next, CRS system is a lot about data 
collection.  And putting in information on that, 
and a lot of the information is integrated on this 
as well for the public to see.  So that's that, and 
Emer will come up next and discuss the CRM system 
for the customer care. 
EMER:  OK, at the moment we are trialling a 
Customer Relationship Management System, CRM 
system in the IT department in Wicklow County 
Council we've broken in three stages, customer will 
come to the help desk, or else they will send e-mail 
or else we will have on-line portal where they can 
summit a request.  We will deal with that, request 
in stage one of the process, stage two we will 
process the case, do whatever needs to be done, send 
out field workers, and send out letters and invite 
people for interviews and stage three of the 
process will be close the case.  Our CRM system 

will replicate this step.   
This is an example of our litter business process.  
We have a lot of different business processes in 
each department and our task is to identify the 
litter, business process, the waste management, 
the housing maintenance and the Housing Needs 
Assessment, create a business process for each of 
them and replicate that process on an IT system. 
Our IT system now I'll demonstrate it the point of 
is to simplify our business processes, use best 
practice and automate an awful lot of information 
where we have customers' information at a touch of 
the button, we will have your history, we will see 
what trends are identifying, are there problems 
occurring with certain house, certain boilers, and 
we will be able to forecast our workload for the 
future based on what we have recorded for the last 
year. 
OK, so, when the customer walks into the help desk 
this is the system that the service customer, the 
staff will be using, they will create a new case, 
John Smith will walk into the department and they 
will have his details, if they don't have his 
details, we will record his details.  He's going 

to report a litter waste case.  We can change that 
according to whatever the case is.  We will give 
the case a title.  If this was housing maintenance, 
we have prepopulated fields here.  We will take a 
description of the case and we will identify the 
team who are responsible for dealing with that 
case.  At the moment, this case is at the help desk 
in the foyer. 
A case number has automatically been created and 
we will assign this case to the environment 
department.  We won't, we might not be able to able 
to handle it immediately and that's when we go and 
allocate to environment housing.  Move on to the 
second stage of the process now and we're in the 
hands of the environment team.  They will look at 
all the recent cases relating to John Smith.  And 
we will now decide to assign Bill Ryan to a case, 
room we have a countdown here, he's given 30 days, 
if he does not reply within that time limit, his 
line manager will be notified and the case will be 
escalated and e-mail now has been sent 
automatically to Bill Ryan, he will receive that 
on his mobile application and we can change the 
priority to high, low, medium, whatever we need to.  

At this moment, Bill Ryan is off somewhere in the 
mountains looking for this abandoned car, he is 
use, G.I.S application, Paddy will come back to you 
on that in a few minutes.  He will then summit the 
information through via e-mail, and the computer 
system, CRM system will automatically pick that up, 
if you see here there's the second e-mail has now 
been received, and we've changed the status to "in 
progress."  We've seeded, we've got the report 
back on time, and we see here that the warden has 
submitted ace report, we have the date he submitted 
it and we'll have the warden's recommendation, 
whether we need to invite somebody for interview 
or not.  Somebody in the environment department 
will review his report, and they will say OK, that's 
fine, we need to call this person in for further 
action. 
So, we're recording now the alleged offender's 
details. And we're going to create an appointment 
for this offender alleged offender.  All of this 
is done through the CRM system and we will have 
updates reminders every so often to tell us an 
interview is in progress, a letter will go out to 
Mr B, telling him he has to attend for interview, 

we can set up 30, 45-minutes, whatever, the entire 
system is tracking everything here, so it is 
incredibly transparent.  We then note when we have 
actually conducted the interview, we can tick that 
off.  We come down and after the interview, we 
record OK. 
We decided to ‘caution’ and we can now close the 
case.  Which case we go up into the third stage of 
the process, and resolve the case.  So, problem has 
been solved. 
And the car has been removed.  It took 30 minutes, 
it is going to take a few days, but the system will 
actually record all that information for us. 
And it is closed.  The members of the customer care 
will also have access to a dashboard here which will 
show the priority cases, it will show us the number 
of housing maintenance case, environment case and 
it will have time lines, it will be basically all 
our key performance indicators, statistics at the 
touch of a button. 
Now, if John Smith decides he does not want to come 
into the counter he can summit a request through 
the council's on-line portal which will be 
available on our website.  John Smith will 

actually register his own name, he will be in charge 
of his own details, he can change his information 
as required, so, John Smith logs in. 
And he will be able to view all his cases.   
So, he will be able to see all the cases he has 
previously submitted the status of each case, and 
he can see there that we've resolved that case, 
you'll see the outcome of the case. 
And customer care unit will communicate with him 
through the portal.  If he's not happy with the 
outcome he can choose to reopen the case, or he can 
add a comment.  Now he's going to create a new case.  
There will be a number of predefined choices, but 
this is how housing maintenance, all other process 
also go through, he can attach a file or photograph 
if he needs to, hit summit and then log out.  And 
that will appear on our CRM system at customer care 
and go through the process that you just saw, drive 
it there, environment out to the line. 
The system will also allow us to allow field workers 
out.  So, our technicians and our housing crew 
maintenance will all be managed on the system.  
We'll know what resources will be available so 
we'll be able to optimise our resources and make 

sure the person closest to the area will be able 
to be sent out to the area and the person being sent 
out has the relevant skills and we'll be able to 
map all of that.  There's an idea where somebody 
was sent out to a local authority house and it shows 
their quickest route.  And it will also manage our 
project service.  They're all our project, we'll 
know who is doing what, how long it took - 
everything and all our council houses are now GIS 
tagged and we can look at them on a map and know 
everything about them.  Paddy will show G.I.S 
where Bill Ryan was sent out with my CRM pass. 
PADDY:  So, as Emer said, the CRM will automate an 
e-mail to litter warden to tell them this regular 
complaint has come in, so they're tasked going out 
with the inspection on this, currently this is how 
the environment section deals with record of 
complaints itself.  Very much a paper exercise, 
so, this is either filled out onsite or back in the 
office, and then it is retrieved whenever the 
information is fed.  So, it is very much a paper 
exercise.  What we'd like to do is move towards a 
digital copy, this is a digital version of the paper 
copy.  So, it is sort of a meted-up reporting sites 

on devices such as tablets and phones, as mentioned 
by Emer the warden will get an automated e-mail from 
the CRM system which will tell them to inspect a 
certain site.  There's no pen or paper required.  
It allows for digital signatures there and you can 
take photographs which will be tagged with the 
inspection.  So, the benefits of digital recording 
are - it is real time captioning towards CRM, as 
soon as the litter warden is out onsite and hits 
summit something will come back to the office and 
actioned straightaway, because the next process 
can happen because it has the information 
straightaway.  There's no paperwork involved but 
it is people do still like to have a paper report, 
there's an automatic paper report creation, so when 
somebody does an inspection a report can be just 
automatically created for that inspection.  
Again, it is location-based so that means, anything 
that's recorded, location is also recorded with the 
system.  And because it is coming back to a 
database, that allows us to do is to do easy data 
analysis of that data which is we wouldn't have been 
able to do with a paper copy. 
So, for example, we have a Who to see exactly where 

the record of the complaints is happening.  I have 
categorised by areas, or mortgage resources or 
tackle a specific problem.  What, so it gives you 
what is being recorded, or what people are ringing 
in about or coming to customer care up about, is 
it litter, is it noise, is it waste water?  We'll 
allow, Wicklow County Council to perform the 
relevant action, whatever is the highest, if 
litter's high, question move resource toss tackle 
that problem.  And we can do When, to see exactly 
when the record of complaints is coming in.  
January could be a popular month for dumping 
because it is straight after Christmas, because 
people need to get rid of recycling, and whittle 
down the complaints, we can pull out and see say 
burning, maybe burning, mainly happens around 
June, we can analyse and make decisions based on 
that data.  And WHERE, I like to see where this is 
happening and analyse the data. I would like to have 
a quick demo. 
So, what happens is litter warden will go out, it 
is all password protected as well.  So, there's a 
map of Wicklow with complaints coming through.  
This is one someone on the admin store's side will 

see, a warden will go out and have an app where they 
can go up to an incident and I'm going to use Wicklow 
Town as an example, they will use phone to capture 
it and fill out relevant fields, and has categories 
if it is planning or waste water this. is the 
environment section going out, say if they go out 
and see the issue is planning related, when it comes 
back in the CRM system it will give e-mail to 
planning section, saying it is not waste water 
issue, it is planning and that will indicate for 
the planning section 
Hopefully, if it is working probably.  I recorded 
this information.  And it is real time information 
to analyse the data.  Once we have the data in the 
system, we can start analysing that data.  So, for 
example, that's a record of all our complaints, but 
you can categorise that in different categories 
now, so to the map. So, now it's seen a lot of red 
dots.  What we do now is we'll see, it might be 
difficult to see there, but they've been 
categorised so we'll see where the burning, the 
waste, the planning is happening or the noise 
pollution, and what we can do after that is provide 
a heat map, which it gives indication of where the 

record of complaints is mostly happening. 
So, it gives a map, maybe there's litters happening 
in the Wicklow mountains so it will give indication 
of exactly most of our complaints are coming 
through.  If we want, we can filter out the rather 
than looking at all complaints, you can filter out 
that information to sigh give me everything that's 
concerned to litter. 
 
There's a drop down, I'll choose litter and hit 
apply, so all the dots will disappear, that's 
important as well because we've filtered by litter, 
we can add our own data that Emer has, to the CRM 
and we can compare like for like, if we wanted to, 
we can say there's litter going on, we'd like to 
add a river layer to see has it any impact.  On our 
river system so we can put that into our system, 
so can compare where all the record of complaints 
is coming in and compare that to the relevant 
dataset.  We can often use this technology for the 
public to use as well, so rather than say planning 
inspector or litter warden coming in to and using 
the technology to inspect data, question have the 
public coming in, so it is a concept or example 

public G.I.S system where to report a major 
incident, it is G.I.S based so someone could come 
across a fallen tree and pick out the phone, because 
the phone knows their location, they can record an 
incident.  They can take pictures, attach pictures 
and make a few comments.  Once they summit the 
incident, that then would be pulled into Emer's CRM 
system that she talked about earlier on. 
 
So, it has a map, so it starts off by giving a map 
of Wicklow County Council, you can put it on aerial 
photography so it may be clearer for people.  
Person takes out their phone you can put it at their 
residence, they want to report an issue, they want 
to report it, and they can literally use GPS or 
predefined drop down menus like fallen tree, they 
can click anywhere on the system, they can give 
their name, few comments, attach photos or take the 
photo if they have it and report it.  What will 
happen then, it will appear on the system.  And 
then e-mail sent to our relevant CRM staff, and then 
we can see a list of other incidents that is 
happening around the country as well.  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Any questions?  

CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you very much.  I don't know 
how we've been doing this without a system like that 
in place, just, a couple of comments in relation 
to the system that's planned for the foyer area, 
to make sure it is accessible for people, even the 
height in the demo you showed it was quite ... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If Paddy and Emer take a list of 
complaints.  
CLLR WHITMORE:  Make sure it is accessible, the 
size of the font that everyone can actually use it. 
Is this system also going to be rolled out in the 
district offices because it is really, really good 
and it might add value in the district offices as 
well and libraries, you know, there's an 
opportunity to engage with the community there? 
And then in relation to the CRM system, will there 
be a portal for councillors for us to access the 
high-level data, like the dashboards you provide 
because that information would be valuable as well?  
Thank you.  
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  It should have been done years 
ago, the system on the wall it looks very simple 
to me because, and I could see the way you were using 
it and being able to move it, but I am anticipate 

not so sure it is that simple to something that 
doesn't know how to use T maybe there's 
instruction, you know to show, I know this sounds 
stupid but you need to show people where to go right 
and left otherwise they won't know.  CRM is 
essential and I'm delighted to see it brought into 
Wicklow County Council. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  I'd like to welcome this initiative, 
if it does improve the service, we give to the 
public it is welcome, considering most of us got 
a letter last week from a prominent businessman 
complaining he hadn't been responded for a 
complaint he made since November about a leaking 
sewage take tank up in Ashford at Mount Usher.  We 
all got that, but the like of that shouldn't happen 
if the system works correctly.  You'd have to 
agree. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Thank you, and this initiative is to 
be welcomed and the importance as Cllr Grainne 
McLoughlin related to there, the importance it is 
user-friendly if it is going to be of assistance 
to the public.  It allows the council to optimise 

the resources to attend calls, it is a similar 
system to the system used by the Garda at the moment 
which allows them to optimise the resources when 
they're attending to calls and manage their 
response, and when they get the reports of the 
incidents that allows them to produce the heat maps 
which are of major benefit of analysing events and 
organising reaction to same.  And the other point 
you made there, is the public use in relation to 
severe weather events and that, so, that, in the 
future can be that, invaluable and those types of 
situations.  Thank you. 
Cllr Shay Cullen we need to improve on our whole 
area of dealing with public issues and I have to 
say the concerns I'd have at the moment with our 
current system should be taken into consideration, 
and what I'm really getting at there, is at the 
moment I feel the public you know, there is 
occasions where people are sending e-mails or 
making phone calls, and they're not being 
acknowledged and I've had this on numerous 
occasions and it is across all department, not only 
one or two departments.  And I think you know, what 
happens is you get disgruntled public who are 

trying to make contact with the council, and it is 
something that we certainly need to look at, in this 
day and age when you put through to a department, 
you know, the phone shouldn't ring out and that's 
certainly does happen from time to time, if you 
don't get through to one person on the end of the 
line that that call should be transferred on to the 
next administrator to make sure that the public are 
served.  But, as I say, I can't take lightly the 
fact that there are times where e-mails aren't, not 
even acknowledged, never mind returned, and calls 
are not taken, so I think, we need to take that into 
consideration, when we're putting this system 
together thank you. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  I think Cllr Jennifer Whitmore may 
have asked the question already, from the manager's 
report, progress is made in network in the district 
offices so would a screen like this be available 
in the Bray Municipal District to view planning 
files?  Can a facility be incorporated where you 
could print the planning files you require, I know 
there's a charge for that, but I'm sure that could 
be incorporated as well and it makes perfect sense, 
and I really something we should be pushing ahead 

with.  OK thank you. 
  
CLLR THORNHILL:  I would like to Paddy and Emer, 
thank you for a good presentation and I would like 
to say as well it is great to see technology and 
you know, just as Cllr Gerry Walsh said and like 
myself, going from my experience in the Garda, this 
is something similar where you have a system now 
where there will be a tracking ability and 
countdown where people will go, so often I seen and 
heard people going and their cases, are of 
interest, so there would be a good tracking device 
in relation to that, and that's good because people 
would like to see a service.  Now, also, I would 
like to ask the question as well about other county 
councils that have used the system and I'd like to 
know about the experience from there.   
Also, about the data that will be collected who, 
will analyse this data?  And, because I mean, it 
is great, I mean, especially in the case of litter, 
I mean, we have to know exactly the hot spots and 
it will help us for the future.  And will there be 
people, when you go in the bank and use the ATMs, 
people to help?  Because people an awful lot.  

Elderly people are not savvy when it comes to this 
new system.  Overall, I think it is brilliant.  
And I think it is for the future and you know, it 
is great at least people will see what is happening.  
Go raibh maith agat. 
CLLR MURPHY:  I certainly welcome it, it brings us 
into the modern age, also, my concern would be the 
height of it, because I know myself that there's 
some ATMs, I'm not able to reach at the level that 
they are.  Also, what would be the facility for 
people with visually impaired, you know, what and 
print and everything else @ visual aspect of it, 
because I think it is very important.  Because it 
would be interesting to have it, in Municipal 
Districts everywhere because there's quite a big 
flow of people, especially now when some of the park 
lobbies are coming back to the local Municipal 
Districts, where we have that facility.  So, I 
would say well done.  
 
CLLR BEHAN:  I just want to thank Emer and Paddy 
for their presentation and obviously they put a lot 
of work into this.  Now, it is great as a concept.  
To come into the Chamber, or the foyer there and 

report a complaint or an issue or ring up and report 
an issue, but in my experience it is not, the 
difficulty with this council, is not the reporting 
of the problem, it is getting the problem 
addressed, and while there might be elite group of 
people out there sitting throughout at a disk, 
taking queries or taking them on the phone and we 
might all have the magic technology, unless the 
issue is dealt with by the people who have 
responsibility for dealing with it, this is going 
to be a complete waste of money.  If it is only 
window dressing, it is absolutely of no benefit to 
the people.  Now I don't expect the two speakers 
to address the issue, that's for the Chief 
Executive, are the resources available in the 
Municipal Districts as well in section, such as 
housing and roads to deal with the issues that 
people have?  The genuine issues they bring up day 
after day with us and with the council directly?  
Are those problems going to be solved quicker 
because of this system?  Because if they're not, 
I don't see the point in having this window 
dressing.  If they are, fine, it is probably worth 
investing to say that happens.  The other question 

for the Chief Executive is what is the role of 
counsellors in this system, is the idea to keep 
counsellors at bay, to force counsellors in this 
elite section out here in the corridors to make 
their queries or make their representations or ring 
up or e-mail, and councillors will be denied access 
to the sections of the council where they need to 
get their business done, whether it is by phone, 
e-mail or in person?  Because if that is employed 
in the system, I would be absolutely against that.  
I think councillors as representatives of the 
people should have full access to all council 
departments, and should not be forced into a system 
out here, because it might suit the Chief Executive 
or top managers in the council, I would appreciate 
answers from the Chief Executive on those two 
points. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Paddy and Emer, if you can address 
the ones you can address. 
PADDY:  Regarding insulation of screening, that 
should be done by the company we're working for, 
we're working with the accessibility officer about 
the font and things like that, and see if he's happy 
what we've developed.  It does link to our website 

and that's fully compliant with accessibility, so 
you can make the font bigger or smaller, so we're 
aware of that.  Regarding installing, we have 
talked to many of the administrators in the 
district, I've given a demo of it to them, and it 
is cloud based, everything you see is saved in the 
cloud, not saved on the TV itself, so, we actually 
have access if we want it installed in five 
districts to update it whenever we want, to send 
a script on it, so if people come in, and say 
Blessington, or Baltinglass administrator want 
something specific to their location, we can update 
it from here.  Regarding the planning files, there 
is a facility at the moment, it is, we kind of have 
to be careful where is it a planning system or just 
a general one top for the public.  I know I 
mentioned perhaps printing out applications or 
documents, there is a planning counter that does 
that at the moment.  Perhaps they're aligned, 
maybe attach a printer and someone can come along 
to a planning file and print it out.  We can look 
into it, and instructions as well, yeah, it is a 
touch screen and a lot of people know how to use 
touch screens, so our plan is to have set of 

instructions lambated to the side of it, and give 
them a quick of how to use it, and choose this, and 
keyboard's integrated, things like that, but we'll 
work on that.  . 
 
EMER:  When a case is submitted, if someone sends 
in e-mail or anything like that, you will get a 
receipt in e-mail to say thank you your case is now 
opened, you will have a unique case ID number, you 
can log on to portal and track that system, that 
case, and see exactly where it is, and what has 
happened.  If you can't get through on the phone, 
you can send it in on-line and e-mail.  Also, 
that's will it be just window dressing?  I doubt 
that considering we're timing how long it takes now 
to resolve a case.  We know exactly who was dealing 
with that case.  The customer can track it from A 
to Z.  We will know how long to took to fit a window 
in the house or solve our boiler problem, we will 
have the entire history on each property and be able 
to reallocate resources based on the trends that 
we are picking up from the system, and we'll 
probably be evolving the way we deal with things 
such as maintenance, based on the information from 

this system.  How can you do something if you don't 
know where the problem lies, and this system will 
identify our weak areas and identify your strengths 
so we will build on this.  So, I think we actually 
need a system like this, so that we can provide a 
service, an adequate, not adequate but a highly 
functioning service to the customers.  And will 
there be a portal for councillors, we have to 
discuss that another time.  It will be the 
information will have to be accessible to possibly 
members of the public with GDPR we'll have to 
clarify what we provide and who will be looking 
after statistics and reading statistics, they will 
be the line managers who will be changing the volume 
and way practices are done based on the information 
we have, so we can get back to you.  That's it. 
Chief Executive.  You will have E planning down the 
track, customer care staff will come out in the 
initial stages and show how to use the touch screen, 
so we'll have that.  And in relation to the as Emer 
said, it is about efficiency, and analysing what 
we do, how we do it, and there is time limits set 
for people to carry out certain tasks so the service 
does improve, everything is captured, there's a 

foot trail and we may change our work processes but 
having the facts and analysis will assist us in 
doing that.  And certainly not intended to keep 
councillors away from staff, staff are always 
available to councillors, but they will be able to 
use the system, log their reps and ought to trail 
where it's gone in the system, but they can 
certainly ring us any time at any stage. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thanks for letting me back in on 
that.  I want to stress to the Chief Executive how 
important it is we incorporate access to planning 
files because in Bray and other districts we're 
planning authorities prior an amalgamation you 
could look in a planning file, it is difficult to 
look at planning files on-line now or else you need 
to have to have a trip to Wicklow to do it, E 
planning coming on-line, but we need to improve 
access to planning files and if this offers an 
opportunity to do that, I think we should do that.  
Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  All right OK.  We're moving on 
four. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  We didn't receive a submission 
when we, as we explained in the December meeting 
we want a new customer care desk, customer care work 
stations and work desk, we have a manager and five 
to six trained staff in all areas of customer 
service that's familiar with housing and 
environment, water, roads, et cetera, and there's 
a new planning public counter space providing range 
of services, including explaining and I think 
incorporating new PCs and planning files, there's 
new customer seating in the foyer and calls to have 
shielded client discussions, revamp of the 
existing small meeting rooms providing a dedicated 
housing meeting room and two additional customer 
meeting a development of break-out spaces just 
outside the Seminole Room and reallocation of cash 
receipting desk to motor tax area and flooring and 
ceiling.  So, it is a modern state-of-the-art 
customer care centre, using this customer 
relationship software that we just had zone 
centralisation on, and it is all about improving 
the service to the customer.  And also, then in 
relation to the Chamber, again, we had the plans 
in December, it is about increasing the size of the 

Chamber, that's the problem when the numbers went 
from 28 to 32, it was physically too small so it 
will go out here and here and there's, it increased, 
there's a proposed tiered seating area which will 
allow greater interaction, and remove the 11 
seating with feasibility and et cetera, the top 
table is extended allowing senior management to be 
available to answer questions, it provides a much 
improved audio-visual equipment, workplace for 
stenographer, et cetera, and significantly more 
space in the press area, and in the public area, 
and we're also, trying to bring the Chamber up to 
the standard of other councils in the region, that 
we have some place we can have civic receptions and 
meetings that need to take place.  The advantage 
of doing it along with the customer care centre is 
we get economies of scale.  We have looked at the 
costs as a result of the last meeting, the costs 
of the Chamber is now 377,000, that's making 
various changes, in relation to reuse of the 
panelling, lowering the spec a little bit but down 
to that, I don't think we can go lower, because you 
have to increase it in size, and there's no getting 
away from that.  The foyer is around 497,000 so the 

two are 875,000 including VAT, there's a 
description of the works, obviously removal of 
curved external wall, in you sighting areas and 
console desk specialist IT equipment, 
repositioning of the doors, it is wheel care access 
in terms of the public and front row of seating, 
and relocation of press and public seating, new 
location for staff seating area space and space for 
wheelchair and access from the foyer, areas around 
the roof lights are repaired and resealed and new 
movable lecture and podium.  So, while we're doing 
this, it is not part of the Part 8 but we'd like 
to do something with the member rooms with 
insulation, roof lighting, heating, and new 
breakout space and removal and rebuilding of the 
partition wall between Fina Gael and independence 
room, so that's it, the funding, as I said we in 
the current budget but 100,000 towards buildings, 
it will come from the code so there's no impact on 
the current account.  The thing would be paid for 
over nine to ten years, and look I think it is as 
a building, we have to, like, people's houses at 
home, you have to spend a certain amount of money 
as years go on and we'll have a state-of-the-art 

Chamber, and state-of-the-art foyer/customer care 
centre.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR BEHAN:  Thanks Cathaoirleach I did speak on 
this on the last occasion when we're discussing it 
and I want to reiterate that, the manager is giving 
figures there, it is as close as you may say as one 
million euros by the time everything is done here, 
and that's a substantial amount of money for a 
council, that can't fix potholes and footpaths and 
roads around the county.  Particularly Municipal 
Districts.  That's the first point.  The second 
point is many people are paying through a nose for 
property tax and getting nothing in return and 
those people will be looking at the expenditure of 
a million euros and saying is this what my money 
is going on, whether Capital or current it is coming 
effectively from property tax.   
I do accept that work needs to be done on the foyer, 
and I don't have a difficulty with that aspect of 
it, I want to propose we break up the project into 
two sections.  And I want to propose that the work 
on the foyer goes ahead in conjunction with that 
system that we've just seen about it so it can be 

facilitated but I'm not happy for the proposals for 
the council Chamber.  One of the biggest 
difficulties I have with it is that it is a complete 
redesign of what was initially here a circular 
Chamber and members bear with me, I know the 
difficulty of the extra eight in the middle here.   
 
But, we are a council who are supposed to deliberate 
and discuss and make decisions as a body of elective 
representatives, I think and not enough work was 
done to see would it be possible to have a full 
circle of the entire membership of the council, 
maybe re-orientating the entire Chamber and having 
the Cathaoirleach and management and staff here, 
and public right behind, many people who come into 
this Chamber as members of the public complain they 
can't see what is happening, they can't hear what 
is happening, councillors, but particularly some 
officials do not raise their voice and people 
cannot hear what they're saying when they're 
talking about things that are very, very important 
to them.  We've complete disregard for the members 
of the press.  Anybody who goes over there and 
looks at where the press has to sit, there's a tiny 

little disk and their seat is way back, they can't 
use the facilities that are put there, plus the fact 
there's a leak in the roof and the rain has been 
falling in on them for years.  I don't think they 
were consult with the that plan but from what I can 
see it is not going to be better in the future 
either.   
However the point, the most essential point I want 
to make is this, what the Chief Executive is 
proposing is a change from a circular Chamber, 
where we can speak directly to each other, and make 
our decisions, accordingly, to a three-rows, 
three-tiers, almost like a church, and I'm 
surprised there aren't kneelers put into it, so we 
can kneel down as we face the Chief Executive and 
the Chairman. 
However, that's just an aside.  My point is 
this - when councillors have speaking, there's 
going to be raised level of seating the public is 
going to be stuck behind there, they won't see or 
hear what councillors are saying and there's 
probably a good chance they won't see or hear what 
is said on the top table either. 
I'm asking, members, to consider, looking for a new 

plan for this Chamber that would make everybody 
equal, that we'd have a full circular claim per and 
the work and that be considered by whoever is 
elected into the new council in May, because they 
are the people who will affectively have to work 
this Chamber when that time comes.  And that we 
decide only today to get the foyer done and that's 
my proposal inquiry. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you very much Chair.  I 
would second that proposal for Cllr Joe Behan.  I 
wasn't here at the last meeting, so I just recently 
had a look at the proposals.  And when I looked at 
it, my primary concern was what is the value add?  
What additional value are we giving to the 
communities by making the changes because it is a 
substantial amount of money and I absolutely agree 
our foyer needs to be upgraded and it needs to be 
more open, and inclusive of the community that we 
are serving, and I think the proposals that you have 
put forward will do that.  When I looked at the 
proposals for the council Chambers, I cannot 
actually see what the value-add is.  To date I have 
not felt that I haven't been able to represent my 
constituents in this Chamber.  I know there's 

people sitting behind me, but it hasn't really made 
any impact on me being able to do my work as a 
councillor, and I don't think the changes that are 
proposed will actually add any value.  And like 
Cllr Joe Behan they will make it more difficult 
because you'll have three rows of councillors and 
I think if you're in the front row you will only 
be able to see the officials and people beside you 
and not the 20 councillors that are behind you, so 
I think it actually disimproves the situation.  Do 
I think we need to upgrade the audio.  And make it 
more inclusive to for members of the public and 
members of the press, but I just don't see the value 
of 400,000 Euro in the proposal that has been given 
to date.  So, I would ... 
I would second that, I think we should separate the 
two projects and deal with this one separately. 
CLLR SHAY CULLEN:  I'd like to pay tribute of the 
Chief Executive for having the foresight to 
bringing the change to the Chamber.  This building 
needs renovation on the basis the public are 
entitled to a modern and progressive facility, and 
certainly I don't believe we have that at the 
moment.  Customer satisfaction is paramount and 

we're here to serve the public in a professional 
manner, I think it's obvious from my work and 
looking at other local authorities that we're well 
behind with regards to the facilities we have here 
for the public.  I think by upgrading first of all 
the foyer area, people will be able to conduct their 
business in a more professional manner.  It 
certainly doesn't lend itself at the moment to that 
situation.  With the open plan it is certainly not 
enticing to the public I would say to come into this 
building. 
And with regards to the Chamber, again I would say 
the issues that Cllr Joe Behan have raised are dealt 
with by the upgrading of the this Chamber, the sound 
the area for the public, the press area and so on, 
we certainly need improvements in this Chamber, and 
I believe that with the upgrade that was suggested 
I think we're having a more modern facility to do 
our business.  And as public representatives we're 
entitled to have a modern progressive facility 
here, for not alone ourselves but the public.   
 
And you know, at the end of the day, you know, we're 
talking about spending money here, on any house 

that we live in, we have to make improvements, we're 
talking about paying this amount of money over ten 
years which shouldn't impact severely on services 
that we provide to the public.  I think it is, it 
is a worthwhile project and we should go ahead with 
it, and I'm willing to propose the complete Part 
8 goes forward today.  Thank you. 
Cllr Grainne McLoughlin thank you Cathaoirleach I 
would like to second Cllr Cullen's proposal, to do 
it in piecemeal is bad management and doesn't make 
financial sense.  I don't know people think just 
because we're councillors we shouldn't have the 
best facilities, I think we should.  The work we 
have to do is means the environment we work in is 
important as everything else as part of our job and 
this Chamber is certainly not fit for purpose.  I 
would like it to go further where when we go through 
the corridors of this building and I look at my 
colleagues and consider all the staff that work 
here colleagues of mine and see some of the 
conditions they have to work in, I think are equally 
needs upgrading, the whole place needs to be paint 
and brought into the 21st century, but to actually 
do the lobby and say we'll leave this as it is, 

doesn't make any financial sense whatsoever.  I 
want to, I won't be here, but I would like people 
who are here in the future, colleagues and 
councillors to work in an environment that is 21st 
century and not something that is just - it is 
pretty dismal coming in here on a monthly basis so 
I congratulate CEO for bringing this far and 
everybody who works on it, I absolutely second it 
and think it should go ahead. 
>>:  I welcome this development, 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  I see the people standing out in the 
foyer waiting for to be looked after and staff doing 
their best to do that, there's more seating for 
customers, that's what we need, I visited other 
Chambers throughout the country and I have to say 
we're in the dark age with the Chamber and there 
has been, and proposed and seconded but I would be 
giving my, I'll be voting that we take to 
description and development work or I'll be 
supporting the refurbishment of the Foy a the works 
upgrade extension and upgrade works to the Chamber.  
I've no difficulty doing that. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Just to acknowledge the Chamber 

was modified last time to accommodate 32 
councillors in a space for 24, and, it served its 
purpose, but Cllr Joe Behan outlined everything 
that's wrong where this Chamber and the Chief 
Executive recognises that as well, so it is welcome 
to see this plan come to us. 
As regards to the tiered seating and circular 
arrangement it would be preferable, I think to have 
the circular arrangement but as we discussed at 
protocol it is just not possible in the space that 
we have. 
And we have to go for that tiered seating, which 
will work, you see it in other Chambers and areas, 
so I don't think it will be a huge impediment to 
business.  In terms of splitting the job, I don't 
think it makes sense in terms of just economies of 
scale that you do both jobs at the same time, you 
don't want to have two separate contracts, two work 
site going on, two tendering processes, it makes 
sense to do all in one go, the pricing we've gotten 
for it is reasonable and I'll be supporting this, 
thank you. 
  
CLLR THORNHILL:  I would like to say from the 

outset looking at Cllr Joe Behan he's making some 
good points, one point I would like to make he 
mentioned the property tax, now, at the end of the 
day, I mean, this is a great project but with you 
talking about a million Euro involved.  And like, 
I mean, people, they're looking what are they 
getting for their property tax but we're in a 
situation here now, the customer area, definitely 
has to be done, but, this area has only been 
refurbished back in 2014, this whole area could be 
designed in such a way as Cllr Joe Behan that it 
could be made suitable in a circular area, but, I 
would just say, is it just a cosmetic exercise?  
The thing about it is, there's people out there, 
they're paying all this money and want to see value 
for money and all of a sudden, they'll say is this 
where our money is going?  I agree, we should 
modernise and get on with it, but at the same time 
I'm here, I'm happy here, but I think it should be 
looked at, the design, to be suitable to all people.  
I mean, and going forward that's what it is all 
about.  I think my main point is people, money, you 
only have to have later situation about the 
children's hospital, two billion and we can't look 

after our nurses.  But anyway, that's my point 
anyway.  Go raibh maith agat..  
 
CLLR DERMOT CULLEN:  Something struck me in Bray 
and wondering if the funding is available and we're 
looking at enhancing our customer service 
provision, I stood there, waiting for a meeting and 
overheard two full conversations with people had 
to share their vulnerabilities, tell their life 
stories and justify why they could be responded to 
in terms of a need being presented, and I wonder 
is there scope within the funds that are being made 
available to look at how we enhance what is 
happening in the MDs as well it would feel a little 
bit disingenuous for us to go out and pitch this 
to our constituents to say we're investing in the 
county council, but not in our local districts so 
I think that's something I'd like to bonder to see 
if there's scope for that. 
  
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach, Cllr Stephen 
Matthews outlined this was discussed a number of 
times at protocol.  And, I suppose everyone's had 
their say in the Chambers as well as the protocol 

committee, but I think it is fair to say protocol 
endorsed this, in its entirety.  And as I take on 
board what has been said about breaking down the 
project.  I'm delighted to hear that the project 
is amounting in at 120,000 less than was mentioned 
here at the last time it was brought up.  As I a 
councillor who was in a venue recently where the 
ceiling fell council, I did mention here, at last 
month's meeting in regards to this Chambers, and 
the ceiling up over the public gallery, and over 
where the journalists actually sit is in pretty sad 
condition and I think for us to omit to doing up 
of this Chambers would be remiss of us as 
councillors, as full time public representative 
and someone who uses the meeting rooms more than 
most, I have to say that the little short of 
disgraceful.   
And it is long overtime that they were renovated 
and done up to an acceptable standard to the public.  
Bear in mind this whole project in my opinion is 
an investment in the public, it is the public who 
will benefit, we as public representatives will 
have a proper environment to carry out workload and 
I'll be endorsing this 100%. 

CLLR WINTERS:  The space in the foyer is 
underutilised and the new civic hub is excellent, 
I went to Dun Laoghaire to see how it worked and 
I'd love to provide that something of that standard 
within this county.  I think it would be crazy to 
divide the project and to half it.  If you're doing 
an extension to your house, do the kitchen, finish 
it off and then start on the utility room, like if 
you're doing T do it all, it will be more cost 
effective at the end of the day and I think we do 
need to improve the services that we do ask, provide 
to the public.  And I think the mention of the 
Municipal Districts is a good idea as well.  I 
think, in some of the Municipal Districts, there 
isn't a private room for people to actually discuss 
and maybe that's something we should be looking at 
as well.  Thank you. 
>>:  In relation to the foyer, the use for public 
facility in modernisation for customer services 
are vital as we've already heard in the last 
presentation, in relation to the Chamber here, I 
think this is a great opportunity to increase the 
size of the Chamber, and promote greater 
interaction, we spoke about the video and audio 

facilities that need upgrading, press facilities 
that need upgrading this is an opportunity to 
showcase in the council in the best possible light, 
bring it up to line, I attended a meeting in 
relation to the proposed green way project with 
Wicklow and Greystones, that was IPW, other state 
bodies and you want to showcase this council in the 
best possible light and the proposal to do the carry 
out both projects at the same time makes sense 
economically and reiterate the point made by 
councillor Snell in relation to the rooms, they're 
badly needed and about time they were done. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I agree with what most have to say 
with the foyer, and rooms and brought into the 21st 
century, and people should be afforded a bit of 
privacy when they're discussing their personal 
business, and I agree that the foyer, probably at 
this stage does need a bit of a kind of improvement.  
Cosmetic or whatever, and certainly in terms of 
audio and visual, but I really do, and I said this 
at protocol meetings and the last council meeting 
I have a huge problem with the layout.  I know we 
have limited space and I also know that understand 

economies of scale we're trying to get everything 
done at the same time to keep the cost down, but 
the idea, I've said this before, the idea of 
round-table talks comes from the 12th century, it 
is an idea whereby nobody has an advantage over 
anybody else.  It is that everybody is supposed to 
be represented here on an equal footing with nobody 
in charge, nobody in control, and I really do think 
we have got to have some kind of a facility, I asked 
at the time, can somebody come back, we've been 
given one design, only one design, and I mean, just 
a bit of lateral thinking here and there could be 
have been another way, we have a huge outside 
perimeter, there's no reason why the press can't 
sit in the centre for example.  There's no reason 
why the people operating the audio-visual 
equipment can't do it from the centre.  We still 
have the same amount of space on the outside, and 
there's no way we couldn't facilitate 32 members 
plus a top table with everybody facing inwards, so 
everybody can see and hear and understand what is 
going on.  I just said this before, one design, 
three-tiers, I don't agree with it, it is like a 
foyer, like an auditorium and for that reason, I 

would ask that I would support counsellor Behan 
that the foyer works and the members rooms go ahead 
to benefit the public and that somebody comes back 
to us with a design just to incorporate round-table 
talks for the purpose of equilibrium and equality.  
Thank you. 
CLLR RYAN:  I've had meetings and I see a lot of 
councils and I have to say this is the worst, and 
my view is if it is good enough for places like Dun 
Laoghaire it is good enough for Wicklow people to 
have a good place, they can be proud of coming.  And 
you know, design goes hand-in-hand with 
productivity, if you get the design right 
productivity increases and that's the truth of t 
so, I don't believe is a particularly inspiring 
workplace and particularly when you look at the 
members rooms, the place where photocopiers go to 
die, it is just an absolute graveyard.  And I 
honestly think we thud think that has to be a shared 
space for places people with go in meetings with 
separate glass rooms, it is the way rooms are 
designed now but it is essential that we get our 
act together and do this, and particularly for the 
customers coming to this council and the CRM system 

link with this will move us forward in the 21st 
century.  Thanks. 
CLLR OLIVER CULLEN:  I probably differ with an 
awful lot of people, I question the timing of the 
proposal, if we have a million people to spend, why 
not building homeless facilities but the leak in 
the corner, we put a few hundred to that, to 
patching up there, because I don't know why you have 
to replace a whole roof and maybe the media would 
be far more comfortable then.  Go raibh maith agat. 
CLLR BLAKE: The CEO mentioned money is put aside 
each year, 100,000 for refurbishments, whether it 
be here in the County Buildings, which has been done 
with extensions, anyone here, has seen huge amount 
of changes and extensions, which have brought all 
the people that work for the council under the one 
roof here, a lot of work and welcome work in that 
regard, some money is put aside, whether it is you 
in the council or districts and we have over the 
years improved, particularly in the west Wicklow 
where we have a new office in the Blessington area, 
a few years back, but we've been discussing here 
for a number of years regarding the parking 
facilities, and there was difficulty looking for 

extra parking and so forth and the recently the last 
few months work has been done out there and it 
improved things dramatically, 350 extra spaces has 
been made and apart from the spaces the exterior 
of the space, taking out of the rubbish and so 
forth, made a big improvement to look at Wicklow 
County Council in that record.  So, from my point 
of view, certainly, I think there's a need for 
upgrade here.  We have 24 people originally here 
in the council, it was probably sufficient at that 
particular point in time but whoever is here with 
the 32, and next council there's a need for upgrade 
as John Ryan said, anybody who has about in other 
council Chambers, while back in the years, we 
probably had as good a Chamber as anybody, but in 
recent past we're falling behind in regards what 
is being done by other local authorities and 
providing proper facilities, but for other 
meetings are held in here, the policing committee 
meetings are held in here and other occasions where 
people meet here as well so it is important that 
whoever is in here, not just us as councillors but 
whoever is in here in the future, we do have a 
building here that we are proud of, and that are 

available to the people as well.  And there is a 
difficulty with regards to the ceiling on it, and 
other members have said there, rather than doing 
it in piecemeal manner, that we do one complete job 
and one complete job at one point in time can often 
be an awful lot cheaper than doing two projects 
divided up, so I would be supporting that. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Chairman.  Just briefly.  
While I support refurbishment and improving the 
facilities, especially to members of the public, 
I absolutely support that, I'm remaining 
unconvinced the expenditure on the Chamber will 
make any significant improvement, that's my 
layman's way of looking at it. 
I see what is being done here, I recognise you're 
trying to improve things, I'm all for improvement, 
absolutely.  I think the maintenance obviously 
needs to be done, that is a red herring, we're 
guilty for not asking for that to be done before 
now, about you for the sake of 377K, I'm not 
convinced that it is going to improve the claim, 
maybe refurbish it, spruce it up and improve the 
maintenance of it, but I have to say my view, not 
convinced that they're spending the money that the 

Chamber will make any difference or improvement, 
thanks. 
Are 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  From my point of view, it is long 
past the customer service out there it is not a 
major refurb, but it has to have this, but rational 
and truly for people to do their business out in 
the public is not acceptable in this day and age 
and certainly to bring it in technology and digital 
age it has to happen as well.  And I think it is 
a part of parcel of providing services to the 
public, that a modern, organisation should have.  
In regard as well to the council Chamber the modern 
organisation should have a modern Chamber and 
certainly a Chamber that we can bring people in and 
be proud of as well, and the easiest thing in the 
world is we won't look after ourselves, we'll look 
out there, that's probably the type of situation 
that is easy for people to say things like that.    
So, it is also easy for people to talk about 
property tax and various things like that, 
particularly when they don't support property tax 
and never have. 
But, the fact of the matter is, the fact of the 

matter is from my point of view, I'm not going to 
be here next year, but I do feel that it is 
absolutely necessary, this Chamber is not fit for 
purpose.  Like it was, I think it was Cllr John 
Snell said the ceiling needs a refurb, the sound 
system is not up to scratch, it is not accessible, 
disabled accessibility as it should be and it needs 
a major refurb, and really and truly, it is only 
a publicity stunt to say we look after the public 
but we won't look after ourselves and that doesn't 
go down, the easiest thing to do is take the popular 
point of view, at this point and go with what one 
of the proposals are, but I'm not for the simple 
reason it is not good for this county to have, to 
split a job that's going to cost an awful lot more, 
when it is going to have to be done in a couple of 
years' time.  This job is going to have to be done 
in a couple of years' time and then when we come 
back, like I can tell you now it will be more than 
what we're talking about now, so I think, from a 
cost perspective it is good business to actually 
get the whole lot done in one contract.  I think 
it is very good business to do that.  And 
certainly, I'll be supporting it.  I want the Chief 

Executive in. 
Chief Executive.  One circular seating 
arrangement, we looked at that from everyone angle 
and couldn't get it in this room.  What we could 
do for modest figure is increase the size of the 
room, it is larger, accessible and much more 
improved meeting space, greater interaction 
between staff and exec we have the much-improved 
audio-visual equipment, more space for the press, 
public, it is making it comparable to the standard 
that's in other counties.  We have something where 
we can host civic receptions and as Cathaoirleach 
said. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm going to take Cllr Joe Behan 
amendment first. 
>>:  MS. GALLAGHER:  Just to say following receipt 
of the manager’s report, by local authority wants 
to vary or modify the development, otherwise 
recommended in the managers’ report or decides not 
to proceed with the development.  So, proposed by 
counsellor Behan and seconded by council lower 
Whitmore.  We proceed with the customer care area 
and not the council Chamber.   
MS GALLAGHER:  So that's 21 against, and four not 

present so.  We proceed with the proposal by Shay 
Cullen seconded which Cllr Grainne McLoughlin, 
that we proceed with the development as outlined 
in the Chief Executive's report. So, that's 24, 8 
against and four not present. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just before we move on, I know I'd 
have support for this, but could I ask the Chief 
Executive to have a look at the situation, now we've 
taken the decision to improve the Chamber here to 
have a look at the my news poll authorities offices 
with a view to upgrading them, technology and them 
and make available to the public as quickly as 
possible, I'm sure I'd have full support from the 
council members with regard to that.  Now we've 
taken the decision, we should spread that out to 
provide as good information as we can in the 
municipal offices. 
Chief Executive.  What you said on board, the lack 
of privacy there as well. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're moving on now.  Chief 
Executive's property executive.  Planning 
permission aim through from An Bord Pleanála from 
for Ashford studios, it is four 40,000 square-foot 
studios, it is 9 a million Euro investment, Joe 

O'Connell a ready to start instruction ASAP, I'm 
meeting him this week.  Avondale park, again, got 
planning permission, and Coillte is starting 
construction, it is 8 million upgrading the house, 
cafe, underground experience and experience 
through the trees et cetera.  The old hearing for 
Arklow west for treatment plant concluded, that's 
old Herlihy and CPO, the tank, it will be about 
three to four months before we get a decision, and 
construction period would be three to four years, 
a very significant construction period.  We got 
our roadworks allocation on Friday, it is 9 - 276 
million.  Up from 8.78, it included the Calgary 
scheme, a good increase there.  And just next 
Saturday we will have the finalists in the 2019 all 
Ireland Community and Council Award for the overall 
award and significant projects, such as Bray dot 
IE, Moments in Time, The Best Community Initiative 
in Arklow, Display in Bray, multiagency response 
in bay head, Volo Around Ireland Race, 
Entrepreneurship is in there as well a few 
projects, I'll take the rest as read 
CLLR BEHAN: I just have two questions, first of all 
in relation to the slip lane at Kilmac, at the 

garage there, why has nothing happened?  Nothing 
has happened on the ground there.  We passed that 
Part 8 a number of months ago, we were promised work 
would start before Christmas, it hasn't started, 
we're now into February, there's no sign on work 
on the ground there.  Could I ask what the problem 
is there?  I got disturbing information and I hope 
the Chief Executive will refute it, that the fire 
service in Bray at the moment is very seriously 
understaffed, undermanned, underpersoned, 
whatever the word is, and that in fact, at recent 
fires in Bray, a number which were serious, other 
units had to be called out from Greystones and 
Wicklow because Bray couldn't muster a two full 
crews which it should have been able to do.  And 
also, equipment that was originally kept, the 
headquarters in Bray, hydraulic lift, is actually 
now being kept in Wicklow Town because they're not 
enough staff in Bray to use that equipment and to 
manage that situation.  Now, is that the case?  Is 
that correct?  And if it is, why is that the 
situation?  Because, the Chief Executive I'm sure 
knows that the history in Bray of tragedies, in 
relation to regarding fire, has been very, very 

serious over the past 20 years.  And to think that 
we can't even manage to have the part-time service 
fully manned, is a very, very big concern.  So, I'd 
ask the Chief Executive what is the situation 
will.? 
 
CLLR RYAN:  Thank you.  I just think the CEO shared 
the news about Ashford studios, getting the go 
ahead, that's such a big, big thing for County 
Wicklow and I think, a lot of credit should go to 
councillor pat Casey, because he really worked so 
hard to get that across the line.  I think the 
change made to the development levies and zero 
rating in the regard to the film industry has borne 
fruit there, which is fantastic, and the move 
around Avondale that's going to be a stunning 
development, and I suppose, just one of the things 
I'd say, being at the business breakfast during the 
week and to hear all of the development across 
Wicklow that are happening, that message is 
incredibly positive and I think it is really 
important that we find a way to get that out to the 
broader public in County Wicklow, because it would 
give you such confidence that we're going in the 

right direction thank you. 
  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thank you Cathaoirleach in 
references to the public lighting report, does the 
Chief Executive have any update on the national 
upgrade plan for LED lighting?  And also, how long 
is left to run on the contract with Airtricity for 
the maintenance of our street lighting? I find them 
very hit and miss to deal with.  Sometimes they're 
great and sometimes they're not the at game at all. 
CLLR SHAY CULLEN:  Yeah Chairman, I just, a quick 
question for Chief Executive, you mentioned about 
An Bord Plenala decisions, is there a mechanism for 
here, that members within made a way for An Bord 
Plenala decisions? Because sometimes we find out 
by mistake or maybe read them in newspapers as we 
have this week, is there a mechanism there, we can 
be made aware of An Bord Plenala rulings. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thank you, for a comprehensive 
reported outlines what is happening across the 
county, like Cllr John Ryan Rhine there, I attended 
the meeting of the strategic enterprise report, and 
the presentation there by the CEO was again, most 
positive and it outlined to the group there present 

the amount of positive stuff that is happening 
across the county and talking to people afterwards, 
there was a huge positive vibe in the room.  People 
weren't aware of what was happening and the stuff 
happening in Arklow with the treatment plant, the 
announcement of the Ashford proposal there, the 
success an An Bord Plenala, the tourism project and 
funding under the URDF, all that stuff, and more, 
gave a positive light so we continue that mode going 
forward, so again, thanks again for comprehensive 
and informative reported. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  Thank you.  May I just say that 
to the Chief Executive there, well done, I mean it 
is a comprehensive report and certainly covers an 
awful lot of, it really keeps us in the picture.  
Two items, following on from Cllr Joe Behan talking 
about, and I suppose this would be slightly in 
relation to the projects shortlisted for the all 
Community Awards, but, there is one there, and Cllr 
Joe Behan alluded to it, about the fire, services 
in Bray, and I would just like to mention two to 
the Chief Executive in relation to down there at 
Greystones, the multiagency and emergency response 
at Bray Head, just to bear in mind you know, there 

was pressure on the fire services but as I said the 
last two meetings about what could be done to maybe 
prevent it for the future, like firebreaks, but 
another question, I would like to ask and I now know 
it has been mentioned in the past, I'd like to ask 
the Chief Executive about white stone remediation 
project and in your report it says Wicklow County 
Council have employed a company to advise 
remediation in accordance itself Mr Justice 
Humphries, I'd like to see progress made on this, 
because we're known as the garden county, and I 
would just like to Chief Executive to the cost and 
further run down on how it is done. 
CLLR DUNNE:  Thank you Chairman.  Like Cllr 
Stephen Matthews I'm concerned about Airtricity, 
I find that when people report faults it takes an 
age for the company to come back and fix them.  
Personally, it is difficult to find out when the 
faults will be fixed.  The first, item on the 
agenda today, we discussed how customer 
relationship, how making things better, there's 
definitely not that in Airtricity.  I also was at 
the business breakfast on Friday morning, could I 
compliment the Chief Executive on his report, it 

was excellent.  The amount of people that came over 
to me after the presentation that said they 
couldn't believe what was going on within the 
county about the data centre in Arklow, wind 
turbines, and the amount of stuff was unbelievable 
and I think it is something that should be 
encouraged, and somebody suggested we should have 
them in the towns as well, business breakfast in 
towns so we get a more local look.  So, staff of 
Wicklow County Council should be complimented on 
that, on Friday morning, thank you. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Chairman.  Page 
28 municipal discretionary funds, I'm getting 
concerned that's building up.  There's a lot of 
money from 2017 that's still not spent so I'd be 
anxious that money is retained and carried forward 
and those works are done, rather than getting 
swallowed up.  I know in the Baltinglass there's 
38,000 that hasn't been spent yet.  I know, I've 
looked for lights to be done, 18,000 of lights that 
were ordered a year-and-a-half ago and not done.  
So, I ask to make sure that money is retained and 
spent where it was allocated to be spent and agreed 
by the members of each municipal district.  Page 

20, the lights, there's a massive amount of lights 
submitted that are still outstanding and I think 
we just have to try and push this on.  Surely, we 
have some leverage with whoever it is, Airtricity, 
or whoever subcontractors we're using to do the 
cabling to move that on.  It is just sitting there 
every month.  Thanks. 
  
CLLR BLAKE:  Thanks. I know that Cllr Edward 
Timmins alluded to the lights and Cllr Gail Dunne 
here, but I brought that up at the last meeting 
here, and the same lights I'm talking about a month 
later they're still not fixed, none are fixed so 
there's it is ongoing problem with regards that.  
One item, page 19, regards water framework 
directive in regard to the sampling has been done 
in a number of rivers in the county.  I want to 
know, is that report available to us, or has it been 
completed yet or when can we get that report?   
CLLR WALSH:  Just this relation to the lights 
there, the point made by Cllr Edward Timmins we 
discussed this again at this point in the last 
meeting if you recall, did I ask this council write 
to Airtricity and seek an explanation for the 

delays, I don't know whether that has been done.  
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good news in regard to Mr Murphy 
was out today and launched the new part of the new 
development in regard to the Vartry, improvement 
of water down in the Vartry, 29 million development 
out of 200 million development that's going to 
improve the quality of water and obviously the 
tunnels up there, needed to be replaced after 150 
years it was.  So that job, part of the job now was 
signed off this morning and completed and was 
completed, within time frame and budget which is 
the main thing which happened and that was launched 
this morning for people's information. 
In regard to lights, like Cllr Stephen Matthews 
are, I'm very frustrated, it is the one area we're 
getting no service whatsoever in regard to give 
people contracts and that.  And people are very 
frustrated out there as well because despite people 
going time and time again, it is months before 
lights are being fixed and frustrating from my 
point of view.  In regard to the fire brigade, I 
know Cllr Joe Behan didn't mean anything like this, 

but I wouldn't want to go out from the council that 
we're unhappy about the fire service in Bray, and 
the performance, I know you didn't mean that, but 
I just feel that the fire brigade in Bray. I've had 
the timing of the times they come out to those 
fires, we had three fires like on a daily basis a 
they've done a tremendous job in a very difficult 
situation in the main street in Bray.  I'd like to 
pay tribute to them for their work in regard to 
that.  They were busy for the next couple of nights 
as well.  And I think, it should be made very clear 
to people, that's exactly what the situation is.  
I'll let the Chief Executive in on a number of 
issues there. Chief Executive.  The slip road, my 
understanding is it is ready to go, the 
landownership issues, but my understanding is it 
is revolved.  The fire service in Bray, there was 
people left and retired, there was more on 
long-term sick, that's all being addressed, there 
was a competition in terms of recruiting 
firefighters, so intention to bring numbers back 
up as quick as possible. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Is it the case there's not the full 
complement of our staff in Bray? 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  If a number of people retire or 
go out sick, there's a lag between when you get the 
compliment back up to stretch in that situation, 
we're covered with the other fire services in that 
short space of time. 
CLLR BEHAN:  You're saying you're completely 
covered, but what you are saying is you're 
depending on firemen coming from Greystones or 
Wicklow Town, that is not good enough.  Cllr Vance, 
I know you didn't imply I was criticising the men 
who were there, they do a magnificent job, 
particularly as it is under manned saying, what 
you're saying is we don't have the full complement 
of staff and you can't tell us when with you're 
going to have them is that correct. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: People will go out sick, it 
happens, similarly, people will retire, they have 
to be replaced, the recruitment process is ongoing, 
positions have we been offered, there's training 
coming up for two or three in the short-term, 
Michael will have more information, that happens, 
the fire service is set up in the interim where 
staff leave and are replaced the other stations can 
cover, that's the answer. 

Just in relation to An Bord Pleanála, if they're 
relevant to Wicklow, yes, Townhall in Whitestown, 
there's geophysical tests, and trial holes now, 
they have a website and consulted all the 
landowners, there's detailed sight location being 
done and in that cost in time we'll relay the cost 
as soon as we have it.  In relation to the lighting.  
There is a consultant appointed in national scheme, 
that's replacing all lights with LED lights, 
they're talking about Wicklow, starting early 
2020, we'd like to bring that back if we can.  
Airtricity there's another contract and Michael 
may fill me up in relation to that.  And similarly, 
the municipal district spends, I agree what we will 
try and do this year is start some of the jobs early 
in the year before the main roadworks programme so 
you ever a not waiting in the later in the year.  
They are capitalised and brought in the following 
year, the money doesn't disappear.  The water 
infrastructure corrective we may get a report in 
the next council meeting in terms of where exactly 
we're, and can we tell from the sampling so far.  
Thank you. 
  

MICHAEL:  OK, on the parallel road in Kilmac, the 
tender is due out on by the 18th of February, that's 
the date I've been given today as Chief Executive, 
there are issues. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Do you mean the tenders are going out 
for advertising? 
MICHAEL:  For a contractor to come in, so we're 
sending it out to the market to price the job in 
order to get a contract. 
CLLR BEHAN:  When do you think the work will start? 
MICHAEL: It would be two months from now would be 
the earliest time. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I know where… 
CLLR BEHAN:  Is coming from, we were promised this 
job, not only would it start before Christmas, but 
completed before Christmas, that's how I 
understood it as well.  So, I mean. 
MICHAEL:  That's how I understood it, but we're 
pushing it as hard as we can there are issues that 
have been to be resolved before the contractor is 
onsite. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  One stage it was talked about being 
completed in 2018, it is disappointing.  
MICHAEL:  There was a question asked regarding 

hydraulic lift in the fire station, I'll get a 
report on that, and circulate it to the members.  
I know that, the locations were changed in order 
to maximise the benefit of same. 
The street lighting in general, the contract for 
that is being examined at the moment, there are 
tenders a recommendation will be made for contract 
and that. 
The discretionary of the Chief Executive has 
covered that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  Right we're on to six now.   
John O'Sullivan and Terry Fahey.  You're very 
welcome.  
JOHN:  Thanks, thank you go raibh maith agat thanks 
very much for facilitating our presentation this 
afternoon.  I understand a copy of the slides are 
available through your electronic system as well.  
My name is John O'Sullivan commissioner 
evaluation, and my colleague is one a senior 
manager in the evaluation office, our purpose here 
today is to provide you with information about our 
revaluation going on of all the businesses in 
County Wicklow amongst other counties as well.  I 
was here and I recall meeting some of you, think 

it was July 2017 before the process kicked off, 
that's over 18 months ago now, and we've done a lot 
of the work, approaching the final stages to see 
the produce the first fruits of the work.   
 
So, basically, this is very much about an 
information session for you, I'll explain the 
process and as well, where we're coming from with 
all of this, and programme that's under way across 
the country.  I'll talk about the what has happened 
so far and what you can expect next.  Terry will 
be dealing with some of those slides as well.  A 
bit about the evaluation office, maybe are familiar 
with us, and the work we do, I suppose the key is 
that we office that assesses the liability for 
rates for all the businesses in the country.  
There's a figure up there, about 1.46 billion, I 
think it is more 1.5 billion, we're an independent 
office under the Department of Housing planning and 
local government.  As commissioner, I have a 
number of functions under legislation and 
independence in carrying out those functions.  
Briefly, in relation to rates and rateable 
evaluation, I am preaching to the converted here, 

you on the systems failing well as I do, there are 
three figures that are relevant to the whole matter 
of rates.  You as elected members decide in 
conjunction with the Chief Executive and head of 
finance, early November what's the overall 
contribution that is required from rates for annual 
budget.  We will decide the valuations of 
individual properties then, and you determine also 
the annual rate and evaluation, multiplier that's 
set here in November for the following year.  And 
then, one multiplied by the other, gives individual 
rates liability.  In effect, every valuation we're 
revisiting every property in the county with a view 
to assessing its modern valuation.  Rates are a 
very important item as you'll appreciate of local 
government funding, you'll make up one-third of the 
entire funding of local government comes from 
commercial rates.   
 
So, it is a very serious stream of income for local 
authorities and it is essential then there's a 
modern valuation base there, that will back that 
up and give that the base significance equitable 
basis for living rates.  To talk about what 

revaluation is, many are familiar with individual 
valuations that we, say extension is added on to 
a property, this is different, this is where we're 
going back, the first principles in respect of 
every rateable property in County Wicklow and other 
counties, it is assessment from the ground up, 
reassessment at the same time.  And then, I've 
tried to highlight there in green the important 
words - it results in a redistribution of the 
liability for rates across the various rate payers 
in the county.  I'll show you later on, it is not 
a money-making exercise for the council 
whatsoever.  Wicklow County Council will be 
allowed to collect the revaluation in the year 
before, who pays what within the overall rates of 
paid across the country.  Revenue neutral for the 
local authorities so there's an extra man which, 
its reckoning, so we'll doing this now and another 
one no later than ten years and earlier than five 
years’ time.  That's set out in legislation and a 
point of re-evaluation is keep up to speed what is 
the changes there across the county and country.  
So what is different from what you will be familiar 
with already is this is a new valuation list that 

will be created before the end of the year, so when 
you have budgetary meeting I assume November this 
year, you will look at brand new valuation list and 
head of innocence and Chief Executive will bring 
proposals based on that, rather than the one in 
operation here.  So, if we just really look at the 
why, associated with it, I suppose, everybody would 
be aware of the fact that over a period of time 
different sectors of the economy, change their 
property value goes up and down, but not all at the 
same rate across the sector.  The way to reflect 
in the rental values, that's what we're talking 
about here, it is not the Capital value of the 
property but rental values, the only way to do that 
over time is conduct revaluation.  And, that then 
allows us to apply local economic factors that 
would be in operation in different streets, in 
different towns and towns across the county and 
villages et cetera, so, it's very much about 
bringing modern rental levels to bear in temples 
the assessment for rates. 
 
Also, one of the other objectives we're trying to 
achieve is to bring improved transparency to the 

system, many are familiar now that our valuation 
is based on nominal values out of kilter with modern 
rental values and every year you would vote here 
in respect what the multiplier would be, as I 
understand, for this year, the multipliers of the 
order of is it, 72.04, so in if you take, I have 
an example later on to show you the difference a 
revaluation makes, you will have a lower, 
multiemployer and higher value so therefore, one 
by the other, you will be multiplying one by the 
other, I'll leave that to an example later on.  
There's a legal basis for the entire valuation, set 
out in the valuation 2001, and there's an act that 
amended the 2001 act to, it picked up on the 
glitches that were in there from the 2001, act.  
The important point here is that you will hear us 
talking and Valuation Office about net annual 
value, and that is the rental value of a property, 
what it would be likely to rent on the open market 
at given date and effectively here, that's what 
we're trying to assess so, when we come to next 
October, when we publish a new valuation list for 
wick welcome it will be based on modern facts done 
at the same time for all 4,500 business that is 

rateable within the county, the important other 
thing to take from this is there's entire appeals 
process associated with it.  And we are basing our 
decisions and our methodologies doing the 
valuation based on decisions, there's an 
independent tribunal that appeals to the higher 
court so we're very much doing this in line with 
best international practice, it is something that 
has been refined and is very much tried and tested 
at this stage across other local authorities.  
 
Going back to the point again about revenue neutral 
for Wicklow County Council, so, it is again, that 
word "redistribution". It is important to note the 
councillors overall rates doesn't change the 
individual amount paid by individual rate payer 
will or may change depending on their particular 
circumstances. So, the to the extent that it is 
fixed for the council, there is a small adjustment 
allowed, essentially there's provision in the 
valuation act for the minister for housing planning 
and local government to apply a rates cap in the 
year after revaluation, in practice the minister's 
also done so, so all revaluations we've done in the 

following year the same amount of rates can be 
collected than the previous year, there's a small 
adjustment allowed for inflation or new 
developments that come on stream in the meantime 
to improvement in buildings.  It is a national 
programme, so on the map there, you will see all 
the areas in purple are claret coloured are already 
done.  The ones in blue, including Wicklow are 
currently under way and due to finish in October 
this year, and the green counties along the western 
seaboard we will start in October and finalising 
in 2021. 
 
That will complete the programme and then it 
becomes cyclical again in the sense that we will 
continue to redo valuations every minimum five 
years and maximum of ten years.  So, there are 
obviously numbered of important steps associated 
with revaluation, when I was here the last time, 
presenting to you I would have been dealing with 
the initial steps the ones in blue, but automatic 
now I'm here to talk about the oneness green. 
We have done all the first, activities there in the 
first four bullet points and the reason we're here 

is to explain to you what is happening next, the 
next major stage in this overall process is when 
we issue a certificate of a proposed new valuation 
to every rate payer the in county. 
 
And at the same time, as that, the council 
officialises here will be making available 
indicative multiplier to go with that, to assess 
what their likely rates liability under the new 
valuation would be.  Associate with that, at this 
stage, and we'll talk about the time lines shortly 
and Terry will be going into the detail associated 
with it, but at that stage each rate payer has the 
opportunity to make what are known in the act as 
representations, to the Valuation Office, they 
have 40 days to do so from the date on their 
certificate.  And then we, we consider each of 
those representations between now and over the 
summer, or after, not now, but from April, right 
think to August and September and then, we will 
issue final certificates to the rate payers, in 
later on in this year and I'll put up the dates later 
on.  At that stage then I'll publish as 
commissioner a new valuation list for Wicklow 

County Council and the other counties you see up 
there in blue, on the previous map.  At that stage 
then, at your finance meeting in I presume 
November, you will be setting the annual rate and 
valuation, the multiplier for 2020 in November of 
this year, so, from the first of January next year, 
the new rates bill for rate payers in County Wicklow 
will be based on the new valuation rather than the 
current valuation levels.  I'll hand over to ferry 
now two will talk about the revaluation, how it 
takes place, what the process is like, and what will 
be happening next.  I appreciate I've covered a lot 
of stuff in those first few slides, there will be 
an opportunity to take any questions and answer for 
you at the end.  
TERRY:  My part of the presentation will include 
more of a process or procedural end of things, how 
it is evidence-based exercise, I'll show you the 
documentation which most of you will receive a 
specimen just before the certificates are issued.  
I'll also go through some of the outcomes that we've 
had in previous revaluation’s other local 
authorities.  And I'll talk you through some of the 
appeal mechanisms and rate payer support.  John 

mentioned we're undergoing re-evaluation 
programme.  This revaluation programme in 2019 
covers alternative local authorities which is 
about 26,000 valuations.  4,500 of which are in 
Wicklow.  They're Valuation Office is to produce 
valuations for those properties which we will issue 
in March.  We collect data, and this slide here 
shows you the different data we collect to assist 
us in at arriving at valuation so we collect rental 
information which we apply and use to arrive at 
valuation for most properties such as shop offices 
and collect trading data that helps us arrive at 
valuations for hotels, pubs and service stations 
and the like and then we collect construction 
costs.   
 
And the construction costs which would relate to 
more unique style properties are exceptional like 
pharmaceutical property or one-off stadium.  In 
the end, that's what we will arrive at, arrive at 
evaluations for 4,500 properties to derive that 
data. Where do we get this evidence? Well, the most 
important thing is, it is evidence-based exercise 
and local evidence, if we're collecting it in Bray, 

we apply the rents we collected in Bray, in essence 
there's a hierarchy of values across any county.  
Bray will not be valued the same as Blessington, 
nor Blessington the same as Bray. 
 
So, we issued what we call valuation forms seeking 
the rental evidence from the 4,500 rate payers, 
across the eight local authorities and we saw 
trading data, and rental information and cost of 
construction, so again, we feed that into the 
valuations we produce. 
 
We also have activities to the particulars 
delivered and it is contemporary and modern rental 
evidence and stamped lease, we get a data, that 
supports the evidence, or the schemes we create.  
And we also have access to the PSRA, data, so what 
I'll show you here is example of before and after 
situation.  It is worth noting that the valuations 
are nominal valuations, existing valuations, on 
property so they're highlighted this, they're 30 
euros, and it is difficult for somebody to 
understand what that actually means or how it 
translates to the actual value of a property.  

Following a re-evaluation, it will be presented in 
a form they'll be able to understand is your 
building worth 5,000 as owe supposed to rateable 
value is €30.  The example shows three properties, 
AB and C, and at the moment, those properties at 
1988 values, it is 1988 values, applied, 
multi-pride by the rate in the pound, ARV, throws 
up rates liability for the three properties at 
2,161, so in other words, 1988, those properties 
were deemed to be of equal value. Following a 
revaluation, the net annual value as John mentioned 
after valuation, those properties are no longer 
deemed of equal value for a variety of reasons that 
may be, there's no town in Ireland, certainly not 
in Wicklow remained the same, in the last 30 years, 
some areas would have improved, some would have 
disimproved and what we're trying to do is to 
reflect those changes. 
So, I'm applying a notional ARV, post-revalue.  
So, in previous very rationalisations, it tends to 
lean between 23,24-25, we've chosen 0.25, to see 
some of the examples, that shows rate liability, 
volume revalue, example A there's no change, he's 
paying the same rates.  Example B he had increase 

liability of 339 and C is reduction.  That's a 
typical outcome and that's what revaluation is to 
produce, an actual, redistribution of rates 
liability paced on the value of the property. 
Now what you can see on your screen next is example 
of a proposed valuation certificate.  This is what 
I was talking about earlier, 4,500 rate payers will 
receive this. 
And you can see, it will contain the valuation, it 
will contain the property description, the 
category of property that it is, and its use, 
and - category and valuation grid so you can see 
the breakdown and how it was arrived at.  It is 
important for rate payers that they study this 
form.  Because, there's an appeal mechanism, 
representation stage as well as an appeal to the 
tribunal but where rate payers can highlight any 
differences that they see or any issues they have 
with the certificate.  But we will make a specimen 
copy of these available prior to issuing those 
certificates. 
So, we intend on issuing them in March, the first 
issue will be the 15th of March, OK, for the vast 
majority of property. 

There will be three trenches of issue of 
valuations, around about 90% of valuations will be 
issued on the 15th of March, you'll have nine or 
ten percentiles, issued on the 2 March, and small 
number of properties issued in early May, the 
reason the small amount of properties are more 
exceptional items, but the vast majority of items 
will be issued in March. 
Now the rate payer themselves should as I stated 
already, should pay attention to the data on those 
forms.  Whether it is the property details orbing 
pyre floor levels or floor areas.  The valuation 
itself in order for them to understand the rates 
liability they will need ARV, indicative ARV, they 
will provide the Wicklow County Council to estimate 
the ARV, we will do that in early March, and the 
rate payer will be able to use that indicative ARV 
and apply at evaluation to arrive at their 
liability.  So, to give example of some of the 
revaluation outcomes we've had in other local 
authorities, you can see that a revaluation is 
positive for the vast, majority of rate payers, 
that you can see in Carlow, Kilkenny, Leitrim and 
Longford there's reduced liability and over half 

and up to 60% of rate payers, and consequently 
reduced rate liability for 40, so you have 60/40 
outcome across local authorities. 
And again, can you see the outcome in Offaly, 
Roscommon, Laois and Leitrim and Laois.  It is 
important, each rate payer once they receive the 
certificate they look and see valuation on their 
property.  They reflect on the rent they're paying 
themselves, and they should familiarise themselves 
if they know what their neighbours are paying in 
rent or use the website themselves, PRSA website 
or if they're a pub or hotel to look at the income 
streams versus the financial streams of evaluation 
office has used at arriving at their valuation.  
 
And it is a mechanism, and I'll talk about it later 
on in the slides, there's plenty of support to 
enable rate payers to make contact with us, to 
actually ask any questions they have regarding 
making an appeal throughout the process.  But what 
is key here, they should ask themselves to have they 
provided the correct rental information to us when 
we requested it, we would have requested it last, 
in 2017, towards the end of 2017 and requested it 

mid-year for the trading data in 2018. 
It is imperative they summit the correct data to 
us 
So, the appeal mechanisms:  The Valuation Office 
sees this as an important part of the whole 
revaluation process, it is about improving the 
quality of the list and improving the quality of 
the valuation schemes.  And each rate payer has 40 
days, to respond to the, once the valuation 
certificate is issued and there's no fee at this 
stage.  We much prefer to see people partaking in 
this stage, it is informal.  We will also run, 
clinics throughout this process, which I'll talk 
about later.  The appeals to the valuation 
tribunal.  This is an area we don't want to arrive 
at.  We believe we should iron out issues or 
correct items that need to be dealt with, prior to 
this stage.  How far, if we feel a valuation needs 
to be defended, we will defend it at this stage.  
This is no need to arrive here at this stage if all 
the data has been submitted and shared.  This 
somebody aria it will cost a rate payer to appeal, 
if they may need to engage with an agent or so on 
to assist them do T but it is not, it is obviously 

a more formal quasi-judicial process here.  And 
you have three possible outcomes, you may have no 
change, valuation may decrease, or valuation may 
increase, but we would much prefer, I can't stress 
it enough to deal with any issues rate payers have 
at the representation stage.  And you can also 
appeal a case, to the higher courts and point of 
law. 
To go through come of the rate payers supports we 
provide through each rate payer through every 
revaluation we have conducted.  We have a website, 
upon which they're frequently asked questions, and 
on-line forms, rate payers can go on-line and view 
their application on-line, and submitted 
representation on-line, they can request hard copy 
forms and instructional videos explaining what a 
revaluation is and how we arrive at the valuation.  
There's e-mail helpline for queries they may have.  
And we provide stakeholder briefings and so on, so 
we engage extensively with trade bodies in 
explaining the process, explaining the appeal 
process and how we arrived.   
 
Key two to success to a lot of the valuations are 

the walk-in clinics so we'll going to provide 
walk-in clinics across five municipalities in 
Wicklow, where the valuer who is responsible for 
the valuations in their area can meet or rather 
constituents have the opportunity to meet the 
valuers.  So, and they will be conducted at various 
stages, one the proposed certificates are issued 
in March, we will conduct these clinics, they will 
be advertised on our website and radio, and we will 
notify the Chamber here off the times and 
scheduling of the dates.  Also, no appointment 
necessary, and if we find there is an excess of 
demand, we will come back, if we're here on a 
Monday, we will back on Tuesday and Wednesday.  If 
there's somebody here on Monday, and we can't 
facilitate, they will arrange an appointment on the 
Tuesday, I cannot stress the importance of the 
clinics, it is an opportunity for the rate payer 
to discuss with the valuer who has been involved 
with that valuation.   
 
They may not like the outcome but they will get a 
human face-to-face interaction with something who 
will explain in detail the process how we arrived 

at the valuation and help the rate payer, if they 
feel they need to fill out the representations form 
and appeal t again, we see this part, this 
representation stage as key part of the process, 
the valuations are not final yet until we issue the 
final certificates in September.  So, I'm going to 
slightly repeat what I've already said here. 
Again, what does the valuation officer provide for 
the rate pair?  There’re the proposed 
certificates, final valuation certificates, we 
will extensive media campaign, newspaper and 
radio, notifying people of the clinics and so on.  
We are here today, we briefed the elected 
representatives and we will be back again if 
required and provide sample documentations to the 
Chamber.  We will have the walk-in clinics and we 
will, as I said already, we will discuss, meet with 
the trade bodies and so on, and website and e-mail.  
But I cannot stress enough the Valuation Office, 
sees and has shown in previous revaluations, it is 
key that the rate payer come and engage with us, 
and we will engage with them, our representations 
and appeals rate has fallen in previous revaluation 
and shown a positive outcome.  So, some of the key 

dates, the order was met in 2017, October, and 
that's the valuation date I should say is September 
'17, so valuation, all the valuations in Wicklow 
is based on September 2017.  We at that time we sent 
out a rent return form requesting rate payers to 
summit their rent, 2018 we issued notices those 
trading properties like pubs and hotels, 
requesting them to summit their trading data.  And 
again, in March and April, we're going to issue 
circumstance, 4,500 valuation certificates on the 
15th of March.  We will have a second issue on the 
29th of March.  And, from those periods each rate 
payer has 40 days which to make representation and 
we will have the clinics within those 40 days. 
On 17th of September, we will publish the valuation 
list, at that time we will again conduct more 
clinics, and again, if people have questions again, 
they want to raise with us to discuss why there 
wasn't a change, and to issue associated them again 
if they wish to make an appeal to the valuation 
tribunals which an independent body is.  So again, 
we will be ever present throughout the process and 
very much willing to engage with the rate payers.  
And then in 2020, January 2020, the valuations 

become effective for rates. 
  
JOHN:  Thank you just to re-empathise.  Now these 
are proposal valuations so they're not cast in 
stone or anything like it, and there's informal 
process to address any issues which might come to 
light.  So, if new information comes to light 
through the representation stage we will take that 
on board and apply it to any properties, for 
example, if we get two additional rents on a street 
that leads us to believe that our valuations were 
too high there, we will adjust all the properties 
on that street for those properties similarly 
circumstance, so it is very much a work in progress 
at this stage.  Once it gets to the final 
certificates being published, in later on this 
year, then the only way to change those then are 
think the valuation tribunal or through reaching 
agreement with us through that stage.  So, it is 
better, we interact now and address any issues for 
additional information associated with it.  So, I 
want to emphasise the key points that are up there, 
and that we will have a presentation in each of the 
five Municipal Districts both now shortly after the 

proposals go out, and also in the Autumn of the year 
when the final valuations are determined.  To 
summarise then, this is really not about additional 
rates for the local authority.  And the valuations 
we come up with is based on local evidence, and 
based predominantly on the information which rate 
payers providing to us.  With the best will, there 
some rate payers haven't engaged with us, and they 
will do so, because it becomes more formal and 
expensive to do so later on down the line so we 
encourage people to make representation to us if 
they're dissatisfied with the valuation and 
provide additional evidence that would support 
their alternative valuation, because what we're 
about here is produced valuation list that's fair 
and Equitable and works for the local authority and 
rate payers as well and all set out in legislation 
and also there's a very well defined independent 
appeal process conducted through the valuation 
tribunal.  Thanks very much. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  This is a question and answer, no 
long speeches now.  There's a number of issues we 
have to clear up on the agenda, one left over from 

last month. 
CLLR BOURKE:  I just wanted to ask you there, if 
the possibility of solar farms being installed in 
parts of the county, what way will they be treated 
as rates?  And secondly, wind turbines, how are you 
going to get valuations on those, considering the 
values they've been trading recently?  VAT 
increase on hotels that have imposed on them since 
January 1 will have big effect on hotels, pubs, 
small businesses engaged in that activity and will 
make a big hole in their profitability, how will 
you factor that into the revaluation, and will they 
get a fair crack of the white horse woods on that 
one?  And similarly, my constituents are small 
businesses and have been complaining to me for many 
years of being charged excessively for rate bills.  
There as petrol station out the road doing a 
reasonable trade until the bypass went by, and 
their trade crashed, but they were still stuck with 
big rate bills they couldn't afford to pay, how will 
they be treated, they need a massive reduction in 
rates to be sustainable, otherwise the business 
can't operate.  And, I think that small retailers 
will be delighted with this, because they've seen 

more and more business eroded by the big 
supermarkets, Aldi, Tesco, the big ones have sucked 
all the business away from small independent 
grocers and traders, and I think they will be 
delighted to see this, because it will give them 
a big reduction, and your figures there, have 
proved it there in the more rural counties.  
There's been 60ers% of them had reduction on 
average so it is good news.  I think it will be good 
news for small business and people who are struggle 
I'll.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR BLAKE:  Thanks for the presentation and a 
couple of questions I had in mind as well.  A couple 
of aspects, particularly in regard to the exempted 
properties at the moment, there's a lot of 
properties that haven't been paying rates for a 
number of years, why have where he continuing to 
rate those properties and is will a proposal to 
exempt them long-term, into the future?  Secondly 
the rental value for properties, can change an 
awful lot from as you said there yourself from town 
to town and village to village and where you could 
have a large premise that could have, quite 

substantial value in rental value, being charged 
substantial rates where you get a very small 
property who has a good business and charging far 
less rates in that regard.  Particularly so your 
example you gave, three examples, one where 
increase of some €300 and another reduction of 700 
but the end of the day, you said there, the outset, 
that there can be no reduction in the overall income 
from the rates in the county so that probably maybe 
misleading to an extent.  In that regard, so 
secondly, the last point I'll make, at the moment 
when you're value waiting the properties are people 
allow today appeal to you in the consultation, 
they're having with you, or do they have to wait 
until the October when you issue them with the fall 
rates. 
 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  I'll be brief.  Currently we give 
100% rebate on vacant commercial properties is that 
normal practice in all local authorities?  And in 
relation to that, often these properties are 
employee the Threshold for vacant site levy and 
there's no financial incentive to do anything with 
these buildings, and this applies in urban centres 

than rural community so would it be feasible to say, 
offer a 50% rebate?  And would the legislation 
allow us to use the 50% rate collected towards some 
works to those buildings, would that come under 
rateable legislation?  Thank you, Chairman.   
CLLR MURPHY: The question I was going to ask was 
asked, will this information be put up on our county 
website in and what is the success of the walk-in 
clinics in other areas that has been held?  And you 
know, because it is very good to see a person to 
person and open discussion, so, you know, I welcome 
it. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you very much for the 
presentation, it was really comprehensive.  I 
think communication of this will be key, so I'm 
delighted to see you're having the walk-in clinics. 
I'm wondering if there's potential for a member of 
the Wicklow County Council because obviously the 
ARV, is an important part of the Jigsaw as well and 
it is not just going to be your results, it will 
be how the two will combine and impact on 
businesses.  I'm wondering with the ARV, I can't 
remember when that is going to be indicative one 
will be released because, if they only have 40 days 

after the issue of the PVC and ARC isn't done prior 
to that, it may not give them the full picture and 
realise what it means for them.  And whether, when 
you put out the letter and the PVC to commercial 
properties, whether you can include the location 
and dates of the walk-in clinics because that's 
going to give people a sense of peace.  But the 
issue of the traits is a really, really important 
one for us as a council, and all councils across 
the country.  And in some regard, I think there may 
need to be a review, because we need to recognise 
a lot of commercial premises, the demographics of 
them are changing in light of on-line shopping and 
the move to the bigger shopping centres, so I think 
at some stage there needs to be a complete 
reanalysis of how we do rates and how it funds our 
council activities.  Thank you very much. 
CLLR BEHAN:  There's no doubt many, particularly 
small retailers and business holders are very 
concerned about this process, and very concerned 
about the impact it will have on business and 
ability to employ people.  So, I certainly 
wouldn't underestimate the worry that people have 
about this.  And I accept that the gentleman here 

representing the office are going by their legal 
required role here but there's a huge amount of 
anxiety about the process.  Specifically, four 
questions, first of all you say you'll get an 
indicative indication of the ARV, presumably from 
the Chief Executive?  But the setting of rate is 
actually a function, reserved function of the 
members of this council.  So, how can you accept 
something, when effectively then you are tying our 
hands, or Chief Executive is tying our hands 
potentially when it comes to making the budget at 
the end of the year, and I just wonder whether 
that's legally sustainable.  That's these that's 
the first point, has a representative of the office 
visited, personally every one of the 4,000 
properties you mentioned?  Or have you visited 
some of them?  If you only visited some of them, 
how did you decide which ones to visit and which 
ones not?  Thirdly, are you now a taking which I 
think is an unprecedented step, including small 
preschools and Montessori schools that are often 
based in people's private house and playing a huge 
part in childcare arrangements for pane people in 
this country, are you no now attempting to include 

them in the revaluation or valuation system?  
Because I think that's very unfair if you.  And 
fourth, connected what with what Cllr Sylvestor 
Bourke asked about competing with the big shops and 
so on, the huge elephant in the room for many of 
the small shops in this county is on-line retail.  
On on-line retail wasn't an issue in the '80s, what 
steps are you going to take to give an across the 
Board reduction, particularly for small retailers 
because of the competition of huge on-line 
retailers such as Amazon who, are not paying rates 
in this county but selling good in this county and 
taking business from the shawl shops.  Thank you. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  I was going to ask along similar 
lines.  Rates is an extra tax on small businesses, 
and it is completely unrelated to profitability.  
In other words, if the businesses are losing money 
hand over fist, they still have to pay the rates.  
Given the amount of shops that are closing down in 
small it Ireland if there's any consideration been 
given a rates holiday, to try and generate business 
in towns, because, we've seen a mass exodus to 
shopping centres often on the periphery of towns 

and it is the death now for town centres.  And I 
have spoken to a lot of small business owners who 
say the same thing, we don't know what we're getting 
for your rates.  In other words, we still have to 
pay water bills and electricity, we still have to 
pay our staff wages, electricity, rent, whatever, 
and so we're paying this enormous amount of money, 
and we don't really know what it is for.  I know 
it is a tax, that's what it is, in not to put too 
fine a point on it. But just want to repeat my 
question, has there been any consideration given 
to either introducing a reduced rate for a number 
of years, sped period, or, a rates holiday for new 
business to encourage investment in towns. 
JOHN:  Thank you very much, I'll do my best to cover 
the range of questions.  First of all, in relation, 
the various types of property that are rateable, 
solar farms, wind turbines, they're all rateable.  
Normally if something a new development like a new 
solar farm comes on stream the officials here in 
the council would list them to come and visit and 
come out, so they're rateable the same way as any 
other property.  The I think you also raised the 
issue of VAT increases on hotels, and what we're 

analysing would be, if we see any change in the 
rental values of properties like hotels or any 
majority changes in turnovers associate with the 
it they would be reflected in the valuation, so 
you're back to first principles, really, so you're 
looking at September 2017 is the valuation date 
there, so we will see operators making to he is 
points to us, when we get to representations back 
in. 
I think you mentioned about an example of a petrol 
station that was by passed and that's exactly what 
a revaluation is designed for, to allow us to 
revisit and take into account, in often cases 
drastically change circumstances.  Without a 
revaluation, there's no other process to pick up 
on those changes in economic factors, so those are 
the bread and butter examples of what we mean there, 
about I that point about changes in economic 
circumstances.  So as things stand right now the 
businesses in Wicklow, and that are being assessed 
for rates really on the market conditions that 
prevailed 30 years ago, and a revaluation will 
change that, bring them to 2017 and thereafter 
we'll repeat the exercise ever river five and ten 

years, so that's the nub of the process.  Cllr 
Vincent Blake raised the point of exempted 
properties why are they rated?  Essentially, if 
they're already exempt, they've revaluation 
doesn't change anything this that, if they're 
currently rateable, there's properties on the 
valuation list that are no longer rateable, like 
domestic properties, they're now removed from the 
list.  So, the list is cleaned up so to speak to 
take account what the current circumstances are, 
associate with the it. 
So, rental values do change, you make the point very 
well there.  And very much what the revaluation is 
to do is to see where the changes have occurred.  
We'd all be aware of a street that was doing well 
30 years ago and not doing well anymore and vice 
versa as well, just to give an example from Dublin, 
when we revalued Dublin City Council, George's 
Street used to be the most valuable street, then 
it is Henry Street and now it is Grafton Street and 
valuation that has picked that up, so it reflects 
the relevant rates commanded in each of those.  
We're aware of a street in a town where the market 
is now outside the town and the street suffered as 

a result of it.  The key point is it is a charge 
on the occupation of property so therefore, it is 
not designed to pick up on just purely on turnover 
associated with it, it is meant to reflect what the 
premises would rent for on the open market.  I 
think you also made the point about how this, how 
the reductions work out when the fact the council 
are allowed to collect the same amount of rates.  
There are people who will receive increases, and 
people who achieve decreases, in the rates as a 
result of this.  But overall the entire cake is the 
same.  Because you will be voting on that here next 
November.  So, therefore the proposals brought to 
you will include very much the same amount of rates 
to be collected in 2020, as in 2019 with minor 
adjustments for new buildings that have come on 
stream.  I think, importantly you raise the point 
about appeals now and in October.  What you can do 
now when you get your proposed certificate is make 
representations, that's a form of appeal in a way, 
it is informal appeal, and gives us scope to change 
thing.  The rate payers will have 40 days to 
contact us about that, we encourage them and talk 
them through it, in the clinics.  But, there's an 

on-line form it makes it very easy for them and us.  
We appreciate not everyone is comfortable to do it 
on-line so it is possible to have a hard copy, we 
don't leave any stone unturned do that.  What 
happens this October if you're appealing then, 
that's a formal appeal to this valuation tribunal 
which is all intents and purposes like a court.  It 
is much more formal, there's a fee associated with 
the it, and we, at that stage, will be defended the 
valuation on behalf of all the other rate payers 
in Wicklow who haven't appealed.   
 
If somebody secures a reduction in the rates from 
the tribunal the tab for that has to be picked up 
by everybody else because the size of the cake 
remains the same, we defend the valuations once 
they go to tribunal the.  There's a small number 
of cases about the dispute of the floor areas and 
we resurvey it and agree that at the time.  
Counsellor Murphy raised the point the success from 
the clinics.  The clinics have been I think it is 
fair to say unqualified success.  We're very happy 
with them.  We're expanding them all the time.  
They are the means, let's face it, this is technical 

exercise, it is not something, business people get 
their rates bill of whatever the arrangements would 
be, but the actual mechanics of how the rates have 
come about, aren't that clearly understood by 
people, some people do understand it.  Our job is 
to communicate and make it as transparent as 
possible to people.  We can't, unfortunately you 
know, our role isn't to explain how the rates are 
spent in the local authority, that's very much the 
local authority's business, it is really how we've 
assessed them and how we have come up with this the 
first instance proposed valuation and factors 
we've taken into at.  We would encourage people to 
take up the opportunity to come out and we will have 
a presence, in all five of your Municipal 
Districts, not necessarily at the same time, we 
will have to stagger them in a certain way.  But, 
look, we appreciate that is part, very important 
for people to understand what is going on, 
associate with the it. 
 
Counsellor Whitmore about the indicative ARV, it 
is only indicative that is produced in just in 
March, now, and that will be produced at the same 

time.  We will be in touch obviously with the staff 
and officials here in the council briefing them 
well in advance.  And, typically what would happen 
is it would be prominent on the Wicklow County 
Council website.  In some instances, it may be 
possible to put together a calculator with t you 
put in the net annual value multiplied by point 
whatever it is that's there and you hit a button 
and it gives you.  It is just very important to pick 
up I suppose, and you raised this point, this is 
only an indication.  It is only to help people come 
up with a punitive rates bill, you will legally and 
formerly vote next November as you do, on what ARV 
will be next year, it is giving people a figure to 
make calculation what their rates are likely to 
look like from now on.  So, it is temporanious, we 
will co-ordinate that with the council officials 
here.  The dates and locations of the clinics, I'm 
not sure, because they change and depending what, 
we will advertise them in the media and have put 
this on the website and the council website here.  
I can't guarantee they will be in the letter going 
out with all the other information that's in there, 
but this works very well, and we'll make it work 

well.   
 
Counsellor Behan raised a number of concerns about 
the small retailers.  We appreciate that.  And 
that is why we have the walk-in clinics because they 
are the means through which we allay some of their 
fears and concerns, associated with it.  You asked 
do we visit all 4,500 properties in Wicklow, no we 
don't, we already have a valuation for every local 
authority in Wicklow.  We visit the ones that maybe 
have a modern rental, fairly recent rent on so we 
apply some of the principles to similar properties.  
We will also visit any property that comes to appeal 
or that would, we were there would be a dispute over 
areas et cetera associate with the it.  The issue 
of preschools and creches, et cetera, the 
revaluation doesn't change anything as regards 
property is rateable or not.  If it was rateable 
before, it will be rateable afterwards, exempt 
before and afterwards, so revaluation doesn't 
change the categories of properties that are 
rateable.  Councillor brought up profitability, 
to how it is taken into account and the issue of 
rates holidays, and possibly reduction in 

realities, the rates holidays reduction rates 
would be policy matters for the Department of House 
planning and local government.  They, our 
legislation is purely a based on assessing what the 
rateable value of the property would be.  The 
actual collection of rates, and the application of 
any special provisions for rates, is entirely 
outside of our control, policy matters for the 
department.  So, now, all we would do in that 
regard then really is assess the property base and 
all we're trying to come up with, is how much would 
that property rent for if it was on the open market 
in September of 2017.  That's ultimately what 
we're trying to do.  There's all kinds of valuation 
mean, and methodologies approved by the courts and 
tribunals how you arrive at that.  Profitability, 
because it's deemed to be character on the 
occupation of property, the profitability is in 
some sectors, is relevant only to the extent it 
might drive the rental value of the property.  
That's ultimately what we're trying do, and that's 
in a way, one of the key things we'll explain to 
people who will visit our clinics because it is a 
very God question, how do we, what is the link 

between profitability and the value we put on the 
property.  And when we have the actual particular 
instance there, before us, we will explain it to 
them.  Shoo 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Could I have freedom for agreement 
for fifteen minutes? 
JOHN:  I hope I've covered those. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Can I just ask, how many properties 
did you visit? 
JOHN:  20-25% of properties during a revaluation.  
CLLR BEHAN:  About a thousand. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I was one of those properties, 
CLLR BEHAN:  Once you make representation ... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I couldn't ask for anyone better 
in fact. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Question of rebates. In Wicklow, 
we give 100 rebates. 
JOHN:  Thank you.  Yeah.  I don't know in the 
answer, I think it varies, and some counties do 
100%, some do 50, 75 % perspective, that's outside 
our area and in local government law.  You asked 
me it was feasible to offer that, all I can say is 
to address that question, to the department.  All 
policy on local government funding will come from 

there.  Our role is confined to assessing what the 
value of the properties, we've no role in either 
the collection or applying rebates associated with 
that.  Apologies for overlooking it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you very much.  We're going 
on to seven now. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I had spoken to the finance, I won't 
delay.  I'm turning to focus on for a second, is 
it on page nine and ten.  Page nine and ten at the 
bottom of the page.  First one is statement in 
relation to reconciliation.  What I get from that, 
is we don't know how many houses we own in the 
county.  Is that the case?  And if we don't know, 
why don't we know, and when are we going to find 
out how many houses we known.  Secondly, it is 
serious statement made on the page ten on River 
Dargle defence team, the completion of works, flood 
defence scheme was procured in 2014 of fees of 1.2 
million excluding VAT in October 2017, these fees 
increased to two million, excluding VAT, and no 
contract should be extended beyond this initial 
contract amount, where that amount exceeds 
procurement rules.  So, what we have here is, a 
contract was agreed, it was increased, and the 

auditors pointing out that 
Shouldn't have happened, I would like an 
explanation why it happened. 
BRIAN:    Thank you.  I'll take the River Dargle 
question first, in relation to that, we do have 
procurement policy in place in relation to contract 
extensions and this was fully adhered to.  In that, 
there was a director's order signed in relation to 
that, and as I say the policy was adhered to, I'd 
make the point that, this particular project was 
examined under the public spending code and found 
to provide substantial assurance it was in 
compliance with the code's requirements. 
  
CLLR BEHAN:  That's not really the answer.  What 
the finance officer said the director approved t 
I'm asking, was that not, is the auditor saying that 
should not have happened.  Who was the director, 
who approved it please.  
BRIAN:  The point I'm making in this particular 
case it wouldn't be financially viable to go back 
out to retender and made more financial sense, the 
cost additional costs were justified, and with that 
point, being take noon account, a director's order 

was signed which complies with the procurement 
procedures we currently have in place, and are 
published.  For Wicklow County Council.  
Everything was adhered to, I suppose, the auditor, 
has to flag the issue.  As he is done in his job 
auditing the report, but he doesn't have a 
particular major issue with it.  He's happy, there 
are procedures in there, they were complied with 
it, and understands the act it doesn't make 
financial or sense to retender, he has to put it 
in the report.  We're satisfied that as I say, 
everything was in order. 
  
CLLR LAWLESS:  Thanks, I had, mine were two similar 
questions to Cllr Joe Behan, I read the report and 
there is obviously a few bits and pieces that jumped 
out.  Under development contribution income, 
like, the absence of controls and recording 
development contribution incomes, the council 
mistakenly miscalculated 1.4, instead of 1.7, and 
this reduced in different programmes groups by 3.6 
million.  There’re little bits of pieces, the 
council recording of the development recording led 
to difficulties in agreeing a balanced statement 

in Irish Water and the Irish Water, I suppose, my 
concern, Brian over this is just, do you actually 
have a risk management kind of list on these kinds 
of things?  Because we only see this once a year.  
I mow the Chief Executive have answers, never 
regards to this reported, but, and I know it is to 
do with the Capital account and not revenue 
account.  But ... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that it? 
CLLR LAWLESS:  The stuff highlighted by the 
auditor it is being looked at and there is a proper 
risk management assessment being done by your 
department and we could have proper reassurances 
in the Chamber.  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Just again in development 
contribution.  When somebody pays their 
development contribution, how the system it goes 
through before it's invested in various projects 
under different directorates. 
BRIAN:  I'll take Cllr Behan’s first question, 
fixed assets, it is not the fact we don't know, we 
do know how many social houses we have, but the 
order was pointing out there isn't a 
reconciliation, between the I house and aggressive 

financial system.  So, in the Chief Executive's 
report, it states how many social houses we do have, 
but the practical process, that has to be done, it 
is quite I suppose labour intensive and we have 95% 
of it done, where they're linked up together.  So, 
it is the crossover between the two systems 
That's been flagged in that case.  In relation to 
the development levies, the change from 4.1, to 
7.7, that relates to interpretation and 
application to accounting treatment rather than 
error, it is identifying short-term developed 
debtors, the methodology used here was using 
invoice states as the criteria, the auditor, has 
a preference for using commencement date, so we 
have adjusted the 2017 figures to comply with that 
question and going forward we will use mention 
dates to have the short-term debtors. 
The other point - risk register.  Actually, that's 
one of the issues that's flagged in the actual audit 
report under, let me see - the last one, 113.4, we 
are looking "at risk" register and develop ago new 
risk register policy and bringing in training on 
risk management four senior managers within the 
organisation this year.  That's in our workforce 

plan, work plan for 2019.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's it. Moving on. To eight.  
Just for noting.  Yeah. 
We need to propose and second it then.  Gerry Walsh 
and ... 
MS. GALLAGHER:  OK, members have been circulated 
with a draft policy for municipal district and 
county receptions and official openings, it is 
considered at protocol meetings, its purpose is to 
set out the various types of receptions that can 
be held by the Municipal Districts and agree a 
protocol to be observed.  It is important to say 
the policy reflect and captures what is happening 
on the ground or what is the policy.  And have 
protocol written down is helpful to any new 
administrator or the Cathaoirleach of Municipal 
Districts.  The Plenary Council and District under 
reserved functions of both the County Council and 
MD have power to hold receptions or Cathaoirleach 
policies, so what we're trying to capture in terms 
of civic is what is seldom is wonderful, so for 
example, if MD want to host a civic it should be 
unique of a great achievement, other than that, 
there's the provision where Cathaoirleach's 

receptions, less formal than civic and more 
appropriate where groups or individuals or teams, 
et cetera, you want to mark the success of that.  
So, page nine, paragraph nine, page ten, covers 
protocol for official openings and launching 
unveilings, in terms of proceed calf attendance, 
the Cathaoirleach takes precedent of all overs 
followed by the Cathaoirleach of MD as appropriate, 
and this is in appearance of Government minister.  
The only thing new, on page eight in terms of 
putting down a process for votes of 
congratulations. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Most people have this.  Because 
propose and second to propose is that agreed.  OK. 
Thank you 
Second was Irene Winters.  OK, we're on to nine... 
Update on the Housing Capital Programme.    
BREACH:  Five pillars of the Action Plan. 
One is addressing homelessness, accelerate social 
housing and build more homes and four is improve 
the rental sector and provide housing, our social 
housing is based around this national policy 
document.  The Capital programme falls two and 
three, which is accelerating social housing and 

building more homes.  That's what I'm 
concentrating, pillars two and three.  As you 
know, we put forward and you voted on it, as to what 
would be our priority list based on the original 
housing strategy that came under the First Minister 
Anne Kelly and that was the first strategy.  With 
that, then, we looked at under the areas of greatest 
need and new build schemes. 
Priority two list that we brought to you over the 
last couple of years is comes under rebuilding 
Ireland and this is where we concentrate on getting 
the highest yield and low impediments, that's more 
units faster and up and running in the districts.  
So, under that, we have 23, number of new build 
schemes and total yield of 430 units so.  Total new 
build coming from Wicklow, is 623, that takes from 
2015 up to 2021, that's our plan.  And then, we plus 
and have other methods, we're going into details 
and that's given this figure we're working towards 
is 137 units, our target is 1225, if we get projects 
up and running, we will exceed Government targets 
by - that's 36 new schemes, that's a huge amount 
of activity over a number of years, so awes know, 
we were slow to get off the tracks.  But we did 

actually deliver in 2018, got three schemes over 
the line.  And 28 units and O’Byrne Road was one 
sitting there for a long time.  Avondale Heights, 
some of you were down to see, and there's 20 
families got in the units were really thankful 
there before Christmas time and Old Library in 
Arklow, I think everybody was particularly proud 
of those schemes.  Unfortunately, our original 
target was for 45 units, we delivered 28 because 
of the development Delaney Park in Arklow, we're 
having difficulty with the contractors, we're 
still having difficulties, wasn't able to deliver 
before Christmas and we're going down serious 
routes currently to get those units delivered to 
us.  The quality is not good.   
 
And I'm not going to be in a situation dealing, 
we're not accepting more quality workmanship so 
this will role on, they didn't deliver this 2018 
but we have this year to get them over the line.  
The Bride Lane we have difficulties with that, 
contractors when the into examinership, we got the 
scheme back up and running again, so those top six 
sites are everything that's actually on the site 

at the moment.  So, as I say, you have Kilbride 
Lane, the early part of 2020, FCA Hall, started off 
well, contractor decided he didn't want to do the 
job anymore, so, at the moment, we're trying to 
expedite the retendering of both two jobs, we 
already have a framework in place.  That's 
hopefully very suitable for the Bray one in 
particular, it is only four units.  That 
particular framework is not suitable for SEA Hall 
because it is valued, that's based over a million 
so the framework for Bray work is less than that.  
But we're still hoping to, expedite that as quickly 
as possible.  The other two aunts currently on side 
is Kilcoole and Drew's Brook, and Blessington, so 
they're current site.  Farrankelly.  Phase two, 
started onsite this morning.  Everybody was 
notified with that, and level drop, that was 
beginning, Whitehall in Baltinglass, that was due 
to start in March and that's our first rapid build 
project and we're hoping to get delivery on that, 
by the end of the year, so that's seven months 
contract and then we, bringing together all the 
aspects of rapid build and bringing to site and 
operating quickly.  So, we do a lot of work in the 

background associate with the that.  PPP Convent 
Lands, I'm going to a meeting tomorrow, as I 
understand it, that's going to site in March and 
give you confidence in relation to that, the 
contractor has been on to us, consortium and 
involves the construction, and core as the approved 
housing body which will manage these units but they 
will be coming from our list, as I said to you 
before, you will be having a Section 85 that is 
passed before the documentation, frank will sign, 
basically it will be led by Dublin city council 
because this is one of five local authorities, as 
part of the, they will be leading authority and 
we're just one aspect of that, in order for the 
contract to go ahead, it will be signed Dublin city 
council on our behalf.  With all of the conditions 
that was attached as part of the Section 85.  
Sugarloaf in Kilmac, we have two contracts, there 
was issues with the documentation, because it has 
been retendered and hopefully offering that soon.  
So, I expect it should begin before summer.  That's 
our projects that is onsite 2019 and then, we will 
also have these coming towards the later send, 
O'Sullivan Lands in Rathnew.  They gave the 

Soldiers Bench in Carnew that part aid is going to 
going to the district.  It was due to go on 
Wednesday, but I understand it is deterred until 
next week.  On Monday.   
 
So the back group to speed things up like we were 
doing, we're doing the works behind the scenes so 
as soon as the Part 8 happens we can get out and 
try and get thank those units tendered, Delaney 
Park, phase two and three, there's dependency on 
phase one, obviously won't have a contractor going 
in, when a guy hasn't fully finished, so he is that 
is probably towards the later end of the year, 
that's the way it is looking at the moment.  But 
it should complete in 2020.  So, that's a number 
of schemes we have on board, so 327, no small fete.  
13 schemes onsite by the end of the year.  So, 
completion for this year, at the moment, is looking 
at the 66 units, this is what we've given to the 
department as our target.  So already at risk is 
FCA Hall and Kilmantin Place. So, we hope that is 
tendered as quickly as place, that is due to be 
finished around October so allow two months, we're 
hopeful to get it over the line before December, 

so I'm hanging on to that, so we have 66 units for 
this year. 
And then commencing in 2020, so apart from all of 
those, we have another twelve schemes coming on 
board.  Some of these, we have brought to use as 
municipal distributes before we go for Part 8, this 
is what we're doing before we approach the 
department.  Because we're making an effort all 
the time to keep you involved, in what we're 
progressing with.  So, Ashtown Lane Wicklow Town, 
we did preliminary discussions on that, so, that 
is going in for stage one for the department before 
the end of the month.  The same with Greenhills 
road, above the convent land site, lapped we know 
we'd hopefully get in quickly.  The only real issue 
is storm water that we'll probably do ourselves.  
Avondale phase two, that again, brought to the 
Arklow Municipal District.  That particular one, 
we were going for stage one approval on that.  We 
done work behind the scenes, there was fill on that 
site, we would be hopeful to get approval quickly 
from the department.     
Ard na Greine Bray, that will go through Part 8 but 
got it to the stage we'll be summiting for stage 

one as well with pre-consultations with the 
department officials.  Moneycarroll Close to 
mountain view, that will be split, 26 units, ten 
will be traditional build and six scheme under the 
rapid build, so, we will apply for Part 8, as a full 
scheme, apply to the whole scheme, when it goes to 
site, we'll split it, for the ones at one end of 
the park is on the front and open space end of it, 
it is fairly level, so the other there's no 
modifications, so in order to knock that, we'll 
split it in two complex.  Cedar Court in Bray.  
We're going to have stage one to the department, 
all of this, most will go in, in March.  Three 
Trouts Greystones there, 34 units, we will have 
that to the department on that.  The old fire 
station in Arklow, those of you doing demolition 
work at the moment, handling as best toes and 
preparing that site for consideration.  We looked 
at it in a preliminary point of view, six or seven 
units.  Burnaby Mills, we brought that to 
municipal district, and we want to bring Part 8 in 
the next week or so.  And that's is to allow 
feedback from yourselves.  Associate with the it.  
Those are two sites hoping to go for competitive 

dialogue, that's and to secure the planning of this 
point is continue advantage to order for us to get 
the best value out of the two sites.  So, we're, 
we will run the two Part 8s together.  There will 
two separate Part 8s, but once we have planning 
security it is so much easier to get the value for 
those sites.  As indicated to you, district level, 
so that there's a 30%, split between affordable, 
private and public.  It may come under bundle 3, 
it would come in and look at developing that as a 
part of the PPP, but that is dependent on whether 
the department accepts it as a site.  Again, this 
is just another string to our bow.  If it is 
accepted as BPP, it is meanings we're not putting 
our energies into developing the design and 
everything else that goes with it, that's handled 
by be is else and will deliver 234 units for County 
Wicklow.  Last one is Shillelagh, but we have that 
site over there, that's one that is Irish Water 
dependent, we are summiting it for stage one, and 
basically in order to put pressure on Irish Water 
to put infrastructure that's required there.  At 
the moment, that's the one thing that's holding 
that backs, we don't have sufficient waste water 

disposal associate with the that site.  It is not 
on their agenda, it is too small, Shillelagh 
doesn't feature on national plans but if social 
housing is delayed because Irish Water is not 
paying attention, and Counsellor Blake was saying 
there's facility for accessing money under the 
rural development that may allow for this to 
happen, but unless we have something in place, we 
lose clout on that.  So that's from 2020, on words, 
now even though I say it is 2020, all the work we 
have to do, we have the 359-week process, we're 
doing the work on this this year.   
 
So, what I'm saying is, that we're doing the work 
this year, and loads on the twelve schemes to 
commence next year to be finished in 2020.  And, 
so just then summary, Wicklow social housing supply 
strategy, rinse from 2015 to 2021, New builds 
priority one and two, gives 623 units and other 
mechanisms, 704, so you can see a 50/50% split what 
we're doing and others.  I'll allow Joe to go, but 
I brought this up, because unless anybody can get 
here, I'm still involved in lending and it is going 
on, I'm there, nearly nine years, but, what I would 

say, is department, have given us approval to 
complete works, so where we're at again, following 
procurement, we had to secure the consultant and 
now they're in place now to secure contractors to 
finish out that job, three more phases associate 
with the it and again, because we're in mediation 
and people are living there, we can't do it quickly, 
it takes time, that's why wither' not accepting 
poor quality workman slap because we don't want to 
be in this position further council the line.   
 
For the councillors in Wicklow, the Hillview 
Estate, of which we haven't, it hasn't been funded, 
but yet we still have everybody up there, the roof 
works which were an issue, it is completed, there's 
a small number of units that need issues addressed 
in terms of leakages but basically that work is now 
done and as far as we're hearing on the ground is 
that all that work has been very well received.  
And the reason why I put it in there in terms of 
other supply mechanism is that, when these 
re-mandated works are repeated, it will release 28 
units back in the council, in numbers, for people 
who are on the housing list, because we're using 

them, and the biggest number is in Glending:  On 
that note then, I just wanted to mention, to some 
of the challenges, we're dealing with, one about 
the contractor, and having proper oversight, so 
people think all the jobs run by themselves, the 
councils once they're allocated, they have nothing 
more to do with it.  But we end up cases like 
Glending, so that aspect of the works is important, 
and frank has supported us in, seeking temporary 
works so they're running at the moment, so we have 
people to actually look after our interests on the 
ground.  Management consultants is another huge 
aspect of my work is trying to get consultants what 
they're supposed to do in a timely manner, when our 
programme is going beyond what it should do, it is 
because consultants are waiting to get more 
information back, so management of consultants is 
a huge priority what we have to do on top of our 
own work.  Public procurement is an issue, only as 
far as we have to be open and transparent.  All work 
has to be advertised in its appropriate manner, 
these are some of the delays we deal with.  But 
they're tide into the process, that's why it takes 
so long, procurement is a big issue, we had to pull 

one contract and re-advertise because documents 
provided by the consultants were not correct.  And 
then, there is always the threat of legal 
challenge, if you don't operate the process 
properly. 
 
Skill shortage is issue in terms of professional 
and trades.  And everybody in the country, every 
local authority in the country, is trying to meet 
targets and then you have that and the private 
sector, so what we're seeing now is an example with 
one contractor pulling out, it is easier for him 
to leave and get another job rather than finish out 
our work.  So, there's that, and all the 
professionals, architects, engineers, country 
doesn't have enough of them at the moment so.  What 
we try do is tap into people as early as possible, 
that we say, there's challenges out there, coming 
from the left field we may not know about yet.  And 
ourselves, staff retention is an issue, we had 
three architects and we have three more, and now 
we're losing a QS, and we're going to be losing 
excellent - so trying to keep people here is 
difficult.  All the rest of us love it in here, it 

is great, but ... 
But again, in terms of, so in terms of professional 
... 
You can't have people moving on, and another 
example that there aren’t enough skills around 
because everybody needs and good people, move on. 
 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Delaney Park started in 2007, 17 
units.  They were to be finished in November, as 
I remember, now we're talking, I was shocked by that 
date of September.  I don't think the members were 
aware of that. 
I've been up there early times.  We have 820 on the 
council housing list in the area.  We've built one 
house from 2007 to 2018 and I want to compliment 
the staff of the work done on the library and 
different projects, we've people on the housing 
list since 2003, that's 16 years, we've people on 
the list waiting on them house whose are now 
possibly going to be homeless, because the staff 
are obviously working with them people.  I'm 
amazed at September, I go up there, I live in that 
area, how that will take to September.  I know all 
the issues, I've been talking about the issue up 

there, workmanship and everything else, how can it 
take 21 months to finish 17 houses?  I don't build, 
but I'd do it quicker myself with a few lads off 
the street.  It is amazing you have September up 
there and that's what you've been told obviously. 
BREACH:  If you were to look the a del tail to 
finish the job on the 21st of September. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  It is disgraceful, I'm amazed a 
company like that, can take from November 2017, and 
like that, I mean until September 2019 and if that's 
the date they're given you can put it back into 
2020, because some of the stuff that's happened up 
there, you wouldn't see it in Mongolia. 
>>:  They haven't given that date, I'm saying in 
terms of the delays maybe coming down the line.  
So, these things take a long time. 
>>:  I sincerely hope they don't get any other 
contracts off Wicklow County Council, they will be 
entitled to go for the next contract.  For that 
news to come out to people on the housing list, 
people at notice in houses to get out of them and 
Wicklow County Council have worked to keep them 
people in the houses that's a bloody disgrace and 
that company should never be brought into this 

county again.  We were frustrated, we thought it 
was going to be February or March looking at it the 
other day, it is going backwards, it is dreadful.  
Itch 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We will get a further update. 
 
CLLR WINTERS:  Part fives, I know that there's 
housing going on in the market in February and 
Ashford and stuff like that, I'm wondering do part 
fives seem to be delivered in 2021, have we no part 
fives coming in before 2019?  And second question 
is in lots of different issues today we talked about 
procurement and difficulties.  I would actually 
love if we could get a list of if you had your wish 
list of how you could fix procurement so we can go 
to the department and say, this is what needs to 
happen to quicken up the process. 
That's it thanks. 
CLLR DERMOT CULLEN:  We look one house for 
completion, and we know down the line Irish Water 
have been granted upgrade of the sewage, there's 
an appeal to that to the Board, we hope to get 
something back within the next couple of months 
from An Bord Pleanála and hopefully it is good.  In 

west Wicklow it is desperate, it is continuous day 
and night where the amount of people going 
homeless, them of people, there's no private 
accommodation to rent, there's no, we're wasting 
our time talking about that, there's absolutely 
nothing there for people. 
 
But what I want to know really is what guarantee 
do we have in the long run, from Irish Water who 
they will give their connections to?  If it is a 
case, they give the go ahead to up to 800 houses 
which are in Kildare, that's not worth a fiddlers 
to the people of Blessington and Wicklow. 
If those 800 houses get the go ahead, what guarantee 
do we have, even the 10% of the social element. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We know about that.  
>>:  What guarantee do we have councillor have that 
the connections will be given to Wicklow.  I see 
we have 50 houses in line but what guarantee have 
we got.  
>>:  The last of the query had dealt with some of 
yours regarding part five, they were in excess of 
30 this year and more to continue on, we're coming 
to in about 30er this year, but 50 every year, a 

bit light depending, so they're coming in there, 
they'll ramp up a bit as the private sector.  As 
regards the first of all, regards the Baltinglass 
area, remember with sewage at the moment, 
Blessington, whereas we can't develop in 
Blessington short-term, there was Whitehall and 
Carnew in the schemes going forward, we will deal 
with any developer, that again to ensure or work 
with capacity within the industry, any developer 
who has developments and sewage or planning 
permission, we will purchase units and advertising 
for that in the very short-term. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Moving on. 
Ten.  Sorry Jenny for keeping you so long there. 
JENNY:  I won't keep you long.  But just this is 
the good news you've had bad news, so I'll give you 
good news.  Creative Ireland is one of the around 
wellbeing, one is healthy Ireland and one creative 
Ireland, you may know about creative Ireland what 
it is, it is a programme maligned across Government 
local authorities and state agencies and 
organisations, in order that the creative 
industries and artists and arts and culture are 
promoted as parts of Ireland's offering in what 

they have to offer, but also, in the development 
of greater supports for it so in the country, the 
brand continues to grow and creates employment, but 
also, for particularly for children and young 
people they get a chance to be creative as young 
as possible, scientifically the research shows 
that it is very beneficial for everything, for a 
whole range of things like social development, for 
mathematics, reasoning and reading and everything, 
so basically, creative Ireland the national 
programme has five pillars.  You can see them 
there.    So, the five pillars, so, they're the 
five work programmes that creative Ireland has, the 
one in grown is pillar two, enabling creativity in 
the community.  That's what local authorities have 
tasked with.   
 
We've been asked to create a strategic plan around 
that, and going forward in 2019 we have a service 
level agreement with creative Ireland to deliver 
that programme for them.  You can see a significant 
investment by the Government, 4.23 million in 2018 
was the spend, across three areas, the first a 
children and young people's programme, they had a 

grinding which went across a broad range of 
measures from film, creative and promoting us 
abroad and then the decade of commemorations, so, 
that's every year, until 2022, as a commemorations 
come up, we will have specific funding to 
commemorate so this year is wharf remembrance for 
example, so local authorities were invested in by 
Government to the tune of 4.32 million, numbers of 
engagement were, they gave us last week but today, 
the numbers of people who engage with those 
programmes was 1.85 million people.  So, in terms 
of where we are, this is just an indication in 2018, 
we received that amount.  They try to give the same 
local authority the same money, we got extra money 
in 2018, but not '19, our numbers of engagement, 
were above and we will more than double that.  We 
have all have culture and creativity strategy, we 
have a culture team, principally one through me and 
administrated in our arts office, and then it is 
made up of the range of personnel you can see on 
the executive with council members.  I'm not going 
to if think every programme with you, so just for 
example, we have a literature programme, for 
libraries, it is the first time in a very long time 

since well before the recession, we have a 
cross-trade thing on the library, what the creative 
Ireland wants to do is to get libraries, film 
commission acts office and archives, culture 
services and culture team to work together in local 
authorities, previously, that wouldn't have 
happened except for ad hoc basis, so this is really 
to allow that to happen.   
 
So, every local authority is different.  We all 
deal with the and try and build what we have 
already, about think is for new activity with 
communities that we wouldn't have previously.  
Last year, in the region of 815 people, this year 
we'll have 1200 capacity for a range of events in 
Arklow and Blessington libraries, some of them 
there, the one is a travel writer and he's 
presenting in Blessington and we have John Banvil.  
And ‘There's a Bear on My Chair’ an author from 
Scotland coming over, wide variety and appealing 
in every age group and wellbeing as well.  We had 
a grant programme, 38,000 was given out to 38 
organisations, we're doing that for 2019 and the 
closing date is on the first of March this year. 

We've a choral programme so we specifically 
developed a four-year strategy for development of 
community singing to help choirs who are existing 
but try to seek new choirs and recognising the like 
the operation transformation exercise choral has 
similar benefits so we're supporting choirs that 
exist and training people who have it as a job so 
trying to create additional opportunities for work 
as well for people in the county.  It has one stop 
on-line very source, website developed, we'll 
commission new songs and work on aspects of nuts 
and bottles like enterprise so running events, 
project management, and insures, and all those 
general things as well as developing them 
artistically.   
 
So, we anticipated there will be about 2,000 people 
involved in that programme.  We also have heritage 
projects, who videos are on-line, and we have the 
archive project, this is a development of new 
heritage and archive app to developing it, to the 
public of Wicklow.  We have 38,041 children in 
Wicklow, so we want to engage a plan for young 
children, so rather than ad hoc move from project 

to project every year, I wanted to create the 
programme to look at that number and see what would 
it take to reach as many as those we can, in 
additional to those we already run, this will be 
launched in April, and run for four years and enable 
us to work strategically in four areas, people with 
complex needs which we haven't worked before, west 
Wicklow development programme and that programme.  
We'll do residencies, readings, performances, 
create creative clubs.  This is a culture night for 
children, every local authority has to do it. 
That's just general information, we'll have key 
centres, the latest consultations with children in 
the county asked for more play outdoors, they said 
they'd rather do things unstructured and outdoors 
so we'll respond to a work with the park lands and 
our libraries, and have heritage venues and have 
unstructured programme of events that will be free 
for the day. 
There will be about 5,000 people catered for on that 
day.  They roll out programmes nationally on 
children and young people particularly, they have 
their own creative Youth Strategy, so every child 
has the rights to participate in the country, 

that's their mandate under that plan.  We have five 
creative schools in Wicklow, there was a pilot 
project where they'll reach 4,000 schools in the 
country, five schools were close from Wicklow.  
And they are throughout the county the majority of 
them are on the East Coast and quite a few in the 
north.  We have sop in Tinahely as well.  The other 
programme is around creative clusters so each 
creative cluster school there's three of those and 
receive €2,500 to help, and this will roll out more 
for this pilot year in 2019.  So, that's it.  Just 
a quick update, and if anybody has questions, 
they're more than welcome to come and ask or check 
out the programme which will be on-line shortly.  
OK.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Any questions? 
I'm tired looking at that, all that activity, would 
you wouldn't believe all that activity is happening 
in Wicklow this year. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  Thanks very much and Jenny, great 
work you know this creative Ireland I think it is 
great to get youngsters and everyone involved with 
creativity.  And I just see that you had mentioned 
about different groups like literature and so 

forth, but the Irish language itself, maybe you 
might tell me is there something there for the 
promotion of the Irish language? 
CLLR BOURKE:  Conference great plans on that 
initiative, I notice you've included choirs, I'm 
delighted to see that, because my wife is in a choir 
and she's dedicated but has complained bitterly 
about the lack of support from the county council 
in the past, they were denied grants. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Would you not sponsor it yourself? 
CLLR BOURKE:  I have been.  But they've been doing 
great work, they've linked up with a choir in Milan, 
from El Scala, who have visited last October and 
stayed, we hosted those in my own house, and they're 
going on a visit shortly but trying to broaden it 
out as much as possible and expand their numbers 
and any help, they' be delighted, it is costly, 
because they have to pay for twigs and it doesn't 
happen for nothing but it is a wonderful experience 
for them. 
CLLR OLIVER CULLEN: Fantastic idea, but what is 
probably needed to be asked for a lot more funding, 
and I'd also, listening to Cllr Thornhill will, if 
you mention 200 years ago in the language and was 

for dipping to the well, it was Irish culture 
dipping into, so it is something I notice and I've 
brought it up several times and nothing is done, 
I'm putting it forward as proposal the logo you put 
up is Wicklow, ‘Land of opportunities’, when I get 
documentation, that's all I get, nothing is done, 
it is passed off, I had suggested and proposed that 
the logo is, Wicklow, and underneath in a thin line, 
bring in a Irish language because it is brushed 
aside as if it is not our language, we are a 
bilingual, that the logo be looked at.  We need the 
logo to have, Wicklow, and Cill Maintain. 
MISS GALLAGHER:  We do have a logo in issue, and 
we will make an equal effort. 
>>:  That wouldn't kill anyone to do that, and the 
all the times they're looking at Wicklow, they're 
looking at Cill Maintain.  Underneath. 
I'm proposing to change the logo and make it centre 
stage.  And there's to problems.  I'm seeing it 
all the time.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm not taking a proposal at this 
hour of the night. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  It is gone past the time, this is 
a presentation, I'm not going to take it, put it 

down as notice of motion and I'll take it then.  Put 
it down as notice of motion.  
JENNY:  Sorry about that, so, yeah: 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I gave people latitude today and 
we ran over time because of it, and I won't do that 
anymore.  And then we'll get to the notice of 
motion and then you can, I'll guarantee you then 
that it will, but it will be harder than it was today 
on people today because I let them go on a bit.  
That won't happen again. 
JENNY:  As regards to the Irish language we have 
policy documents print in both languages, and, 
similarly, they will be reflected on the website 
when they're put up there, in both languages, and 
stitched into the children's activities and the 
literature programme.  There are events in Irish, 
and in English, as we go through for the children's 
programme days.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Jenny, I am all sure on behalf of 
us all that's a great programme, well done.  
Congratulations on it and I'm sorry that it came 
in this late in the evening. 
It certainly a lot of other members could have 
benefited from it as well. 

END OF MEETING 
