 
1
 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 2nd DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2019 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a non-verbatim 
transcript of the stenographic notes in the above-named 
action for communication support.  
 
JENNIFER SINNAMON 
JENNIFER SINNAMON 
 
 

 
2
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon, members. Apologies for the late start, 
you are all very welcome back after the summer, I hope you all had a nice 
break. We have an extensive agenda to get through this afternoon, so I 
would remind you all of the three-minute speaking rule and I will be 
enforcing it. Okay, first item on the agenda to confirm and sign and first of 
all I would like to just acknowledge Senator Denis O'Donovan, he is here 
from the Seanad and you are very welcome here. I think before we start we 
will do the votes of sympathy.  
ADMINISTRATOR: For Patrick Conlan, father of our friend and colleague 
Brendan Conlan. For Michael Fitzpatrick, for John Bolingbroke of Redcross, 
worked for the Council for many years. For Molly Staunton, our colleague 
and friend of Martina Byrne. For John Smith.  For May Walker, mother of our 
colleague Mary Rose Walker and for Rita McNamara.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Are there any other votes of sympathy?   
CLLR WALSH: I would like to pass condolences to Shay Monaghan. He was a 
member of our fire service in Greystones.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, if that is all of them we will stand for a minute's 
silence. Okay, to confirm and sign the minutes of the order of the meeting 
held on the 1st of July 2019, which was attached. Are there any?   
CLLR BLAKE:  
ADMINISTRATOR: Seconded by Cllr Snell.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 2 to consider the proportion of property measure 
WW40424F known as Connolly Square county Wicklow, to Mr. Paul Quinn 25 
Connolly Square as per previously circulate do I have a proposer.   
CLLR BEHAN: I want to propose.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Do I have a seconder.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?  Agreed?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: To consider the disposal of a portion of property 
measuring 0.032, to Tanager DAC in their capacity as charge holder over the 
property as previously circulated. Do I have a proposer?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposers, please?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Paul O'Brien.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: And seconded by Shay Cullen.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?  Yes, thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 4 to consider a report in accordance with Section 
179 of the Planning and Development Act as amended. It is the proposed 
solar car ports at county buildings car park Station Road Wicklow Town. The 
report has been circulated.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Do I have a proposer?  Councillor Matthews, seconded by 
Cllr Snell. We will go for a vote.  
 
Vote was taken 31 for and one not present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To consider the Chief Executive's monthly management 
report.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I will mention one or two points and I then I will take 
questions on that. The An Bord Pleanála decision has come back positively in 
relation to the Arklow wastewater treatment and also for the container hotel 
in Wicklow Town, work commenced last month on the library in Wicklow 
town and the tenders are back for Fitzwilliam Square and that will come 

 
3
back in October. Tenders are back in Arklow and the consultants are working 
on the detail of the public realm. Design and documents for the transport 
bridge and works will commence on the scheme there in October as well. 
Tenders were due back last Friday for consultant on the Blessington 
greenway. The applications were submitted in respect of Glendalough, 
Baltinglass and extra funding for the Blessington Greenway. We will see how 
it goes. Rathdrum is going forward on the 30th of September, receive 
funding 50,000 each, one for Knacanagh foot paths and another for the 
multiuse games area and a contract was signed today for a 3.5 million 
contract with them. I will take the rest of it as read and I will take any 
questions.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: I have just three items I wanted to list. For the Chief 
Executive, first of all on page 15, last Friday at 5.30pm, we normally get a 
blizzard of emails from Wicklow County Council at 5.30pm on a Friday telling 
us different things we didn't know about and last Friday we received an 
email saying:  "Wicklow County Council has engaged consultants to do a 
town health survey on Bray." And they will eventually come back and report 
to Wicklow County Council and basically the object of the exercise, which 
every single person in Bray will agree with is to try and re-enhance the main 
street area of Bray and try and ensure that it becomes a thriving town 
centre again. What I cannot understand, for the life of me and I wanted to 
see if you can explain it to me, we have had four public meetings of Bray 
Municipal District and one with the administrator, never once was it 
mentioned that consultants were going to be employed to conduct in health 
check on Bray, we weren't asked if it was a good idea, we weren't asked 
should a survey be done, an online or a physical survey and we weren't 
asked what questions should be asked, we weren't able to discuss what 
would happen to the report and the survey when it was done. We were 
completely bypassed and blind-sided.  
 
Now, for the new members, this happens all the time here. Councillors are 
disposable, as far as the management of this council is concerned. We are 
barely tolerated and instead of building up a team attitude, particularly, 
what I feel so strongly about is the newly elected members, enthusiastic, 
young people, primarily, coming on this Council for the first time and the 
message we are getting is an email at 5.30pm on a Friday saying we are 
doing this, not a mention, it's not even on the agenda of the council meeting 
on Tuesday night. I want to know, Chief Executive, what is your attitude to 
councillor this is in Council and in Bray Municipal District. Every member will 
be affected by issues such as this coming down the tracks in the next five 
years. As far as I am concerned we need a lot of work done in Bray town 
council and town centre, but the elected members have to be involved from 
the beginning and the same would apply throughout the county. I think we 
need to get this straight right at the start of this session at this five years, 
where we stand as public representatives. Have we got a voice or have we 
not?  Or are we only to be tolerated where necessary and I am not going to 
accept it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Ferris.  
CLLR BEHAN: I have two other issues, I am very unhappy.  

 
4
CATHAOIRLEACH: I will let you back in after other councillors have spoken, 
if you cannot take three minutes to make one point.  
CLLR BEHAN: I also want to know what is paying.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Joe, you have to respect everyone.  
CLLR BEHAN: I am asking the question here.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: You will have to wait, I am sorry, you can't do this.  
CLLR BEHAN: It's on the report.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Ferris.  
CLLR FERRIS: I will be very brief, I just have a couple of questions to ask, 
but can I comment on the previous exchange, I think that kind of behaviour, 
Cllr Behan, would put people off, being aggressive like that, I think you can 
get your point across without shouting and I honestly don't believe that we 
are only tolerated by the Directors and the Chief Executive. I would like to 
raise a point on page 7, I raised, if you remember last month the issue of 
rent arrears and I would like to commend the work being carried out by the 
rent team in their effort to recruit these arrears. I noted when I got a brief 
report back that the three areas in the county with the highest amount of 
arrears, which is Bray, Wicklow Town and Arklow do not have rent collectors. 
I understand these are the most populated areas in the county and therefore 
that is the reason why the arrears are so high there, but I like to know if the 
Chief Executive thinks that this is a situation could be approved by 
appointing rent collectors to these three towns and I think things could 
change dramatically, hopefully. The other item on page, on this, I would like 
to ask Mr. Curran to provide the members with details of all publicly owned 
land in the county that has not yet been developed and on page 8, in 
relation to the Kilbride social housing scheme, I was contacted recently by 
some residents living adjacent to Kilbride, living in Clover Hill, they tell me 
now that the works are starting at 7.00am in the morning. Now I received 
confirmation when the previous contractors were on site that works, it was 
written confirmation that, they were told that works could only commence at 
8.00am, now they are starting at 7.00am and the residents are being told 
that, they have been given permission. I think 7.00am in the morning is too 
early for all of that noise and everything else, so I would like to receive 
clarification on that, thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR McMANUS: I like to take two questions on the housing section in 
particular and around HAP. So I notice that from your last report in July up 
until this report, that I believe there is 176 more houses reliant on HAP. I 
am wondering where does that go?  Does that get fed in nationally. And 
secondly the homes with place minder I asked at the last meeting and I will 
ask again, that is a new service that we have, a new employee and I would 
like to know how they are getting on in terms of, I think it's 97 households 
they have supported since October 2018 in terms of what is their experience 
of supporting people who are on homeless HAP. Are they having difficulties 
in fulfilling their role, in terms of protecting their wellbeing as a staff 
member, but also protecting people who are on the HAP?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: I think most of that is going to be covered under the 
housing presentation. Cllr O'Brien.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. It's not a follow up because I 
want to make the same point as Cllr Behan and because I was struck by the 

 
5
scenario in the same way and when I read the report and it says Bray Town 
Team and I don't know who that is, but I am not on it and I haven't been 
invited to be on it, I do, in the news and social media and in the county I 
hear about great stuff happening in town teams, so I would aspire for Bray 
to have a Town Team that can show that is there a group of people 
committed to doing good stuff in the town. And likewise, I replied to the 
email that I got, within half an hour of getting it asking, I work in that world, 
of doing consultation doing public engagement, I might have even done this 
for free if I was asked.  
 
I think it's important, in that this is a whole piece of work and I have worked 
in organisations, with the greatest of respect, bigger than Bray MD as well, 
so there is a whole back end of work that is required to do that in the best 
interests and with the best possible outcomes for the stakeholders who are 
the people of the town, so I would, also, you know, we are invited to a focus 
group meeting that is clashing with something else that am at, it carries on 
whether me or my colleague are available to go. It feels like we are missing 
an opportunity to do a health check that could have a positive impact and 
forward in the next five years for us and Bray as a town. I would like to 
know are there terms of reference for how town teams are created and is 
there a model that Bray isn't following but could.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Mine is just very brief, it's I 
know, at the last CEO's report and this one as well and possibly all of them, 
we don't have any comparative figures for social housing and for homeless 
or anything like that, in other words, we are looking at figures here every 
month and we don't know whether the figures are increasing or staying 
stable and I think that is an important thing to know, in other words if there 
is a problem for the work or getting better. Even if you had a comparative 
figure with, even the previous month, and maybe just a year to date, just an 
extra couple of columns added on so we can see where we are, because it's 
hard to determine from these, thank you.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you very much, chair, I am going to follow on with 
the question in relation to Whitestown dump, it appears that during the 
determination by the judge was that site would be remediated within three 
years, don't know if that is actually the case, but if the Council were to go 
back to the court with a timetable of actions to show when it would be 
remediated and what actions would get them to that point. I am wondering 
would we be supplied with that timetable that would have gone to the judge. 
Also with costings I would query that because there was a question over who 
was going to end up paying for Whitestown and we are going to come into a 
budgetary year right now and that would be a significant amount of money, 
so who will be footing this bill, the Council or the Department?  And I 
suppose a more up to date information on where we are with it and when 
the plan will be remediated.  
CLLR LEONARD: I wanted to say, it wasn't on the report, but the Chief 
Executive mentioned it there, I just want to welcome the sewage treatment 
plant for Arklow, it's been long overdue and well-needed. I want to ensure 
that Wicklow County Council protect a lot of the residents along the lines of 
where the pipes will be laid, recent works on the Harbour Road have left a 

 
6
lot of vulnerable older people and people whose homes have been damaged 
and they have been caught in a loop of nobody claiming responsibility for it, 
between the contract between the County Council and Irish Water, these 
would be along the same line of the works that would be done and I would 
like the Council to take responsibility and they work with Irish Water to 
prevent them having to go through so much.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just in response to the issue 
about receiving an email on Friday, about a company called Future Analytics 
to do a health check on Bray, it's actually a very positive thing to have this 
happening. This was discussed at a councillor's induction meeting that I 
organised, so all of the councillors were aware we were looking to carry out 
this work on the town and have a health check done on it, I believe it's an 
objective of the Town Team and the Wicklow Economic Think-Tank to have 
these processes carried out.  
 
This company is experienced in economic matters in relation to town and I 
think we have gotten a good company in to do this, so I don't want the 
feeling around the chamber to be that councillors didn't know about this, 
councillors should and did know about this, we also have two public 
meetings coming up which councillors have been informed of as well and we 
have had wide stakeholder engagement on it, this hasn't been going on 
quietly and this is what you do when you are trying to make an 
improvement. You create a baseline study and say what have we got, what 
do we need and what can we do?  That is what we are starting to do for the 
town. Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Like many of my councillors in 
the area I am being inundated with emails complaining about the state of 
the Murrough, I am wondering is there any update on the illegal dumping 
there, thank you.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, yes, I too wanted to record my 
concern about the Town Teams and forums, in our area the Town Team in 
Blessington do great work and the forums in Baltinglass and Blessington do 
great work. Then at times they seem to know more than what is going on 
than the elected councillors know. I would express my concern on that, it's 
the people who have the mandate and are responsible to the people in the 
area and it's very important to remember that and while I don't always 
agree with everything with Joe Behan says, I don't believe it's appropriate 
that another member of the house will chastise him on how low or high he 
raises his voice. It's a sad day when you see other councillors checking other 
councillors on the noise levels or whatever.  
CLLR FERRIS: I think I am entitled to my opinion.  
CLLR O'NEILL: It's none of your business.  
CLLR FERRIS: It is my business.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: The town teams have worked well, people involved sat 
down and looked at what was needed and they have gone a long way in 
providing facilities and applying for grants in public buildings and a lot of 
projects were provided for, have the back of the whole of the community 
under the Town Team, the same in Blessington, they are a big driver for the 
Blessington greenway and councillors and officials are involved and I think a 
lot has come out of it in terms of building and getting people involved in 

 
7
Chambers of Commerce to come on board, Bray is an ex Town Team which 
has now been established the town health check is just a follow on from 
that, it's active citizenship within the town and it's been positive to date and 
I have no doubt this one will be. Councillors will be involved in the town 
health check, they will go to a meeting on Thursday night and they will be at 
the Municipal District meeting and to date they have been very positive. In 
terms of rent arrears, there has been a move away from getting as many 
people as possible to go on to direct debit, to use the pay basis with An Post 
and the rent collectors are working inhouse and trying to get as many people 
as possible door-to-door, those days of collecting money door-to-door are 
gone nationally. It has been working, more and mother people as they move 
into council houses set up a direct debit system and it seems to be working. 
The public land will come under a presentation in relation to housing supply, 
similarly the Kilbrian starting at 7.00am, we will take it up with the 
councillors and we can discuss it. Those figures are centralised, they are a 
shared service, based in Limerick to all of those figures come back to 
Limerick. They have a place finder who is working out very well in terms of 
tenants and these are all dealt with on a case by case basis and very sense 
active issues and it can be difficult for people to find rental accommodation 
and it needs that extra resource to find accommodation and work with them. 
It's been working very well from my point of view, the comparative figures, 
we will have a look at that, the supplies and the numbers moving and we 
can certainly do that.  
 
The Whitestown, currently the remediation plan has been prepared. There is 
a lot done in terms of surface water and examination of surface water and a 
physical survey and there is in terms of a detailed investigation. The timeline 
has gone back to the court and the remediation plan will be finished in 
March, that is the time that needs to be agreed by ourselves, by the owners 
and by the EPA and then we will have, I think it's over about two years the 
work will be done. 78 in the original judgment, it may go longer than that, 
but again it's been brought to the attention of the judge. Costs were always 
paid by the Department, we have had discussions about the Department, 
they know it's coming and we don't know yet what the cost will be on the 
remediation plan and we are forwarding that on to the Department.  
 
Wastewater treatment plant, that was between the contractors and we will 
certainly keep an eye on that. There is legal action being taken in relation to 
the Murrough, that is ongoing as we speak, we will provide details. Thank 
you.  
>>: If you have specific questions, the HAP home finder will be giving a 
presentation, so one specific question, say the money, is where as we were 
or weren't reliant, we will say part of the local current supply is HAP and HAP 
is part of the supply and the formula the same as local authority or group 
housing bodies, so it is, it might not be the exact wording I prefer to go 
with, but we will have a presentation that might answer most of the 
questions.  
CLLR CREAN: Can I come back before we live the report on the Town Team 
piece. Maybe because it predates me I like to know more to get them on the 
agenda. I would like, like questions have been asked around the terms of 

 
8
reference, the accountability, where is the mandate and is there a legislative 
base and even in relation to the Greystones one it's great work for the 
realm, that is a planning tool, okay, it complements our work, but the 
duplication we need to look at is there public representatives on that who 
are on it, do they report to us, so we don't have a repeat of this again and 
again and there is some mechanism, where, I suppose for me I need to 
learn what are town teams, what is their function and how I connect with 
them?  In the July report, it's not in August's report, but we would get to ask 
questions on the July report, but they had bus shelters and they got money, 
€15,000, I would be interested in are they deciding, the train session needs 
a shelter, that is a priority I am hearing is coming from my constituents, is 
that being considered?  So if you decide what the actions are I would be 
interested to learn more. So if that could be on the agenda it would be good 
to get more.  
CLLR WALSH: Just to make the point in relation to that and also the 
mechanism put in place in relation to the Town Team in Greystones 2020. 
They would report back to the Municipal District on a regular base and to 
keep the members updated on what is happening there and there are 
representatives on the district on the Town Team.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 6 to consider the adoption of the 2019-2024 
Strategic Policy Scheme.  
ADMINISTRATOR: At this stage the elected members will have a copy of the 
actual draft scheme. The scheme has been on public display now over the 
month of July and August, about six weeks. There were seven submissions 
received and the members got a report on the 19th of August, summarising 
those submissions as well as a copy of the seven submissions so we got 
submissions from the environmental pillar, Keith scan London, from James, 
James Benson, eastern region executive of the Construction Industry 
Federation and Helen Howes, who is the Wicklow Council PPN.  
 
If I could draw your attention to the members have been circulated before 
the meeting, with Appendix1, which is the proposed framework and also a 
list showing the elected members preferences on each individual SPC, so if 
you look at the appendix 1, taking into account all of the submissions 
received, the wording in black is the original scheme and the wording in red 
is the proposed configuration by the submissions, so for example, on the 
planning and environment SPC, the Construction Industry Federation have 
expressed on interest in being on that, so that is catered for there at pillar 1. 
The chambers, the local chambers have looked for representation on all six 
SPCs, so if we were to go with that planning and economic development is 
catered for, you would have a new seat on the transportation and 
emergency services. Housing in Cork estate, that is catered for. Community 
and cultural and social development is catered for, as is the development 
and enterprise support, as is the climate and biodiversity SPC.  
 
The environment pillar has asked for representation on all six SPCs, so that 
is catered for planning development and also planning, you would have a 
new seat on the corporate estate from environment conservation as with the 
community, cultural social development. The PPN have asked that Comhairle 
Na Nog be filled by a young person. So that is there also. Just in relation 

 
9
then to the pillar to the representation from fisheries and forestries, we did 
write to the Department of Agriculture and Food, they are asked to be 
provide representation for all SPCs around the country, because it's a new 
SPC, they are going to come back to us. And then just in relation to the 
elected members representatives, if the corporate policy group considered 
the configuration and the members representation, so if the plenary council 
approve this today we can go ahead and fill the spaces and kick off with the 
SPC meetings in mid-October. So just in relation to the submissions 
received, a recurring theme was that the overarching driver policy creation 
in county Wicklow must be for sustainable development, development that 
meets the need of the present without compromising future development to 
meet their needs. This considers the impact of all aspects of 
decision-making. 
 
Reference was made to the UN Sustainable Goals and with these in mind 
they proposed the following underlying dimensions for the scheme and just 
in response to that, the goals of the climate adaptation strategy are 
designed to plan a coherent response to the effects of climate change and 
this will be weaved into, not only our SPC, about you our corporate plan. A 
recurring theme in the submission was around training and yes, we will 
provide training for SPC members, both elected members and sectoral 
representatives. There was a number of submissions made in relation to how 
we operate the SPCs and we certainly will do this insofar as practically 
possible. There was a submission in relation to, that sector reps have their 
travel expenses paid. Just to say that this will require a budget, which we 
don't have and also a resolution of the council, not many local authorities 
provide for expenses to nonelected members and where they do only the 
PPN reps are paid, where possible, but the Wicklow PPN Charter provides for 
the recoupment of expenses to their members.  
 
So, if there are any questions I am happy to take them and if, I suppose the 
important thing would be to sign off on the framework so we can go out to 
sectoral representatives and maybe get back to the members on the 
meeting on the 2nd of October when the membership is finally decided.  
CLLR BEHAN: Cathaoirleach, can I clarify that the, everyone who is listed 
here that wanted to be on any of the committees, particularly the 
oversubscribed ones, like housing and the community and cultural, those 
people are now officially going to be included on those committees?   
ADMINISTRATOR: The elected members.  
CLLR BEHAN: Yes.  
ADMINISTRATOR: No, what you have hear is the configuration, if you look 
here you have the economic and support SPC six people, five space on 
housing six people looking to go on it, community culture and social develop. 
Plan, then 6 for six places. Transportation, water, three for five spaces and 
climate and biodiversity, five for five spaces so it is open to use elected 
members to change the numbers of those committees if you wish to bear in 
mind.  
CLLR BEHAN: Can I follow up on that, that is why I asked the question. I 
want to propose we do change the membership numbers to reflect the 
interest of the members of the council and obviously housing and community 

 
10
are two very big issues for people, that is why they are oversubscribed. I 
want to be on housing but I recognise we can't have everyone on housing so 
I opted to go to another one. For the people who have said they want to be 
on those particular ones we should today agree to change the number of 
members required on those to facilitate those members. You might also 
remember, on the last occasion we discussed that I suggested there should 
be an opportunity for members of the public not involved in any of these 
national pillars to indicate an interest in being a member of the SPC and we 
would take that into account when we decide finally on the membership, on 
the day Lorraine suggested I keep that proposal until today, I want to make 
it now, Cathaoirleach, and I presume we will be advertising to are those 
members anyway and I want to propose we do that.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I think the representation on it 
is broad and it covers quite a lot of areas and interests, so I think we have 
the numbers right in terms of the outside representation on it, it's good to 
see buyer rental representation crosses many of the SPCs as possible, we 
are all aware that every one of those directorates and SPCs, the policies they 
may bring to full council have a huge impact on climate change and 
biodiversity and the environment, it's good to have that. Delighted to see 
Comhairle Na Nog as a part of this and I hope members fully endorse that 
here today. In terms of the numbers, the elected members and the way the 
numbers have worked out, I think we should give the, maybe the bigger 
parties a chance to have a chat amongst themselves to see, I notice the 
bigger parties have quite a few reps on the SPCs, maybe to talk and see if 
we can level things out before we take a step to go with the numbers. I 
don't know how much talk there was beforehand.  
 
The transport one is hugely important and I am surprised at that being 
undersubscribed. A lot of challenges in transport in Wicklow in terms of 
public transport and the requirement for that and I would be really 
underfunded in terms of large public transport projects for are Wicklow. I am 
surprised it's undersubscribed and it's my second choice. So, I would 
propose they go with, as presented here today, I wouldn't be so sure of 
changing the numbers of membership, at the moment I would like to give 
the members a chance to discuss that amongst themselves, but I would 
have to propose it's presented here today.  
CLLR SNELL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  Again.  As chair of the Housing & 
Corporate Estate, the positions available are five and there are six people 
who are looking and half of that as the first priority. In regards to economic 
development and enterprise, there is six spaces on that and five people have 
expressed an interest to go on it, so I think the logical thing to do would be 
to say that everyone would get their first choice and that we now make the 
housing and corporate estate six positions rather than five and reverse it in 
regards to economic development and reduce that from six to five. The 
problem here is that you still have community cultural and social 
development at seven and transportation and emergency services at three 
and I personally think that no SPC should have three members and I think 
four is not enough, I think it would have to be five and let community and 
social develop. Go to six, but that is, it's all right, we can make it decision to 
change housing and economic development, but some members who are 

 
11
down for the oversubscribed communities and culture and social 
development, at least two of those are going to have to move across and 
that is something that the members here, it would be unfair on me to 
suggest that, but if you want to take it in regards to housing and increase 
the number to five, at least you are pleasing six people on housing, you are 
also pleasing the five who want to go on the economic development, but 
unfortunately the bigger question for the other members in regards to CDP.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you very much, chair. Just in relation to Cllr 
Behan's proposal on bringing in members of public I wonder how that would 
work and if we had a lot of people how we would choose. I think it 
represents an issue we have to look at and that is how we communicate 
what the SPCs do, not only within the council, but a lot of the time it's not 
really communicated to each member what each SPC is doing but then how 
we go beyond an out to the communities and get our message out to people 
as to what we are doing and what happens in these meetings. I think that 
level of oversight is really good and it would probably be spur you on to do 
more within the SPCs and for it to be more of a policy driver than an 
implementation check box exercise, so I am not sure how that would work, 
so I think, at this stage I would be keen to get this signed off and get 
moving with it and maybe look at how we can increase engagement with our 
communities on a different footing.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Just on the transportation and emergency services we 
had difficulty in the last five years as well attracting councillors or, I mean 
and an on a few occasion, we had council meetings because we hadn't got 
the right number of elected representatives. That is why I put my name 
down for that, I am very interested in that, but I know that Cllr Behan put 
his name down and myself and Derek, two-and-a-half years each, that is not 
the reason I went on it. It's very disappointing, obviously there is others 
oversubscribed for whatever reason, so really they should have to transfer in 
there, because we are not going to get the numbers and no use going ahead 
with three.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Cathaoirleach, I am one of the 
ones that is on the CTSD and I will transfer over if there is a space on 
economic development and I will transfer there no problem to move this 
along.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I suppose I was making my own 
stand for going for the community cultural and social development 
committee. I had opted to go on that number one and I hadn't made any 
other options for the other committees because that is the committee that I 
feel suits my strengths best and indeed my colleague Cllr O'Brien had put his 
number one choice down for housing. I think Stephen Matthews made a 
good point that because there are a number of big parties on this they 
should look to change it and I would like to thank Cllr Kennedy for offering 
to change to transportation water and emergency services, but what I sorry, 
sorry the economic development and enterprise support, I would be keen to 
stay on one and I am putting my cards on the table. Cllr Murphy. Is the 
SPCs, that is where there is a link between community coming in to sit on 
the SPCs because it is a representation of Municipal groups. Also on the 
SPCs groups with disabilities, because each part of the SPC is really, there 
mass to disability involved in that and I don't see anything through any of 

 
12
them, so I think that needs to be looked at as well.  
CLLR WALSH: Just by way of clarification, I think, Councillor Kennedy's 
suggestion that he go to the economic development SPC and not 
transportation and water, but looking at it there is certainly an imbalance 
there, three members on that SPC, the transportation one as councillor 
Fitzgerald it needn't have to be because of a lack of representation and it 
shouldn't, so we should look at populated that SPC, Councillor Snell's 
discussion about changing the spaces from economic development and the 
housing estate is one that maybe might be considered as well. Certainly 
transportation water and emergency services, these extra, needs extra 
representation.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: It is open to members to sit on more than one SPC, if 
they want and transport, water and emergency services was my second 
choice, so if we have a dearth of people looking to go on it I would be happy 
to go on transport, I just got my first choice which was economic 
development and enterprise support. Is there anyone.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Delighted to have you.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: If we could get one more to transport we are done.  
ADMINISTRATOR: You could, we can stay with the six on economic 
development and enterprise support, that is six. That increase the housing 
one from five to six, CCSD increase from five to six, planning stay at six, 
transportation and water and emergency at five and planning and 
biodiversity five, it would mean if people don't want to transfer over that 
members can serve in more than one SPC and one.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: So we need one more person to join the transport water 
and emergency services. Is there anyone that thinks that that is an 
important thing within the county.  
ADMINISTRATOR: They can come back on the 2nd of October if you wish.  
CLLR BEHAN: Can I make a suggestion, that among the chairs of the other 
SPCs that a draw is made and one name comes out of the hat. I think that is 
the fairest, to join that committee as the last member, or even do it, like for 
five years one year on for the chairs to be involved on the committee. I 
believe that is a fair compromise.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I think that is a fair solution as well. Members happy with 
that?   
ADMINISTRATOR: So in terms of the numbers, so I am interested just for 
the framework for the numbers we are going economic development 
enterprise support six, housing in Cork estate, six. Community and cultural 
development six, planning and environment six, transportation water and 
emergency services five and planning and biodiversity five. Agreed?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: And the fifth place on the transport, water and emergency 
services will be filled by a draw of the existing chairs of the SPCs.  
CLLR WHITMORE: I am not so sure about that, chair, I think, personally I... 
personally I have stayed away from it, going on a lot of other committees, 
because I want to devote my time to the SPC, so to now go on to another 
SPC, as a chair, I think I personally don't know if that is such a good idea, 
because there will be a lot of work involved in the SPC so I don't want to be 
sitting on another one if I can avoid it, to be honest.  
CLLR BEHAN: It's one year.  
CLLR MITCHELL: I am a chair part time on the transport and emergency 

 
13
services one. It’s very important for a very large number of people in 
Wicklow the transport and it's only going to get worse and worse in the next 
five years and it's clearly important that we manage to try and get the 
investment that is needed, particularly in public transport and also roads to 
support the people and I am disappointed that more people aren't interested 
in trying to help with that.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, have you decided that you 
are going to go off.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: No, I am going on both.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: You are going to be on both. So that means that with 
the first three at six, and the fourth one at six, there is only one problem 
then and that is just one, so I think the only fair thing to do is the ones that 
are oversubscribed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There won't be any oversubscribed, we are just short one 
person.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Okay.  
CLLR BLAKE: I will go up to that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Vincent will go on to transport.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Are you going on both, Cllr Blake?   
CLLR BLAKE: I don't mind.  
ADMINISTRATOR: If you go on both we leave CCSD at six, but if you are 
going off it, it goes back to five.  
CLLR BLAKE: One year or permanently on it, five years?  I would be going 
back on to that anyway after two-and-a-half years as vice chair of it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Do you want to be on both if you are going to be vice 
chair.  
CLLR BLAKE: I will go to both.  
ADMINISTRATOR: If I could get a proposer and seconder to that?   
CLLR SNELL: Proposer.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Seconder.  
CLLR GLENNON: Just a point of clarity, when Lorraine called outside spaces, 
five for planning and environment or six?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Six.  
CLLR GLENNON: Still six.  
ADMINISTRATOR: And then the framework, the actual framework has 
circulated, can I get a proposer?  Councillor Whitmore.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: What about Cllr Behan's proposal.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: The guidelines set out clearly the way the SPCs are set 
up, so they are looking for a minimum of seven and where appropriate a 
minimum of six and where appropriate seven selectors so they set them out, 
the environmental... and social inclusion. And then they set out clearly how 
they are nominated. So three of them come from the PPN and the rest come 
from the environmental conservation comes from the PPN and social 
inclusion comes from the PPN and the development and construction etc. It 
sets out clearly how you do that and development companies and state 
agencies are not permitted to go on it, but the PPN may recommend people 
from those agencies, so that is the way it's set out, so there is nothing 
stopping the SPC bringing in the experts at any time to a particular meeting, 
if someone wants to come in they can come in on that basis, otherwise they 
have to come in through the PPN and the Act is clear, it's the shell, 

 
14
remember shell take the guidelines into account and they are quite clear in 
terms of specifics on that.  
CLLR BEHAN: Cathaoirleach, it's a reserve function of the members to decide 
the make-up of the SPC. That is it. We are, it's in our hands and I want to 
propose that councillors don't want to, it's fine, it's a democratic decision, I 
want to propose that we advertise for members of the public who are not tie 
need any organisation that might have an interest in the six areas to 
nominate themselves and give a reason why. That is all. I am just trying to 
widen it out of just the organisations in the county, we are an organisation, 
everything else is an organisation, it's just to reach out to the people out 
there, that is all, so I just want to propose that, Cathaoirleach.  
CLLR SCOTT: I want to make the comment on Cllr Behan's proposal, if we do 
that that we have to have guidelines and framework put down as to how we 
go, how they apply from the public and how we judge who should sit?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: In terms of the legislation it says: "The establishment of 
a strategic policy committee shall be undertaken by the local authority in 
accordance to the guidelines that are issued." And the guidelines are very 
specific, so that is laid out and the legislation is very clear that that must be 
taken into account.  
CLLR BEHAN: We have taken it into account, but we can still invite members 
of public to be part of it, that is all I am saying.  
CLLR FERRIS: I would like to second Cllr Behan's motion that the wider 
community should be invited. I know a lot of people who have asked me 
about the SPCs who aren't affiliated to any of the prescribed groups and in 
relation to the Chief Executive's comment there, these are guidelines that 
are set out.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: The establishment of a strategic policy committee shall 
be undertaken in accordance with such guidelines so you have to do it in 
accordance with the guidelines and the guidelines set out who the selectors 
are and how they are selected. It shall go down in accordance with that and 
it sets out what should be done.  
CLLR FERRIS: I second Cllr Behan's motion and I would like to see that 
being examined, because as I said, a number of people, individuals who 
aren't members of the PPN or any of these organisations, because they are 
just individual, they are not part of a group, they are individuals, but have a 
particular interest, either in, as we were talking about earlier, transportation 
Bus Connects and all of that kind of thing and in other areas, they have been 
disallowed and disenfranchised from being able to get a place on any of 
these committees and what Councillor Scott said there about trying to, I 
suppose find out if people are suitable or whatever, I would say that that 
should be down to the particular SPC committee, but I think it should be 
explored with the Department and sure we are not the only council around 
the country who have come up with this.  
CLLR WALSH: Cathaoirleach, I think the proposal would be difficult to put 
into practice in terms of what criteria you are going to lay down in terms of 
suitability, etc. Maybe we can get further clarification from the Department, 
but I think it would be difficult and as I think the CEO suggested that if 
needs be, chairs of SPC can request certain people of expertise to attend 
certain meetings that are relevant to whatever topic is being discussed. I 
think it would be a difficult one to throw the net wide and to cipher what is 

 
15
suitable and who is not. And what the agendas would be on sitting on the 
SPC.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry.  
>>: Just.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just to say we read out the seven commissions received 
and I can see where Cllr Behan is coming from. The decision made in July 
was to go out and get submissions from interested parties. We have to 
recognise the PPN structure, as being voluntary and community 
representation throughout our committees, that we have to do that. And I 
have been in contact with the administration network throughout the 
country and had this question has been raised at other local authorities and 
the guidelines are being strictly adhered to. Just to say that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, I wonder if, because the chambers are in each 
area, if there were members of the public who are genuinely interested in a 
particular SPC, if they could be encouraged to contact their local chamber, 
because sometimes what we have is an SPC where we have a person 
appointed to it, or a body appointed to it and they don't actually have the 
representation to attend all of the meetings, so maybe if we could encourage 
members of the public through their local chamber to actually join on 
through the SPCs that way?   
CLLR BEHAN: I understand why you are saying that, but people actually 
have to pay to be in the chamber of commerce and they are not just 
members of the public, they are business people, maybe people don't agree 
with it, could we take a vote and if it's agreed with very to check it out and if 
it's found out this is not possible legally then we drop it, but I think for the I 
would be interested to know what members think.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Before we do that, it's unfair to go for a vote when there 
is a little clarity on it. Could we bring it to protocol and thrash it out and we 
will put the framework here today that is through and we will come back and 
address it properly at the October meeting.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: It's always been coming through the PPN and it comes to 
particular meetings if an expert or someone interested in that particular 
area, it's always there.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Can I ask, are the meetings public meetings?  Are they 
open to the public?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: The press can attend.  
CLLR WHITMORE: But members of the public can't?   
ADMINISTRATOR: They are not public meetings.  
CLLR WHITMORE: That would be another way.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If we can thrash it out and we will come back to in in 
October and it will be on the agenda. We are going to take a vote on the 
framework as it stands at the moment.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: It's important for the SPCs and governing bodies to get 
through today [INAUDIBLE]...  
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposed by Councillor Whitmore and seconded by Cllr 
Matthews.  
 
VOTE TAKEN  
 
ADMINISTRATOR: So that is 34 and two not present. Okay, members.  

 
16
CATHAOIRLEACH: Number 7 to consider the first draft of the Wicklow 
County Council corporate plan 2019-2024, the initial draft was attached with 
the Departmental guidelines and we will have Lorraine first and then the 
Chief Executive.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Okay, members just to say that the guidelines in present 
to what was planned 2019-2024 were circulated to all of the members, as 
was the first draft of the corporate plan. So the corporate plan sets out our 
goals, our high level goals and visions for the next five years. Have you to 
take an organisation wide strategic approach. It has to be adopted six 
months before the annual meeting, so that gives us a time frame up to the 
6th of December. We have to take into account certain activities, the 
activities of the Municipal Districts, cross-cutting issues which include social 
inclusion, human rights, climate change, mitigation measures, sustainability, 
disability rights we, have to look at the migrant perspective as well as other 
issues. With very to look at our resource, how we will implement the plan 
with our human resources and our technology. We have to look at areas of 
how we are going to monitor our progress and how we are going to report to 
them and the elected members. We have to take issues with regard to our 
other plans like the local economic action plan, our national plan, customer 
service, how we provide our services to our public, so importantly, as well, 
we have to reach out to all of our staff, we have to go through a wide 
stakeholder consultation process, so if the members were, if the plan is 
presented in two parts. One takes account of what is in the guidelines and 
the other is the Departmental functions, the goals and objectives and each 
department is fed into that. So if the members were agreeable today what 
we do is we go out to our staff during the month of September, consult and 
engage, in October go out to our wider stakeholders, our SPCs, LCDCs, our 
committees, the PPN, business interests, etc, etc and/or elected members 
with a view to coming back in either November or December with a 
completed plan and that plan will lead into our annual service delivery plan 
and our performance development systems internally.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Just in terms of the goals there is four broad areas, the 
first is housing and community, so the first one would be the high level goals 
over the next five years, the second is economic development planning and 
infrastructure, third is organisation development and financial matters we, 
have the fourth one now which is climate change adaptation and 
biodiversity, we will take any suggestions from members in relation to the 
high level goals and they would feed into our annual service plan and we will 
have a measurement of that as well. So we will ask members between know 
and the next meeting if they have any suggestions for high level separately 
when we are going through the consultation with staff if we could feed that 
back and get on to us.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Everyone agree?  Thank you. To consider the adoption of 
the Wicklow County Council Climate Change Adaptation Policy, previously 
circulated and copy attached and Mark is going to give us the presentation.  
MARK: I think Sean might go first.  
SEAN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, just to give you a brief background and 
particularly for the new members, this process started in April, when the 
council approved the draft strategy and it went out on to public display from 
the 7th of June to the 5th of July. I hope I am not stealing too many of 

 
17
Mark's slides here, but we had 97 submissions during that period, which is 
the highest number, there is 17 local authorities involved in the adaptation 
regional office, which is very encouraging, it means there is good awareness 
out there of the issues involved. There were some difficulties I think for 
people and it's very understandable, in differentiating between climate 
mitigation measures and adaptation, but to make it quite simple, we have 
already had a mitigation measure way proved by the council insofar as we 
have the solar panels out there, that is to reduce our carbon footprint and 
greenhouse gas emissions. Adaptation is more managing risks and impacts 
that are existing in, or are anticipated to exist. I think the important 
message today is that this is only the first step. The objective of the strategy 
is to make climate change into all of our actions and I described it previously 
was like health and safety. You wouldn't build a house without taking health 
and safety into consideration, you wouldn't even fix a tap without taking 
health and safety into consideration. So the objective is to embed it into all 
of our functions.  
 
The other thing to consider and come up when we look at the budget that 
there are budgetary implications for the measures that are included in the 
strategy and it's important that we face up to those when budget time 
comes around. One of the measures is the appointment of a climate action 
officer and I think that will be very important, because in the formulation of 
the strategy and analysing the submissions and so on, we had to draw on 
our existing staff and divert them from other important projects that they 
were involved in and I would like to personally thank Mary Cahill and Jim 
and a Teresa and Mark who were involved in producing what is in front of 
you today. As a result of the submissions we have considered them, taken 
them into account, we have quite a number of changes suggested and the 
kind of strategy which is before you for adoption, 23 new ones and three 
amended ones. There is a require. On us and all local authorities to adopt it 
by the 13th of September, so I commend the report in front of you today, 
with the amendments for your adoption and Mark will bring you through 
them.  
 
Mark. Thank you, Sean and Cathaoirleach. Okay, I will briefly mention some 
of the slides are from the presentation given earlier on in the year when the 
first draft was presented so apologies for any repeats. That is the definition 
of adaptation, just to make sure that you are all aware and more importantly 
members of the public who understand this process, because we are 
adopting a particular strategy here that the adaptation is not the same as 
climate action. A lot of people use the word climate action to describe this 
strategy, it's climate adaptation strategy. So we are trying to embed within 
the organisation and is that is for the most part within the executive, myself 
and my colleagues to make sure we take into account how we deal with and 
cope with climate change going forward. There are other policies in place 
where we can have more climate action, but this is primarily about climate 
adaptation. Again to stress mitigation and adaptation, the bulk of this 
strategy is about adaptation, occasionally we stray into mitigation, but that 
is only the action itself, when it's seen as mitigation is seen, adaptation is all 
about approach. This is a, this is how we propose to bring the process 

 
18
through with you. The dates are incorrect on this one in the sense we didn't 
quite meet our particular targets to have the public consultation in May, we 
did start it in June, by managed to reach our expectation to have the 
strategy before you for the 2nd of September, today's meeting, because 
there is an onus on us, as public bodies to have the adaptation adopted by 
the end of September. So this is the only opportunity to have it adopted as it 
stands.  
 
The way the strategy was divided into five themes, local adaptation 
governance and business operations, infrastructure and built environment, 
land use and development, drainage and natural resources and community 
health and wellbeing. I can go through, to confirm we did the public 
consultation, we started in June and completed it in July. We closed it and 
we collated the submissions we got. We did quite a considerable effort to get 
out to the consultation, to make sure it got out to the people. We have put it 
up on social media and on the website, we sent it to the public participation 
network and as a result of sending the draft strategy they came back looking 
for us to do presentations and Jim did two presentations, he went on the 
radio and we also have other local authorities who have come up into us 
with comments. In particular the CARO. That is the Climate Adaptation 
Regional Office, which is set up to assist all local authorities. They also, 
when they read our draft strategy had some comments and we incorporated 
them in. CARO wrote to some high level stakeholders in the Department, 
communications and the environment to remind them we had put our draft 
strategy on display and they also made some comments. 97 submissions 
were submitted, Jim, and others were tasked with going through every 
single one and preparing a position on each one and Sean, myself and Mary 
and Teresa reviewed the submissions on the proposed changes. We came up 
with 23 new actions and three amended actions in the draft, that is 
amended, compared to the draft that we initially sent out.  
 
So, the version we sent out last week, for adoption is changed in 26 
locations, compared to the draft that was sent out for public consultation. 
We there is a requirement we adopt the strategy by the 30th of September. 
So hopefully you will be happy to adopt it today. On the question of 
mitigation and climate adaptation again, to remind you we already have a lot 
of other actions under way, Sean mentioned it for the solar panels, we also 
have 20 something projects around the whole organisation being funded this 
year by a Better Energy Committee grant, that is an energy efficiency 
programme, so it's lighting and heating system installation, we are rota row 
fitting six houses under that grant as well as the routine work that goes on 
in housing, where as every time a house is relet, it has an opportunity to 
improve the energy efficiency. So we have a lot of action already under way. 
There is the green scheme fund and the fund that was announced recently. 
These are all what we understand as climate action. It's about how we 
operate ourselves. So I can go through each of the 26 changes but I would 
like to pause now and see what you want me to do. Do you want me to go 
through 26 items?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Not in the time allowed, I don't think individually, I am 
sure most people have read what was sent out.  

 
19
 
SEAN: Could I say that all of the actions in the strategy have gone through 
strategic environmental assessment and appropriate assessment. That is an 
important part of it. We got that independently, it's gone through that 
process, so just to mention those items which were circulated here also.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I think I said it before, as the 
party that had led the charge on climate action and change in the last 20 
years, to see reports and strategies like this, suddenly becoming into the 
mainstream to be discussed in the chamber I am delighted with it, it makes 
me realise the last 20 years were not wasted. They were on some other 
issues. I want to thank the staff because the staff did a huge amount of 
work on this. I know Mark, Jim, Mary, Teresa, Sean, and I know you had to 
drag staff in from other areas to help put this together and to me that 
indicates that at some point in the future, I think climate action and 
biodiversity and environmental loss is going to need its own directorate at 
some point in the future. 
 
That is obviously not for us to decide here today, but that is the direction it's 
going and the policy coming from all SPCs will have to be climate, because 
that is the challenge that we are facing in everything, in transport, in 
housing, our economic growth. It sits with the planning directorate at the 
moment and I think it's well guided in that. Myself and Councillor Whitmore 
will be chairing the climate action and biodiversity diversity SPC. I know 
some of the things that came in were mitigation and it being how do we stop 
and slow our impact on climate change, where as this document was about 
an adaptation strategy and how does Wicklow County Council as an 
organisation adapt to what is coming down the road with climate change and 
we have managed to weave in some mitigation measures in there, but it's 
mostly about adaptation at the moment. Everything that we feed in is going 
to feed into our climate change SPC, so all of the submissions coming in 
today, if people reading this and they feel their submission didn't fit in or 
was rejected, I can assure you it will be looked at the climate change SPC, 
we aren't quite there yet, but this is a first step on how the organisation 
adapts to climate change, we will have a mitigation strategy and a pollinator 
plan strategy and a biodiversity plan. We have the county development plan 
starting in six months’ time where we have to look at that again. We will try 
to weave other make submissions and suggest that some of those get 
weaved into the policy, also into our transport planning. I suppose you have 
to be realistic. Wicklow County Council is not going to stop climate change 
and Wicklow people are not going to stop climate change, but what we have 
done here is we have set a bar here in County Wicklow, we were the first 
county to declare a climate emergency. If we adopt it today we will be the 
first to have a Climate Adaptation Strategy, we declared we will be 
cognisant.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: 15 seconds.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: I would like to propose this and I look forward to working 
with Councillor Whitmore in the future.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Before I get into the adaptation I would like to welcome 
Laura McKidd, she works in Templecarrig, you are very welcome and we can 
talk to you later, would you like to, no, we can't. You we will talk later. I 

 
20
suppose Cllr Matthew it's has covered a lot I was going to cover, I would like 
to thank the team, it's great we got 97 submissions, it really shows how high 
this is on people's agendas and that really Wicklow is a very environmentally 
switched on county and that places a lot of responsibility on us as public 
reps and we have to listen to what is being said and make sure we lead on 
it. While this is an adaptation plan and it's very much an organisation and it 
will adapt to climate change as it happens, there was a lot of submissions 
put in in relation to biodiversity and I want to make sure that anyone who 
put in a submission is aware that as chair of the SPC I will make sure that 
your ideas and your thoughts and concerns will be taken into account by the 
SPC and that we will look at what was raised during all of the submissions. I 
want this SPC to be a very active SPC, to be outward looking SPC, so that 
we look, because the reality is Wicklow County Council is very tight on 
resources, there is only so many staff and there is only so much they are 
going to be able to do, but we have such an enormous amount of expertise 
within our county and we need to make sure we use the SPC as a tool to 
reach out to those people, to engage them, get their expertise and use that 
to drive policy within the county and that is what I would like to do over my 
first two-and-a-half years as chair.  
 
I think there is money set aside as leader funding as well and I really think 
as a council we need to make sure that that environmental money does not 
go back and get redistributed to other branches within the funding and that 
is something I would be keen to see. So, we will be looking at a mitigation 
plan, we will be looking at biodiversity and we will be prioritising that the 
adoption of the All-Ireland Pollinator Plan. Engagement of young people is 
going to be key in this, young people drove this, really brought it to our 
attention and I am delighted that Cllr O'Brien here beside me is going to be 
on the SPC because he does a lot of work with Comhairle na nÓg in his real 
job and we would hope to bring that expertise and get those people involved 
as well. So I like to thank the council staff and everyone who put in a 
submission and I suppose just so people are aware we will be using this SPC 
to make sure we do an awful lot in the area of climate change, climate 
action and biodiversity.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I was outside the chamber when 
this was first brought to the members here in April, with a megaphone 
protesting along with others, some of whom are in the public gallery. It’s a 
privilege to be in the chamber and to hopefully be approved to go on to the 
climate SPC and to work on the submissions sent in by the public. I want to 
thank the staff and it showed in response to the adaptation strategy it 
showed in the detailed way they respond to all of the suggestions, even 
though a lot are to do with mitigation. It's worth having a mention on 
mitigation, I said this in nigh first day in the chamber, we have 12 years to 
turn this around, so we bear a heavy responsibility in this chamber over the 
next five years, the length of the next council term, we don't have the time 
to be sitting here in five years’ time starting to talk about mitigation, it starts 
now and it will start with climate SPC, which I am looking forward to getting 
involved with. Again since April, it's worth pointing out, we have had the 
Amazon burning, Greenland melting and we have had a recent report from 
nature suggesting that Ireland is under severe risk of flooding due to climate 

 
21
change, so we don't have time to wait around. We can do that within our 
resources and Budgets and we will work on that as hard as we can in the 
SPC. Just a specific point, I would like to welcome the action that is brought 
in bringing in a sustainable transport plan. We were talking about transport 
earlier on in the SPC, I would like to raise the question and it may be a 
comment or now or next month's meeting, in regards to the new funding 
that is being announced by the Government recently, the local authorities in 
regards to putting out electric vehicle charging points, I was wondering if 
Wicklow had had a chance to look at that and see how it would be 
implemented across Wicklow and with particular reference for Greystones, 
which is desperate for a charge point at the moment. Thank you.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Very briefly, again, there is isn't 
much more to say, but I genuinely in terms of the staff and what they have 
presented today, I read a lot of reports, I even write a lot of reports and to 
see the commitment to this within the detail is hugely commendable, like I 
am in awe, reading through the submissions and seeing that every 
submission got a response and that is not copy and paste, that is not off the 
top of the head, that is detail, a commitment to an answer that people are 
looking for. I can't comment enough and I feel the plan, the strategy here 
today and it's almost like it's throwing the gauntlet back down on us and I 
am excited. If we recognise the journey from April to now, we should 
comment everyone who has been a part of that journey and those who have 
been outside the building challenging us and us taking on the challenge in 
here, I think it's to be recognised and I am really looking forward, we have a 
young person and Wicklow is doing a lot of firsts here and I think that should 
be recognised. We have a young person on an SPC, first in the country, we 
are taking the charge, we are not just seeking to be the first, I think we are 
authentically presenting ourselves as willing to be the first, I am really 
looking forward to the challenge that comes with that.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  It's just a small point, but 
it's something that I raised about three months ago. Congratulations on the 
adaptation strategy, and all the work done by the team, a huge amount has 
gone into it, but I am a great believer in the devil is in the detail and the 
small detail and this is a broad spectrum. Three months ago I asked about 
the plastic mug, the use of plastic mugs in the building and I was told they 
were going to be phased out, now I can see them around here today, I also 
see around here a wonderful idea, reusable bottle made of plastic, we should 
be leading from the front. We should be sending out the message that 
plastic is not a way to go. We have fish stock and our turtles being choked 
by plastic. We have all even the photographs of rivers and seas that are 
chock-a-block with plastic, we have to start phasing it out and the change 
begins with us and we should start taking ourselves seriously and looking at 
small things like that.  
CLLR CREAN: Again I like to reiterate what people have said about the staff, 
it's an amazing piece of work and great to see the level of detail in response 
to submissions, I was highly impressed and yes I would agree we do need a 
mitigation plan as well, so it's great to facilitate that, the only other thing I 
would like to add is as the members have mentioned the climate SPC and I 
would be of the opinion that although we need SPC in terms of the 
mitigation and pollination plan, I think it would be dangerous at that SPC 

 
22
would carry the climate actions really across all of the SPCs and we really 
need to make that clear and on the public record, even the housing SPC that 
I will be a part of that, going through different houses and making sure 
energy efficient homes are built, they are going to be key priorities, so I 
think across all of the SPCs we will all play a lead role and it won't just be 
one SPC, yes it will be a leading one, but it will be a leader of all other SPCs 
as well, so that needs to be really clear for the public as well. Thank you.  
CLLR LEONARD: I would agree with Mags and Mary, I think we need to 
incorporate this action that all of the hard work which has been done into 
projects that are pending very soon, especially three major projects in 
Arklow, the sewage treatment report. The inspector recommended that ABS 
technology be used so that water treatment would be considered, a decision 
was taken not to take that route, but I would like to push to get the latest 
technology to make that water 100% reused instead of pumping it out into 
the sea, because eventually we will need to do that and now is the time, 
before the plant is built to incorporate things like that. The OPW are doing a 
glad relief scheme in Arklow, it's a hard engineered solution to the flooding 
in Arklow, I would like to see part of that being soft engineering and keep 
the green corridors and work with the river and biodiversity and mitigation 
as part of that as well, that is a pending project, there will be money there 
to do it and it could be incorporated easily into it. And then, the historic core 
in Arklow, there was a 1.6 million planned development down there, the 
stone for the historic core is a proposed to come from China, I would like 
that to be sourced in Ireland if possible and in a sustainable way. Nobody 
else wants to come on that so we will have to go for a vote on that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: As proposed by Councillor Matthews and seconded by Cllr 
Scott pursuant to the provisions of the climate and low carbon and the 
national adaptation framework, Wicklow County Council resolves to... having 
considered the draft strategy, contents of the report and submissions 
received during its period of consultation and the SEA and AA screen reports 
carried out in accordance with the requirements of the SEA Directive, DIR 
2001/42/EC and Article 6.3 of the Habitats Directive.  
 
Vote taken.  
ADMINISTRATOR: That was 28 for and four not present. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 9 to consider the adoption of the Wicklow County 
Council traveller accommodation programme.  
>>: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, members of have been circulated with the 
traveller accommodation programme. The programme was drafted in 
conjunction with the local traveller consultant committee and following an 
extensive period of consultation, so it was circulated to the members on the 
31st of May with the proviso it has to be adopted before the 30th of 
September. So I am not going to go through, there is a bit of a policy 
overview and legislation there that you can read at your leisure, but for the 
purposes of today, I suppose I want to go through our timelines. We have to 
adopt before the 30th of September and just to state our policy statement. 
So it's the policy of Wicklow County Council to provide standard housing 
options as well as group housing in accordance with the assessment of need. 
Now, obviously these housing options are provided in recognition of 
travellers cultural identity as an ethnic minority group. The outgoing plan 

 
23
was prepared at a time when ethnic minority status hadn't been afforded to 
the traveller community, so this is a change in this plan.  
 
So in November 2018 we did an assessment of need for traveller families in 
Wicklow and you can see the breakdown of the traveller accommodation, we 
have ten home owner, people in standard housing, we have people in halting 
sites and residents in basic services site, a lot of travellers in rented 
accommodation, sharing houses and bays on halting sites and authorised 
sites and those in emergency accommodation, the same for the general 
population. The breakdown of the assessment of need show that we had 
about 80 families that were deemed to be in need of housing or social 
housing options.  
 
So, it's interesting to note that despite a lot of media commentary on 
traveller accommodation, over 75% of traveller accommodations would 
prefer standard housing. So that has informed our plan. Within the 
programme we have also retained the 1-16 ratio, so if we are allocating a 
scheme of houses with over 16 houses a minimum of 1 in 16 is allocated to 
traveller accommodation. So that is a minimum and we would be successful 
in increasing our statistics on that area, for example, we did 33 allocations of 
standard housing in the last few years. That is a significant amount. There is 
a breakdown of the assessment of need over the Municipal Districts, but as 
you can see, standard housing, 59 out of 80 is the preferred option for our 
families. Traveller specific accommodation, includes housing and halting 
sites and single sites is 21 with a total accommodation of 80 required in the 
current programme. We had particular targets, you can see the targets there 
in the current plan, proposed redevelopments and just updates there, for 
example, although we had proposed redevelopment in Silverbridge to 
construct three houses that has been considered premature, in light of the 
proposed road upgrade, so it's been deferred.  
 
So what we have done in the interim period we have refurbished the units 
for new families and they have been reallocated with a further unit to be 
refurbished. Rocky Valley we looked at relocating families there, with the 
preferred options of families, we do listen to the family and work closely with 
them, they would prefer the site to be upgraded. Windgates, the preferred 
option is to upgrade the site. So our targets under the Traveller 
Accommodation Programme is, one of the proposals we had was the 
revamping of Ballinteskin.  
 
So we are going to have to take out page 12, in the final paragraph we will 
be removing pending the outcome of that legal opinion. We are looking, we 
do have an implicit programme for development to consideration of lands 
available in a Municipal District that may be suitable to provide traveller 
accommodation. Again, I mentioned refurbishment Silverbridge upgrade to 
Rocky Valley and we are looking at consideration to changing housing bays 
to houses, subject to funding and available consideration in each Municipal 
District. We have a proposal for a specific group housing scheme in 
Rathdrum to accommodation an extended family grouping, who apparently 
are on the roadside and we hope to work in partnership with them. I like to 

 
24
acknowledge the input of the local traveller accommodation consultant 
committee, the outgoing one and the new incoming committee, we had our 
inaugural committee last week and Cllr Joe Behan is our new chair going 
forward. We presented last week and they have partially endorsed the 
adaption of this plan, so I would ask the members if they could see their way 
to adopting the plan today.  
CLLR BEHAN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. First of all, could I formally propose 
the adoption of this strategy, I want to thank Jackie and her staff for the 
work they have done on it and previous members of the traveller 
consultative committee and the present members, the newly appointed 
members and the members of the last housing SPC who also discussed this 
strategy and chaired by Cllr Snell. In particular I would like to congratulate 
the two travellers on the committee for their input and the key to success in 
how we handle the issue of traveller accommodation in the future is positive 
co-operation between all of the agencies and elected members and 
travellers' representatives and the staff of Wicklow County Council.  
 
I would make one point in my work as a public representative and I am sure 
many of the other members would agree with me on this, when you do find 
that travellers are in a situation of trying to seek rental accommodation, 
private rental accommodation, very often they are suffering double 
discrimination because if their name appears to be a traveller name, very 
often and very quickly landlords refused to entertain them at all. We know 
it's illegal, but it is most definitely happening. That is why we need positive 
discrimination measures such as one in 16 of every new unit being allocated 
to a traveller family and if they come up on a housing list that they are also 
allocated that house. It's essential we continue with that policy. I believe 
myself it's one of the reasons why so many young travellers want to have a 
settled lifestyle, they may want to travel at certain times of the year, but 
they want to have a home they can call their own and one of the concerns 
that the travellers representatives that indicated to us as members is that 
because of the extreme shortage of rental accommodation in this county at 
the moment, unless things change soon we will be back to a situation of 
having to deal with illegal encampments around the county. That is a day we 
do not want to go back to and we want to work positively, but we have to 
make sure that travellers have every possible assistance to get housed on a 
permanent basis and I have commend it.  
CLLR SNELL: Again I want to thank the outgoing committee under the 
Chairperson Nicola Lawless, she did tremendous work over a five-year 
period and I have no doubt that Cllr Behan will continue that work that is 
being put in place. The SPC look forward to working with Joe and his new 
committee and indeed the housing section. Everyone knows that there is an 
array of complexities around the issue of traveller accommodation, but it 
goes beyond that, it goes into education and health and that is why we all 
have to work hand in hand and I believe that the Municipal District over the 
next five years, in each area, will have to also work with the SPC and with 
the local traveller accommodation, because we all have to find solutions, for 
the betterment of all of our citizens. So I want to thank the housing 
department for the amount of work that they put into this, I couldn't let 
today go without mentioning Eamonn McCann who is retired, Eamonn was 

 
25
an stalwart of working with the traveller community. I know Eamonn is still 
there in the background if needed and there are new people who have come 
on board to replace him, but certainly it's about working together. I want to 
thank you, Joe, Jackie and the staff and certainly we will roll up our sleeves 
and work together going forward, so I would like to second this strategy.  
CLLR McMANUS: Thank you, chair, I would also like to welcome this today, I 
think it's a really important piece of the housing puzzle overall and thank 
you to the staff who did work on this and like we were saying about the 
climate adaptation strategy, again the submissions it seems all got a 
detailed response as well and were considered so I appreciate that. My 
question was going to be about budgeting and how that would be part of this 
plan, it seems to be missing, but that is going to be teased out between the 
SPC and ELPAC going forward, I don't know if you can clarify that, but I 
appreciate it and welcome it.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I want to thank Jackie for the presentation, because 
the plan in its initial format doesn't show the level of work which has been 
carried out, so when you compare the two it's great to get that feedback. 
Just in relation to the plan itself and from that the maintenance of sites, I 
had the opportunity, with Cllr Corrigan and O'Brien to visit the sites recently 
and I think it's a separate issue to this plan itself, but on a separate matter 
we need to look at the maintenance arrangements at some of the site we 
have in place and specifically some of the fire protection issues around 
there. So I would, as a maybe we could have some specific reporting on 
what is being done and what is planned to be done in the areas going 
forward, but thank you for the plan itself in its current format.  
CLLR BLAKE: I am a member of the SPC on housing and I join with the other 
members in thanking Jackie for the presentation and the work being done by 
the staff as well. I think the fact that, or the comment that Aoife has made 
there regarding the sites. Certainly one of the things that we came across 
down the years of the upgrading of the sites, a lot of those families do want 
to live in proper housing accommodation and there is opportunity for those 
sites to include a full living accommodation for the families that are in those 
particular locations, so certainly, again I would like to thank the whole 
committee for the work done.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I just want to commend Jackie and all involved on the 
report and just over the last five years, I have seen first-hand the work that 
was done and we did allocate some houses in the Municipal District there 
recently and had the unbridled joy of some of the people who were allocated 
the houses. I mean probably some conditions that were not suitable, but 
now they have new houses and we want to commend the County Council for 
how they have handled those. I know people were absolutely thrilled and I 
kind of wish the new Chairperson and the committee all of the best on that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: If there are any more comments, can we, do you want to 
go back to the questions.  
JACKIE: Just to go back to one of the items for clarity. Joe Behan mentioned 
it, the possibility of increasing due to the lack of private rental 
accommodation and discrimination against travellers. What came from the 
last meeting was that it is an issue and there is corresponding wise illegal 
encampments as private rental falls in that sector. It has been put to the 
ELTAC, the proposal at the last meeting that a subgroup be formed to 

 
26
examine legal encampments and the reason they happened and what 
measures can be put in place or is there lack of, as Cllr Snell mentioned 
education, so probably do some things that provide that, so that will mean 
the work with ELTAC going forward. The budgeting, there is a capital 
programme funding for the traveller accommodation programme, we applied 
to the traveller accommodation unit, for example, if we are going to be 
upgrading sites in Winegates we will be looking to get a budget for the 
traveller accommodation for that. We also have a huge amount of revenue 
expenditure on traveller accommodation and going back to what Cllr 
Kennedy and Blake mentioned. We employ caretakers to maintain sites and 
we do, we undertook a fire audit after the Carrickmines tragedy and that is 
to the fore at all times. On fire safety and the difference between caravans 
and mobiles and improving living conditions for our travelling community. So 
that is a constant part of the work in this area. We are also and again a 
proposal that has come through the ELTAC, we have arranged for fire 
training for our travellers in halting sites and that is being going on in 
October. We do a huge amount of work around fire safety in the halting sites 
and again just to echo what Cllr Snell said about Eamonn McCann being of 
great assistance to the ELTAC. He has been ably replaced by another 
member of staff now, but I think that is everything.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Okay, so proposed by Cllr Behan and seconded by Cllr 
John Snell to adopt the programme.  
 
VOTE TAKEN  
 
ADMINISTRATOR: That is 28 for and four not present.  
CLLR WALSH: Just wanted to come in before Jackie went in relation, she 
mentioned the rise in illegal encampments across the county. I know of two 
in our area and at least one of them is there over a number of year, much to 
the annoyance of local res dents, just from the council's perspective, I know 
there was legal proceedings issued in one case, are we any near tore finding 
alternative accommodation to those, don't go into too much detail obviously.  
JACKIE:  It's a matter discussed with sensitivity in the legal department and 
with the ELTAC. The problem with the legal challenge, not only can we take 
proceedings for trespass, we have to have regard to the fact that while we 
are taking injunctions we are a housing authority at the end of the day and 
we have an obligation to help indigenous travellers on our list, however we 
don't want to have a perception whereby a family is, goes and illegally 
encamps and is then housed, because that isn't fair. So basically how we 
deal with them is under trespass law, so it is a long drawn out protracted 
way to deal with illegal encampments and can be very costly, so where we 
can engage with the families under homeless HAP or bring them into our 
homeless team and try and find alternative and suitable accommodation for 
them. In a lot of illegal encampments, we might find they are not indigenous 
to Wicklow, so they are camping in Wicklow and hoping to get on to the 
housing list in Wicklow, perhaps coming from more crowded areas hoping to 
be housed sooner. A lot of travellers would look at us to put provisions on 
illegal sites to make them basic sites, but generally when there is health and 
safety issues there we don't do that, so we can go through the courts which 
is very costly and our preferred option is to engage with them through the 

 
27
housing authority and bring them through the system that way and try and 
meet the need that way. But the reality is it is on the increase, but maybe 
with the next presentation on supply, I mean we are definitely seeing as Cllr 
Fitzgerald said we are seeing much more allocations happening and as the 
supply increase and the one in 16 kicks in we will hopefully see a 
corresponding reduction in the illegal encampments.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: This is just as an aside, it's following on from Cllr 
O'Brien's question earlier, it's not so much about the illegal encampment on 
the Murrough, which he referred to, it's also the illegal burning of rubbish, 
which is turning an area of special conservation into a disaster zone. It's 
incurring the wrath of people, there are so many people that are upset about 
what is happening there, it's been destroyed. Now I know there is a legal 
and ongoing process and you need proof of something, someone being 
caught in the act burning rubbish, but a lot take places at night-time and 
some as late as 2.00am in the morning. But there has to be some way, 
otherwise we could be looking at this same problem in two years’ time, there 
has to be some way of going on it, that the whole area is being destroyed 
and it's supposed to be an area of strategic importance and special 
conservation, so if was any way it could be upscaled or prioritised or even 
put CCTV cameras, even on a temporary basis to try and solve the 
problems. Six months it's going on and it's getting worse and worse.  
JACKIE:  As a person who walks the Murrough regularly I hear what you are 
saying and we share the concerns on this matter. The burden of proof I 
won't speak on behalf of my colleagues in waste management, but we have 
had across the table meetings with waste management and housing because 
there is strategic issues to be looked at here and with the Municipal District, 
so we are trying to do a tripartite scoop on this, again we have to have, look 
at our obligations under housing and look at the burden of proof under 
waste management, because I think the thing is under waste management 
we don't have evidence of who is burning and who is dumping, we have a 
fair idea, by don't have evidence that is going to stand up in court. 
 
We have looked at the idea of CCTV, again we have to be careful about 
anything like that, so these are all on the table at the moment, so we are 
hopeful, we have sought costs from two companies to look at in the 
short-term, which we hope goes some way to mediate the damage being 
done down there. Unfortunately our hands are tied with regard to proof, we 
are going to find it difficult to win in court without proofs, especially when we 
are looking at families that are indigenous to the county and are on our 
social housing list. So unfortunately that is the situation at the minute.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you. Okay, to item 10, to receive a presentation on 
Wicklow County Council housing supply programme.  
>>: Okay, there has been a number of queries regarding housing to include 
new members on housing in general and supply, as people are aware, 
housing is quite a complicated issue, involving them throwing a whole load 
of information out to the Department meeting which will deal with housing 
splice and the October meeting we will deal with the maintenance type 
issues, grants and funds and homes at the next meeting in October. So this 
will concentrate on supply. There will be an overview of supply and particular 
emphasis on the local authority. Other essential parts of supply and we will 

 
28
deal with questions afterwards if that is okay with members?  BREEGE: Good 
afternoon, let me introduce myself to the new members of the Council. Most 
of whom I have spoken to, but not everyone, I want to say congratulations 
on your election and I look forward to working with you over your term of 
office. For those of you who don't know me my name is Breege Kilkenny and 
I am a senior engineer and I am in charge, a manager of Wicklow's housing 
capital construction programme. The first slide, just to give you the 
background, in Wicklow, currently we are working under rebuilding Ireland, 
from which there are five pillars. So basically Wicklow's housing supply 
strategy, so it's beginning when there was changes in Government policy in 
2009 away from the policy of zero build to policies of social housing and 
construction. So under the first policy document and then subsequently 
under the current policy which is Rebuilding Ireland, the slide you have in 
front of you.  
 
There are five pillars of action to address housing and homelessness under 
the Rebuilding Ireland plan and pillar one is to address homelessness and for 
today, I have highlighted today, it's pillar two and three, which is to 
accelerate social housing and build more homes and then under pillar four, 
it's to improve the rental sector and pillar five to utilise our staff in a better 
and more efficient way. I am concentrating on pillars two and three. The 
next couple of slides are from the Department, they have a tracker system 
and basically under Rebuilding Ireland, the minister has set down delivery 
targets for each local authority and this is tracked quarterly and reviewed 
annually. So the current delivery target is for 2018-2021. On this slide I 
have extracted it, indicating the new building delivery targets for Wicklow 
over that period 2018 to 2021. Where this lies along our proposed delivery 
pipeline. So the orange light shows that what the targets are and this 
doesn't include voids and on the other side we will be above it. That is our 
plan by 2021. So in April of last year the minister set down a total supply 
target for Wicklow of 1,225 units over the period. Our housing strategy will 
see Wicklow in turn a total of 1,327 over this period. But, furthermore, we 
are also looking, in the Pipeline, beyond the 2021 period because everything 
is not going to stop again in 2021.  
 
Again, just taking from the sheet, this is public and it's on the sheet, so this 
is what we delivered in 2018 and for that we had a total of 83 new social 
housing units. This was broken down into 28 if we delivered our own build, 
ten turnkeys and 45 par fives. This is our delivery stream for 2019. So 
Wicklow will see an increase in its total social housing supply to 272 units 
this year and an increase of 300% on our delivery from 2018. Again this 
slide shows an extract from the Government's tracker, presenting a 
breakdown of the social housing units as follows. 54 will be our own local 
authority build, up there in blue writing on the right. 172 turnkeys and 45 
par 5s. Then, post 2019, from the following two years, 2020 and 2021, 
Wicklow will see a further increase in its own social housing delivery and an 
additional 475, again the blue writing on the right corner there. That is what 
we will deliver ourselves and then a total of showing 557. What I will say 
here is that this demonstrates a sevenfold increase in the number of social 
housing units that Wicklow will construct in this two-year period. Our 

 
29
bumper year is going to be in 2020, I will show you those figures as they 
come along. So I will just bring to your attention that this extract from the 
Department's tracker sheet only presents what we have already achieved 
approval status. We, as I have said we have more schemes in the pipeline, 
but we haven't submitted them for approval yet, but they will be post 2021. 
So Wicklow will definitely see the delivery of more social housing units 
through par 5s and turnkeys that were indicated on this slide, so even 
though that is what is shown at the moment, as we see there will be other 
units coming through, like we are going to deliver more than 12 units of par 
5 in those two years. Again I am concentrating on our construction 
programme and that figure is what we are going to deliver ourselves. Again, 
this is from the Government's tracker sheet, so you so you can see our 
delivery over the next three years will be more than what is being asked us 
of us from the delivery targets by the minister. Just to then give you the 
background, as I mentioned earlier, and again just to give you confidence in 
the numbers I have put up there, so you don't think we are blowing our own 
trumpet, without any substance behind it, so Wicklow's local authority new 
builds supply programme had two phases. The first phase was 2015 to 2018. 
Again, when Government policy changed. Our second phase is currently 
under the new build plan programme. So the first aspect of our strategy and 
that is why our units were low last year, we were concentrating on the 
greatest need, but also infill sites and we were only getting small sites for 
what we are working on and we are using the traditional build and 
construction. In the last year we had a review and realised we need to look 
at bigger sites and get bigger numbers and attempt to go through rapid 
build. This was discussed and brought forward through the SPC and as a 
policy change we will tackle the rapid build and we are now seeing dividends 
in relation to that. Our shift towards rapid build was necessary given the 
delivery target given by the Government of these 2,225 units and almost 
50% of this will be -  1,225 and most of this will be required by local build 
and rapid build now. Just to recap Wicklow's total build in 2021 will be 557 
units of our own and the total target for, under Rebuilding Ireland is 1,225. 
Okay, completions, 2018/2019. So by the end of this year we will have these 
82 units. As we all know Avondale in Rathdrum, the old library in Arklow and 
some in Bray was delivered by the end of last year. In July last year we 
finally got two open and I think you are aware of some of the issues we had 
with a contractor in one of those there. Oak Drive is being allocated this 
month and Whitehall is for delivery in November/December this year. That 
will be close to the wire, but that will be 82 of our own units to date. So, 
again that is what we deliver, but what we have on site at the moment is 11 
schemes. Kilbride Lane 42 units in Bray. We are waiting on that for a long 
time. The FCA hall, Farrankelly in Greystones. Delany Park is about to 
commence and Carrigeden, the contracts have just been signed on that one. 
So I have broken it down from our traditional build and our rapid build. 
Whitehall hopefully for delivery at the end of the year.  
 
The PPP, that is what they are doing, anyone up there will see how quickly 
that is coming up out of the ground in difficult conditions with a lot of rock. 
Merrymeeting lands and Coolattin Oats, I believe that contract has been 
signed now. So, from completion in 2020 we will have nine schemes coming 

 
30
in. This will be our bumper year of our own delivery of 226 units. We will see 
the delivery of all of those coming through and I talked about it on the 
previous slide. Then for 2021, we have 249 units. With Avondale phase 2, 
some of these will say, you voted on last year for those that are under 50 
units. We are now going ahead to fin ushers our approval process and get 
that on site as quickly as possible. Ard na Greine in Bray was voted through 
and Ashtown Lane and Delany Park, you voted on that last year. Greenhills 
Road we will be bringing that to the Wicklow Municipal District soon.  
Moneycarrol is on display. Three Trouts we have submitted that for approval. 
And the Old Fire Station in Arklow, again we will be bringing that to the 
Arklow Municipal District. Most of these were in the district, again to brief 
people to our schemes, before we bring it to a partite before we bring it to 
the Department even, so just to recap, under Rebuilding Ireland 1,225 units 
and Wicklow's new build, will be the 554 units.  
 
I wanted to say something about the four-stage approval process, it hasn't 
gone away, but with the rapid build we are in negotiation, our CEO is on the 
delivery committee, and we are trying to reduce down the number of stages. 
So for some of our rapid build we are going to part A as soon as we get to 
stage one, effectively eliminating one stage of the process. So the rapid 
build is lowering the amount of time we are stuck in the four-stage approval 
process. With the new councils, just to let you know, stage one is site 
appraisal, where we have to get approval for the scheme in any format. 
Stage two is preplanning, you have to give a detailed costs report. This is 
the bit I have the issue with. The only cost report that can be a tender 
document. There is, there is that one and then post planning and pretender 
and then final tender approval. So the tender stage tends to be 
straightforward. We can get stuck between stage 2 and 3, getting the 
information and getting the approvals. But we are making progress and you 
will see from the scheme that went to Baltinglass, we actually got it through 
the four-stage approval process in 52 weeks, whereas the four stage is 59 
and most local authorities are sending over 60 and 70 weeks getting through 
that process.  
 
I will just mention to you, the little bit of colour slides at the end, this is a 
scheme we have in Whitehall, 34 units. There is 23 two bed and 11 three 
bed units. This was the schematic that came in from the design build 
contractor. Essentially it's a modular construction in terms of they are PEG 
units. This is the 3D model they produced at the time of their presentation 
for their tender. That is the time, it comes in the stages, they have to do a 
template of the unit and you can come out and examine it, so from our point 
of view, you can see all of the elements of the construction as it proceeds. 
And then I will just put these slide together, this is from about a week ago, 
this is where it's at on site at the moment and that is the internal, you can 
see plaster boarding ongoing internally and then there is another slide of the 
outside. So that is from the site. So thank you very much.  
>>: Hello, everyone, my name is Rachel Gillespie, I am the homeless HAP 
finder for Wicklow County Council and also the staff member in charge of the 
HAP section. I will run through these because I feel like I am, I have a lot. 
So HAP was introduced as new social housing support on a phased basis. It 

 
31
was roll out in Wicklow in December 2016. So all social housing supports can 
now be accessed through the one body, the local authority. Prior to this, 
prior to HAP financial assistance was given through the Department of social 
protection in the form of rent supplement. So on and off over the year, you 
may be familiar, had you to be on the housing list to be eligible for rent 
supplement and they changed the rules and you didn't have to. So now we 
should have the true figures of those in need of social housing support. Any 
household that is qualified for social housing support is eligible for HAP. So 
the only exception to this is if the tenants, or the applicant's circumstances 
has changed since the HNA and they can be now over the income threshold, 
so that is something to be mindful of. So we have 1,420 HAP tenancies 
created in Wicklow since the inception. Nationally 48,465. HAP was 
introduced in 2018. It's available to Wicklow County Council applicants and 
the intra-authority movement. So that that means that any applicant can 
remain on the list in Wicklow and rent through the HAP scheme in any 
county in Ireland provided they are under the income threshold for that 
county, and also the applicants need to be mindful there is different caps for 
each county. We have one central transactional service centre in Limerick, 
so all of the information is checked and assessed in Limerick.  
 
So nuts and bolts really, household accommodation in the rental market in 
general, the contract is solely between the tenant and the landlord, Wicklow 
County Council are not party to the tenancy agreement. The local authority 
makes a monthly payment directly to the landlord subject to the rent limits. 
Tenant pays a weekly rent contribution to the local authority based on the 
household's income, so that will be the same as any tenancy tenant. They 
can be on the list for standard social housing. Dublin City Council through 
their housing SPC brought in awarding additional points in their scheme 
letting priorities for any housing applicants who took up HAP as a way of 
encouraging people to take on the scheme and to, I suppose be reassurance 
to them that they would be considered for social housing when their time 
would come up. Households can now work full-time. So that is the biggest 
change that has happened since rent supplement, where you could only 
work, I think it was 19 hours, whereas now you can work full-time. The 
household is expected to remain in the property for a period of two years 
unless exceptional circumstances apply. So there are maximum rents 
described by the Department, four or more children, or if we have a different 
family make-up, saying a mother and child wishing to share with the 
grandparent we have to go for a Section 43 determination from the 
Department. So in some stages we can get different funding, so they are 
declaring now the top ups, which is something that didn't happen under rent 
supplement. We tried to ensure that the tenant isn't spending more than 
30% of the household income on rental payments, so that is the weekly rent 
plus any top up that needs to be under 30%. We do have a 20% distressing, 
so that is generally applied for homeless cases or where there are serious 
medical conditions, so there is just a quick recap for the different family 
make ups. See the additional 20% there. A quick one on my job, obviously I 
try to seek out potential properties suitable for people who are currently 
homeless or at risk of homelessness. I work closely with the homeless team, 
if a property becomes available, if I haven't met the clients themselves I 

 
32
liaise with my colleagues and try to find them a right landlord/tenant match. 
The main thing I can do is the deposit and two months' rent upfront, so we 
can pay out the full deposit and the rent for up to two months. I would be 
the single point of contact for the landlords and applicants and then the HAP 
application is given priority to make sure there is no delay in payments. The 
payment is made directly by Wicklow to the landlord and ordinarily takes ten 
working days. So we have 120 households up until last Friday, six in 
payment last Friday that assisted under homeless HAP. They are people who 
have been in emergency accommodation and people who are at risk of 
homelessness. So, there is just a few slides on HAP as a flexible policy 
response, so it's the flexibility of the private rental market, expands area 
choice where there is little or no social housing. Other local authority 
accommodation is an option to a transfer list, it was decided at the housing 
SPC that the default position would be to keep HAP accommodated tenants 
on the housing list for social housing as opposed to removing them if they 
didn't respond. So the default position is they remain on the housing list. 
Prevents families from being caught in a poverty trap that. Is one of the 
main benefits of the scheme. When you are in HAP, your income can go up, 
you will so still be in receipt of the HAP support, obviously the more you are 
earning the more your weekly rent will be, but at the same time the support 
isn't pulled from, so it helps families improve their situation, I suppose and 
just a couple of quick slides, these will all be circulated so you won't need to 
go through them in detail. RAS is on the decline because HAP is the greatest 
show in town at the moment, or so the Department thinks anyway, so there 
is less people currently on the rental accommodation scheme than there was 
previously because in some cases landlords are selling, but we currently 
have 390 households under RAS at the moment. So they will be circulated 
later, so my contact details will be on it, if anyone has any specific questions 
and want to get in touch with me, my office is opposite Jackie's and feel free 
to pop in.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We can say on behalf of the interview panel, you are 
hired! Rather than having Breege and Rachel playing musical chairs we 
might just direct them to Joe.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just the first question is I 
didn't quite catch what the director said at the start about training or 
induction for, was that for SPC members or all members?   
JOE: First of all, this is only part of the housing presentation, the second half 
will be at the October meeting, that will deal with homeless and 
maintenance and some of the grant issues. We would also have training with 
the SPC members, and we circulate that to members and all members can 
attain that at any stage on that training, but anything we circulated with the 
SPC will also be circulated to all members.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: I would be interested in attending that session for SPC, 
the second question I had was the figure that was put up for part 5 or 2020 
or 2021, that was only 26 units?  Does that count all the part 5s in relation 
to new builds in the county that we would expect in 2021?   
CLLR McMANUS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I have two parts to my question. 
The terms of the supply can I ask does Wicklow County Council utilise the 
repair and leasing scheme and if we could get the figures of how many units 
have been provided through those. I don't know if I can ask this, but I really 

 
33
appreciated both speakers mindfulness of newer members and I would love 
to know what Rachel's experience has been, I don't know if she was here 
earlier, between October and now, what we seem to be seeing is an increase 
in demand and I am wondering what her experience has been in terms of 
managing that and particularly across the five MDs, is she seeing a 
difference?  Maybe that is not a suitable question for now, maybe we can go 
back to it.  
CLLR GLENNON: In the presentation from Breege and perhaps I missed 
something, just in relation to the presentation, the allocation of one house in 
Oak Drive in Blessington, that seemed to be the only house that had been 
built north of Baltinglass and perhaps it's something that on this occasion, 
it's quite a long constituency and it's 20 miles from Blessington and it's 
alarming there isn't something there in respect of the northern end of that 
Municipal District, perhaps I missed something, but that was a figure I came 
out with.  
CLLR CREAN: Thank you. I have a few questions so I will list them all. The 
first one is, I supposes from the earlier question about having a comparator, 
I was looking back at 2018 and comparing that period to this period and 
there looks to be a 7% increase this year so far, so it's gone up, so my three 
concern, it's great to hear about the build programme, that is good news, 
but I think the need is growing and the question around affordable housing 
and then Brexit proofing as well, the fact we are lower towards the end of 
our target dates, is there a concern there. I am also considered in whether 
or not we have a services plan. I was reading there recently about the 
Housing Act and that ministers comment that part five, so affordable 
housing on a statutory basis, I know it's a housing SPC, but I would be 
interesting to know as a housing strategy, do we have a housing services 
plan or a plan to develop one?   
 
Because that seems to deal with more specifics around making sure we do 
plan ahead and Brexit proof. On the Rebuilding Ireland targets I was hoping 
that maybe it's linked to the monthly CEO report, could we include the 
targets in that, so we can monitor our performance all the time. Again, I 
know listening to a presentation seems like, we are going to meet them by 
the end, but I think we need to be mind. Like I said, mention of Brexit and 
anything happening to the economy, we need to, not necessarily put 
everything towards the end in achieving those targets, so I have a concern 
on that. And I would like to know what the percentage of turnkey 
developments are in Wicklow, we could get some examples on that. Maybe 
there is some stuff on that, but that not for this presentation and just to find 
out again on the two schemes that you have that services site fund and that 
local infrastructure and housing action fund, are we applying for that?  I 
know there is a development of Rathnew, but I didn't see it on the CEO's 
report and then there was the original application for Kilcoole, I have had 
that clarified, but I am interested can we get an interest on how we are 
utilising the scheme out there to utilise the public land that is there and 
make sure we are ready for that.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you to Breege and Rachel 
for their presentations. I suppose there is some positive news in relation to 
Breege, the Rebuilding Ireland targets, I have seen them with my 

 
34
interactions with the housing sector there is a slight improvement, I think 
staff are seeing things easing up, but only slightly. There is still an emphasis 
on the private sector with 172 turnkeys, but our total build is 2021, the 
figures are positive there. Just, again, Rachel, I know she does tremendous 
work and I want to acknowledge the work she does as the HAP finder, but 
again there is concern, while we have 1420 HAP tenants, you are looking at 
security for your residents and it's great to have a HAP property, but that 
sense of security, obviously is there, the national figure 48,500, that is 
massive, so I just want to ask, are landlords willing to engage with the HAP 
scheme more, I know there was a reluctance initially, but does she find her 
experience has improved and again, maybe we need to look at affordable 
housing schemes going into the future projects that we have taken on?   
CLLR O'NEILL: Again I like to thank Rachel and Breege for their work. As Cllr 
Glennon pointed out we only have one house build in 12 years, we have 300 
people in the housing list on that area, but I am hopeful there might be 
news soon on the building, as you all know, there is about a quarter of the 
town of Blessington is in the county of Belair, and next March there is some 
starting there on the Kildare border. We feel, in the area, that it's not really 
fair that the services are provided by Wicklow County Council for the 
336,000, the property tax goes to Kildare County Council, the levies go to 
Kildare County Council, but yet we supply the services. So what I want to 
ask the director, has there been any approaches made as regards the 10% 
of these 336 houses that are due to start in March next, going to our list in 
the Blessington area?  There has been, I am aware of the great works done 
in Shillelagh and Carnew and Baltinglass as Breege pointed out the 34 units 
will hopefully be ready by the end of the year. So there has been great work 
there, but with the proposed 336 houses which will start next March and also 
I believe in the pipeline there could be up to another 600 and they will be 
built into there, if we feel that, some of those eye units or are there any 
plans to do so?   
CLLR TIMMINS: Thank you, chairman, just in line with what my fellow 
councillors have raised, but just a specific question in relation to Blessington, 
there is council land and land that is zoned for housing, I would like to know, 
the sewage plan has permission now, so I like to know what is the actual 
plan for that council land in relation to social housing?  [INAUDIBLE] is by far 
the social housing in any town.  
CLLR MULLEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I would like to thank Breege and 
Rachel for their preparation. Just two questions, in relation to the rapid 
build, I understand the planning cost development and construction process, 
is there delays still between the co-operation department on the approvals 
and the local authority approvals and was there a gap and secondly I want 
to know on part 8 housing developments, what is the basis of an appeal to 
An Bord Pleanála and a fast-tracking of that if that happens. On the HAP 
then I want to know, we were informed that you can rent a property in any 
adjoining local authority, normally that works both ways and I wonder is 
there any evidence in particular of Dublin local authority tenants where the 
thresholds are higher coming to other local authorities, like west Wicklow or 
south Wicklow and renting properties and what action can be taken?   
CLLR P KENNEDY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. And thank you, Breege, in 
relation to the presentation. I was just wondering under the Rebuilding 

 
35
Ireland home loan mortgage scheme, have we had many applications for a 
mortgage and how many of them were successful?   
CLLR FITZGERALD: Just in 2016 I sat here and we were facing into a dire 
situation, particularly in Arklow and in the Arklow Municipal District, we had 
built, I think 2007 was the last time we had allocated housing which was 
down on the Harbour Road and it was a dire situation for people on the 
housing waiting list and for the councillors and those involved. In the 
meantime Trojan work has been done in the last couple of years and I just 
note in its last year, we have allocated 61 houses, which includes the old 
library, the turnkey and seven in, or 17 in Delany Park, I understand from 
Breege, you are suggesting that 47, there should be some movement on the 
47 in Delany Park shortly. So there has been Trojan work done and long 
may it continue.  
 
The difficulty is for us now, obviously there is planning permission before the 
board and there is a sewage treatment plant hopefully goes ahead, there is 
another year, I am told by Irish Water because it will take a year before 
there will be any progress on it, but that would be welcome, if everything 
gets the all clear, I just want to comment the staff, because in 2016 I felt 
that we were facing into a lot of problems, the difficulty today is there is two 
private residences available on Daft.ie, we have no housing, as you know 
about and I keep in touch with you there and we are facing into a dire 
situation, because if the employment, we have a scheme on the old IFI site 
which is bouncing 475 jobs and 75 permanent jobs. We have the sewage 
treatment plant and we have an application for a primary care centre and all 
of those will create jobs and people wanting to live in Arklow, but we can't 
do anything for that. I want to thank the staff for the work which has been 
done over the last three years. I can't thank you for the years before, 
because we got no houses, but I am thanking you for what has been done. 
We had no social housing, we might have bought some, but it's given me 
some comfort to see people going into the houses in Delany Park, they put 7 
in the library last December and I think by the end of this year we should 
have had 35.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: 15 seconds.  
>>: I am very quick to finish. I want to thank everyone involved to bring 
about this situation and it gives great hope to me and the 847 people still on 
the housing district.  
CLLR SNELL: Thank you, I like to start by thanking Breege and Rachel for 
their presentations. I suppose like any protects, any member, depending on 
their mindset and how they are feeling on that particular day can take the 
positives or the negatives out of the figures that is presented. So that is why 
I think it's important for all members, new and old, that they are aware that 
through their own Municipal District, through their own efforts as an elected 
member, they can come into Wicklow County Council and speak to members 
of staff. That has always been available to everyone, some people choose to 
do it and others don't. Some people like to focus on the negative and grab 
the headline, some like to be proactive and help their constituents and I 
think the vast majority will see the positives that has been presented here 
today. I would like to refer to Rachel's role and I know people are saying 
homeless HAP, placefinder, but I know from my experience of dealing with 

 
36
landlords and that that when you introduce Rachel as priority HAP it has 
much of a more bearing on the landlords and the role that Rachel provides 
because there is a stigma attached to people who are classed as at risk of 
homelessness or from a homeless background and the reality is that the vast 
amount of people that present to Wicklow County Council are not actually 
homeless at all, they have been given their notice in their own private 
rented accommodation that they have six months to find somewhere else. 
The figures will reflect that they presented to Wicklow County Council, 
because that was something we wanted to change here over the last couple 
of years and not having people presenting the day they were to be out. The 
success rate of our homeless team has been immense. I would like to say in 
regard to Breege, Breege came here many years ago and took on this role 
and inherited an awful lot of historical problems and some of them housing 
estates are in each of the five Municipal Districts and they have cost a lot of 
money and I will refrain from naming any of house housing estates because 
it's unfair on the tenants within the housing estates, but the reality is that 
there is a huge body of works taking place in each of the housing estates 
and that is something that we won't have going into the future by making 
sure, with the help and guidance of each member of this council and our 
staff going out to meeting the Municipal Districts and discussing part 5s and 
8s, people are not mentioning the acquisitions that took place over the last 
seven to eight years. A lack of investment from the Government over many 
years finally is being addressed, so thank you, Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Anne Ferris.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I also would like to thank Breege 
and Rachel for their reports today, I think particularly for new councillors, 
it's very good to get that information and the figures and I think you are all 
in the housing department must be, the housing sector of Wicklow County 
Council must be one of the busiest sections and you have had your trials and 
challenges, I would say from about 2008 and it's great to see that the 
figures are going up with the allocations s and particularly we can have great 
hope for the future -  allocations. At the, during the Chief Executive's report, 
I asked him about the public lands, how much could he give the members 
about all of the public lands in the county that are owned by the council, but 
are yet underdeveloped and he pointed to this presentation now that it 
would be there, now we got great details about various areas but I wonder 
are there more lands?  I presume there are more lands that aren't covered 
in this report that haven't been developed on yet, but are public lands?  So, 
I would still like to get some details on that, thank you.  
JOE: I will deal with most, one particular question regarding the 
geographical improvements and I will leave her alone after that. The part 5 
question, now, that is only approved once we have in the system, we are 
100% sure at the moment, it will be between 15 and 18, that brings the 
question regarding the turnkey, if you look at slide 5, that will answer the 
turnkey ones and you haven't got it there, I can't read it, but come back to 
me if you need the answer, what it does show is if we did this five or six 
years ago 100% of supply would be local authority only. Now, if you look at 
the other apartments, you look at, as Breege mentioned the PP bundle, that 
is 51 in Wicklow Town, that is an essential part 5, turnkey we advertised to 
available capacity in the private sector and in a lot of areas, particularly in 

 
37
the Wicklow and Arklow area, developers have come in and have sold entire 
unit part of units that is an essential part of the delivery and it means it's 
quicker and there is other people working through the process. Slide 5 
should cover that, if it doesn't come back to me for the exact answer. 
Sometimes it depends on timing. Particular question from [INAUDIBLE], we 
advertise, it is slow, there are few bites. I think we might have one or two 
cross plan, we may not have, it's very slow, there was a situation where 
local authority purchased units. Two parts to that, one is going into 
acquisitions and Government policy is to minimise acquisitions to 
concentrate on new builds, that is why, we are allowed 2024 year we may 
breach that, but in the scheme with regard to 226 that is less than 10%  and 
the Government is, there a whole load of competing issues there... so with 
very acquisitions, we are capped and on top of that, we buy one or two in 
the private sector that are ready to go, they need a little bit of work they are 
turned over in a couple of weeks. If we build them, we have to explain, we 
have to, later on in the allocation, it's not really, we use it in the odd case, 
but it's not a, our first choice. I will come to the Blessington area. In 
Blessington there was no sewage in Blessington in the last couple of years 
and therefore that affected our supply in the Blessington town, however we 
had the Burgy land is in our radar, we had included it on the next version of 
the PPP, there is a candidate item there and probably the first choice at this 
stage, we also will come back to the areas to consider the same thing 
moving forward as a rapid build, so we are in the middle of that, but we are 
waiting for the Government to announce that. 
 
Okay, also, I had breached the issue of part 5 in Kildare with the director of 
housing in Kildare and we will be talking to him again, so now I haven't 
forgotten about anyone, that is on my radar. Government policy, in the last 
couple of years it's been on social housing and our housing we, have gone 
through all the residential land and most of the resident land and we have 
taken the low-hanging fruit as people are familiar, because in each area we 
have gone back to councillors and we have produced two or three units per 
area if the land is there, but it's getting, probably the best of it is gone 
through and we are going through now, if anyone has a particular piece of 
land we will deal with it, but yes we have our next phase which is 2021 post 
Rebuilding Ireland on our radar, but we probably took the easy ones first 
time and also in the Department, the emphasis is on infill at the start. If you 
look at 2018 onward, anything outside towns that was relatively flat and 
took relatively bigger units in most cases we developed those, but the 
particular piece of land, they are getting more difficult and we have a 
spreadsheet of the land, residential land available for housing and we will, 
there isn't much left at this stage, but there are some cases where there is 
no information. Blessington and Arklow would have pieces of land there, but 
again we can't blame resources and planning and develop. When we have 
others with the infrastructure that is there. That brings us on to 
concentration in the last couple of years by the Department has been on 
social housing and moving on that, affordable has come in with part five last 
year, I think... we applied for funding on the various sites and we were 
successful this year in getting new land, however what they said was it was 
approval in principle, we still have a long set of negotiations on costs to get 

 
38
the stage on for Rathnew, the Killincarrig, it will be in Greystones, regarding 
those, that is a little bit different, because it's not a state sponsored 
subsidised, one of the difficulties and challenges with affordable housing is to 
make them affordable. Land cost has to be included and have you to look at 
that service site requires, provides an incentive by making contribution of 
the infrastructure and leave the land cost out, so we will be back to the SPC 
and back to how the sites are funded and Rathnew being the first one there. 
The rapid build, I wouldn't say there are delayed with rapid build. That could 
be clarifications and negotiations on an ongoing with the Department, if you 
try to minimise that, as people go to the councillor, before part 8s and 
developing beforehand and if we look at all members we have had no 
difficulty with part 8s, even [INAUDIBLE] in situations where they have been 
there at the part, we all know roughly where we are going. At times there 
can be clarifications required for the Department but particularly rapid build 
there is an emphasis in trying to get these things done. There was a 
particular question about HAP and there is anecdotal information that there 
are some rentals, we don't think it's a major factor, but we keep an eye on 
it. We, through Rachel, we have good relationship and the agents or valuers 
to deal with that. I think there is a particular question I missed over here 
regarding mortgage to rent, if it was mortgage to rent scheme we have had 
a number of those this year, particularly people were mortgages are 
challenged I think and [INAUDIBLE] there has been a number of those if that 
was the particular question out there. Okay, I will leave Rachel to deal with 
the particular question regarding the HAP and the geographical area.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: I thought the database was going to be on the slide, we 
looked at the land bank and there is some sites remaining so we will give 
you a copy of the land bank showing what we have built and what is 
remaining.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you.  
RACHEL: Just in relation to Cllr Mullen's question on the renting 
intra-authority movement. I flagged that at a workshop I was at. The 
concern was we would have an influx of Dublin people renting in Wicklow, 
but the answer to the question is that the caps are the same caps for 
Wicklow regardless of whether you are on the Dublin or Wicklow list. So if 
you are renting in Wicklow and you have two adults and one child your cap 
is €1,150, we only have a 20% discretion rate, where as the Dublin regional 
executive have a 50% discretion rate, but they cannot apply that to Wicklow 
. Also the Dublin authority is obliged to check that the rent price is in line 
with that area, so they would check with us, send us an email, saying if 
someone is going to rent a property in this area, this amount and they are 
confirming to us that they are going to be under the threshold and we would 
generally not turn it down, because it is allowed to rent in any area. On a 
general area, how we are getting on with landlords, I would find the 
engagement has been very positive, it's certainly a matter of building up 
trust with landlords and I find if I get working with them once they will come 
back to me and I will be able to give them other tenants and make more 
matches. I would invite anyone to come down to our office to see how busy 
we are and that is a reflection of how popular the HAP scheme is, with both 
tenants and landlords.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, we have only 13 minutes left, so number 11 to 

 
39
considered protocol in the opening of tenders.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just a bit of background on the 26th of August at the 
annual meeting at the local elections the elected members had... and the 
protocol passes that an elected member is entitled to be present, so the 
policy and procedures sets out the procedure in relation to receipt and 
opening of tenders which are not electronic, so submission have become 
mandatory since October 2018. They are submitted on an e-tender website 
after the expiry they are elected by one member. A for sign off purposes. 
Since the introduction of electronic tendering not all and a few local 
authorities have elected members present as a tender box cannot be 
unlocked until the closing date of receipt has passed. So it was agreed to 
have the protocol committee consider the opening of electronics and 
tendering and a requirement of elected members to be present. So following 
the consideration of the matter of protocol meeting in July, the committee 
agreed in order to demonstrate transparency that the presence of an elected 
member at the opening of tender documents when submitted 
non-electronically remain a requirement. It was recommended there should 
be no requirement for the presentation of an elected members at the 
opening of facilities, electronically, so if the members, so if the members 
approved of this we would refer the policy to the procurement unit of 
Wicklow County Council to ensure that it's implemented across the 
organisation in compliance with protocol and regulation. It doesn't relate to 
tenders received on paper and it doesn't relate to tenders that are received 
by email and where they can be, they can be open but are not open as 
opposed to cannot be opened, so if elected members are in agreement with 
that policy, we will proceed with it.  
CLLR BEHAN: I have signed and been present at the opening of physical 
tenders over many years as a councillor. Normally there is a cover sheet, 
one page that indicates the price that the person is offering to do the work 
for and I think it's a very bad precedent to go down the road of not having 
an elected member present, no matter whether it's electronic or physical. 
Could it not be possible for the head page, the first page, the summary page 
to be printed and signed off in the presence of the person who is nominated 
member of staff while the councillor was there, so you open it, you print the 
first page, with the summary of the detail and it's signed then by the 
members. I actually think that is a far safer way to do it than say councillors 
don't need to be present anymore.  
CLLR DUNNE: I notice when tenders are coming in, especially paper tenders 
are coming in and saying the closing date is a certain time and the opening 
of the tenders is day other two later and there is a scramble to find 
councillors after Monday and I am suggesting that when the tenders come 
in, if they are to be open be it a Monday where you would have a scattering 
of members around to allow the staff to find someone and open the tenders 
rather than sending out emails saying is there a councillor in the building?  
Surely a Monday would be a better day, when most of the meetings are 
here?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Can I say in response to Cllr Behan, he is right, that is the 
practice at the moment, that is what is happening in relation to tenders that 
are received through that, the sheet is printed off and the member signs it, 
if that is the way the members continue wanting to do it, what the 

 
40
discussion is around is what you are certifying as an elected member is that 
the tenders have come in, that they haven't been opened prior to the time 
or date and that you see the list, but with e tendering you physically cannot 
open tenders, an official cannot open the tender until the time period has 
passed. With other tenders that are received the submission at the 
residential dates of course the protocol committee are recommending an 
elect member should be present. It's up to the elected members if they want 
to continue with the current process, but we have just moved on and it's 
something that came out of the annual meeting.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: A quick show of hands. To keep things as they are.  
 
Show of hands.  
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: And to adopt the new scheme?   
 
Show of hands.  
ADMINISTRATOR: We would have to have a proposer and a seconder and if 
there is any dissent we have to go for a vote.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Aoife Flynn Kennedy propose and Anne Ferris seconded 
that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Behan, you want to...  
CLLR SNELL: I want to second it, I am probably here more than often than 
any other member, I have signed more tenders electronic and hard copy still 
available to do that, I think for everyone's sake I think it should remain as 
is.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We will take Cllr Behan's vote first.  
ADMINISTRATOR: The propose the same, if you want to remain as is.  
CLLR BEHAN: Just say old or new.  
ADMINISTRATOR: If you want to say as is, say remain or new.  
 
VOTE TAKEN  
 
ADMINISTRATOR: So that is 20 for the new procedure, nine for the old 
procedure, one absentia and one not present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: We have to set a date for the council meeting before the 
end of September for the Local Adjustment Factor. So we have to, I think on 
the 23rd, Monday the 23rd of September to discuss the local property tax 
and the setting of the Local Adjustment Factor. Agreed?  And then to note 
the first draft of the Wicklow County Council Annual Report?   
ADMINISTRATOR: And, Councillors, just to say it is simply a first draft and 
we will come back to you. Just to note it.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: I want to ask, that the only thing on the agenda or will 
any other motions carry over to the one on the 2nd of October.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: 2nd of October.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Without a doubt?   
>>: 2.00pm?  The time.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes, 2.00pm.  
CLLR CREAN: The minutes from the previous meeting, I didn't get to ask at 
the time, the matter ace rising there is a piece I would ask about the 

 
41
harbour SPV, that was supposed to go back to that board and they were 
going to bring a report back, I was wondering is there any update on that?  
It was one of the actions from the last meetings.  
ADMINISTRATOR: In relation to the special purpose vehicles. We will bring it 
back to the.  
CLLR CREAN: It was said yesterday it was going to come back to the 
committee and a report to come here.  
ADMINISTRATOR: We will bring it back to Sean, he is the director of 
services.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There is a question to the Chief Executive from Lourda 
Scott.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you, just in relation to the Sign Language Act which is 
coming into force next year and just to acknowledge in Section 66 the Irish 
sign language act are the duties of the public bodies, will they have their 
public meetings interpreted by an Irish sign language interpreter and that 
this would be made available and secondly following on from that, just 
acknowledging that members of the deaf community have a specific 
requirement accessing services and will they provide them under Section 6 
of the Irish Sign Language Act.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: The Act says that the council as a public body does all 
that is reasonable that Irish Sign Language is provided for a person who 
cannot hear or understand English or Irish or access statutory entitlement or 
services required under statute for public body, but for council meetings we 
have never had a request for that, and we do provide the live text streaming 
and also a transcript on the website on Wednesday following the meeting. 
We have never had a request and we do all that is reasonable and that 
would be considered reasonable. Certainly anyone coming in looking for 
services and has a hearing issue we can deal with that and we will apply 
whatever measures we need to deal with that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Just before the meeting concludes, the protocol 
committee, when we met last the time, a couple of people thought they 
were on it and weren't on it and what have you, so to probably reflect an 
increased membership of the council and the more diversity we have in the 
council than previously, and to have a better balance of both old and, not 
old, previous councillors and new councillors we are looking at increasing 
that and bringing it to the next meeting, but to cover today's meeting we are 
going to ask Cllr Snell and Matthews to attend the meeting and it will come 
back to a full meeting for all the members to consider. Okay. The 
presentation for the special Olympians is on at 5.15.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Just to let you know about the rates evaluation on the 9th 
of September at 6.00pm in in the county buildings.  
 
 
 
