 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY 
COUNCIL HELD AT SHORELINE LEISURE 
CENTRE, GREYSTONES, CO WICKLOW  
 ON  
MONDAY 7th SEPTEMBER 2020 AT 14:00 P.M.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
MYCLEARTEXT LTD:  
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named 
action for communication support.   
 
 
 
Elaine McCarthy 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(Bell rings) 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good afternoon ladies and 
gentlemen.  Members ... 
Good afternoon everybody and thank you for being 
with us this evening.  Just before I get into the 
agenda proper, just a couple of things I'd like to 
mention, one is that just to mention that all of 
the mics and desks have been sanitised and there's 
earpieces there for anybody who can't hear, and 
thanks to everybody for setting that up and 
organising that for us. 
And something else I'd like to say is congratulate 
all of the leaving certificate students who 
received their results this morning, I'd like to 
congratulate their parents, guardians and 
students, I wish the very best for them in whatever 
they want to go forward.  Second thing I'd like to 

congratulate Cllr Derek Mitchell who became a 
grandad this morning to twins! Congratulations 
Derek. We'll move to votes of sympathy.  Lorraine 
if you have them. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, for Walter Armstrong, brother 
of our colleague Wesley Armstrong.  For Veronica 
Carroll mother of our colleague Jackie Carroll.  
Michael Burke brother of Michelle Burke.  And 
Connor Kavanagh, Maureen McAllister mother of our 
colleague Emer, and Mr Clower father of our 
colleague Aideen, and also, we're going to close 
a Book of Condolences that we opened for John Hume. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Does any members have any other 
condolences? 
CLLR BLAKE:  I've known the Kavanagh family.  We 
should thank the family as well by a number of 
families in Canada would have better news this 
week, the tragic passing of Connor. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Vincent Blake.  
We'll stand for a moment. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Members before I get into the 
agenda one thing I'd like to propose with your 
permission, I’d like to deal with items 1-7 and then 

13-15 first.  So, I'm going to propose that, would 
someone second that, Cllr Paul O'Brien has seconded 
that.  Thank you very much.  Item number one, to 
confirm and signing of the minutes of ordinary 
meeting of Wicklow County Council held on Monday 
15th June 2020 (copy attached). 
Cllr Irene Winters and Cllr Sylvestor Bourke, any 
matters arising from those? No matters arising. 
To confirm and sign minutes of annual meeting of 
Wicklow County Council held on Monday 15th June 
2020 (copy attached).  Can I have a proposal, Cllr 
Vincent Blake and Cllr Irene Winters.  Proposed 
and seconded any matters arising? No matters 
arising. 
Item number three, to confirm and sign minutes of 
special meeting of Wicklow County Council held on 
Thursday 20th August 2020 (copy attached). 
That was meeting held in Wicklow County Council 
proposed by Cllr Paul O'Brien and Cllr John Mullen.  
Thank you. 
So, we move to disposal notices and the first one 
I'll hand to Lorraine. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Disposal notice on for three year 
lease to Helen and Noel Jacob, so with permission 

we'll remove that notice from the agenda because 
there are plans there to develop a roadway in the 
near future so we'll deal with Mr Jacob's request 
in terms of a license, if that's agreeable and I've 
been speaking to Mr Jacob. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Everybody agreeable.  Five is to 
consider the disposal of 0.0060 hectares or 
thereabouts of land in the townland adjacent to 27 
Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow to Mr. Ciaran 
Connaughton, 27 Connolly Square, Bray, Co. Wicklow 
(as per notice circulated).  Cllr Paul O'Brien and 
seconded by Cllr Grace McManus.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed? Agreed. 
Number six is To consider the disposal of all of 
the property in the townland of Arklow, Co. 
Wicklow, the piece or plot of ground with dwelling 
house and premises thereon known as 114 Fernhill, 
Arklow, Co. Wicklow to Mr Barry O'Neil, 114 
Fernhill, Arklow, Co. Wicklow (as per notice 
previously circulated).  Proposed by Cllr 
Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr Tommy Annesley is 
that agreed? 
Agreed thank you. 

MS GALLAGHER:  Cathaoirleach, that is in relation 
to the item seven?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number seven. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Before we propose with this, this 
is in relation to ABEC, and there would be a, I'm 
the Company Secretary of ABEC, and there will be 
a number of directors here, Cllr Tommy Annesley is 
a director of ABEC, as well as Chief Executive Frank 
Curran, and Colin Lavery is a director of that 
company, just to declare that. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do they need to leave the meeting? 
MS GALLAGHER:  If they withdraw that would be fine 
OK. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number seven is to consider 
the disposal of approximately 239.50m2 of office 
spaces situated in the townland of Arklow, Co. 
Wicklow - Arklow Courthouse, 1st storey area, by 
way of a lease for a period of 4 years and 9 months, 
to Arklow Business Enterprise Centre (ABEC CLG) (as 
per notice previously circulated).  Proposed by 
Cllr Pat Fitzgerald, and seconded by Cllr Peir 
Leonard. 
  

MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed? 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed by everybody, thank you.  
So, I'm going to take item 13 next, to ratify the 
filling of the vacancy on the Wicklow County 
Council Joint Policing Committee by Cllr Erika 
Doyle, Bray Municipal District, arising from the 
election of former Councillor Steven Matthews to 
Dail Eireann.  Can I have a proposal for that? 
Cllr Melanie Corrigan, proposed.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Seconded by Cllr Anne Ferris.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed, yeah.  Item number 14, To 
consider the nomination of a representative from 
each of the Municipal Districts to the Wicklow 
County Council Access and Inclusion Committee 
(report attached).  This is a new committee set up 
by Michael nickel con's department, we can send 
this to Municipal Districts.  Is that proposed, 
Municipal Districts, yeah. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Seconded by - item 15 is to amend 
paragraph 6 of the standing orders: Place of 
meeting and address of principal offices: to allow 

for the Cathairleach in consultation with the 
Meetings Administrator to determine the place of 
meeting as a result of Covid 19 crisis and physical 
distancing requirements for a 6 period of months 
from the 7th September, 2020.  
Proposed by O'Brien, and seconded by Cllr Mary 
Kavanagh is that agreed. 
MS GALLAGHER:  I'll take a vote on that if that's 
OK, because standing order says that ... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Derek Mitchell. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Is this for the Municipal 
Districts who may need to meet in different places? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes.  Yes, it would Cathaoirleach, 
yeah, if they need to meet at different places, if 
you recall we have had a special meeting convened 
by quorum to designate the shoreline for our June 
meeting as well as for this meeting here today.  
So, by attending standing orders for six months it 
enables Cathaoirleach's meetings with the 
administrator to identify a venue and that would 
be the same for the Municipal Districts if moving 
out of the Municipal District offices. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Who would have the authority then 
to decide where to go? Let's say Greystones. 

MS GALLAGHER:  You'd have to do a separate 
resolution at your meeting, this is just for the 
Wicklow County Council meetings. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  OK.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Do I have a proposal for that? 
CLLR MITCHELL:  I propose it had 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  And seconded by Cllr Derek 
Mitchell.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Just taking a vote. 
That's great.  That's 21, sorry, that is 29 for, 
and three not present.  Thank you, members.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item eight is considered Chief 
Executives Monthly Management Report. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   We have a number of schemes - 
housing schemes now such as Farrenkelly and 
Baltinglass completed and Convent Lands in 
Wicklow, and Rathnew that scheme is coming to 
conclusion as well, so I might try and do official 
openings with social distancing, similarly the N81 
realignment, grove ends might do that as well.  We 
received significant funding, from the NTA for 
cycling and walking routes, a lot are welcome, some 
schemes we have been looking for years, like 
Hollywell footpath through meeting of the waters, 

it is very welcome and we will be taking on an extra 
6GOs and two engineers so that will be done by 
direct labour and we will have a presentation on 
it later.  In addition, we have 378,000 climate 
change adaptation grants, more road schemes and 
footpaths that will be done before the end of the 
year.  And we have avenue Covid-19 grant so Arklow 
north and Greystones coastal walk and cycle ways, 
pedestrianisation and improvements in Wicklow Town 
so a number of good schemes coming through on that, 
which will be very welcome. 
We got the rural regeneration and development fund 
400,000, 500,000 for Newtownmountkennedy in terms 
of designing, traffic management, public places, 
community Space spaces et cetera, Wicklow Gaol won 
Trip Advisor award, very impressive, prestigious 
2020 Trip Advisor's travellers choice, Best of the 
Best Award, so that's welcome as well.  We would 
have scored a good bit above average in the national 
oversight and Audit Commission, Local Authority 
Satisfaction Survey, over half those surveyed 
believed the council was doing a good job at 65%, 
it is higher than the national per cent which is 
57%, 57 overall satisfied with Wicklow, we are 

higher than how citizens feel informed and higher 
than average value for money and road safety 62% 
compared to 59 and similarly on the housing side 
so that was welcome.  But there's stuff there 
obviously that we'll learn from, and try and 
improve on. So, I'll leave it at that, and take 
questions.  
CLLR DUNNE.  Yeah there you go. Thanks very much 
for your report, it is always a makes a very 
interesting reading. 
Just on the Trip Advisor award for Wicklow Gaol as 
member of the enterprise board who run that, it is 
a great achievement for the Gaol to win such an 
award, it puts it on the map throughout the world 
never mind throughout the country and it was a great 
day for the Gaol and everyone should be 
complimented who is involved.  One other issue for 
me, no funding for the Wicklow and Greystones 
Greenway, it is just something we hope to keep the 
fool to the back of the neck on, because that could 
be one of the most, that could be such a great walk 
for people coming either way, and the amount of 
people in tourism that would run into Greystones 
Wicklow and Newcastle and Kilcoole et cetera would 

be unbelievable. 
What worries me a little bit, we're looking at the 
whole scheme and I know that from Wicklow to 
Kilcoole, that there doesn't seem to be that many 
obstacles and I'm wondering should we concentrate 
on that first and then carry on from Kilcoole to 
Greystones because even that to get that started 
alone, would help to tourism industry in that part 
of the country.  And just for somebody who has just 
been away on a stay case, we all know how important 
tourism is within the county and I think that would 
be so bring so much tourism and it is important we 
keep working on that, thank you Chairman. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and I also 
want to thank the Chief Executive for his 
comprehensive report and compliment the staff of 
Wicklow County Council in reaching the achievement 
of 60% of satisfactory rate, anyone who dealt with 
the council over the last few months will concur 
they deserve that 60% if not more.  I want to 
welcome the over 3.3 million from the NTA for the 
25 projects around the county.  From my municipal 
area I want to welcome the funding for the path from 
Rathnew and Ashford and the junction in Wicklow 

Town called the Leg of Mutton, it is unsafe for 
years and finally good to see the money it deserves.  
I want to welcome the funding over half a million 
for Newtown which I believe will transform the main 
street and I'm delighted to see the new library and 
Fitzwilliam Square near completion in Wicklow 
Town.  Cathaoirleach these are fantastic 
announcements and most welcome along with all the 
other worldly schemes around the county.  In my 
opinion the smaller states should be looked after, 
including roads around the county as well.  Having 
suffered greatly because of years of neglect.  For 
example, for two years now the residents on the 
L5602, near Newtown, have been asking for the road 
to be improved, I drove the road myself two weeks 
ago and I was shocked by the state it is in, because 
the hedges have not been cut for some considerable 
time now, it is impossible for cars to pass each 
other.  There is a school bus that has to use that 
road, to bring special needs children to school and 
yet there's several incidents on the road now as 
well.  I also rant to raise the state of the 
footpaths on roads in Wicklow Town, it means a lot 
to residents in the town.  Over the past number of 

weeks I have been inundated from calls from 
residents in Mount Carmel, as they get washed out 
it, because the pipes get block, the residents 
showed me the state of the path in new potholes 
formed because of the years of neglect.  49, there 
was actually a spring coming out from under the 
footpath and on to the road which is going to prove 
hazardous in the winter should it freeze.  I was 
contacted by a furious residents in St Matton's 
road telling me how his daughter went to cycle, only 
to injury herself outside the house because of the 
potholes, I can go on and on, I won't because it 
is time I'm asking the Chief Executive to use his 
considerable influence to work with us, I 
understand budgets are tight but these can't be 
neglected for any more. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Keep it short if they can, Cllr 
Gerry Walsh. 
  
CLLR WALSH:  Yeah, thanks Cathaoirleach and thanks 
to the Chief Executive for yet another excellent 
report.  Just two comments really under the social 
housing stock, I see the rent arrears is 2.78 
million gone over from a million-last year, I want 

to know what plan is in place to address that.  And 
on page 41, in the transportation statistics, 
section, there's references to the N11 junction 
road improvements, and I know we attended a 
briefing up in the Glenview Hotel in last November 
in relation to this, we were presented with a 
document there, that was seven options online and 
off line options and I must say at the time that 
presented a lot of anxiety to residents in the 
general why, particularly around Delgany and Glen 
Helen of the downs, I know they're considering the 
preferred options route but looking at our core 
strategy document, there's references to it, and 
the references is, you know, since the M50, N11 
merge, that's where the improvements are 
necessary, why go through this process, and in the 
meantime people are genuine lie concerned in 
relation to their properties, as I say some of the 
routes are going through SAC, some are going 
through people's properties, golf clubs et cetera, 
so it has caused anguish, so we'd hope that we're 
near conclusion with some certainty with that 
project. 
  CHIEF EXECUTIVE:    In relation to the Wicklow 

to grain stones Greenway, we did initial 
feasibility study on that and I concluded there may 
be a feasible route, that you're going through SPA 
and SAC, but maybe a route that isn't affecting the 
qualifying interests going through the sand dunes, 
but, the reality is that, we need to do a full 
environmental impact assessment report on the 
entire project that’s the next phase.  The cost of 
that report, route selection et cetera, the finding 
of the route, doing the full EAR, NIS and presenting 
a report, the cost is 800,000.  We looked for 
funding recently and we didn't get it, but there's 
going to be a lot of funding now for cycle ways and 
walkways, coming down the track, particularly with 
the green Government et cetera so we'll apply again 
but we need that significant amount of funding to 
do the full EAIR, we can't split the project, we 
need to do it for the full project.  The process 
itself will determine if the project is feasible 
and if it is deeming to be feasible that goes to 
An Bord Pleanála, that's a priority for us to do 
the funding and full environmental assessment 
report.  Cllr Paul O'Brien in relation to food 
paths and roads, we will take that into account in 

the L5065 for the roadworks programme to 2021 and 
Municipal District works so we will be working with 
the various Municipal Districts at the end of the 
year and next year in relation to that.  Just in 
relation to the rent arrears, they're gone up but 
the actual amount of rent has gone up, there was 
a rent review so people are paying more, there's 
issues around Covid-19 but we're following up on 
each and every one of those, but as I said the amount 
is gone up but we look at arrears and follow up with 
people and we are of course sympathetic as we can 
in relation to various different circumstances. 
The M11, N121, the outcome of selections report was 
due one or two months ago, we haven't got it yet.  
I know there was, they were asked to look at a bus 
lane as parliament of the process as well so we will 
have that report on the preferred option and taking 
into account the possibility of the bus lane but 
we haven't got it yet, we're expecting it shortly. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Chief Executive, Cllr 
Vincent Blake. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Yeah.  Thanks.  Thanks Chairman, 
thanks for the presentation. 

certainly looking forward to the money for the 
Greenways and particularly the Greenway from 
Arklow to Shillelagh, it is an old railway line and 
a lot of work has gone into it over the last few 
years and hopefully additionally funding can bring 
this to fruition.  I see the Carnew housing are 
completion date now of the February, 2021, rather 
than the back end of this year, I sincerely hope 
we can stick to that date of February, because there 
is a grave need for new houses forks our applicants 
in Carnew.  I know references has been made to road 
safety and the amount of work and money made 
available to food paths and upgrading roads as 
well, from the rural point of view, one of the 
biggest things we have in terms of road safety is 
potholing and rural roads out there, there's a 
grave need for work to be carried out.  I know we 
won't get restoration work done on them for this 
year but certainly we're heading now at this stage 
back in the winter months again and there's a huge 
amount of work needs to be done out there, in terms 
of potholing the roads.  Secondly the other aspect 
eluded to as well is hedge cutting and can I ask 
the Chief Executive who's responsibility at the end 

of the day is it to cut the hedges.  I know I've 
seen the adverts in the Wicklow people this week, 
asking the farmers to cut it, but at the end of the 
day there's a lot of hedgerows out there, that 
difficulty as to who's responsibility it actually 
is.  At the end of the day what responsibility have 
the council got in terms of ensuring that the 
hedgerows and some ditches out there and dangerous 
junctions as well that the hedgerows are cut back 
in that regards.  Thanks. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN.  Thanks, Cathaoirleach.  
Just a quick one for Chief Executive, I suppose 
first of all thanks for the report, the July one 
and August, and as well, the team down in the 
council who have been communicating with us 
throughout the summer, whether it is offers to 
seminars and consultations and flow of information 
has been very welcomed. 
Just rebuilding Ireland, I appreciate you might not 
give an answer today, but it would be great for a 
follow-up.  So just the take up on the rebuilding 
Ireland loans that there seems to be a high number 
of declined and a high number of I will eligible.  
And I know we would get people asking questions 

about that and people who find themselves not 
eligible for housing house, not rich enough to buy 
on the market and is there anything we can do to 
mitigate the reason why people are declined, thank 
you. 
  
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks Chairman. 
Just a page 47 of the report, parking income, I 
suppose first of all I would like to find out what 
has the impact of Covid-19 been on the figures of 
parking across the county? 
But, I suppose, more importantly for me as a Wicklow 
Municipal District councillor the figure of 
124,520 is incorrect on the basis we have two of 
the largest revenue sources of car parking in 
Glendalough and Brittas Bay that are not included 
in the Wicklow municipal figure and I've been 
calling on this issue to be resolved for a number 
of years now, without any success, but, there is 
no doubt in my mind first of all Wicklow Municipal 
District needs the revenue but secondly it is 
totally unfair that the revenue goes to the 
environment section and not to the Wicklow 
Municipal District.  As far as I'm aware the 

Wicklow municipal staff, look after both of these 
parking facilities and I think it is time that the 
revenue was correctly put forward to the Wicklow 
Municipal District. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   The Greenway Arklow to 
Shillelagh, that's moving in the sense the NTA is 
funding the environmental assessment report so 
that's good it is moving along.  There will be CPO, 
and the EIER, natural impact statement will go to 
An Bord Pleanála at the same time.  Carnew housing 
delays, they lost six weeks but back up and running 
and seem to be working OK. 
The potholes again it will be part of the roadworks 
programme, the velocity Jet Patcher is there now, 
which is efficient, one for the east and west, one 
efficient way of filling potholes that will help.  
And with the hedge cutting the responsibility is 
firmly with the landowner, there's no question 
about that.  If there's issues around road safety 
we will come in and, in some cases, carry out hedge 
cutting but firmly with the landowner. 
And in terms of rebuilding Ireland, the issue is 
almost always in relation to income, that people, 
there is a certain level of people need to have for 

a loan on the rebuilding Ireland, it is based on 
the fact that no more than 35% of the household's 
income should be paid on the mortgage, that's what 
it is based on and we have to make that assessment 
and take the views of the housing agency and et 
cetera on board.  In relation to Glendalough and 
Brittas Bay, they're run by way of franchises and 
you're right the money does go to environment 
section who look after the overall maintenance, 
we'll look at.  I know parking general in Wicklow 
is up now preCovid-19, but I'll ask Brian how much 
of a hit we had on it, Brian do you have that to 
hand?   
BRIAN:  We're looking at a hit 400 to 500,000 on 
parking, as the Chief Executive said the figures 
in July was the first month, I suppose that brought 
us back up to normal preCovid-19 levels.  So, we 
would be hopeful that will continue until the end 
of the year.  However, that 4-500,000 is lost 
income that will not be recovered, we have as part 
of an overall report that's been sent in to head 
of finance association, covering all 31 local 
authorities, we've made a case to the department 
and deeper in relation to that.  So, we're still 

awaiting news on that front. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Chairman and thanks Chief 
Executive for your report.  There's two things, 
first of all I welcome the funding for roads, the 
rush funding that went through announced a couple 
of weeks ago, in particular for Stratford, 
Hollywood and Dunlavin, at one point I'd like to 
make about it is, I believe one of the conditions 
is that the money is spent by the end of November, 
and I think that's completely impractical.  Could 
we lobby to have that extended to the springtime 
because, the contractors are all been inundated to 
contracts and it wouldn't be physical to have that 
work done, and it would be an absolute shame that 
bonus money that we received for improving roads 
in the county and particularly main streets that 
wasn't, if that wasn't spent it would be a crying 
shame and I'm sure the intention of Government is 
not that the money would be lost due to an 
unrealistic time constraint.  Secondly, just on 
restart grants, I believe there is still further 
grants with closing dates at the end of September.  

I wonder, could they be publicised as much as 
possible because a lot of businesses are not aware 
of them, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Edward Timmins. 
CLLR MULLEN:  32 thank you.  Thanks, 
Cathaoirleach for the report as usual. 
Just a few quick questions, just the status of the 
west Wicklow swimming pool project, the site 
identification process for that.  I think 
hopefully this is some moves identifying the 
appropriate site for that.    And I'd like to thank 
the staff or the districts in particular and 
engineers in assisting meeting with some of the 
schools and attempts to reopen after the Covid-19 
lockdown.  But, as you may be aware, there's been 
a difficulty in Baltinglass with the traffic school 
warden not being able to continue at short notice 
and therefore we have no traffic warden in 
Baltinglass where we have two, large primary school 
and large secondary school and primary road going 
into the town.  I know there their recruitment 
process has started but there's probably an interim 
period there that could stretch out so I'm 

wondering if we could try and be flexible in 
achieving the safest possible circumstances for 
the road crossing to allow the schools to function.  
Thank you very much Cathaoirleach. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr John Mullen, 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Thanks, thanks Chief Executive for 
your report.  As usual it is very, very detailed. 
Can I first of all say well done to all of the staff 
in the council for all the great work they've done 
over the last number of months and continue to do 
in a very difficult period for us all.  I have a 
number of questions to Cathaoirleach so you might 
bear with me.  I believe we need to reintroduce a 
sect meeting because it is not fair to the report, 
we get from the CEO to be racing through it as fast 
as we do.  I think it merits a two-hour meeting to 
have a proper discussion so I ask that would be 
considered. 
The other question I have is have we actually paid 
anything out yet on the restart grants? 
And then under the 3.3 million allocation with NTA, 
is it time to review this, or is it starting to look 
like an exercise? 
Because there's a lot of footpaths that need to be 

done in different villages, including my own 
village, and I think they need to be starting to 
get prioritised because it is very important to the 
residents living in those areas.  On the housing 
situation, I think the housing section are doing 
an excellent job under very difficult conditions.  
But I would ask that I think single men and 
separated fathers need to get a better crack of the 
whip, maybe more considered, consideration, now 
you might argue they do, but, I have a number of 
them on to me recently and they're in dire straits, 
so I would ask that might get some reviewing. 
Also, on the housing improvement adaptation 
grants, I notice that there's no budget for 2020. 
So, I'm just wondering what the story is there, and 
why that is the case? 
And on page 18, I'm wondering can we get it, is it 
possible that we could get a listing of all the 
funding programmes that are available, that could 
be sent out to, certainly I'd like it, sent out to 
all the members so we can look at each programme 
and look what is available and the detail of it.  
We tend to get it in hindsight or through a third 
party who are no not represented, so I'd ask for 

that to be considered.  And the planning 
infrastructure, I just think that we're starting 
maybe to put the cart before the horse, there is 
an area I'd like to discuss in detail but I don't 
think chair you would allow me to do it today so 
I'll speed on.  I sense that, the way certain 
things are done and I am sure it is not intentional 
it is just the way the system works and I think the 
system need to be reviewed, but there does appear 
to me watching it from an organisation perspective 
that, unintentional undermining of the role of the 
elected representative.  We tend to I won't use 
the - we tend to get that in lots of situation, that 
needs to be seriously reviewed, I know this is a 
problem in other local authorities as well.  And 
I'm not sure what the members think about it, but 
I've got strong passionate views on it. I'm not 
annoyed over it by the way, but I am passionate. 
The Wicklow passport, interesting initiative, it 
is good to see, that's on the cards for a long time 
I think the person who probably through that in the 
pot three or four years ago was Martina Robinson.  
On the page 26, how are we integrating the climate 
action SPC committee, how is that now integrating 

with the planning seen that it is so very important? 
And I'll be as quick.  This is what I mean, we do 
need a meeting to discuss these things properly.  
I propose on planning, that we should have a members 
committee that meets with planning I know we have 
a SPC, but I think we need a grouping in addition 
to that, that specifically looks at planning just 
to make sure there's consistency, because you tend 
to find sometimes someone looking for a house, 
albeit and even though it is in a town, seem to have 
a lot more difficulty than a developer coming in 
with a hundred plus houses. 
And also, on planning, planning enforcement, I did 
look to have a special meeting on this chair but 
I know time doesn't allow it but it is in the CEO's 
report and I would, I don't think it is good enough 
to discuss it with SPC, I'd like to discuss it in 
a full council because we feed to have a full 
procedure in my opinion dealing with 
subcontractors, builders getting permission and 
then subcontracting on to someone else to build the 
houses, I'm racing this and it doesn't suit me. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I understand where you're coming 
from, but I need to move on. 

>>:  Here we are today, I don't like the way we're 
running. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I'm not finished. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Time.  Can you be quickly please. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  You're using up my time now.  Also, 
on the Whites remediation project, there was 
references to the judgment of Mr Justice Humphries, 
could we get a copy of that and what's the cost and 
who pays for it, Chair. I'm confused at this stage 
because I'll leave it at that, but it emphasises 
my opening point we need a proper meeting to discuss 
the CEOs report, he does it professionally and I 
would love on behalf of my constituents to be able 
to discuss it properly.  There are loads of things 
we need to talk about.  And I emphasise again, I 
do believe that public reps are not getting a fair 
crack. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you for that contribution.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   Just in relation to the roads 
funding, it is a challenge to get that money spent 
by the end of the year there's no question of that, 
and we'll have a report on it at the meeting, we're 
trying do it by correct labour which is the quickest 

rather than going to contractors, we're recruiting 
GOs, it is a challenge but we'll be doing our best.  
You made a good point maybe we should ask the 
department maybe can they be deferred until next 
year.  In relation to restart grants, yeah, we've 
done a lot in terms of writing to people, and 
Chambers of Commerce advertising it, putting on the 
website but we'll try and get the message out, after 
the scheme changes, we'll get that out as well.  On 
the west Wicklow swimming pool, the obvious site 
is around the Avonree we have a land zoned for 
community, residential, active open space and 
buffer beside the lake.  We are preparing a town 
and village application for town and village grant 
scheme which will cost around 200,000 do a full 
assessment of the area zoned of active space and 
community that will identify exactly where the 
sporting facilities, will go, running track and 
swimming pool, once we've got that done it will be 
an important document because it will assist 
funding applications we will make in the future.  
That will go in at the end of this month.  
Baltinglass and terms of school traffic, Municipal 
District will look at that, and we'll try and fill 

that post.  Cllr Tom Fortune wouldn't recommend a 
second meeting at the moment, it is hard enough to 
get social distancing, but it is something Protocol 
Committee can look at.  And, the in terms of 
footpaths, again, we'll certainly have a look at 
that, obviously it is part of the roadworks 
programme, schedule works, discretionary funding 
but there's more funding coming from the NTA and 
we can look at what we're prioritising what we put 
in those grants next year.  Exact amount of the 
recertificate grants, I might ask Brian that in a 
minute, I don't have the exact minute.  Single men 
and separated fathers, I get that there is a 
national policy now, that all local authorities 
will look at one bed units when we're building 
housing estates so that will cater for the single 
men and single women indeed.  But it is just when 
you have multiple bedrooms families have been on 
the waiting list, will get more points than the 
single men but the department have asked us to do 
a housing need assessment in terms of analysing our 
housing lists and they are in favour of building 
more one-off units.  HTGD grants, we have our 
funding for this year, I might ask Jo to give exact 

figure. 
In relation to the Wicklow passport, again I agree, 
it's a good scheme, it is just starting up, a lot 
of interest in it, and retail units and various 
different towns et cetera so that's going to make 
a difference. 
The climate action SPC, has got a presentation on 
the county development plan, so they will be 
feeding into that and climate action is a big part 
of the county development plan so there's always 
going to be a link between those two SPCs.  And the 
issue of contractors and subcontracting, not 
necessarily a planning issue but something that the 
planning SPC can look at.  And Whitestown 
regeneration, remediation plan should be ready by 
the end of November.  That will go through 
consultation process between EPA National Parks 
and wildlife, brown field and we but the cost of 
it in terms of consultancy have been paid by the 
department.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
CLLR CRONIN:  Thank you very much.  Thanks for the 
presentation and also before I start I want to thank 
all the council staff for their work over the past 

number of months and especially those working in 
the communities assisting with deliveries and I 
know they're continuing to do so, it is a huge help 
to people in the area. 
I'd like to welcome the funding announced under the 
July stimulus package, it is nice to see towns and 
villages will benefit from this funding but I do 
think that we need to ensure we continue our work 
on rural roads, I know many of my councillor 
colleagues raise it had today but the issue of 
potholes is huge, especially around the rural areas 
of west Wicklow.  Also, just on the funding that 
was announced it is great to see footpath in 
Hollywood receive funding, I hope the bus stop will 
continue to be a priority for the council, I know 
I've raised it on many occasions but we're still 
looking update on that.  Do we have a date for the 
houses in Dunlavin, the turnkey development? 
I know phase one have been allocated but we haven't 
got a date yet to allow people to move in. 
And they were due to move in in March, then July 
and still don't have a date yet.  I know there's 
people anxiously waiting to hear if they will be 
allocated a house on phase two. 

 
CLLR GLENNON:  I'd like to thank the Chief 
Executive for his report, and while I'm complaining 
about west Wicklow forgotten about, it is nice to 
see Hollywood is getting the footpath go ahead. 
The funds are there now from central governments 
so there's no reason why it can't proceed.  And I 
understand that the agreement has been reached with 
the landowners.  I'd like to take the opportunity 
to thank the Corrigan family in Hollywood for their 
continued support towards the community.  Dermot 
and Katy, and his parents Peter and Alice are 
continuously being asked for, to assist in the 
expansion and development of the community and I'd 
like them very much for their efforts.  The same 
families in Hollywood are called upon on continuous 
basis, they're asked for land for the school, 
graveyard fat path and hopefully in the future, bus 
stop.  I spoke to the Chief Executive and plans are 
well advanced in that way, and I hope that that 
comes together rather quickly. 
West Wicklow, I still maintain is largely forgotten 
about when it comes to council advancing our 
causes.  While we're pleased about Hollywood, 

disappointed to see that project driven by Cllr 
Gerry O'Neill largely the footpath around Red Lane 
is taken off the list and not getting funding in 
this round, I would hope that is progressed in the 
future and supporting counsellor O'Neill in his 
efforts in that regard.  It is over a year ago I 
mentioned the white line stops at the top of the 
Wicklow Gap, there is no white line, once you head 
west, you seem to forget about us, it is on the 
behind when it comes to support from the county.  
From the county council, and I'm going to end with 
by saying that the bridge in Baltinglass, the 
pedestrian bridge needs to be done, I understand 
a million euros in relation to the update of the 
town would incorporate the bridge across the River 
Slaney, it is urgent and dangerous to people having 
to cross as it is, thank you. 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and thank you 
Chief Executive.  As always, I agree with Cllr Tom 
Fortune it merits a lot more time to discuss it. 
I want to take the opportunity to thank the planning 
staff in particular, in the council who have been 
very generous, particularly myself as a first time 

councillor dealing with CPD in providing training, 
answering phone calls and e-mails, so a big thank 
you to them.  A couple of quick things on the 
report, just under pipeline schemes on page 8, the 
Three Trouts in Greystones, is listed as 40 units, 
and I was just wondering, what the overall capacity 
for units, is it the total number of units on the 
site? 
And I was just wondering has the LDA been approached 
or has service sites funding for affordable houses 
been examined, if we could have an update on that, 
that would be great.  And the second point was on 
page 34, on waste management, and Chief Executive 
you know I've been in touch with you before about 
the problem with litter in Greystones district, and 
it was getting to be a crisis point over the summer.  
It is a busy district at the best of time with 
visitors coming in from the cliff walk and 
obviously people are on staycations and staying put 
and the one man in van is not sufficient to deal 
with litter and the waste in the summer months 
particularly in our district and has been numerous 
complaints the whole summer over this from the 
public. 

So just want to raise that again. 
  
CLLR LEONARD:  I'd like to thank the Chief 
Executive for the report as usual it is always very 
informative.  In relation to the business restart, 
could we get a number of the eligible businesses 
and then compare to those who applied, maybe a 
breakdown of that.  Social housing arrears, the 
2.179 million, is there a plan in place to recoup 
that and maybe could my motion that is further down 
the agenda be part to implement the payment card.  
I would like to congratulate the passport, and 
she's been doing a great job to promote it for 
Wicklow tourism and in relation to the maritime 
areas in Arklow, I'd like to thank the Chief 
Executive and others involved in putting together 
the RDF plan for Arklow Harbour, that's very much 
appreciated.  I'd like, if possible, to get a 
update on the report, or today on the coastal 
erosion, the funding application for coastal 
erosion and feasibility study that's been done with 
Iarnrod Eireann, in particular the north beach in 
Arklow and access to that. 
That's very important.  To get something done 

there. and just lastly, the harbour master's 
assistant, last year, I think it was roughly around 
a year ago, I was it was confirmed that the harbour 
master's assistant would be kept, and about you it 
is a year later and we still haven't, that position 
hasn't been filled and I'd like an update on that 
as well please. 
  
CLLR O'NEILL:  It was just on three issues there 
if I could thank Cathaoirleach. 
On the swimming pool for west Wicklow:  
Blessington area, you know, is that to be built in 
the town or where is it going because I understand 
that if it would be the case it is outside the town 
it can't be alluded to in the account and 
development plan because we're not discussing the 
issue of the town plan, today. 
So just want clarification on that, where is the 
swimming pool going? 
Briefly now on another issue, housing, I'm 
concerned as a councillor for the last couple of 
year that there are now three new housing estates 
have planning permission, private developments, 
and it is 14 years now since we had any social 

housing built in the town.  And we notice 280 
people on the housing list in the area, and I think 
it should be seriously looked at, it is a serious 
issue. 
I know the issue with Irish Water, they got their 
permission a couple of years ago to upgrade but, 
upgrade the waste water treatment plant but, they 
have only informed me recently it will be 2022, 
before they go ahead, so we have, in Blessington, 
we have issues where planning permission is in 
place for housing but none can go ahead until they 
upgrade is in order.  And also, concerning there, 
because up to a dozen local people have got planning 
permission to build one-off houses in the 
Blessington area, they've been granted permission 
by the local authority, but they again can't move 
on it, until this upgrade is in place.  Just third 
one, I want to say well done to all the staff here 
on the Greenway and house moving, I know every 
effort has been made by Wicklow County Council to 
include people and the people of the area in 
consultations, but whatever again I want to express 
my disappointment that the ESB who are the main 
stakeholders here, they haven't engaged with 

people.  Only last week, a meeting was called which 
county council attended, but however, as I say the 
main stakeholder, ESB didn't bother.  And just one 
other issue there on the Greenway if I could mention 
there, the link to Tulfarris I don't think that 
should a priority, that's a private enterprise and 
it is wrong we include private enterprise with 
public money.  Go raibh maith agat. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
Cllr Avril Cronin, again we take on board what 
you're saying about the potholes it is ultimately 
a budgetary, but the jet patch Cher will help.  
Hollywood, we have engaged a consultant to look at 
the design, because obviously that's a decision for 
TIA, it is not a national road, but, by preparing 
this design and allaying their fears, we think when 
we summit this to them it will assist in the 
decision-making process.  I might ask Joe to 
comment on the exact date for Dunlavin and pipeline 
for Greystones, and if you wouldn't mind, I'll come 
back to that in a second.  In relation to Hollywood 
footpath, I agree, it is great to get that funding 
and you know, there will be more NTA schemes in the 
coming years, so we need to identify what we want 

for that. 
The footpath around Red Lane and white line of the 
Wicklow gap, we will take that up with Municipal 
District.  The bridge in Baltinglass, worthwhile 
project and we should take that to Part 8 stage and 
have it ready to apply fortuning, there's a lot of 
money spent on Baltinglass from the RDF, but we 
should keep that in mind as well. 
Terms of Cllr Lourda Scott, the west management, 
yeah, it is something we'll look at in terms of 
Greystones, but, a lot of it is due to behaviour 
and behaviour of visitors and locals that you know, 
we saw issues where people were buying pizzas, 
putting it into the waste bins, and there's 
certainly element of enforcement required, we put 
extra enforcements and that did help.  One man in 
a van, working every day, clearing out litter bins, 
you would imagine would be enough but it is 
something, it is more than the amount of litter bins 
and the clearing of them, there's personal 
behaviour we need to look at as well.  But 
something we'll look at between now and next 
summer.  Cllr Peir Leonard, details in relation to 
rerestart Grant School we will look at that, 

arrears, we'll try everything in terms of direct 
debit, household budget, we have collectors, we 
seem to being getting there, but there was changes, 
rent review, and we had Covid-19 but we will be 
working on that.  RDF for Arklow Harbour, yes, we 
should keep pushing that one, it is gone in the 
housing planning of local government now, but we 
will wait and see what comes up on that.  Harbour 
master, that filling of that post is with our HR 
recruitment section, things have slowed up because 
of Covid-19 but it is on the list.  The coastal 
erosion, we should have that shortly as soon as we 
get that we'll circulate it to members. 
Cllr Gerry O'Neill it relation to the swimming 
pool, what we're doing at the moment, is looking 
at the lands we own and comprehensive master plan 
for all sports, it doesn't have to go through the 
county development plan process, that land is zoned 
for active open space and community and we'll look 
at that the best way using that in terms of swimming 
pool, running track, and playing field, et cetera. 
Just in relation to the Greenway and ESB, yeah, 
certainly, now they're committed, there's no 
question about that, 100% committed but need to be 

involved in the process, and the link to full 
ferries, we'll have a look at it, the whole thing 
is about tourism and that's key part but that's 
something we'll have a look at.  Thanks. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Chief Executive.  One 
more I missed, Cllr Mary Kavanagh. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Yeah, this is just to get back to 
the issue of parking. Especially in relation to 
Wicklow.  We pay probably the highest charges in 
the county. 
In comparison to the other Municipal Districts.  
And yet the two biggest funding receipts don't come 
to us.  And I know you've said you'll look at it, 
but I'm wondering what the possibility is of doing 
an exercise to do a proportional ratio of the work 
carried out by Wicklow Municipal District, versus 
the work carried out by the environment section and 
political the receipts accordingly so that both 
sections will receive something.  I think it is 
very unfair that we're charged the highest amount 
in the county and yet we lose the two biggest 
funding streams completely and I think we should 
get some kind of proportional payback. 

to the Municipal District because there's a lot of 
work we need do in the town with regards to all kinds 
of things, and it would certainly help.  So instead 
of just looking at it, can you look at it from the 
point of view of trying to split the cost carried 
out, costs incurred by the Municipal District 
versus the environment section. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   OK thanks Cathaoirleach.  
Yeah, we'll have a look at that, it is operated on 
a franchise basis but we'll certainly, that's a 
good session suggestion, we will do analysis on it 
and come back to you.  One or two for Joe Lane. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're fine. 
JOE LANE:  OK.  Three questions, Dunlavin, this 
isn't enough scheme it is improved housing body 
turnkey so we're just, the last information we've 
been given quarter 4 this year so we're confident 
it will be Q4 and actively engaging with the 
developer and improving housing body to complete 
phase one and two.  Three Trouts, I think the 
question particularly was can it be improved 
housing body, can it be social housing and 
affordable.  No, that scheme particularly was 

purchased for social housing.  The current service 
sites fund which is the grant scheme for to aid 
affordable schemes is fully for infrastructure 
only and doesn't include land cost and there's 
people familiar with that scheme, there's a strong 
land cost there in the 41 units, the department will 
allow us to get the return back on that land.  But 
that particular one was earmarked for social 
housing. Blessington:  As elected members are 
aware; it was included as PP3 included circa units 
included in that site which will get rid of the 
pent-up demand.  I have been, I'm involved with the 
PPB scheme at national level and the planning and 
the scheme development will not be delayed 2022, 
they're running in parallel, and everyone accepted 
the scheme that the scheme by the scheme is ready 
the sewerage scheme should be in place.  We have 
joint engineering in lots of areas, we have 
advertisement for turnkeys where we ask developers 
if they have capacity to want to discuss where some 
of their development could be solid to the local 
authority to deal with social housing, a people are 
familiar in two areas in particular, this is 
provided early supply of units and can be a great 

way to supply augment around supply.  So, we have 
issued those ads if anybody is aware, you can come 
back to me and a number of members have. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Perhaps the statistics on the 
restart grants, Brian would you circulate them 
would you. 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  I have a new number here, just on 
the initial restart grant, we had 11,056 
applications and paid out 4 million in grants to 
businesses.  As you're probably aware, there's now 
a restart plus grant scheme where the criteria have 
changed, the minimum grant has been increased from 
2,000 to 4,000 and maximum has been increased from 
10,000 to 235,000.  We've had a get that in number 
of software changes to process those applications 
but to date we've received over 1,300 on the new 
restart plus grant scheme, and they're to a value 
of 5.2 million, and will be commencing payment this 
week in relation to those new applications.. 
As regards Cllr Peir Leonard had a query regarding 
eligible businesses, we have over 3,500 rate payers 
so that's a good guide as regards knowing exactly 
eligible, it depends on the businesses and how much 

they've been impacted by Covid-19.  The criteria, 
only allows businesses that have had their turnover 
reduced by 235% or more, to apply and they also must 
commit to retain staff are on the TWSSS so two 
strict criteria that, so we wouldn't know how many 
are eligible until they apply.  As a guide of all 
rate payers, he was 3,500, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm going to move on to item number 
nine. To receive a presentation: Local Property Tax 
Funding - Mr Brian Gleeson, Head of Finance.  At 
this at that stage I would also like to acknowledge 
and welcome Deputy Stephen Matthews who have taken 
time out for this presentation, it is great to see 
our former colleague back with?   
BRIAN:  I wanted to give an overview of the 
property tax model and how it works, outline the 
proposals, on local property tax was included in 
the programme for Government and highlight 
Wicklow's baseline figure and how it impacts on our 
current and future funding. 
In relation to the programme for Government, you're 
probably aware there was a number of 
recommendations, included in it. 

In relation to local property tax specifically all 
monies collected locally will be retained in the 
county.  And the impact of that, would be annual 
national equalisation fund, which was used to 
supplement counties whose LPT funding was below the 
previous level received under general purpose 
grant scheme that would be paid by the executor as 
opposed to each county giving up 20%.  Another, 
proposal a programme for Government was inclusion 
of new builds, since 2013, which are currently 
exempt from paying local property tax. 
Unfortunately, the recommendations, require 
legislative changes, to be put in by the dement of 
finance and additional funding from Deeper to 
implement the proposals.  The end result in 2021, 
is that there's no changes toss LPT model or 
allocation to local authorities. 
To explain the local property tax baseline, this 
represents the minimum amount of funding provided 
to a local authority, from the local property tax. 
It represents the previous level of funding 
received by the local authority under the 
general-purpose grant scheme. 
Those local authorities with a surplus funding over 

and above their baseline are required to self-fund 
services, in the housing capital area, there be 
replacing central Government funding.  In 2020, 
1.7 million from funding from Wicklow, local 
property tax was earmarked from this self-funding 
of housing.  The Wicklow County Council baseline 
of 8.5 million is based on historical data, and not 
current information following major population 
changes over the last 10-15 years.  The local 
baseline, there was an actual local government 
funding review, which included a review of the 
baseline and that was undertaken in 2018. 
Led by the Department of Finance in order to 
identify key indicators for determining updated 
baseline levels for local authorities, these 
indicators included population, population 
increases, area, density, and the level of 
commercial rates income in a county. 
You were probably aware a formal paper was 
submitted by Wicklow County Council to the 
department supporting the strong case for 
increasing the baseline figure for Wicklow. 
The end result I suppose, of the baseline situation 
is unless the baseline is adjusted the net 

financial benefit to Wicklow County Council 
arising from the proposed elimination of 
equalisation is actually zero and the net financial 
benefit to Wicklow County Council, from the 
inclusion of these new builds which we've spoken 
about will be minimal. 
Just to give a bit more detail on that:  The 
existing CSO, statistics in relation to new builds, 
has approximately 3,500 new builds completed in 
Wicklow from 2013 to Q2 in 2020, the average LPT 
payment in Wicklow paid 2020, was approximately 
350, in a would generate additional income of 1.2 
million the proposed equalisation for Wicklow in 
2021, is 3.5 million therefore the gross financial 
impact of these programme for Government proposals 
for Wicklow County Council is 4.7 million.  
However, due to this situation with regard to the 
historical baseline that's in place for Wicklow, 
the net financial benefit will only be 240,000 to 
the bottom line. 
I'll go through the detail of the model, and explain 
and show you exactly why that is the case.  This 
is the current situation, this year, there's 17.3 
million has been allocated to Wicklow, based on the 

receipts for local property tax within the county.  
20% goes into the national equalisation fund, 
nearly 355 million, that reduced to 13.8 million, 
compared to baseline of 8.5 million which shows a 
surplus of 5.3 million of the surplus it is split 
between what Wicklow can retain for its own use, 
which is the net discretionary income and amount 
to self-fund housing capital, project. 
The surplus, discretionary income is calculated, 
you can see from the screen there, it is 20% of the 
total funding so it is 20% of the 17.3 million and 
that comes to 3.5 so the 3.5 gives 1.8 million for 
self-funding, so there's approximately 12 million 
available to the Wicklow County Council revenue 
budget, to spend on our own resources.  The rest 
of it goes to the self-funding and to the 
equalisation fund. 
If I move on to scenario two:  It shows the proposed 
situation with zero per cent, or of equalisation 
where it is eliminated, here we have the same 127.3 
million is allocation, obviously now there's no 
amount has been allocated, or removed for the 
national equalisation fund so we retain 17.3 
million.  However, our baseline is unchanged, of 

8.5, and that means our surplus has now increased 
from 5.3, up to 8.7. 
Given that the net discretionary income is still 
20% of the total allocation, which is 3.5, it means 
now the self-funding element has increased by the 
same amount of equalisation.  It has gone from 1.8 
million to 1.3 million which leaves bottom line of 
12 million unchanged. 
the last scenario, is, includes zero per cent 
equalisation and also the addition of new 
properties, which we said were about 3,500 worth 
1.2 million in this example we've increased 100% 
allocation, from 17.3 million up to 18.5 million. 
Zero taken off for equalisation so retain 8.5, 
baseline again remains unchanged.  So now we see 
the surplus has jumped from 8.7, in this example, 
and now up to 9.95 million. 
The net discretionary income has increased 
slightly by 240,000 because we're getting 20% now 
of 18.5, rather than 20% of 17.3, so that's slightly 
gone up to 3.7 million.  And surplus is increased 
from 5.3, up to 6.2, for self-funding, and the end 
result of that is that the retained amount in the 
revenue budget is 12.24 million, increase as I said 

earlier of 240,000, in comparison to the other 
examples. So, where does that leave us? 
I suppose following the publication of the 
programme for Government I wrote directly to the 
department highlighting this anomaly and 
requesting the baseline to be revised. 
It was pointed out that a number of the changes 
required additional funding from DEPA and 
legislative changes from Department of Finance, 
CCMA financial committee which I'm a member 
included this issue, and official submission to 
LGMA of the financial impact of the programme for 
Government.  But, I believe what we really need now 
is political support and political pressure in 
relation to this, particular situation to ensure 
Wicklow County Council, its baseline is adjusted 
to an appropriate and fair level, so we generate 
and we retain an appropriate level of the LPT. 
So, I suppose, for information purposes I know 
people would have been aware of the programme for 
Government and inclusion of the local property tax 
recommendations and maybe weren't aware of the time 
line involved, and whether that would impact on 
budget 2021, so, I can't confirm based on the 

reasons I've outlined in relation to legislation, 
that the 2021, allocation will remain unchanged. 
So, that will have to be taken into account, in our 
LPT meeting in two weeks' time.  Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Brian.  As I watched 
that presentation, Brian it is the same 
presentation with the same two years, we have the 
same money, same problems and same challenges. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Brian.  That's real 
accounting trickery as I'm sure you recognise.  
The problem there is they're using the same fund 
for housing figure as a formula, self-fund for 
housing should be a fixed figure, so ever are I time 
our total property tax income goes up funding for 
housing goes up and reduces the total of the 
discretionary amount.  So total discretion amount 
stays the same, no matter how much money we get on 
property tax the way the formula is set up, it is 
absolutely nuts that the figure for self-funding 
for housing increases I think there in your 
example, I just saw the figures for the first time, 
increased by three million from first scenario to 
third scenario.  So we then have to come up with 

three or 3.5 or 4 million on money for self-funding 
for housing, which means that, is that ultimately 
mean you get less money from the department for 
housing, you're digging into your own pot for 4 
million and the way it is set up, if you had 30 
million in property tax, they'd up your 
self-funding to housing to 15 million so you'd 
still end up with the same.  So, the way the formula 
set up it is a joke actually.  It means no matter 
how much property tax you get, they'll throw it back 
that you have to use a big chunk for self-funding 
for housing, but discretionary money stays the 
same.  Your example we went up by 4 million, if you 
were allow today keep the 3.5 million, you were 
allowed to keep that or 20% and allowed to keep 1.2 
million extra for the extra properties, that's 
what, 4.7 million and you end up with only 250,000, 
or extra, 240,000 extra, on an extra income of 4.5 
million, sure that makes no sense at all.  The way 
it set up is flawed and needs to be changed. 
  
CLLR BEHAN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Cllr Edward Timmins is a very wise man and 
accountant on top of that, and I think he's 

described this as an accountancy trick and there's 
no doubt that's exactly what it is, not perpetuated 
by the, or perpetrated by the staff of the council, 
but by successive governments and Government 
officials. 
And to add insult to injury, even if you add in the 
houses that have not been paying property tax since 
2013, we're still not going to benefit. 
So, it is an outrage that this happens, year after 
year, and what's even more outrageous is that we 
can't provide extra services over and above what 
we used to be able to provide when we got the support 
grant.  Although people's pockets are emptied to 
pay for this tax, we're not getting resource toss 
actually make a real difference to people where 
they live. 
And the other point I'd make to members is we're 
going to be faced in two weeks ago, this is being 
set up today to give us a certain message, it is 
a truthful message, but, make no mistake, we're 
being set up to be asked to consider another 
increase in the property tax next year. 
And last year we were told it was an exceptional 
year, on that occasion that there was an 

exceptional situation, because of lack of funding 
over insurance refunds, I can't remember the exact 
detail and we were told this was a once-off. 
So, we'll wait and see what comes before us now in 
a fortnight, but I suspect members are going to be 
asked again to go along with this complete fraud 
on the taxpayers of County Wicklow.  And I'm 
certainly not going to go along with t and I'm glad 
deputy Matthews is with us, he is familiar with this 
argument and he's now on a congratulate him I see 
him today he is appointed as Chairman of the Dail 
committee on housing and look forward to his 
contribution on that committee. 
But I would ask Deputy Matthews to take back the 
message to colleagues in Government that we in 
Wicklow County Council are not going to accept this 
continual punishment for the people we represent 
because we live on the outskirts of county Dublin. 
  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I think the microphone is out of 
synch.  Just this is a con job.  To be honest about 
it, I took the opportunity on Friday to speak to 
Michael McGready the minister and asked him the 
question about the equalisation fund, the 

baseline, the houses since 2013 that have paid no 
property tax and, that's the minister for finance, 
won't be making any changes.  The changes will come 
in 2022.  The fact is you'll probably get more 
money one way and go out the other.  I have plenty 
of examples in Arklow strict where you have one 
person living, husband or wife is no longer there, 
huge houses, paying huge property tax, and when I 
see where the 20%, of our equalisation fund goes, 
the counties that were property prices are probably 
50-60% of price of houses, price of houses here in 
Wicklow, it is absolutely disgusting, and I know 
there has been a meeting on it, in Government, and 
it looks to me that is going to stay the same, 
whereas counsellor Timmins says the more we get the 
more is taken off us.  We have had seven years now 
of people not paying property tax who should have 
been paying property tax and we have equalisation 
fund going to counties that are let's say wealthier 
than this county so I think you're quite right 
Chairman we need to use political pressure to get 
this changed, but in saying that I wouldn't be too 
hopeful. 
  

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
CLLR SNELL:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
Just to point out that, and I'm sure most members 
are aware, that this is unfair tax.  It was unfair 
tax when it was introduced all those years ago and 
it is still an unfair tax today. 
Of the 3,500 people who don't pay anything this this 
county a lot of members here last year would have 
felt that was going to be changed and unfortunately 
we've been told today it is not and I understand 
from your perspective as head of finance with you' 
not relaying the message so we won't shoot the 
messenger today but the reality is that there's 
under 100,000 people who haven't put their shoulder 
to the wheel since 2013 nationally, and we have 
people in this county who inherited family homes 
that was in their family for generations, who are 
being hit with a property tax.  We have people 
sitting in houses that are valued up to a million 
euros, who have never paid one red cent in local 
property tax.  This is a national scandal. 
And we know that they keep changing the goalposts 
in regard to the equalisation fund.  Members here, 
over many years raised the point that we have 

counties who actually reduce their local port tax 
in their own county and some of the money raised 
here in County Wicklow was shifted off to them to 
help them put in their services which is an absolute 
shame on people at national level.  I felt this 
would change, and unfortunately to hear this news 
today is despicable on people hit out there, 
potentially an increase in the local property tax 
and I certainly won't be supporting it. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Members would it be fair if I said 
we're all on the same hymn sheet here.  And we need 
to get to the county development plan, we have a 
document from Brian, it is the same we got last 
year, we understand it, we're back here in two weeks 
and would you mind if we moved on and we moved to 
the county development plan.  Cllr Tom Fortune I 
know you want to get in, we won't get to the county 
development plan if we don't.  You can discuss it, 
but we need to get to the county development plan. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Can I make a ten-second comment.  
We need to get the five TDs in the room with us, 
there's no point, one or two coming in, we need them 
all here because, they need to stand up and be 

counted on this. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Tom Fortune and 
actually we did invite our five TDs here and we only 
have deputy Matthews who did turn up.  So, would 
you mind if I moved on because I do need to get to 
the county development man.  Thanks members, I do 
appreciate your co-operation on this.  Item on 
ten. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Can we do nine to set the date for 
the RPT. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Set a date for the LPT.  Monday 
21st of September, at 2pm. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr John Snell and Cllr Irene 
Winters.  All in favour? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item number eleven is to consider 
the First Chief Executive's Report (previously 
issued) prepared under Section 11 (4) of the 
Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) 
regarding the review of the County Development Plan 
and to consider any directions regarding the 
preparation of the Draft County Development Plan 

2021-2027 proposed by the members under Section 
11(4)(d) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(as amended). so I would welcome Sorcha here and 
before you come in, thank you yourself and Bernie 
and all the work you did on this and the time, but 
I'd like to acknowledge all the work the members 
put in and the time they put into it, in relation 
to sending in questions and that.  So, I will hand 
over to you?   
SORCHA:    Thank you.  Thank you members, we're 
here today to discuss the first Chief Executive's 
report prepared for the review of the county 
development plan, thank you all for inputs over the 
last few weeks, and we'll get to them just after 
my presentation so I'll move as quickly as I can.  
The planning process move on to the next slide 
please. 
Thank you.  We've completed our first stage public 
consultation which as you know started towards the 
end of last year.  And we had a number of public 
meetings and prepared an issues paper on our 
website that was publicised in all our forums and 
advocacy 156 submissions which is a 50% on increase 
on the previous plan, they are getting more complex 

as people get interested if planning and instead 
of maybe addressing one or two issues a lot would 
address multiple issues so they were quite complex 
as some of you saw when you read them.  Key issues 
that came up were climate change transport and 
place making in the past development plans we've 
had submissions for example with regard to housing, 
and there was a bit of a sea-change this time around 
so people are more interested in infrastructure and 
services and proving their communities than just 
the delivery of new housing. 
The first Chief Executive's report was issued to 
you on the 12th of June and that concluded 128 
recommendation with regard to policy and 
objectives and proposed new course strategy.  
We've held over 20, probably more like 25-30 
workshops with councillors in various 
configurations, Covid-19 obviously caused a bit of 
a problem but we got to speak to all of you in either 
groups or individually.  So after today the Chief 
Executive has to continue to produce a draft 
development plan which we submitted to you the 
members in due course, it will be a proposed draft 
plan and you will have to adopt that as a draft plan 

before it goes on public display. 
All of the objectives in the current development 
plan will be reviewed and amended and updated as 
necessary particularly in accordance with NPF, and 
ministerial guidelines so some of have you come to 
myself and the team about some ideas and some are 
already addressed in the development plan but we 
will update them and approve them and integrate 
ideas where possible.  Unless the Chief Executive 
signalled all provisions will remain in the plan.  
So, one of the key things in the Chief Executive's 
report is proposed new course strategy and that's 
probably the area where you have come to us the most 
over the last few weeks. 
And most of you know at this stage our new 
population on housing target have come directly 
from the national planning framework and you have 
obligation to prepare a plan consistent with the 
national planning framework and the regional plan. 
In terms of the population targets, County Wicklow 
has been allocated a population target for 2031, 
at the upper end of the range which is 164,000 and 
those not familiar with the current development 
plan the current population target for the county 

is actually 178,000 for 2028.  So, the new figures 
give a lower population target and over a longer 
period. 
Through, intensive lobbying and work from our 
members on the Regional Assembly, we've managed to 
achieve an extra allocation on top of that for Bray, 
and that basically comes out of the Dublin pot of 
population growth because Bray is in the 
metropolitan area.  And that population growth has 
to go to Bray, it can't be spread out over any other 
town it is earmarked for Bray only.  So, that would 
affectively bring our 2031 upper end figure to 
173,500. 
That translates to housing numbers, which is on the 
bottom end of the table there, and effectively 
means a growth in housing between 2016 and 2031 of 
15,368 houses so that plan is headline figure and 
further tables you would have seen in the Chief 
Executive's report Rae late back to that number, 
15,368. 
The regional plan requires, and the national plan 
require us to look at all of our towns and evaluate 
them and look where the population and housing 
growth is going to occur.  And the approach has 

been lifted directly from the regional plan which 
set out an asset-based test which is a number of 
variables and pieces of data, that have to be 
collected for each and every settlement to evaluate 
whether it has the capacity to grow and what kind 
of level of growth.  So the assessment criteria 
include scale, function, human capital, place 
making, enterprise connectively environment and 
infrastructure and as part of the report, one of 
the document was you will see, that you've seen is 
called the Asset Based Assessment, every town over 
1500 has gone through that assess., the reason why 
1500 is taken is the CSO sets 1500 as definition 
of an urban settlement. 
And the planning act also, categorised towns of 
1500 or under as a smaller subset of a town that 
you treat differently than the bigger towns.  So, 
based on that, the data that he is in the 
asset-based assessment, we proposed a new 
settlement hierarchy, which is on the next slide. 
I know this is hard to see but you have all them 
circulated with the presentation.  This document 
is in the Chief Executive's report you got last 
June. 

So, in terms of the settlement hierarchy, the 
regional plan has already identified Bray and 
Wicklow Rathnew as our key towns, and that's a 
definition conferred by the regional plan.  
They've been identified following an assessment of 
our towns by the Regional Assembly. 
Only towns below those towns within your gift to 
set into a new hierarchy.  So, we're recommending 
that level three and hierarchy should comprise 
larger towns of Arklow, Greystones and 
Blessington. 
Greystones obviously is Greystones and Delgany.  
Level four in the hierarchy then, are the towns 
between 1500 and 5,000 which are Baltinglass, 
Enniskerry, Kilcoole and Rathnew and Newtown.  The 
lower part of the table which is the smaller towns 
so 1500 or less, and going down to the rural areas, 
level five we're recommending Ashford, Aughrim, 
Carnew and Dunn Levin and Tinahely in one and Avoca, 
Dunard, Kilmac, Roundwood and Shillelagh, below we 
have tiers of villages that you are familiar with.  
So, we have our new recommended settlement 
hierarchy so now that we have that we should 
allocate growth to each of those towns. 

And, the key determining factors of level of 
housing growth in each town is headline figure from 
earlier which was nearly 15,000 units but we have 
a cap of 30% set by the national planning framework 
that no town other than towns designated as key 
towns, can grow than more than 30%, so based on that 
30% being a limiting factor we have done our best 
to allocate growth around the county, we've made 
a recommendation to how that would be best done. 
Again, apologies if the numbers aren't clear but 
it is in the Chief Executive's report.  You will 
see some towns have overshot the 30%, limit since 
2016, and nevertheless we have still recommended 
some additional growth be allowed in those towns 
because we can't have a zero growth rate anywhere, 
because there will be good infill town centre-type 
development we want to be able to grant permission 
for but we have to strictly limit that, if the town 
has overshot its 30% cap. 
At this stage then the Chief Executive will proceed 
to prepare develop plan in courts with his 
recommendations and his proposed core strategy but 
you have the opportunity to issue directions now 
for example, you would like to see amendment to one 

of his recommended policies or if there was a 
particular policy you were unhappy with, this is 
your opportunity to issue your proposals to the 
Chief Executive.  But ultimately the Chief 
Executive has to proceed to have a draft 
development plan in RCS, and ministerial 
directions, so what the planning access is 
following consideration with first Chief 
Executive's report, members applying authority may 
issue direction, there's no obligation for you to 
do, regarding the preparation of the plan.  They 
should be strategic in nature and take account of 
strategy obligations of the local authority.  In 
issuing directions, members restricted to have 
sustainable development of the area.  A number of 
you would have come to me with suggestion that is 
may well be good suggestions but may not be 
strategic in nature and we've advised you of that, 
but we will work with you to integrate your 
suggestions, wherever possible but might not be of 
this particular meeting but maybe for subsequent 
meetings and we will continue to work with you over 
the next period to integrate those suggestions as 
we go along. 

The next stage of the plan are like I said to 
actually prepare and propose draft plan to summit 
back to you the members, we would be hopeful to get 
to you before the end of the year and then you have 
time to consider that proposed draft plan and come 
back to a council meeting next spring and adopt that 
as a draft plan.  At that meeting it will also be 
open to you to make further amendment if you wish, 
but you will have a draft plan in font so it is 
easier if you want precise changes, after you adopt 
a draft plan it goes on public display and you will 
be familiar with the process that follows.  Public 
submissions, another Chief Executive's report, 
after that, it is possible to adopt a plan or amend 
the plan, if you wish to make amendments at that 
stage there's another public display period and 
Chief Executive's report so we're looking at 
towards the end of next year or early the following 
year before a plan is adopted. 
So that's the presentation for you and I understand 
that the number of you do have proposed directions, 
that you'd like to summit to the meeting so, 
Cathaoirleach I'll hand back to you to take it from 
there if you wish. 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Sorcha and thank you for 
the presentation.  Members that have directions, 
I'll take them now. 
Cllr John Mullen.  Sorry ... 
Are we taking them in order, we should take them 
in order. 
>>:  Yes a number of members have submitted 
directions and we've packaged them together and 
sent them back around to everybody there's a 
document you all received and they're all in number 
according to I suppose where they would appear in 
the development plan so those relating to score 
strategy would be first and then moves-to-on to 
other issues like employment or design standards.  
So, if you want to follow the numbering system 
that's in the document, that will work yeah. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Direction number one, has been 
proposed by Cllr Fitzgerald, Cllr Glennon, Cllr 
Annesley… 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Will propose this, Cllr John 
Mullen is it? 
CLLR MULLEN:  And if I could speak just as well one 
or two related, I know they're different ones, but 

I want to speak to both of them rather than hold 
up the meeting every time because I know my name 
appears a few times, unfortunately.  But it does.  
First of all, I would like to thank Sorcha and 
forward planning team. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Can we get straight to rather than 
thanking everybody because we don't have the time. 
CLLR MULLEN:  It was important because as a new 
councillor it was hard to understand that process, 
it is very hard for us as elected representatives 
and I refer to Cllr Tom Fortune's comment earlier, 
what is the function of a local representative? 
This plan is a very important plan, it lasts for 
six years. 
And yet when the figures were produced and I know 
the planners are sometimes acting with, in my view 
with their hands tied behind their back because 
this came from a national framework which is deeply 
conversation of itself and drives in the face in 
my view of local government and the purpose of local 
government which is to allow the people in the towns 
and villages of all of County Wicklow to develop. 
And Cathaoirleach, that's why I did want to thank 
the planning staff because I'm not blaming them.  

They've patiently taken me will you this at several 
meetings, e-mails and conversations. 
By I still come to the conclusion that the figures 
published basically tell one tale and that is 
development in this county will happen in north 
Wicklow, and it won't happen anywhere else. 
And there will not be a degree of flexibility to 
ensure, particularly when it comes to housing and 
housing crisis, that we actually deliver housing 
units at the end of the plan rather than theatrical 
figures.  Now figures were produced for the growth 
of various towns in Wicklow.  And because those 
figures were produced and are published, our tacit 
agreement is on them, and I can't agree to figures 
which tell that many towns and villages in this 
county will not be able to deliver houses, will not 
be able to deliver or argue for the waste water 
infrastructure or road indicators to measure 
improvements, that they deserve anyway because one 
will follow the other. 
Infrastructure will follow housing development. 
Housing development will be tied down in this plan 
on the figures that have been produced here and the 
essence and I know we're at the start of the plan 

and there's a will long way to go, I want to flag 
it now in front of this chamber today because this 
is the first time we've had this process and I know 
Covid-19 makes this more complicated with the fact 
we could have meetings upon meetings about this 
plan because it is so important in my view, but, 
certain towns in this county are going to get 
development out of this plan and others, vast 
majority in this county is going to be ignored and 
that's unacceptable.  So what we're trying to 
build in with our proposals as a group, and my 
second one which I'm willing to drop if the first 
one is accommodated, is that we should have 
flexibility to ensure that we deliver housing, for 
the 10,700 in total can be delivered wherever they 
are practically achievable. 
Rather than working out of targets that are not 
achievable. 
And that's the essence of what, without getting 
into it too long and I accept what you're saying 
that you have an obligation to do what you have to 
do. 
But as elected reps we have a role too and one of 
the county developments plans, if it is writ been 

I the national Government and department, owe 
officials up there, be honest about it.  But don't 
expect us to rubber stamp it. 
And say it is a county development plan which we 
have all sanctioned because at the moment, based 
on these figures it couldn't be. 
I'd like to conclude on that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr John Mullen. 
Sorcha do you want to reply to that, that's a 
proposal from the Fianna Fail group, and we need 
a seconder so it will be seconded by the same Fianna 
Fail group. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Do you have a seconder. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Group is seconder on that as well. 
  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Could we continue on and come 
back to Sorcha what time is it over at. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  4pm. Cllr John Mullen ... 
MS GALLAGHER:  Are we still on number one, is that 
agreed? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that agreed? 
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreeable with that?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   On number one there, I think 

Sorcha referred to Planning and Development Act 
2000 which deals with issue of directions, at this 
point in time our members may issue one, but you 
have to consistent with the strategy and take into 
account statutory obligations of local authority 
and relevant policies and objectives the 
Government to the minister and then are issued a 
clear directive, not to review wind energy strategy 
at this stage so that, I don't think we can run with 
that one. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If we take number one on its own 
then Cllr John Mullen, is that fine and then go to 
number two? 
So, we have a proposal for number one.  And 
seconded by the same group.  So, do I need to put 
that to a vote them? 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  I'm not sure how we're going to do 
this, is it something we're going to comment on and 
move on?   
SORCHA:  Yeah, Cathaoirleach, if you want me to 
come in there, I suppose, just in response to Cllr 
John Mullen's point, you're absolutely right that 

certain matters have been taken out of our hands, 
via the new MPV particularly.  Which when it was 
first produced we were told it wouldn't be 
prescriptive with regard to housing numbers it 
would be qualitative we would look at our places 
and look how they should grow based on 
characteristics, and then six months later, a 
companion document was published with that, called 
MP F sorrowed map which set target so there was 
inherent contradiction there, we have targets and 
they're Government policy so Chief Executive will 
prepare a development plan that complies with that 
policy, he also has to prepare planning with 
planning act which requires him to have score 
strategy, and core strategy which is how it is set 
out in the act has to set out population and housing 
targets, for each settlement and they can't be 
fluid, they can't be between 100 and 500 houses in 
Baltinglass, they have to be a particular number.  
How of course there isn't going to be a slavish 
adherence that once if the target is a hundred 
houses, once 101 comes along everything is refused 
but there has to be a structure to core strategy 
whereby the numbers that are targeted for different 

places, add up generally to the target that we're 
given for the county.  Otherwise we're just 
letting the market and developers dictate our 
growth strategy and you suggested we should allow 
development to happen, where there's demand or 
where people want it to happen or maybe there's 
services, but that's not a structured approach.  
Essentially, we would be letting someone else lead 
us into development strategy and develop and 
landowners leading us into a place where it is led 
by them and we don't have control over it anymore.  
So, the whole thrust of the MP F is we take control 
where the houses is going to be delivered not 
landowners or developers or the market, we decide, 
or you decide where the best locations are.  And 
we shouldn't be looking at housing as being the only 
funding source for services, the whole idea of the 
MP F is that we allow using to occur where the 
services are already in situ or about to be provided 
or can be provided by quickly, that we don't wait 
for housing to be delivered with no services coming 
along with it and hoping we get development levies 
and hoping then the Department of Education build 
a school or NTA fund traffic improvement scheme.  

That we look at places that have the infrastructure 
already to grow, and where places don't 
infrastructure, we don't target them.  This phase 
for masses amount of development, we use this phase 
of development, this development plan to play 
catch-up on all the services that are missing in 
certain places, whether that be employment, road 
infrastructure, schools, and we slow down or 
moderate the house and growth in those places until 
we have catch-up on the services, and then next plan 
around if that catch up occurred, then that place 
can then become a place where new housing should 
be delivered.  And that's a theme that's coming 
through, many, many of the public submissions that 
we got on the development plan, that people aren't 
opposed to housing being delivered, but, a lot of 
people's opinion it is delivered in places where 
the services aren't adequate and they want to see 
us and other agencies investing in the services now 
before we have a glut of new houses and places where 
the services are inadequate.  So, if a town, if 
we're recommending a town should moderate its 
growth rate in this proposed core strategy, that 
doesn't mean the door is closed for housing growth 

in that town forever, it means during the currency 
of the new development plan, we the council, and 
all the other agencies, need to work together and 
pool our resources to do that catch-up in that 
place, to improve the quality of life in that place, 
for the people who are already there and not be 
waiting for new development to provide that 
financing for new services.  We have an obligation 
to the people who already live in our towns and live 
in our counties that are living in places with 
inadequate services, and this is supposed to be a 
period of catch-up and moderation and in the future 
we should be looking, new houses, significant new 
housing may come about in the future but this stage 
is for catch-up.  And that's the theme of the NPF 
and that's what is coming through in the figures 
they're giving us.  They want to see places, 
Wicklow, Meath, Kildare and Louth moderate housing 
growth because these are places that had a lot of 
housing growth but not investment in services.  
But that mightn't be the situation forever. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Cllr Shay Cullen. 
  

CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks Chairman.  Just two 
questions, number one I think it is important to 
be clear on the core strategy settlement figures 
for everybody here because I'm not 100% on this.  
The total figure of 10,700, I suppose the first 
question, when does that figure come into play? 
The listen I have for asking that, is currently, 
we have a lot of planning permissions going through 
the system.  If for example I'll use one in Ashford 
where there is a currently a planning permission 
with An Bord Pleanala for 133 houses but Ashford's 
figure for the next ten years up to 2031 is a 
hundred, so, if a planning permission gets for 133 
gets the go-ahead, that figure is smashed, it is 
gone, so, I suppose the question for everybody to 
be clear here is, the 10,700, when does that come 
into play? 
If those planning permissions that are in the 
system or will be granted before this development 
plan is operational, does that 10,700 figures 
reduce town accordingly with the planning 
permissions that have been granted? 
Another example Roundwood has 48 live planning 
applications being granted and the target for the 

next ten years is 50.  So, am I right in saying in 
a, two houses can be built in Roundwood in the next 
ten years? 
These are the type of figures that it is important 
that everybody is very clear on. 
And just on the number one there, direction number 
one, I just want to move on to that.  Again, if we 
vote to agree with number one, the initial response 
from the Chief Executive is the development plan 
itself cannot play a role in active land management 
as it is policy document.  Active land management 
would be an action, activity to be carried out by 
the council officials and therefore would be an 
operational matter. 
I want clear direction on this, if we vote to go 
against the CE, what is the repercussions for us 
as councillors. 
Thank you. 
  
CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you. 
I don't see how we can vote for number one because, 
the superior authority is national Government and 
Eastern Midland Regional Authority handed us down 
a population number which is we're required to 

allocate out in a very prescriptive form.  I was 
on the Eastern Midland Regional Authority when this 
was discussed, and there was a great deal of 
haggling and argument with the department and 
everybody else about the prescriptive nature of 
these target and it was agreed in principle and has 
been achieved in practice that I don't know 
something like 10-15,000 population target was 
transferred from Dublin to Wicklow. 
Because it was unrealistic the numbers that were 
there.  But I don't see how we can actually agree 
with this, when we're told by the superior 
legislators that we can't. 
As far as can I see the main reason, we're going 
to have to down-zone a lot of land in individual 
settlements, and the main reason for that as far 
as I can see is that the number of people per house, 
which has been assumed in the year 2031, is 20% 
different to what was assumed in the last 
development plan in 2015. 
So, therefore, you need a lot less houses for the 
same number of people. 
How, in 2015 I proposed that would be the case 
because I felt that the numbers in the plan were 

unrealistic, and were leading to over zoning of 
land because the social change which is implied in 
the huge drop in numbers of people per house wasn't 
going to happen and the last census had shown even 
in fact moreen that I thought that was the case. 
Unfortunately, the councillors didn't vote for 
what I proposed as being the target for the number 
of people per house and could bees consequently 
there will be a lot more down-zoning of plan 
together with reduced targets coming down from 
above.  So I really don't see how we can, how we're 
going to move forward against the superior 
authority of the national Government and the EMRA, 
which has decided this is the population target for 
Wicklow and we have to divide it up so I don't see 
how it can go ahead. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Thanks, Cathaoirleach. 
Just a follow-up question to what Cllr Shay Cullen 
was saying in terms of Ashford and we did this put 
this point to the staff around meeting in 
Blessington in relation to Ashford because 
certainly Ashford in section five I think they are, 
that they will obviously take up the vast north of 
the 29% increase over the next number of years, so 

we made a point of Ashford, are probably in the 
wrong category based what Councillor Cullen 
granted in Ashford so they will take up the vast 
majority of that, so can I ask, Sorcha is Ashford 
in the wrong category? 
In that regard, because that will probably take up 
as I said again take up the vast majority of the 
400 units part of section five of it. 
SORCHA:    Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Just with regard Cllr Shay Cullen's comment, this 
is the new county plan, it won't be adopted until 
2022, but each stage we go through between now and 
then we're going to have to revise the figures, that 
are in those tables. 
So, at the moment, we have this target of around 
15,500, that's not changing.  We've had 
approximately 5,000 houses and in the table that 
we circulated to you in June was 5,002 that have 
either been completed or commenced construction, 
since 2016.  So that leaves you with 10,700 left 
to allocate out around the rest of the county.  
Since we issued that report that number, 5022 
increased by over a hundred and the next time we 
come back at Christmas and January with proposed 

plan it could have changed by 500.  There's a 
number of large developments say in Greystones that 
have permission for a couple of hundred houses that 
haven't commenced yet and if they were to commence 
between now and Christmas the 5022 could be 500, 
so, every time a house starts construction or 
estate starts construction, your 10,700 within 
your gift to allocate subject to certain principles 
reduces.. 
So, as we go through the plan, we will be producing 
more tables and there will be decisions will become 
more and more difficult. 
Over the next 18 months but the figures don't kick 
in until the development plan is adopted.  So, 
that's the simple answer to that.    But related 
to that, Cllr Vincent Blake's point about Ashford 
maybe being in the wrong category because of all 
the houses proposed or granted, that's, just 
because there are landowners willing to bring land 
to the market or developers willing to apply to 
planning permission is not dictating factor where 
a settlement should be in the settlement hierarchy, 
Ashford is struggling with regard to certain 
services, for example we had submissions with 

regard to school places, and there are other 
services that are under pressure in the town.  
Ashford is very limited public transport and car 
dependent and limit employment at the moment.  So, 
it is not that there's pressure for housing that 
dictates where a town should be in the hierarchy, 
it what kind of place it is, and what services it 
has to support housing. 
And that's the asset-based assessment that is set 
out in the regional plan. 
Also, I point out Ashford is under 1500 in 
population, and that puts it in a certain category 
of type of town, as per the planning act, and the 
NPF and RSES, it mightn't be too far exceeding that 
in due course, but at the moment, it's only, around 
1400 but so is Aughrim, so they're both the same 
size but different places what is happening in 
them.  So, like I said, NPF is about a sea-change, 
mindset change about how we decide where 
development happens based on the services 
available and the place and type of place you want 
it to be, rather than just whether there are 
developers or landowners who see that as attractive 
place that people will buy houses in. 

Cllr Derek Mitchell, yeah the figures change every 
cycle with regard to household size, so, when we 
prepare the last development plan 2016 we didn't 
have the benefit of the 2016 census figures so we 
were basing like predictions about household size 
what happened before that, and what was happening 
with average household size and the 2016 census was 
the first census in many decade where the average 
household size increased in this country.  So, 
we're starting from a higher point, this plan 
round, but, the NPF have set I won't say a target 
household size it estimates household size will 
reduce to 2.5 by 2040 so that's our start points 
is 2016 census and end point is 2.5 in 2040, so we've 
imagined a linear progression declined to 2.5 and 
they're the figures we utilised, so every plan 
there's changes and figures, and changes this 
assumptions we use and there will be different 
outcomes as a result. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thanks, Cllr Joe Behan is next.  
Just before I bring in Cllr Joe Behan I decided I 
would go until 4.00, that's within the gift of the 
Cathaoirleach and thinking of the amount of people 

would have in the room so we haven't a vote on one, 
so we'll continue on, we are within our rights to 
go until 5, because we have to deal with this. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Thank you I think you're right and 
want to compliment Cllr John Mullen and others who 
spoke for identifying one of the major problems 
with the planning system in this country, which is 
that it has been handed down to public 
representatives by national civil servants. 
And we, are basically here having our hands tided 
when it comes to deciding our development planning 
priorities for the people we represent in our 
county and a lot of the directions that are put down 
here today and a lot of work has gone into them by 
individual members is to try and ease the 
restrictions on rural housing in this county and 
while I come from Bray, and I welcome the fact that 
there will be further development in Bray, this 
should not be done at the expense of people living 
in rural parliaments of County Wicklow. 
Now how we get around this conundrum I do not know 
but I thought there might be hope when the new 
programme for Government was introduced and 
launched, it was stated one of the plans in that 

programme was a review of this entire national 
strategy.  And I wonder to what extent we may end 
up having to change, somewhere along the way 
because the Government might decide to come up with 
a new plan, yet again. 
But I personally will be supporting proposals that 
are made here today that eases the situation for 
rural dwellers we're living in unprecedented 
housing emergency in this country.  We have many 
people who have land around this county where they 
could have one or two houses, maybe on their 
property with the advent of homeworking it doesn't 
necessarily mean there will be more traffic on the 
rural road, it might mean the caught quality of life 
would be better for our people and because of the 
fact we have one of the most restrictive regimes 
in the entire country, we should as public 
representatives have the opportunity to make our 
views known on this.  And to have our views 
incorporated in the plan.  Yet again, we are being 
told by the top table you can't do it.  Your hands 
are tied, in this case it is because there's a 
national plan that tells us what he can with and 
can't do.  We should resist this at every possible 

opportunity, and certainly from the point of view 
proposals put here today I think they're very 
sensible and should be supported by all of us.  
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, there are a number of 
hands up and number of hands to go down, I have a 
proposal from Cllr John Mullen on behalf of the 
Fianna Fail group and it is seconded by the Fianna 
Fail group and Cllr Pat Fitzgerald, do you want to 
come back in or put it to a vote. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  Again, I just want to come in quickly 
but I have a quote here from the national policy 
objective nine that local authorities, is not 
identified in policy 2a or 3 in this infrastructure 
maybe identified a 30% of more regional local 
planning stages subject to agreement at regional 
Metropolitan and or local authority as 
appropriate. 
And in the rural, spatial plan, also allows the 
local authority I presume the members of the local 
authority to issue flexibility in regard to these 
measures.  Well that's while I accept what you're 

saying, the purpose of what is on the paper, is to 
tell people in rural Wicklow, that apart from being 
exceptionally difficult to build a home you won't 
be going to your nearest village either because 
your nearest village won't be building any homes 
either and that is simply unacceptable.  That's 
not balanced planning, it is not accountable 
planning as regards the citizens of Wicklow and 
what we're trying to sorrow deuce at this stage is 
that to try and lobby for a degree of flexibility 
on the actual, I'm not saying where they should be 
delivered.  It's your figures are saying where 
they're going to be delivered.  And I'm saying 
that's unacceptable, that doesn't match the 
reality of what is potentially out there.   If I 
have to formally push it to a vote, I will ask for 
a vote to be taken if that's appropriate. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We have a proposer and seconder, 
I put it to a vote Cllr John Mullen. 
  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Would it be fair to take a vote at 
this stage when we don't know what other proposals 
might be on the table. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We can't, we have to take them as 

they're in front of us. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   In relation to the numbers.  As 
the plan develops and as more houses come on stream 
and they're built the table will change anyway 
because we now and a year's time if there's 200 
houses built in Greystones we will adjust the 
figures because you have to have a certain amount 
of capacity in each why are to deal with locals so 
that figure will change as the thing goes on, and 
subsequently when the plan adopted in two years' 
time we will do a review, we are obliged to do a 
review of it and the figures.  If that clarifies 
things. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  Again, the text that we're putting 
down in my view and in the view of the other 
councillors who support it is a allowing a degree 
of flexibility being issued here, so I can't see 
the problem in us, in that text that we propose 
being inserted in the plan.  I don't think it is 
a breach of significant nature it allows 
flexibility to deal with the reality of the 
potential for housing development in Wicklow 
considering we have a housing crisis in all parts 

of Wicklow. 
And I therefore, again, this is my first time and 
I know this process a newer than it was before, so, 
if it is going to a vote, it is going to a vote.?  
SORCHA:  To be hear clear the proposal before you 
on this particular matter is what set out in 
proposal number one there and what that proposal 
is asking is that the Chief Executive take, or the 
development plan plays a more active role than 
active land management.  To make sure that housing 
units are delivered, and the Chief Executive has 
no difficult with that, because we do that anyway, 
we service land, we use vacant site levy and so on, 
there's no problem with the principle of that 
concept but the concept of flexibility in the 
numbers, to be honest, it's a direction that would 
be very difficult for the chef executive to comply 
with, because it is not clear what you mean by 
flexibility.  The core strategy has to include a 
table and that's in the planning act it is not some 
Government guideline or ministerial letter the 
planning act says there has to be a core strategy 
table and the table has to have numbers in it, and 
that has to be in the development plan.  So, to say 

that, you're directing the Chief Executive to bring 
in element of flexibility isn't clear what do you 
mean by that.  Because it is not possible to say 
that the target for growth in Tinahely is between 
100 and 500 units, the core strategy can cannot 
include a figure like that so the direction is not 
clear for the chef executive to know what you want 
him to do exactly.  So, when he prepares the 
development plan how is he to know what to put in 
the plan that meets your requirement there.  Is 
there a particular town where you'd like to see a 
higher target? 
If so, that is what should be proposed and for 
example there's one town Rathdrum where there is 
a proposal.  Whether the Chief Executive is able 
to meet your requirement, meeting all the other 
requirement of RCS, and ministerial direction, 
would be something that is has to be teased out 
after this meeting.  The proposal number one 
doesn't include a specific action, that you want 
the Chief Executive precisely to take in the 
preparation of the development plan.  I would just 
add as well that the point raised about rural 
villages and rural housing being restricted, 

people won't be able to build anywhere, in the last 
four years, there's been twelve houses built in all 
of the villages in County Wicklow.  There are 5,000 
houses completed or commenced, 12 have been in 
villages, we're talking about 50 settlements from 
the large villages, small villages, to rural 
hamlets. 
So, there's clearly a problem there, it isn't 
people are refused it is people aren't applying for 
permission in these places, most like because 
there's limited services in these places.  And 
what we should do is tackle that problem and again 
that's subject of another direction we take that 
we take root and branch look at villages and 
identify places where there is services for 
development or services can be easily delivered, 
and then we identify those places and promote them 
as places for people to live.  In terms of rural 
one-off housing, at the end of the day if someone 
qualifies for rural housing, doesn't really matter 
what the number is in the development plan, a cap 
won't be reached, if a person is eligible and fulfil 
all the normal criteria and site meets the criteria 
it will be granted permission regardless there as 

is a notional number reached in the county 
development plan, you see the number there is 800, 
so, that won't be reached by the time we do the next 
development plan and figures will have changed.  
So, these figures aren't targeting or decimating 
rural settlements, they've most effect on the 
medium size settlements and bigger settlements 
effectively. 
So, I just point that out to you but coming to back 
to the direction, Chief Executive needs to be clear 
what you want to do on foot of this proposal and 
then, the Chief Executive and team can endeavour 
to look at that and see how we can go some way to 
meeting your needs or what it is you want to see 
achieved. 
  
CLLR WALSH: Figures and looking at for example Bray 
and target for Bray to 2031, and looking at the 
figures delivered since 2016, Bray is basically two 
key sites there, one there's difficulty around one 
of them at planning stage in one application, if 
Bray doesn't reach the target during the course of 
the plan, I know that, is the mass figure, in 9.5 
included in the figure here it is, so just for 

example, if you look at Greystones, we've maybe 
overdeveloped in the last number of years, and we 
require follow-up infrastructure but, we have two 
Part 8s coming and there's other developments 
coming so by the time this is development, 
Greystones will have not head room for new 
capacity.  And Arklow is another example in 
relation to wastewater treatment plant and 
delivery of that, which is four years away.  Cllr 
Joe Behan made the point in relation to the NPF, 
2040 plan, it is too long a horizon to make 
predictions and sensible practical projections in 
like this in relation to population and employment 
changes things are starting to happen, so we will 
have a review in two years aim time what flexibility 
will we have at that stage.  Because obviously the 
landscape will have changed somewhat if things 
continue as they are.  So, again, we need some sort 
of flexibility, rather than be stuck rigidly with 
the figures presented to us, thank you. 
SORCHA:  On that, the Chief Executive will prepare 
a report two years after the plan adopted setting 
out how the implementation of the plan is going at 
that point.  And, if something radical has changed 

or some major problem with housing delivery is 
identified, the certainly can initiate a variation 
of the plan at that stage if that's what is needed 
at that point.  Variations can be initiated at any 
point but that seems like a perfect time to do it, 
within two years, but if, if the NPF are still the 
applicable higher order plans at the time, we would 
adhere to the principles that are set out of them.  
I suppose the number of people mentioned that 
things might be changing, at a higher level, and 
so be it, if there's revision toss the national 
planning framework, if something comes during the 
adoption of this plan, we'll do our best to do that 
along the way.  If it happens just after we adopt 
the plan, we vary the plan.  So, the team are 
available to amend the plan and vary it whenever 
is needed. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   If those houses come on stream 
in Greystones in the next year, needless to say 
we'll revise this, and this table will change, 
between now and when we adopt the plan. 
  
CLLR TIMMINS: Members of my family own land in 
Baltinglass that is zoned land and in line with 

legislation, if votes are going to be coming up and 
discussions coming up about numbers of houses and 
in different towns and villages with ethics 
legislation, I think I should absent myself from 
the meeting and any votes on these topics.  So, I'd 
like to do that now please. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll record that thank you. 
Where are we with the direction number one? 
CLLR FORTUNE:  When Sorcha mentioned 10,700 and 
any developments between now and say January 2022, 
would have to come off that figure, that's what I 
understand it to be.  So, when people are talking 
about flexibility, that means to he unless I'm 
missing it, that if there's 2,700 houses built 
between now and January 2020, that means we have 
8,000 units to play with in the plans, is that the 
way it works? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Yes, that's my understanding. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  We could have a situation because 
there's lots of things in the pipeline as I 
understand it, where you'll have very, very little 
amount of houses across the county to go in the 
plan. 

I mean, it gets back to my point, I think we have, 
and I'll shut up in a secretary second, I think we 
have urgent need on the different topics to review, 
which is separate what we're talking about, what 
the public reps are all about, how do we, allow to 
operate on behalf of constituents, how do we do 
things, are we told to do exactly what we're told, 
can we not get the TDs involved with us-to-get 
things sorted out for the county.  It is not 
working as I see it at all. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  I will come back to 
Cllr John Mullen now, just on the direction number 
one.  So, we need to move on, and make a decision 
here as to what we're doing in relation to direction 
number one, we have a proposer and seconder, Cllr 
John Mullen are you happy to take what Sorcha is 
Chief Executive is saying, where there is 
flexibility, there has to be were his words or do 
you want to push this to a vote to have the wording 
inserted in the Chief Executive's report the next 
one around? 
MS GALLAGHER:  In relation to the process there, 
is a proposer, and with the five elected members 

so we will take a seconder, and if there's no 
dissent, if everybody is in agreement with what is 
proposed there's no requirement to take a vote.  It 
is only where there's dissent we will go for a vote.  
If everybody in this room is agreeable to what is 
being proposed, there's no reason to go for a vote. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is everybody in agreement?  No.  
MS GALLAGHER:  So, we'll go for a vote.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're going for a vote because we 
have to move on. Sorry, we've called it now, I'm 
going for a vote. We're vote on the wording that 
Cllr John Mullen and the group, direction number 
one circulated by the planners. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Can everybody project their voices 
because there will be a lull with the microphones. 
That's 15 for, two against, seven abstaining and 
eight not present. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Direction number two was proposed 
by Cllr John Mullen and seconded by: 
CLLR MULLEN:  Withdraw on that one.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Direction number three is 
proposed by Cllr Tommy Annesley, Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald and Cllr Pat Kennedy. 

Cllr Pat Fitzgerald? 
 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  I'm on.  The proposal of the 
group is to direct the Chief Executive to identify 
Arklow as core regional town level two in the - we 
disagree with the decision as a result of the 
asset-based assessment taken by Regional Assembly 
through the spatial and economic strategy upheld 
by Wicklow council which designates Arklow to be 
a level three core regional sustaining town. 
And when I look at what level three is, the 
self-sustaining town with high levels of 
population growth and weak employment base which 
are reliant on other areas for employment and/or 
services and which require catch-up investment to 
become more self-sustaining. 
Arklow, just I won't delay because we're tight on 
time here, the description of a core regional 
self-sustaining town is where there's high levels 
of population growth and weak employment base, 
however, Arklow has seen the lowest level of 
population growth 1% lowest of all towns in levels 
one and two, has the least commuter transcription 
to Dublin at 14%, as a strong employment base ratio 

at 0.63, and equal to Bray.  The description of 
core region key town level two, largely 
economically active service, that provide 
employment for the surrounding areas and with high 
quality transport links and capacity to act as 
growth, drivers to compliment the regional growth 
sisters.  We have so many active services in 
Arklow, like plastic, Arklow Shipping, LMH, 
Armstromg Timber, and Arklow hotel, court services 
and Arklow health service.  It is my view and the 
view of our group that Arklow should be in level 
two, which will attract more investment into the 
town, the town is showing strong signs of 
additional committed economic activity, SSE are 
locating in Arklow and the prime require care 
centre, and LMH and two data centres on old IF site, 
so accordingly I'm asking the members to agree for 
Arklow to be on level two, that Arklow should be 
on level two, instead of level three. 
 
CLLR ANNESLEY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
Arklow designated a key town on level two also, 
presents it with greater opportunity to source 
additional funding for critical infrastructure, 

that it requires the construction, construction to 
a southern interchange via slip road from M11 to 
the Vale Road construction and completion of the 
rock beck to knock more roundabout, Roadstone road, 
to enhance potential for economic development and 
regeneration of the harbour, to support ongoing 
investment to the infrastructure to continued 
renewal maintenance and improvement to a high level 
to ensure high quality of frequently safety 
services accessibility and connectivity.  And 
plus, also the flood defence works.  Thank you 
Cathaoirleach. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Tommy Annesley as 
you read the Chief Executive's report, he's 
basically saying this is from the economic strategy 
not county development plan so to be honest ... 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   We don't have the authority to 
change that, that's set by the regional authority 
and not by us. 
  
CLLR ANNESLEY:  Can I come back in there, it is 
Government policy to build on brownfield sites, 

that's recommended in Governments strategic 
policy.  And in Arklow we have the site in the 
centre and harbour, and also various brownfield 
sites in Arklow.  And as Sorcha said herself it is 
in key towns and Arklow is a key town so thank you. 
Cathaoirleach, Is that part of the national 
planning objective? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Part of the objective is part of 
the programme for Government, is my understand 
something that right.   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   I'm saying what you're saying 
with Arklow and promotion of Arklow as town and 
development that's something we're working hard on 
but designation what is a key town and core regional 
key town and self-sustaining town, that's not a 
determination we make, that's a determination 
that's already been made by the regional authority 
and we can't change tax-payer but certainly, now 
I agree with everything, Arklow is up and coming 
town and in terms of economic development we will 
be proposing all areas and sites and proposing them 
as you mentioned. 
  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Really apply to Arklow, it is not 

actually factual to be honest about it.  High 
employment, we're employing over 800 people in 
Arklow from north Wexford and further afield from 
Dublin.  So, I mean, Arklow is a town that should 
be in level two, to be quite honest about it.  Towns 
that provide employment for surrounding areas with 
high quality transport links, and capacity to act 
as growth drivers to compliment the regional growth 
centres, that fillets Arklow. 
And we have in the last few weeks, we've had two 
people looking at investing in Arklow, huge 
investment, and I think it should be in category 
two. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   I know, but we don't have the 
authority to move it. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Whoever the authority has to 
move it should move it.  But it says here, we 
believe it is not the sole remit of the Regional 
Assembly through to regional status and the Wicklow 
County Council is not bound by their decision.  
Planning and Development Act 2,000 section 11A and 
regional spatial and economic strategy section 42.  
So?  Sorcha:  I think there's probably, sort of 
maybe, it is terminology that's the problem here. 

And when a regional plan or national plan is 
adopted, they put towns into categories and give 
them a name, we used to have moderate growth towns 
and large growth town type two in previous plans, 
it so happens the regional plan as identified a 
certain type of town and given it a name and called 
it a key town and the regional team and Regional 
Assembly have done a detailed assessment using 
their asset based approach and we would have 
provided them with thousands of pieces of data with 
regard to all of our towns, and based on that 
exercise, they have identified that this category 
that is called "e-towns" that are two towns that 
fulfil that definition are Bray and Wicklow 
Rathnew, it doesn't mean Arklow isn't a key town 
as the Chief Executive was saying, it is really 
important town in the county and a lot of work is 
done to regenerate it, and applications are put in 
for URD F, funding and so on, NTA is working with 
the roads department on developing a transport plan 
for the town so lots of activity going on, because 
of our belief that Arklow is a very important town 
that needs investment and attention.  But the word 
"key town" is just a particular term in the regional 

plan.  And Arklow hasn't been identified with that 
designation in the regional plan.  What we are 
propose something it gets the next highest 
designation available and in accordance with table 
4.2 of the regional plan the next category are 
called self-sustaining growth towns and 
self-sustaining towns and the difference between 
the two of them is the one that self-sustaining 
growth town is a town that has all the services 
ready to grow in housing, whereas self-sustaining 
town still needs investment in infrastructure, to 
allow for large-scale housing.  So, as the Chief 
Executive said we're committed to Arklow having the 
highest possible designation, and we agree it is 
a key town, it is just not a key town as defined 
by the name given to those towns by the regional 
plan.  And we're committed and the Chief Executive 
has said that to including a lot of policies and 
objectives and statements in the plan highlighting 
the importance of Arklow.  So that will occur 
anyway. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, we got Sorcha's views and 
Chief Executive, and Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and Cllr 
Tommy Annesley and I have done a lot of work, Cllr 

Pat Fitzgerald do you want to push this to a vote.  
Cllr Tommy Annesley are you seconding this. 
  
CLLR ANNESLEY:  Yes, I am. 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Even if you put this to the vote if 
it is not within the powers of the elected members 
they're acting beyond their powers. 
>>:  We'll find that out. 
MS GALLAGHER:  We'll go for a vote. 
17 for, one against, 7 not present and 7 abstaining. 
Votes are carried. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Direction four is from Cllr Tommy 
Annesley, Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and Cllr Pat Kennedy.  
Cllr Tommy Annesley is speaking on this. 
CLLR ANNESLEY:  Yes, thank you Cathaoirleach.  
We're looking for the housing increased to 100-165, 
and I'm going to state a few reasons why, employment 
in Rathdrum will increase over the coming years to 
the taking over the chemical factory.    Rathdrum 
is currently constructing a new primary care 
centre, planning permission has just been granted 
for 125-bedroom nursing home, St Colman's Hospital 
has a planning application for Wicklow County 

Council to increase the bed capacity.  There is 23 
acres of zoned land ready for development.  
Industrial land sorry. 
Avondale Forest Path is about to commence, 8 
million development for tourism purposes.  As we 
know, Rathdrum has connectivity close to N11, 
corridor same as Wicklow to Arklow, rail corridor, 
daily bus services to and from Dublin.  Education 
in Rathdrum is two creches with further two 
planned, Lee primary schools and one secondary 
school. 
That's why I'm looking for, we are looking for the 
houses to increase from 100 to 65. 
Sorcha:  I think it is out in the report we 
submitted back to the Chief Executive isn't in 
favour of this proposal, I suppose there's a number 
of difficulties with it. 
The first difficulty is with the growth in Rathdrum 
to date from 2016 to date has already reached the 
30% limit.  Nevertheless, the Chief Executive is 
still recommended some additional growth in 
Rathdrum because we can't have a newly growth 
scenario, because we need to accommodate good town 
centre infill and recommended an extra 100 units 

in Rathdrum.  That would bring it up to growth rate 
to 45% which is in breach to the NPF but Chief 
Executive to stand over that and fight that case.  
However to bring it up to 165, would increase it 
to close to 55%, so, I just, at this point it is 
noncompliant with the NPF and can't see it getting 
through the next layers of checking that we're 
going to have to go through, whether that's with 
the department or office of planning regulator. 
In addition, to increase the growth for Rathdrum, 
would mean the numbers still 10,700 to be allocated 
around the county so to increase Rathdrum, you have 
to propose where the 65 will come out of because 
otherwise the Chief Executive isn't clear what 
you're asking him to do.  So, the proposal should 
be accompanied by a proposal where the 65 is to come 
from. 
The final point is that, during this cycle the 
planned cycle, there's likely to be on going issue 
with water supply which may not be made good, it 
is allowing the development where the services are 
available and it is noticeably where services for 
that development is available.  For those reasons 
the Chief Executive is not in support of the 

proposal. 
  
CLLR ANNESLEY:  Thank you Cathaoirleach. 
With due respect Sorcha, it is not Rathdrum's fault 
it had shovel-ready sites to be ready to go before 
the development plan came on the table.  Rathdrum 
was ready to build houses, they are ready to build 
houses, and I don't accept that, that you're 
putting the responsibility of the 32 members of 
this council to say, well if we're going to extend 
Rathdrum, 65, we will take it from somewhere else.  
Can I go through those figures you've given me and 
all the councillors, and can I surely put 65 let's 
take example for Arklow, 12,050 houses will be 
built in five years when we know we're not having 
a treatment plant until 24/25, it could come from 
Arklow, I'm not saying it should be, but 65 houses 
are not a lot to ask for in Rathdrum and I'm he can 
pressing it is this the sites shovel-ready to go.  
But thank you Sorcha. 
I don't accept it but thank you. 
SORCHA:  1200 units for Arklow is not for the five 
years, it is for the eleven years, so the sewage 
plant will be up and running before that. 

>>:  In your words we will review the documentation 
in two years' time.  OK.  Now you're given it, 
twenty minutes a now you're changing it, it is up 
to review it is only numbers we're talking about 
at the moment. Would you agree, no. 
SORCHA:  It is numbers we're talking about, but the 
10,700 has to add up to that number, so, without 
a complimentary proposal it is not clear what 
you're asking the Chief Executive to put in the new 
development plan. 
  
CLLR FORTUNE:  Yeah, clarification, yeah, I'm 
getting very concerned and very confused now, I 
really think we should stop this process now.  And 
I think all the directions that have come in should 
be analysed by the executive with the implications 
that we're discussing here around the table so we 
all have a clear picture what we're asked to vote 
on, we're asked to vote on things that the people 
say in South Wicklow want, we don't know what effect 
it will have on the rest of the county how the 
figures will get out this is terribly unfair 
discussion going on a general basis and I recommend 
we stop it and get the detail get the backup to the 

directions that have been fed in and we can look 
at the same hymn sheet and have the same discussion. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks, 
CLLR LEONARD:  I would have to be in agreement with 
Cllr Tom Fortune, I think the planners have put a 
lot of time in this, and I worked with architecture 
for years and seen the results of bad planning and 
not bad planning but development-led planning and 
I think it is very important to have a proper plan 
in place, I'm totally in favour of Rathdrum growing 
and Arklow and everywhere, growing but 
sustainably.  I think that if we start messing 
around with figures now we'll mess up a lot of work 
and I think we should all maybe take a big pause, 
and be led by the planners in Wicklow County Council 
because I do have good faith in them and the change 
of direction the way we're going forward is the 
right way to do things.  The other way has resulted 
in flooding and lack of infrastructure, lack of 
community services for communities and once and for 
all we need to get it right and I think it would 
have great benefits in the long run for Wicklow. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  I think we should 

proceed I think there's a lot of time and work gone 
into this over the last period of time and it is 
up to everyone to make sure they read the documents 
that were circulated. 
Cllr Tommy Annesley, it is your proposal, the Chief 
Executive is not in favour of it, on the extra 65 
units.  For Rathdrum.  You have to direct us what 
you want to do. 
CLLR ANNESLEY:  We put this motion in and we would 
like the extra 65 units, I don't want to put the 
extra pressure on the Chief Executive but that's 
what he's there for and I would like to take this 
proposal to a vote even if you have to. 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cllr Gerry Walsh. 
CLLR WALSH:  I don't see how we can decide on this 
now here and then because we're bound by the figure 
of the bottom line so if we're adding 65 to one area, 
we have to take it away from another.  So we're 
making a decision, sort of in the dark and maybe 
it should be subject to the two of had year review 
we mentioned earlier but I don't see how we add 
figures willy nilly looking at the overall plan and 
looking at the impact of the overall plan. 

  
CLLR ANNESLEY:  Well, I'd like to go ahead with 
this, you know, if members that want to vote for 
it, or don't want to vote for it, but that's my 
feeling. 
CHATHAOIRLEACH: proposed by Cllr Tommy Annesley 
and seconded by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald. 
  
>>:  Does this decision have to be made today? 
SORCHA:  Well, the members are given a certain 
number of weeks to consider this report and it was 
eight weeks which was up about two or three weeks 
ago. 
Now the planning act does say that no-one can 
challenge the validity of development plan for the 
timelines in the development plan not being 
achieved.  So, it doesn't have to be done today.  
But, I suppose, if this is put off to another day, 
it's going to take longer to produce a draft plan 
because we need your directions to prepare the 
draft plan with and I don't think anybody wants to 
delay it getting a development plan moving.  I 
suppose the other option and maybe the Chief 
Executive might come in on this is we're aware of 

the proposal and of the desire to give Rathdrum a 
little bit extra than is in the proposal and we know 
the reasons a we do understand, we tried to put 
together a table that complies with the NP F and 
restriction that is come with it, and we know it 
is not perfect but it was the best we could propose 
to.  I suppose over the next few months, what in 
preparing a plan we can certainly talk to the powers 
that be whether that's the Regional Assembly, the 
minister, the OPR, and see is there a way of 
addressing the concerns that you have, both the 
first proposal and proposals like this, and see can 
we find some kind of compromise that partially, 
maybe gives you what you're looking for and also, 
substantially complies with the NP F and RSES, 
because there's a number of proposals here that 
probably all can't be complied with, some of them 
are mutually exclusive and Contra contradictory, 
so if we pull them together, rather than strict 
instruction this that is to be in the plan, we know 
what you want and work with you can we come up with 
something that meets half way or gets you closer 
to what you want, which means you are not giving 
us a fixed direction on it and voting through a 

direction.   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   You do have an opportunity to 
make an amendment with a draft plan you can make 
amendments whatever you want. 
>>:  That's a good point, if we work together over 
the next few months and propose a draft plan and 
can't get a meeting of minds on say the population 
figure for Rathdrum, we can get half way but that's 
still not enough for you, when you come to adroit 
the draft plan you can make amendment and vote 
through amendment at that point.  But it will be 
preferable if we work in collaboration over the 
next few months on these types of issues and 
accommodate everybody's desires and wants for the 
plan.  If we can't you can't and still have the 
opportunity to come back. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Pat Fitzgerald wants to come 
back in. 
  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  If there are issues which 
require clarifications we can put them back to the 
eastern Midland authority, that happens, my mind 
is on them and they get queries such as this, in 
relation to county development plans from various 

counties and maybe, some of these issues can be 
thrashed out at that forum. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Tommy Annesley will we leave 
it and come back to another day. 
CLLR ANNESLEY:  I would be amenable to that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Direction number five is proposed 
by Cllr Shay Cullen. 
  
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks Chairman.  I suppose very 
similar to the Rathdrum proposal I don't want to 
go over old ground but Ashford is obviously very 
similar and if Sorcha is willing to do a similar 
for Ashford as for Rathdrum in terms of looking at 
the figures over a period of time, I'm quite happy 
to go along with that. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you Cllr Shay Cullen.  OK.  
Direction number six is Cllr Shay Cullen, seconded 
by Cllr Gerry O'Neill. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Yes it is do with level seven eight 
and nine in terms of small villages, clusters, 
hamlets, and open countryside, I suppose, there is 
a huge level of frustration in rural communities 

where you know, local people are finding it hard 
to get sites, to get planning permissions, being 
put under huge stress, and I think we need a 
complete review of level seven, eight and nine, 
there's you know, there's areas across our county 
that we call them villages and you may have a 
church, you may have a school and that's it, and 
in terms of trying to build communities, I think 
it is important that we review this strategy 
because it is certainly not working, I think Sorcha 
eluded there is twelve or thirteen planning 
permissions over the last number of years in rural 
villages.  And I think there's total confusion 
amongst the public, particularly the rural public 
in terms of where sites are available, are they 
available, what's the criteria, there's a 
perception in rural areas, as next to impossible 
to get planning permission so we have to open this 
up for a broad discussion, and I think Sorcha's 
willing and Chief Executive is willing to review 
the whole strategy with level seven, eight and 
nine. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: They have agreed do that in this 
response.  Direction number seven.  Service sites 

from the Fianna Fail group. 
Cllr Joe Behan. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Just point of order it is quarter to 
five, I've submitted an urgent question, can you 
indicate what time the urgent questions will be 
taken, because if not the meeting will finish at 
five, we haven't got an additional time extension 
approved.  So just, once I know it will be answered 
before the meeting is over, I don't want to 
interrupt your discussions. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Standing orders provide for 4.50pm. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: OK.  Direction number seven.  Is 
topic on housing and serving sites from Cllr Gail 
Dunne, Cllr Patsy Glennon, ... 
CLLR GLENNON: Before I go into that one, just 
comment that I wanted to make about the overall 
picture we're dealing with today.  I think it is 
fundamentally flawed, the numbers that are 
allocated to certain towns. 
For the next number of years and my logic for that 
or reasoning for that is that towns that were 
neglected with infrastructure are going to be 
doubly penalised there's no conviction within 

those towns because of failures in the past 
providing the structure.  This was discussed at 
SSPC by Cllr Sylvestor Bourke and made this point 
to Sorcha and her team on that day.  Towns that had 
been neglected will get a double whammy by the fact 
they're not included in decent development over the 
next number of years.  And comparison, I made that 
day was some years back, Blessington was roughly 
a third size of Greystones, yet developments in 
Blessington was two houses versus hundreds if not 
thousands in Greystones.  I just think that there 
has to be something built into the plan to cater 
for to provision of infrastructure during the 
period that those numbers can be raised in those 
towns.  You've 500,000 houses allocated for 
Blessington over the next period of this plan, so 
I don't think it is going to be enough.  Now I'm 
going to move on to direction number seven and this 
direction is accordance with national planning 
objective 18B and support new homes and small towns 
and villages, that development plan identifies 
suitable service sites in each of our small towns 
and villages to attract build their own house using 
the current infrastructure that is available to the 

council.  And it is in line with national planning 
objectives 18B. 
There is I've a list here of 30 in large villages, 
80 in large villages and 30 clusters and there's 
a number of sites in each of, number of each of those 
categories that could benefit greatly from the 
council providing service sites, it would cater for 
a category of people that Cllr Paul O'Brien 
referred to in our earlier discussion, people that 
don't qualify for social housing and those who 
cannot afford to buy a site and build a house for 
themselves, the middle income worker, or even the 
higher middle income workers finds it hard to get 
on the property ladder and that will greatly assist 
them so I ask the council to look at that and take 
that as direction going forward. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: thank you.   Sorcha.  I think ... 
We've in agreement with that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: The time is now is 4.50 and told Cllr 
Joe Behan I would go back to them with members’ 
agreement we should put this on the agenda for 2 
success, to finish this, because we won't get if 
finished to.  I would like to finish county 

development plan on the 21st, when we meet to do 
the LPT, and there should be few items. 
MS GALLAGHER:  LPT meeting will be one item so we 
could discuss it at protocol if members are 
agreeable. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Joe Behan, you wanted to raise 
something? 
MS GALLAGHER:  I have a question submitted by Cllr 
Joe Behan.  I'll read it out.  Has the amendment 
to the planning permission to Florentine Centre in 
Bray agreed by Wicklow County Council been approved 
by An Bord Pleanala, if not, why not? 
The response is, compliance with planning 
permission develop is a matter for the developer 
in agreement, that is provided for however the 
council has issued a warning in the in relation to 
alleged amendments and the processes under way, 
therefore nothing more can be commented on.  A full 
report of the development is given at Bray 
Municipal District meetings on a monthly basis. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Cathaoirleach, I couldn't hear the 
second half - is An Bord Pleanála mentioned in the 
response?  The question is about Bord Pleanala.   
The officials of Wicklow County Council agreed 

amendments to the planning permission we voted for. 
And I'm asking, the question have An Bord Pleanála 
given their consent to those amendments.  If not, 
why not?  So, can you answer that question? 
MS GALLAGHER:  As I say, compliance with the 
planning permission is a matter for the developer 
in the development agreement. 
So, it is up to the developer to satisfy themselves 
they are in compliance, but what I can say, what 
I've added is Wicklow County Council has issued a 
warning notice in relation to alleged amendments 
and that process is under way. 
That warning notice was issued in July. 
  
CLLR BEHAN:  Cathaoirleach I'll ask for a copy of 
the response but that's not an answer to the 
question, I don't want to delay any longer, this 
is a very, very, significant situation that we're 
entering into here.  Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you Cllr Joe Behan. 
OK, well I think that concludes all the business 
we have today.  We can, we have a few minutes left, 
what time is it.  We can do another one. 

MS GALLAGHER:  You have another five minutes or 
seven minutes. Do you want to go to number eight? 
  
CLLR BLAKE:  On number five, have we parted are 
part of the problem I see in relation to sites is 
that we did provide a number of service sites on 
council-owned land in the past, and it is that 
aspect that hasn't been complied with that we're 
concerned about, there is sites that the council 
loaned and were designated for private sites to be 
sold by potential people in the local and that's 
part of the problem in terms of people being able 
to buy and build sites with houses own by the 
council. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you.  Direction number eight 
is proposed by Cllr John Mullen and seconded by Cllr 
Gail Dunne.  Rural housing, Cllr John Mullen. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks, I accept that it is within 
the current plans, so I withdraw that now. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you Cllr John Mullen. 
Direction number nine is Cllr John Mullen yourself 

again. 
  
CLLR MULLEN:  I accepted that is included in the 
plan, so, I withdraw that as well. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Number Ten, employment strategy. 
  
CLLR ANNESLEY:  I was a bit upset to see this in 
that again, Bray and Greystones and Wicklow was 
mentioned and because Arklow is not a key town, it 
wasn't sufficient to produce for the IDA sites, 
Arklow has IDA site, the same as Greystones, 
Greystones is not a key town and I don't think it 
is fair if you don't allow Greystones in the loop 
with the IDA sites that you're going to exclude 
Arklow, it is self-explanatory on that one and it 
is not go Arklow against fray stones but I want a 
fair play field for everybody.  We have a lot to 
offer in Arklow. 
Thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Tommy Annesley.  
SORCHA:  This is terminology being used in the 
regional plan. 

The reason why the IDA site in Greystones as opposed 
to other town is Greystones is in the metropolitan 
area and it is sites within the metropolitan area 
is in the regional plan, it doesn't identify any 
other strategic sites outside of the metropolitan 
area, because it is in that area that's why it is 
its employment site is picked out and others 
aren't.  It is the same as previous proposal, we 
are absolutely committed to employment in Arklow 
and employment sites in Arklow highlighted and 
promoted it is particular terminology that's in the 
regional plan, so we can identify the IDA site is 
Arklow strategic site using the definition of 
strategic site in the regional plan because they 
have not identified it but we can identify the IDA 
site a strategic site in county context rather than 
regional context which is the Greystones one is, 
so we use that terminology but we'll have to make 
it clear it is a county strategic site rather than 
a Metropolitan area or regional strategic site.  
It is terminology. 
  
CLLR ANNESLEY:  It is a company in Ireland and have 
a look at Wicklow, look at their county development 

plan, they wouldn't see Arklow in it, it is not fair 
for Arklow to be excluded because we're not 
Metropolitan.  The next motion I will be putting 
in is I'll move to Wexford and I don't want, but 
you're leaving Arklow out of it, and I'm not 
surprised west lads picked up on this, because you 
haven't included the west either, I'm here to bat 
for Arklow and that's very fair, I know it is only 
terminology, but, it is not fair terminology. 
  Sorcha the core strategy is supposed to show the 
county plan is consistent with the regional plan, 
the core strategy isn't encompass everything, it 
covers key high level issues and that's t so, there 
will be plenty of places in the development plan 
where Arklow will be highlighted adequately.  I'm 
guaranteeing you of that, but we can't give it a 
designation, regional designation that the 
regional plan hasn't given t 
CLLR GLENNON:  Following on what Tommy says in 
terms of west Wicklow, west Wicklow doesn't get a 
mention, which doesn't surprise me, I'm tired of 
working about it, Arklow is not Metropolitan, 
surely Blessington is, it is the same distance from 
Dublin as Greystones is, there is development 

sites. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I've two minutes left, what do you 
want - I have to get this finished and I have to 
go back to Cllr Tommy Annesley.  What do you want 
me to do here. 
CLLR ANNESLEY:  I don't always want to be fighting 
so I will have to take this one on the chin but I'm 
going to let you know I'm not happy for it but thank 
you for your response. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you item eleven is on behalf 
of Cllr Tommy Annesley, Cllr Pat Fitzgerald, Cllr 
John Mullen, Cllr Walsh and Cllr Dunne, core retail 
strategy.  But Cllr Fitzgerald, do you want to go 
with that?  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  But I see that you're not opposed 
to it, so I’m happy to leave it rest with yourselves 
to have it incorporated.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Onshore wind farm.  
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks and again, I accept the 
direction here is because we're under ministerial 
direction, I did want to, I'm not going to push it 
to a vote, I happen to be one of two public 
representatives here today from the only part of 

Wicklow offshore wind farming no part of Wicklow 
has on shore industrial wind farming there's 
another proposed industrial development in 
Kilranelagh.  Which will damage the landscape, we 
have massive potential which I think we should 
investigate and go through it and we need to review 
therefore the damage to the landscape that further 
on shore wind farm development will do but accept 
we're under, again, accept but it is frustrating 
we're under ministerial direction on this point but 
I withdraw it.  
 
MS GALLAGHER:  If we have a seconder, Cllr Mags 
Crean is not here.  Cllr Joe Behan thank you find 
out what number you are. Table six. 
  
CLLR SCOTT:  Thank you for fitting this in, we had 
a lot of talk during the afternoon about housing 
and numbers, and I suppose the one thing that is 
striking me is discussing the formulation this plan 
in the middle of global pandemic and haven't 
mentioned this once, we are in the pandemic for the 
last nine months and globally year-and-a-half, we 
have had SARS and swine flu and Covid-19 and 

estimated we will live with Covid-19 for the next 
couple of years, according to recent reports in 
nature, so while we're drafting our CDP it is 
critical to take this pandemic and future pandemics 
in consideration particularly about high density 
living and particularly considered about co-living 
developments as an example, may I think it should 
be banned outrightly but we don't have the health 
authority to do that, however, I think the agrees 
with me, looking at his response, we're stating 
that committed to monitoring emerging health 
policy and ensuring plan is consistent with same, 
I say we already have the evidence for concerns 
here, we heard NEFIT there's a huge transmission 
factor when people are in close approximate 
equipment or sharing facilities, we've seeing 
direct provision sisters and schools and meat 
factories as evident, we're living through 
measures to prevent the virus and we're sitting 
here, carefully distanced and discouraged to mix 
with one another, I mentioned co-living 
development specifically in relation to this 
direction as these have potentially up to a money 
people kitchen and living areas, without doubt 

social distancing would be difficult and 
advisability of isolating in individual spaces as 
small as fifteen square metres would be questioned.  
I know and I'm glad Minister O'Brien has started 
a review on these particular developments as they 
are compatible with health policy, however in 
drafting our plan my question is in 2023, or 24 
there's another Covid-19 or another high profit my 
density living accommodation put in by developers, 
so will we confident in plan we're taking public 
health evidence in consideration when assessing 
these and critically assessing individual and 
outdoor space provided in terms of the challenge 
of disease spread.  I would like to take 
precautionary approach with plan and answer yes to 
these questions and adopt this direction.  Thanks. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thanks Cllr Lourda Scott. 
SORCHA.  We note the minister is undertaking a 
review of co-living developments.  So, we will 
follow that and see where that goes, and should 
revise policy, emanate from the minister's office, 
obviously integrate that in the plan if we're at 
the right stage but we'll do with a we k on the other 

issues, generally about health and wellbeing and 
possibility of future outbreaks or other health 
concerns, we have committed in the Chief 
Executive's report that for the first time will 
include a health and wellbeing audit of the plan 
and this isn't something we've done before and we 
will obviously have to concern ourselves with the 
land use elements of health and wellbeing that's 
thaws the only thing within our gift.  We have a 
good submission from the health service executive 
that set out factors that contribute to one's 
health and wellbeing and we're going to use that 
as basis for preparing this audit to check our plan, 
and our new emerging new plan to ensure it doesn't 
include provision that is might be contrary to 
improve health and wellbeing and take 
opportunities we can to enhance opportunities for 
improving health and wellbeing.  So, I think a 
combination of monitoring the minister's review, 
and this health and wellbeing audit should go some 
way to addressing your concerns.  And we're happy 
to work with you over the winter and see how that 
develops. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you, Cllr Lourda Scott are 

you happy enough. 
CLLR SCOTT:  I haven't seen the parameters of the 
minister's review and there's no date on that, so 
that's a question I have, and as I was saying he 
will specifically looking at co-living, I don't 
know what terms of references he looking although 
it and in terms, five, six years’ time, if there's 
another forum of high density, high profit, 
developments that called by another name will that 
then be encompassed under his very rue, am I 
confident that's enough.  That's my concern, I 
don't know what other members think, but we're 
living in a critical E critical pandemic crisis at 
the moment, and really need to discuss this, and 
putting in a clear direction or plan, whether 
through the health and wellbeing audit but this 
needs to be specifically considered, I think it is 
crazy in a situation we're in at the moment we're 
not going to have a specific direction about this. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you Cllr Lourda Scott fair 
point in fairness. Item 16 is correspondence, 
there's no correspondence. 
Cllr Lourda Scott that is been agreed or does it 

go for the vote.   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   I would wait for guidance and 
come back to that a later date. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We can come back. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Can it be revised at later date? 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:   If you leave that one with us, 
we will check it out. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Could you find out terms of references 
for the review. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We can write to them and see if we 
get that. There's no correspondence so that brings 
us to the end of the meeting, thank you very much 
everybody. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Thank you members and could the 
members of the Protocol Committee remain and maybe 
we'll meet this side of the room.  Just quickly. 
And if you want to avail of refreshments, water, 
et cetera, sandwiches and cake to the back of the 
room please do. 
  
