 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 14th DAY OF JANUARY 2019 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
Elaine McCarthy 
Elaine McCarthy 

CATHAOIRLEACH:  Could I welcome you back to the 
first meeting of the new year and wish everyone a 
happy new year, it is going to be a busy half year 
anyway for some people but anyway, I want to wish 
you all well and families well for the new year.  
I want to welcome MyClearText, this new time 
captioning people we have from time captioning here 
today.  Elaine McCarthy and Orla Pearson, there's 
a first meeting here today and I'd like to welcome 
them today and pay tribute to Patricia Miele from 
Gwen Malone stenography who had been doing the time 
captioning up until September.  Before, are there 
any votes of sympathy before I start the meeting?  
Yeah, 
CLLR BLAKE:  Sorry a death of Bridget Bollard. 
>>:  Martin Murphy, as part of Murphy Undertakers, 
and Martin was always part of the funeral service 
and I think that, to his family, would be passed 
on from the council, my brother-in-law's brother. 
>>:  Family in Old Court on the passing of Sean 
Murphy, a famous footballer and man of note in 
community, not only in our area but in Wicklow, 
thank you. 
 

CLLR TIMMINS:  Over the weekend a brother of a 
former council employee. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's it. 
MS GALLAGHER:  For Judith Cochrane, daughter of 
Doreen Bateman, Bridget Pollard, Tinahely, I think 
he's mentioned there, for Maxwell, father of our 
colleague Mary Doyle and father-in-law Brian Doyle 
and Mick Byrne, general operative with the 
operative crew.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I didn't get you there. 
>>:  In memory of Liam Keogh.  And the family in 
Bray as well.  Pat.  Keith.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We will get it right.  Grand OK.  
Stand please.  
>>:  They were from Rathdrum originally but lived 
in Arklow. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Item one on the item of the agenda, 
proposed and seconder.  Agreed.  Confirmed 
assignments to the budget meeting held on Monday, 
2nd November, proposed, Cllr Vincent Blake and Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke.  Confirmed signed of ordinary 
meeting of Wicklow County Council held on the third 
of December, Cllr Gerry O'Neill and Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald.  OK.  We're on four, disposal, 

there's a number of disposals here, have there been 
queries in regard to the numbers of disposals or 
anything on that, the normal procedures, we know, 
we get these two weeks beforehand and gives 
opportunity to query anything on t so as long as 
they get that, that's fine, we're on to four now 
please. Proposed and seconder, Cllr Brendan 
Thornhill, do you want to propose this? 
CLLR THORNHILL:  Yeah, I propose in relation to. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Cathaoirleach we're on four now.  
Proposed and seconded by Cllr John Snell.  Is that 
agreed?  OK, that's fine.  Five, 6 Wolfe Tone 
Square West, Mr William Dodd.  I'll propose this, 
seconder by Cllr Christopher Fox.  
MS GALLAGHER:  Agreed by all. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Six I want to propose seconder for 
this, it is, Cllr Christopher Fox.  Agreed?  
Number seven, proposed by Cllr Gail Dunne, seconded 
by Cllr John Snell.  Is that agreed?  OK.  Agreed 
yeah.  Eight.  Cllr Pat Fitzgerald seconded by 
Cllr Tommy Annesley there, that's it OK.  Is that 
agreed?  Agreed.  Nine.  Proposed by?  Gas 
works.  At Naas Road Blessington. 
Proposed by Cllr Jim Ruttle, seconded by Cllr Gerry 

O'Neill.  Is that agreed?  OK.  Ten:  Proposed by 
Cllr Pat Fitzgerald.  Proposed seconded by?  Cllr 
Sylvestor Bourke.  OK.  That's fine.  OK.  We 
just note that in the minutes, your abstention 
there OK.  Eleven. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Is that agreed by all. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Number 11, yeah.  
CLLR FORTUNE:  I have a query by the ... 
That's the only query I have, I'm not proposing but 
accuracy of the maps, that's all. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Joe did you want to come in, have 
you talked to the director about this. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I couldn't get them. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Can you deter to later? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If we get that sorted out, if not 
we'll have to get it on to next month's Chairman. 
CLLR MCDONALD:  It was just around the price, the 
388,000, is that current valuation or is that a 
transfer from 1996? 
>>:  From a developer to be sold on to the state, 
so that's where. 
CLLR MCDONALD:  We weren't sure, that's fine, 
thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're going to bring this back 

later on OK. 
>>:  Is there a possibility we will be transferring 
full title to the Department of Agriculture?  And 
without any further say by this the council is there 
any possibility that we could put condition into 
this sale, that if it was if it was sold on by the 
department or part of it sold on, that it would be 
a condition that first have to come back to this 
council for approval because it is a large public 
park and widely used and if we give, and sign away 
any control on it now, the public will have no 
further say in it.  But so, I'm concerned given 
that the big fight we had by all the political 
parties at the council to secure the roads we would 
try and condition it, so as that, in the future, 
if part of or handed over to Coilte that they have 
sold thousands of acres of lands. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You're well aware and to get 
disposal notices two weeks before this meeting and 
I asked specifically in that area of disposals, to 
anyone that gives councillors to get in touch with 
the staff and tease out any particular problems 
that may exist in the disposal, it is no point in 
bringing it up the last day like.  You've had a 

fortnight like everybody else. 
>>:  My concern is if this is signed over to the 
department. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You're saying that, and we'll try 
and get an answer for that later on. 
>>:  I would prefer if this is referred to the area 
on the 20th ... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  It is a function, while it is here, 
a function of this council, right ... 
Sorry, it is a function of this council at the 
moment unless we decide to defer it, the director 
is here, he’ll talk and try and query and if there's 
a query with the problem with the map, we'll have 
to sort it out next month, we'll try to sort it out 
and bring it back in the meeting, you'll have an 
opportunity. 
MS GALLAGHER:  If there's any additional 
conditions it will have to be a new disposal, if 
there's additional conditions or, it would have to 
be a new disposal resolution. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're moving on.  We're coming 
back to it, we'll come back to the end of it at the 
end of the meeting.  Twelve.  Considered Chief 
Executive monthly managed report. 

>>:  One is the outer scheme, we got funding for 
three projects, one is the factory reservoir walks, 
157, is Cian's Way upgrade, village of Hollywood 
Glendalough, 165,000, to repair, which is 80% of 
what we look for in those three projects.  And TII 
have also given their allocation for this year, now 
it is about three times more than we got last year 
and the year before so we're doing well with TII, 
that includes 2.1 million for the Kilmac Road, and 
million for the junction road, we'll come back to 
that later, there's 4.1 million for the N81, of 
which 3 pf 6 is for the Knock Road bends.  I'll take 
the rest of the report as read. 
CLLR FOX:  Thank you Chairman.  Well thanks to the 
Chief Executive, I think like other councillors I 
find these reports very helpful, and laid out in 
a very easy to read format.  Just a query, in 
relation to the planning applications section.  
OK.  Request you tell me how many planning 
submissions were submitted to Wicklow County 
Council, they're misleading as it has a grant rate 
of 82%, however it doesn't seem to include 
applications, whereby people have to withdraw them 
before a decision, has been made because they're 

recommended for refusal.  Now, as all councillors 
know, people generally do not accept the refusal, 
they do withdraw their planning applications, and 
I think it's slightly misleading if these figures 
are not included, because as you know, there are 
a lot of couples who are applying for particularly 
one-off rural houses that have to go through two, 
maybe three planning applications, before they can 
overcome all the issues because of very tight 
restrictions, that we have on rural planning 
applications.  So, I think, for future purposes 
perhaps we should include one the number of 
applications made to this local authority, two, the 
number of applications that are withdrawn.  And 
then, the decisions issued and the decisions to 
grant because I don't think a grant rate of 82% is 
reflective of the actual situation on the ground.  
Thank you, Chairman. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK, 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  On the third lane at Kilmac the 
grant received, have you any idea when the work is 
commencing? And also, when we passed that part 8 
here it was on the agreement that we would look at 
the service road to the rear of those properties 

there as well to make that a safer situation.  So, 
I'm wondering have we progress on that, and on the 
Greenway to Bray which was also to be part of that 
process as well. 
CLLR BLAKE:  Thank you Chairman and thanks for the 
presentation as well, and very detailed 
comprehensive document, a small number of queries, 
first an issue I've been bringing up for some time 
that's the vacancy of the house in Knocknamana, and 
when the unfortunate incident occurred there, I was 
assured the work would be carried out within six 
months, it is a year or more than we had the 
unfortunate fire in the house.  
Second thing is in relation to the planning 
applications I think see 39 individual planning 
applications, to one-off housing, and just to be 
of an issue we have, particularly in our why are 
in Shillelagh, Avoca, Blessington as well, and 
Donavan, where he don't have the water sewage, and 
people are saying no houses are built in the 
locations and what's our chance of being able to 
build, in the rural areas with our own water and 
sewage facilities, and obviously we've a planning 
strategy out there, that prohibits people building 

in the rural areas, we're not building houses in 
the towns, we don't have the water and sewage for 
them, and people are getting frustrated in the fact 
that they're, whether in rental accommodations, 
overcrowded housing or whatever else, there's a 
problem out there, and we're meeting Irish water 
on a regular basis but the level of progress we're 
making in terms of upgrading the location is 
minimal.  Whitestown remediation costs is the next 
point that's on going for quite some time now and 
it is important we get an update on where we are 
with the Whitestown and cost, and implications it 
may have for the Wicklow County Council, lighting 
is an issue with the changing of the lighting system 
and so forth.   
And I know a lot of them around the county where 
a lot have been out, and it is a winter problem than 
a summer problem.  The last thing I have a problem 
in my area, and that's removal of a P&T pole, we 
ended up with P&T pole right in the middle of it, 
and it is my understanding that Telecom Eirean is 
looking for €1500 to remove a pole, is that 
reasonable? Or can we look at possibility of 
talking to Telecom Eireann in terms of health and 

safety reasons, they take responsibility for the 
removal of them in situations where they're causing 
a problem.  Thanks Chairman. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Chairman, I'd like to draw people's 
attention to just what I see as a small lack of 
information that us members are receiving, and what 
I'm talking about specifically is grants to groups 
in this county, be it voluntary groups, community 
groups, whatever.  These grants are very, very 
welcome, but there's no system whereby we actually 
see a list of all grants that are given to 
communities in our areas.   
I'm talking about community grants, leader funding 
and town village renewal, there's a raft of grants 
of community groups receive, and I'd like to see 
some system in place, where we're informed of what 
groups actually get funds.  Apart from the fact of 
us, as public reps, wanting to know the 
information, but, secondly one of our functions as 
well is discretionary funded in each municipal 
district, we have a say over how funds are 
allocated.  Now how can we make, how do you say, 
logical and sensible and fully informed decisions 
about allocating money to groups, if we don't know 

whether those groups receive funding or not, 
previously for often the same projects.   
So, I think in the interests of transparency and 
us public reps knowing what is going on the ground, 
all funding that's been granted to whatever group 
in the county, that it should be given, maybe on 
a district by district basis that we're informed 
and given a list who is awarded the money, I'm 
talking about the point of grant being awarded not 
the actual pay-out, but the point where the funds 
have been awarded and agreed.   
And I propose here today, that that members are 
informed and to each different group, what 
mechanism you do that I'm opened minded out.  This 
management report is the best tool because it is 
updated every month so we're not going to be waiting 
three or six months to find out the information, 
so we have timely information about what groups are 
getting funding.   
And, I know, I'm concerned that we're not getting 
all the information as local reps on that funding, 
funding is welcome, there's a lot more streams of 
funding coming down the tracks now, through various 
schemes, regeneration, village renewal, the Clar, 

there's a raft of funding there that's difficult 
to fully keep track of, but I'd like to see that 
we have a list and accumulative list, not just 
one-off to it is listed throughout the year, so, 
in January, such and such group were approved, in 
February, and we have a running total so we can 
track what groups are getting funding throughout 
the year.  It is also a way of us, maybe, having 
a better idea of how funding is being spent.  Is 
it spent where it should be spent?  You know, 
because at the moment, we're in my view, we're in 
the dark, in relation to that funding. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Grant. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Thanks, I was asked this question 
a few years ago about how many people with 
disabilities are on the housing list in the county.  
And then, what considerations are going into place 
as regards new housing estates to facilitate you 
know, people, elderly people or people with 
disabilities.  I know for, I mean our area, west 
Wicklow there, there are plenty of three bedroom 
houses where people are living alone, and a lot of 
these would be elderly but they're taking up the 
space of three bed and they'd gladly go to a 

Bungalow as such is a thing was included in new 
housing estates and that would free up the area for 
larger families.   
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK one sec, 
CLLR CULLEN:  Yeah.  I'd like to second council 
CLLR TIMMINS: Because of various grants, we had a 
particular situation here back in November, where 
it was, because we were asked to prove 
discretionary funding for a certain group.   
And we did. 
And later to be found out a week later the same group 
had got, received a huge grant from the same 
council.  And, if we had known, at the time, that 
this group had already received massive grant, we 
certainly would have given us pause for thought.  
And that shouldn't have happened.  The same people 
shouldn't be getting two mutual grants, from the 
same council and that's very concerning.  I'm long 
enough around here to remember what happened, the 
fallout from leader one was in this county. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll get that ... 
Sorted out now, this is a question and answers on 
chief executives, I know it is important and 
everyone around the chamber would agree with you, 

I'd ask you to move on. 
CLLR CULLEN:  We need to look now. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We all think that's a good idea. 
CLLR CULLEN:  The other issue I agree with Cllr Fox 
about the issue of planning, can we get a report, 
regards from An Bord Pleanala, I think it was in 
2017, that, Wicklow, no appeal in Wicklow was 
successful, we had 100% refusal and normal grants 
is 30-35% appeals are successful.   
So can we have update on how, the appeal system in 
An Bord Pleanala is working, the other thing about 
the ESB, I was at a member meeting on Friday, as 
you were yourself, and I was a bit disappointed to 
hear the ESB spokesperson told them, I rose the 
subject about public lighting and repairing public 
lighting, the ESB, officials there said it is 
nothing to do with the ESB, we only connect it. 
 
It is the County Council to hire the contractors 
and County Council's job to ensure the people do 
the job in the time and ESB is consulted when they 
have to connect the electricity, and that would 
take a matter of six to eight weeks, so, we have 
lights here in west Wicklow where we have approved 

funding for the past two, and two-and-a-half years 
and haven't been erected, I understood this was a 
difficulty with the ESB, and I think Cllr Behan 
raised it here, and according to the ESB told us 
at the meeting is it is council and why is there 
delays. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I've allowed you, that's a notice 
of motion there.  They're sneaking them in here.  
All the other members, I'm trying to be fair, not 
to you, but I have to be fair to the other members 
in the council.  
>>: The only issue - don't try to be dramatic. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm trying to be fair. 
>>:  Can we have a report with the up-to-date with 
the remediation south side. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's brought up already. 
>>:  When can we have an update. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  There's no need for reputation. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks again for the comprehensive 
report, on a point referred by Cllr Blake in the 
issue of public lighting the number of reports 
issued going back to September/October in relation 
to street lighting not working, still not attended 
to, there have been delays, signatories in that 

record, so I'm wondering, I know in my Greystones, 
cases reported last October, as I said, still 
haven't been with Airtricity and I say to write to 
them and see what the delays are, we're through the 
second half of the winter now and it is not 
acceptable.  Thank you. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  No, I have been in. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That's grand.  Chief Executive. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thanks, the planning 
applications, we can include that, that's to 
problem, applications made in the Chief 
Executive's report, and the figures, in relation 
to An Bord Pleanala, we can get that last year if 
necessary.  Cllr Matthews, we're coming back to 
N11, but that contract is with to go in parallel 
service road, we have a framework for consultants 
now so Greenway at the back of it, that project will 
be given with the consultants, Cllr Blake in 
connection with water and sewage, we'll take that 
up with Irish Water we're going to invite them with 
a meeting of the full council to put questions to 
them and get update on their exact programme.  The 
WCC remediation, again, consultant has been 
appointed in relation to Whitestown remediation, 

they have a lot of work done in geographical 
surveys, they're doing detailed site 
investigation, and appoint a contractor in 
relation to that, and it is only when that work is 
done, we'll have indication of the costs.   
 
When they have full site investigation done and 
come up with remediation plan, at that point we'll 
be sitting down with the EPA and department et 
cetera, and have a good idea what the costs will 
be, but really while that work is done, it is a 
guestimate, so that's a, we have contacted with 
landowners, they're setting up website in relation 
to that, but we need to get them to finish the work 
first and have a draft remediation plan.   
 
In relation to public lighting, there's a new 
scheme as you know that, all lights will be replaced 
by LED there's procurement consultant in place, 
that's starting at the end of 2019 and 2020, now 
I might ask Michael in a minute to relation with 
the problems with ESB networks and the pole, we can 
pass that on to the area.   
 

The grants, now we try to include, and in the report 
every month everything that's come in. 
I mentioned one or two in the terms of the outdoor 
recreation, but all the other one, we can include 
and we have information, that's no problem in 
relation to community grants, community 
facilities, scheme, and the leader, et cetera, we 
can provide all that information, absolutely no 
problem.   
Again, in relation to disabilities, all new houses 
of course are built with fully disabled access and 
people on our list are generally dealt with on a 
case by case basis, I might ask Joe to come back 
there in a minute.  OK.  So, maybe, Michael if you 
want to comment on the problems with the public 
lighting? 
Michael:  On page 18 of the ... 
Chief Executive report, it gives figures there now.  
It is difficult to get the figure below around 400, 
now, we have a staff member working on this, and 
we are trying, as hard as we can, in order to get 
the figure reduced, this figure is there, last year 
as well, there were issues in this, so we're working 
through it now regarding the connections with the 

ESB and that, like we have issues as well about 
getting ESB connections there's delays certainly 
when I'm looking at Arklow there's issues there, 
actually getting the connections all the rest of 
the work is done by connections are not made by the 
ESB networks at this point in time 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is there a time factor with ESB or 
will they give you a time factor, I think they 
indicated at the meeting last Friday, that most of 
the problem was with the councils and really, they 
were behind a little bit, but it was only a matter 
of a few weeks. 
CHIEF EXECTIVE:  It is more than a few weeks 
Chairman, yeah with particular lights in Arklow, 
you know, finished for a couple of months and still 
they're not lighting. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Good we have that information then 
OK. 
>>:  On the Knocklyon, I believe that's an 
insurance issue or might be delays with regards to 
insurance, I'll check on that and come back, and 
as regards disability, whereas the strategies 
regarding broad delivery vary, whether or not 
disability, or disability progression is normally 

through allocation process and there's a number of 
solutions in that.  We do try to at times, in 
dealing with particular cases we have dealt with, 
either through our own design and allocation, or 
even through part five process to get solutions at 
a local level. 
We haven't got agreement from the department yet 
for universal design but as people are familiar 
with the Part 8s gone through, we have Bungalows, 
we have disability access and ground floor type 
solutions and invariably it be the allocation 
process, point system that will deal with most of 
the solutions. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK.  Right moving on.  Could I 
just say, we haven't had a meeting since this, but, 
I had the pleasure of along with Andrew Doyle, 
Minister of State opening up two housing moment 
Arklow, Rathdrum and I think, I have to say, 
Rathdrum I was blown away by the standard of 
workmanship and quality and rooms in those units, 
I've never in my experience, as long as I'm on the 
council, I never seen such high quality in 
developments.  And I think, we as a council should 
be proud of it as well.  And all of the people in 

fact should be proud of the type of buildings that 
we are now producing for the people.  Both A-rated 
developments as well.  Absolutely superb.  And 
certainly, I don't think, I know the people who move 
in will be delighted with those quality homes so 
that is the standard now that's been set as far as 
I'm concerned for the rest of the county as well 
and really and truly, I look forward to a fairly 
good amount of houses coming on stream with that 
quality in the near future.  OK, we're moving on. 
Item 13. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Yes, we have Sarah Latcuff from 
Gamma Consultants and she's going to give the 
results of the survey given before Christmas, 
before she kicks off, I want to draw the attention 
of the transcript that is appearing up over the 
presentation slides, that's something new that 
MyClearText have introduced, if the members like 
it, we can discuss it again at protocol if you wish.  
Do you want to say anything? 
 
>>:  By way of background, where this came from is 
various discussions we had with IDA and Enterprise 
Ireland, we're making the cause with outbound 

commuters and high standard of education, they had, 
the numbers, but they always said look it is all 
well to say that, we need proof and statistics and 
that's where it came from, if I hand over to 
Charlotte, we can take questions after that. 
CHARLOTTE:  Good afternoon everybody. 
I'm very glad to be here to give you the results 
of the commuter study.  This was undertaken with 
a view to understanding everything about the County 
Wicklow commuter. So, where they're coming from, 
where they're going to, how educated they are, what 
industries they're working on, people's attitude 
to their commute, how they feel about it, what 
changes, they would be willing to make and what 
changes they would like to see to improve their 
commute.  So, I'm going to start with figures and 
all the figures are in the mule report. 
So, of the 60,073 workers in Wicklow, they are 
mostly going to Dun Laoghaire Rathdrum and Dublin 
city, 2,7835 workers are muting from Wexford to 
Dublin and that's relevant because although they 
may not be coming to Wicklow, they're passing 
through County Wicklow on their journey.  So, we 
also took a look at the mode of transport people 

are using, there's drivers coming from County 
Wicklow, 41,308 people are driving.  An overview 
of the attitudes people have to their commute, 74% 
of survey respondents from unhappy with their 
commute.  70% said they would prefer to work in 
County Wicklow and 33% said they would even accept 
a pay cut if it allowed them to work in Wicklow, 
over and over again through the study we found time 
is very important to people.   
So, we had a few data sources to use to answer to 
these questions.  One data source is called Place 
of Work or Study Census of Anonymised Records, it 
includes every person who completed a census form, 
where they live, where they work, the features of 
their commute, such as mode of transport they use, 
what time of day they leave, how long the journey 
takes. It includes demographic features of the 
commuter themselves and because this is an 
individual level census data, it is tightly 
controlled, but what you will see not included is 
how people feel. So we complimented this by 
designing an on-line commuter survey, this was 
calculated to align with the data, this was run for 
two weeks in November. There was a very strong 

campaign, to get the word out.  That included 
leafletting on key routes, social media, on-line 
advertising and motorway signage and all this 
promotion paid off because they ended up with 6,750 
people contributed their views, which is a really 
excellent sample.   
So, with a little more detail.  We have 60,723 
workers as I mentioned.  So, of those, more people 
leave County Wicklow than remain in County Wicklow 
so 24,000 leaving and students would be leaving 
County Wicklow.  And the focus of this is primarily 
on the workers, it is because most of the questions 
we had to answer would be relevant to workers but 
not be so relevant to the students. 
So, the demographics, characteristics of County 
Wicklow commuters, they're highly educated 53%- 
more than half have a third-level qualification.  
The biggest sectors are wholesale and retail which 
is 23% of people.  And followed by communications, 
information technology and finance, which is 21% 
of people.  And also, worth mentioning is a further 
20% of people in education, health and social work 
so those are the Minden graphic characteristics 
with the large well-educated workforce, the 

question is where do they go?   
So, this map, I grant you there's a lot going on 
it, but these lines are showing you the flows of 
people from their origin regions shown in blue, to 
their destination regions, shown in red, so you can 
see we have big strong lines representing a large 
number of people going from Greystones Bray and 
Wicklow municipal districts, mainly going 
Dunlaoire and Rathdown and people in Baltinglass 
are ending up in Wexford and Carlow.  13 % of people 
who leave come from Bray, sorry, 31% from Bray, 19% 
from Greystones. 
So, the question then is how are people travelling 
to work?  And you can see that by far, the largest 
number of people are travelling as drivers of cars 
or advance. 
And you've probably noticed as well that the number 
for car passengers is smaller, there's about 20 
times as many people driving a car, as travelling 
to work as a passenger in a car, but we should note 
this is only people travelling to work, so, there 
would be some people who are maybe travelling to 
school as car passenger who are not counted there. 
So, the car is indeed the most dominant form of 

transport being used all over the county.  But 
approximately 6,000 people there using public 
transport, there is regional variation there, it 
is not the same for every district.  Of the train 
users, over half of them are commuting from Bray 
and Greystones municipal districts and going to 
Dublin city, which shouldn't be a surprise because 
that's where the train exists, Bray is more in Bray 
municipal and that's because of the availability 
of the bus as an option.  So, having established 
how people are travelling you might be wondering 
why is this?  So, we asked two questions on the 
survey:  If you drive, what are your reasons for 
driving rather than using public transport?  And 
if you use public transport, what are your reasons 
for using public transport rather than driving?  
And we found a very consistent result there, which 
was that everybody wants a shorter commute.  
Everybody is choosing their mode of transport to 
minimise the time they spend doing it, that's true 
for people who drive and use public transport.  
Mode specific one, using public transport they're 
saying they don't have access to parking at 
destination and people who drive, are mentioning 

the reliability of the public transport service as 
a factor in that. 
So obviously convenience is important, people want 
a short commute but also people will use the public 
transport service if it was available to them and 
if it made sense for them.  So, given that time is 
important we talk about more about time - I see the 
labels in the presentation don't seem to have 
appeared, don't worry, can I give you the numbers 
if you want them.  More than a quarter of people 
who commute from County Wicklow are having to leave 
home before 7.00 in the morning by 8am, more than 
31,000 people are on the road, so that's obviously 
a huge number of people, most people's commute is 
not overall long, only a small proposition have to 
travel for more than an hour, but that depends on 
the routes, if we look at the main routes within 
County Wicklow, we have 37% leaving before 8am and 
5% have to travel for more than half an hour, in 
contrast, if we look at the main routes out of 
County Wicklow, we have 71% of people have to leave 
home before 8am, 65% of people have to travel more 
than half an hour, and 17% more than an hour.  So 
that's a different picture who leave the county 

compared to people who stay within the county.  So, 
putting all that together:  When we asked people 
the survey question, how do you feel about your 
commute?  The answer was on balance, not that 
happy.   
So, 74% of people all together who responded to the 
survey said they were somewhat unhappy or very 
unhappy about their commute, compared to 12% said 
they were somewhat happy or very happy.  Now that 
again, depends on the commute and depends on 
whether the person was leaving County Wicklow, or 
remaining in County Wicklow, so of people leaving 
County Wicklow, 78% say they're unhappy and 10% say 
they're happy, those who workplace is within County 
Wicklow, 56% of people are unhappy, and 7% are happy 
or behalf happy, comparing that with features of 
the commute, we said people reported higher levels 
of happiness if commute was short, under half an 
hour is good, under fifteen minutes is better, and 
depending on the mode of transcript, people able 
to walk or cycle reported higher level of happiness 
who could use public transport or drive.  So, what 
might help with that?  We asked people, what 
changes would significantly improve your commute?  

And the answers were very clear, nobody I'm sure 
will be surprised, 64% of respondents said they 
wanted a shorter journey, so time continues to be 
very, very important.   
The public transport findings are interesting, 
that two of the things most people said they wanted 
to see was for public transport to be more frequent 
or more reliable and that's particularly 
interesting because these are not just responses 
from people who already use public transport.  
Lots of these are people who drive who, want there 
to be better access to public transport, more 
frequent and dependable and that holds up what 
we've seen before, use of transport is by  
far the highest in areas where they  
are well served.  
So, given that people are happier on balance, if 
they work within County Wicklow, we asked two 
survey questions, if a job similar to your current 
job but located in County Wicklow was available to 
you, how likely would you change job?  And also, 
if a job similar to your current job located with 
County Wicklow but lower pay available to you, how 
likeable would it be to change jobs?  This is 

telling us how important the commute is to people 
so.  There and is a big difference in the personage 
of people who said they're likely or very likely 
to consider the options, 70% of people said they're 
likely or very likely to consider a job within 
County Wicklow, 33% of people likely or very likely 
if it came with a lower salary, there's a difference 
but 33% is still a significant percentage.  
Variation of course exists here, this isn't 
uniform.  People with a long commute, commute 
lasting more than 90 minutes, 78% said they'd 
prefer to work in County Wicklow and 48%, would 
consider if it meant a lower salary.  Is varied by 
sectors, and sectors open to accepting a lower 
salary in exchange for a position within County 
Wicklow with easier commute were finance, 39% of 
them said they'd likely or very likely to consider 
it, and in information technology, and that was 
37%. 
 
 
So, one more survey question that's informative.  
We asked them about remote working, if you had the 
option to work in a co-working space, remote 

working space or E-hub located in County Wicklow 
how likely would you be to take that option?  And 
overall, 49% said they would be likely or very 
likely to consider that.  So that's almost half of 
people, half of the survey responses. 
And similar to what we saw earlier about financial 
and information technology being two sectors open 
to change they were also the most open to 
considering remote working, that's 63% working in 
information technology was opening to this as a 
possibility.  We found the longer the commute is, 
the more eager people were to consider an 
alternative.  So, I'll sum up with quick overview 
of everything I've said.  What we can say about the 
County Wicklow commuter is they're well educated, 
and IT and finance sectors are well represented, 
and these sectors are open to alternatives to long 
commute, whether working with lower salary or 
within County Wicklow.  The majority of people who 
leave the county go to Dublin, mainly Dublin city 
and Dun Laoghaire Rathdown, there are a lot of 
drivers in Wicklow but not necessarily because 
people want to drive but they feel they don't have 
a viable alternative in public transport.  And 

lastly the County Wicklow commuter places high 
value on time, they want a shorter commute, they 
make decisions around commuting, based on what is 
shortest, many would even consider an alternative 
such as lower salary position, or a remote working 
position, if that meant their commute would be 
easier and remain in County Wicklow.   
Thank you very much for your attention, does anyone 
have questions?   
>>It is up-to-date information and we need this 
information when we make our case to IDA, 24,000 
people leave the county, and 53% third level of the 
education, 86 are unhappy, 80% would consider 
working in Wicklow, 48% would consider, a hub or 
working remotely.  And again, that's good 
information to have, and we're planning these 
things, and we're more likely than the rest of the 
country of travelling more than an hour, IT and 
finance and creative sector are well represented 
but more unlikely to be happy, and those are the 
headlines, and we summarised them, but it is good 
information to have. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thanks, and thanks Charlotte for the 
presentation.  I'm sure we'll agree it is a most 

useful survey and telling us we suspected all along 
as we witnessed the morning snarl-ups on the N11, 
and which is affected commuters and their quality 
of life.  Just looking at the presentation this, 
some figures jump out, the number of people driving 
the cars, and the small number by comparison of 
passengers I would suggest people aren't 
carpooling.  The sorry the reliability or lack of 
reliability of public transport and people would 
use public transport more would it be more frequent 
and more reliable.  This is something as a district 
we had a very positive meeting last week with Irish 
Rail and Dublin Bus to address the situations that 
currently exist with the peak hour train and bus 
services.  So, again, this, it needs investment, 
at the moment our design there, in improvements in 
N11, maybe option of Park and Ride dedicated bus 
lanes along there, should be considered with Park 
and Ride stations, stuff like that, but again, this 
is a useful survey and the Chief Executive pointed 
out we're trying to attract businesses in the 
county and highlights the existing skill sets in 
the county education sets so, we have sites such 
as IDA site in Greystones, which we're trying to 

promote now, this would be assistance in that 
record. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks very much.  Thank you very 
much for your presentation, it was really, really 
interesting.  And I'm really pleased that the 
council commissioned it.  I think the issue of 
commuting is one of the biggest issues facing not 
just the residents of Wicklow, but also the actual 
council and the viability of our towns.  The daily 
exodus that happens from our towns, primarily into 
Dublin, what it does is it impacts on people's 
lives, their work/life balance is all skewed.   
 
It undermines our towns, because we don't have 
people who can spend the day or go shopping, or have 
their lunch in the town and then of course that will 
impact on the rates.  So, this is something that 
we as a council should be focusing on because we 
are a commuter county, but we should be trying to 
minimise that as much as possible and enable people 
to work when they can within the county, whether 
that's through job creation or actually providing 
a place for people to work.  An awful lot of the 
profession that is are outlined in your 

presentation, a lot would be able to work from a 
co-working space.  And I've raised this with the 
council, and I'm hoping that at some stage we will 
start looking at providing co-working spaces, 
particularly in the five main towns in the county. 
 
I think if we were to provide them, they would need 
to be subsidised somewhat, because we want to 
enable people to work from Wicklow and not just the 
people whose companies will pay for them to work.  
I also think they need to be in the centre of the 
towns which is really important and that will 
actually help sustain those towns, and I think 
things like providing creche facilities would 
enable women in particular to be able to 
participate the workforce again and there's 
obvious economic benefits for that.  So that's 
something that I would really like to see the 
council working towards, because I think, 
otherwise we will continue to send our workers out 
of the county each day, those workers will sustain 
the economies and towns where they are working, and 
we are undermining our own towns and our rates, 
capabilities as well by not doing that.  In 

relation to the, really interesting the proportion 
of passengers to single drivers cars.  And I think 
that's something we need to look into as well and 
the option of carpooling and providing carpooling 
spaces as Cllr Walsh said, spaces on the N11, would 
help. We don't do these very well in Ireland, but 
every other country would have carpooling and it 
is part of daily life, and this was interesting, 
and I can see huge interest in this data. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Lots of people are now. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  I have two questions. I got the end 
of the figures there, so, 41,000 people travelling 
by car, 2,000 are passengers, does that relate to 
39,000 people are in single occupancy cars or do 
the cars have a passenger in them?  The second 
question, Park and Ride has been referenced, do we 
as a council have any concrete ideas on where a Park 
and Ride would best serve the N11 and have we 
forwarded, progressed any of the ideas?  Because 
everybody would use a Park and Ride, or a lot of 
people would.  And lastly, just Wicklow has been 
left transport, our national TDs when you look at 
the transport plan in 2015 it was all the north and 
west and very little for the south, south-east, and 

there's huge commuter numbers coming up there.  
Now, there's a plan for rail electrification to 
Drogheda, Maynooth and Hazel Hatch and Wicklow was 
left behind, we need a DART extension to Wicklow, 
same distance out to those place and eastern region 
growth has Wicklow town and Bray as large 
population growth centres. I really think we should 
start the balance rolling and look for feasibility 
study for electrification to Wicklow.  Thank you. 
  
>>:  Thank you it is useful, but it is useful, 
dealing with Government agencies and NTA and 
others, to have actual statistics which can show 
what we already know, but, the national transport 
plan prepared a short, a couple of years ago, 
provides a very good transport service to pray.  
But south of there, it provides a worse 
service - Bray.  Not just the same service for a 
larger population, but also, a worse service, and 
the recent changes to the railway introduced have 
increased the journey by 20% to Greystones and 
similar amounts to Wicklow and Arklow.  So, 
clearly, people are looking for a shorter journey.  
Well the national transport plan as it's being 

implemented and intended to be implemented, will 
provide the people with a longer journey which is 
exactly what people don't want.  Now, we met with 
Irish Rail and we NTA wouldn't meet us, but we hope 
to go and meet them.  And it is essential that, they 
deal with the fact that making public transport 
worse will put people in cars and therefore you need 
another solution like express buses or something, 
and, the most remarkable point about public 
transport in Wicklow is the rail line south of 
Greystones is almost totally empty at rush hour, 
there is one train in the hour-and-a-half of rush 
hour which is a very short train, and nobody in the 
NTA, in Irish Rail, seems in any way interested in 
dealing with that.  They have not put forward an 
investment proposal to go in the national transport 
plan, they just ignored it, and when we speak to 
them, they talk about oh maybe we'll find a train 
somewhere.  We ask for a long-term plan and they 
say "oh yeah that's somebody else's 
responsibility" what is needed is that the staff 
in the place, the NTA and Irish Rail and the bus 
people, put forward a proper plan, for serving the 
county and that hasn't been done and I'm very 

critical of one train very short at rush hour, and 
expensive railway to maintain and N11 massively 
overfull.  I can, we suggest things like Park and 
Ride, sites at Willow Grove and it is talked about 
Ashford and Wicklow I know, there are many places 
we could suggest it, I did a study on some of the 
rail aspects and some of the things that, the 
suggestions are in there, but what is needed is for 
someone to listen to them and take action, and come 
up with a defined plan for the county.  Otherwise, 
we'll have far more people taking longer journeys 
at the present plan.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. 
CLLR RYAN:  Thanks.  First of all, I think the 
response rate was fantastic, so, everybody 
involved in actually putting it together and make 
it happen should take a  bow but shows frustration 
that so many are feeling and that's why they filled 
it out.  Results are no surprise, but as you say, 
it is a research to make the case, I suppose I wish 
we were clearer as a county what our case is, in 
terms of what our asks - do we want electrification 
of the line to Arklow? Do we want dual track? Where 
do we want our Park and Rides? Carpooling, what 

exactly is it that we're asking for?  So, if I don't 
know that, I think it is probably likely we're not 
making a good case as to why that should be 
happening.  In the presentation one of the 
questions what would make you happier?  You could 
replace the word "happier" more appropriately with 
"healthier” because sitting in a car for that 
length of time is bad for your health, on a number 
of fronts but from a family point of view, you're 
away from your family and away from things you want 
to do, and there's crashes every business day on 
the N11 which is affecting people's health and 
environmental impact the way we're doing things at 
the moment.  And it is becoming an enormous issue 
that hopefully people are taking seriously, but, 
this, you know, and unlocking the solution to that 
is critically important in terms of environmental 
impact.  The could working space, 50% of people, 
co-working space, people said they would be up for 
it maybe a lot of people don't know what it is and 
it is important it is not just about a desk but new 
philosophy as to how to get work done, and not 
working from home, but joys from working in a 
commune cool environment.  But these places have 

to be really invested in and put in, so they're top 
of the range, broadband a key element to that.  
Claremont could be our first working facility, I 
know it is not in a town and it is really important 
that, we actually have a leader to show people what 
that actually looks like.  
Even if we get 10% of people off the road that can 
be enough to have the flow actually work rather than 
the whole thing go mad.  We also have to be clear 
about the IDA, when they're trying to sell Ireland 
abroad, they're looking at productivity levels and 
productivity is affected hugely negatively by 
people not being able to get to work.  So, we have 
to look at our civic spaces too, in terms of trying 
to ensure we're creating clusters of people where 
they want to come and work.   
The final point, pay cut, it is interesting, not 
only people would need to have a pay cut but the 
amount they're spending on transport and travel 
themselves is enormous, so thank you very much for 
the presentation.     
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you Chairman, I'll be brief, 
that's for your presentation.  It just, 70% of the 
people would like to work in Wicklow and 33% would 

take a pay cut.  I feel the problem is we're finding 
it difficult to attract businesses to Wicklow.  
They come as far as Greystones but probably won't 
come further than that.  You can get the DART to 
Greystones but not any further south.  But the 
thing, I'd like to say, we had an initiative there 
a number of years, where we went to Dublin, the 
council went to Dublin and Wicklow were open for 
business, and a number of companies came down, 
talked to the council, and I think we should go and 
do that again, to see, is there companies, wanting 
to relocate to Wicklow and given the opportunities 
to talk to the staff?  And I think, the Chief 
Executive should look at that, and maybe go back 
into Dublin and see if we can attract people. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK fine, 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach briefly, I 
welcome the foresight in knowing a survey like this 
would add not just a chat, if we're going to use 
data informed policy development and data informed 
strategic development, then placing a value on 
commissioning a study like this, is very much 
welcomed.  Ultimately a study like this, does 
present a challenge back to this chamber, and back 

to the council.  I think that's again, something, 
we not to reiterate the points made by Cllr Ryan 
but it is up to us to respond to the data, and my 
question would be about how we will share the data 
with the general public, because again, we value 
their input and we think how we're going to give 
it back to them and share the results would be 
interesting to know. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Thank you for your Chief Executive for 
the initiative and undertaking the survey.  The 
fact that so many people took part in the survey, 
it is essential, that we don't just leave it there, 
that this becomes the process that will lead on to 
improvements for those people who, completed the 
survey and those who didn't.  Just, a kind of 
information question for myself, when you say that 
it over 40,000 people are travelling to work by car, 
are you extrapolating from the survey or using the 
figures for those?  And right across the board, 
those statistics, the number of public transport 
and so on, I think, that just from my information 
I'd like to know what exactly what is the basis for 
that figure?  The second point is that, the whole 
question of availability of parking for people to 

get to public transport, I think this is a huge 
issue.  And it does highlight the need for proper 
Park and Ride facilities in this county near the 
main roads routes and attached to that also is the 
fact that the Luas is at the moment is a big driver 
of people using public transport in the Dun 
Laoghaire and Dublin county area.  
We don't have it in Bray, but I suspect quite a lot 
of people are parking at Brides Glen, and then using 
the Luas there and it is important in establishing 
a Luas presence in Wicklow and raised again the 
question of whether the Luas, just going to Bray 
DART station or on to that line is the right way 
to proceed and whether there shouldn't be a spur 
to Fassaroe and into the county, but it seems to 
be working in Dublin.  And, I just like, a comment 
if possible, from the top table as to what exactly, 
has there been a question of movement, from the 
Government, or the transport authority in relation 
to establishing Luas directly in the county, thank 
you. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Thanks Chairman.  Thanks, don't 
repeat to what other people have said, co-working 
space interests me in the west of the county, we 

don't have a train network.  And just generally, 
thanks very much it is a great survey and great to 
see numbers and statistics, because we're not 
talking about a vacuum.  
I don't know how Wicklow compares to other 
counties, from the statistics, Wicklow probably 
has the highest commuter level in the whole 
country, so therefore, Wicklow certainly is in a 
position to demand investment in relation to 
reducing this commuter thing that's happening.  
And I'm thinking in particular the co-working based 
like Clare County Council, which I'm sure doesn't 
have the level of commuting that Wicklow does.  
  
They have three centres for co-working, and I 
think, I believe they're sponsored by Enterprise 
Ireland and they're in three different locations 
in county Clare and Wicklow has none, so I look at 
investment in co-working space, I know Baltinglass 
in the old courthouse closed down about seven or 
eight years ago, one of the options of the funding 
was developed a co-working space in the courthouse 
right bang in the centre of town which is the best 
place to have it and there's ample parking nearby 

as well.  So, I would urge that, Wicklow, given its 
the statistics that we can present, given its, you 
know the facts on the ground, Wicklow should be in 
a strong position to look for investment in 
co-working and maybe part as future and town and 
village renewal and see how Clare got their special 
designation to get three councils, Wicklow is more 
than Clare is, so co-working space, we put forward 
issues associated on that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  This is running way late, and 
there's a number of other issues, so try to be as 
brief as possible.  Thanks for the chief for 
initiating the survey.  One element of commuting, 
which hasn't been touched on, is, the availability 
of housing. And affordability of housing. 
It is amazing how many people from Bray, through 
affordability had to go Gorey, and places like 
that, somebody from Bray has to buy a house in north 
Wexford, and actually, it has arrived from the 
centre out, the city centre has hollowed out from 
a residential point of view, and it has had a 
knock-on effect, people from originally from 
Dublin, have bought houses in Wicklow and north 
Wicklow, and it has published people south, Bray 

and Greystones, young people from Bray and 
Greystones had to move further south and into 
Wexford.  And it is a vital element to reduce 
commuting times that people from Dublin, would be 
given the opportunity to live in the city centre, 
I know we'll be discussing the regional guidelines 
later, and it is a critical part of the whole 
strategy on economic and residential growth is 
that, people start to live in the city centre again.  
It has doughnutted out from the centre out and is 
a critical part to resolving commuting times as 
well.  Thank you, Chairman. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Just very briefly the 70% 
dissatisfaction rate is alarming that so many 
people are unhappy with the having to travel to 
work.  One thing that stands out is that for all 
the traffic that's going in one direction in the 
morning, there's nothing coming in the other 
direction.  And I spoke to the one of the Arab 
presentations, up in where?  Glenview Hotel, and 
one thing he said was how you change that is by 
investing in the area from which all the people are 
disappearing in the morning.   
And that's one thing we haven't seen in Wicklow 

county over the last few years, we haven't seen 
major investment by IDA or anybody else that will 
bring people back, we have the population, we have 
the workforce, and it will be a realistic solution 
to get the traffic all coming in the opposite 
direction and that would cut the dissatisfaction 
rates in half, and all towns would benefit as a 
result.   
So, I think, Wicklow County Council, should pursue 
some large working investment in the county like 
a digital hub or something like that. 
CLLR THORNHILL:  Hi.  Go raibh maith agat I think 
the same.  You know, when I look at the figure 
there, 40,000 people travelling to work, you know 
in the car, I mean, it goes to show where we have 
come from.  I would like to say that not rocket 
science to say it has to be public transport but 
when you talk about public transport you have to 
talk about reliability and frequency.   
And, also with that tied in with that is carpooling, 
I was talking to a friend of mine recently and he 
was, he told me he was making use of lift share.  
And abroad, the same thing I saw abroad as I saw 
here, loads of people using cars, and one person 

per car, so I would like to say we should be looking 
at a situation, where, maybe a dedicated lane for 
multi-passenger cars, so it is about efficiency and 
especially I look at the situation where people 
would be happy to work at lower pay rate.   
You spend so much time commuting and as Cllr Ryan 
said and well said, that they're their health 
should come into effect.  Go raibh maith agat. 
CLLR CULLEN:  Thanks Chairman.  First of all, I 
want to congratulate Charlotte on an informative 
survey.  I will be brief.  The figure 38% of people 
surveyed, would use a more frequent or reliable 
transport - I suppose, from Wicklow, for example, 
the town team have talked about Park and Ride and 
carpooling, that's fine, if you can free up space 
on the N11.  Unfortunately, at the moment, if 
you've a Park and Ride system, the basically bus 
transport will be caught up in traffic.  So, we 
would have to look although dedicated lanes for bus 
transport or carpooling or both, so that would, 
obviously free up the volume of traffic.  I suppose 
the other part of the question I would like to ask 
would be, there is quite a lot of people that would 
be driving as far as public transport, certainly 

I know quite a few people who would drive as far 
as Carrickmines outside the county and use the Luas 
to get to the city centre, I'd like to get a feel 
for the numbers that maybe affected, where they are 
having to use their car and public transport.  And 
if there's something that could be done there to 
alleviate that problem. 
CLLR TOMMY CULLEN:  Counsellors in the Baltinglass 
is looking for the Luas to be extended to 
Blessington, and we don't know how this, how the 
N81 will turn out, hopefully it will turn out good 
but if it doesn't the very least one would expect 
the Government and department to do is extend the 
Luas from City West to Blessington, because, it is 
not a long distance and through open countryside 
which would be quite cheap.   
It is not like the cost of running through an urban 
city area and I think the councillors in the 
Baltinglass district would like that to see that 
looked at as an option.  The other thing there 
needs to be a, I just looked at the figures of people 
commuting from the battling gas municipal, area, 
that's a huge amount of people 10,000, Bray has 
3,000 more. 

But, so, that will give you the enormity of people 
travelling to work.  And on the N81 in particular 
there's no pull-ins for people to pool car parking, 
I was talking to colleagues in Kildare County 
Council and they're actively building car pull ins 
for people who are going to work and within, on the 
N7 and N9, there's two major car pull-ins by Kildare 
County council, within 6 kilometres of each other 
and there's 150 cars parked a day there.   
So that's taking a huge amount of cars off the road, 
so that's very good for the environment as well as 
more people are travelling and pooling cars and 
less emissions so I would like money assistance 
granted to pull them in.   
But Chairman, I hope, that we're going to get good 
news about the N81, looking at those figures, our 
concerns about having that included, reinstated, 
and this county council's policy, these figures of 
10,000, and 7 and 11,000 people commuting 
regularly, justifies upgrade in the N81. 
Chief Executive:  Just in relation to the 
carpooling:  The town team here in Wicklow are 
looking at a trial system around the Beehive, that 
will have that sort of Park and Ride.  We granted 

planning permission for a Park and Ride with 
Wexford bus out towards Arklow but as Cllr Cullen 
pointed out the bus still gets stuck in the traffic 
and the key project in all of this is N11 and M11 
with extra lane, and we'll have a presentation on 
this shortly.   
Co-working, we will have state-of-the-art 
co-working as part of the Arklow core project in 
the Courthouse in Arklow so we'll have to set it 
up as a model.  There's a private operator in 
Wicklow town and Enterprise Park in Wicklow Town, 
but we need them in other towns as well, there's 
grants with Enterprise Ireland competitive fund 
and urban regeneration fund so we'll have a look 
at in terms of Bray, Greystones and Blessington.  
In relation to rail electrification and rail 
services in general, south of Wicklow, we're coming 
to the strategy shortly, we need to put that in to 
be clear, we need a serious upgrade and thought into 
what happens the rail line south of Greystones.  
The in relation to Luas, I agree with Cllr Behan, 
it is in the until transport plan for 2028 to 35, 
link to Blessington and Fassaroe makes sense, and 
maybe we should start lobbying in relation to that.    

The availability of housing a affordability links 
into supply, that's where the Fassaroe there and 
things that are in terms of landfill and golf links 
land with public transport bridge getting funding 
for that, will hopefully accelerate, but supply is 
needed and there's a lot happening in Greystones 
and Wicklow town as well.  Yeah, I think that's it 
I might hand over ... 
Well again, it is the place to start is including 
it in the RSES, I would say, and start lobbying from 
then on.  
>>:  So, to answer specific questions about 
numbers and data points there. 
The approximately 2,000, 2,173 car passengers, 
compared to car drivers, so yes, the car passengers 
would be included in the cars that are being driven 
obviously.  These numbers only include workers so 
it is possible that some of these 41-39,000 one of 
person cars may have people dropping children to 
school or giving a student lift so there may be more 
people than is strictly being represented here.  
There was also a question about the data sources, 
what came from the survey, and what came from the 
Census. In the full report sources were given, so 

check it there, but numbers of commuters, absolute 
values, anything that's got a figure of so many 
thousand, that comes from the data, people with 
particular attitudes and feelings and sentiments, 
that comes from the commuter study data.  And as 
I said, in the full report the source for severing 
given. 
There was also a question in relation to inbound 
commuters in Wicklow, compared to number of people 
commuting out of County Wicklow, although that 
wasn't the focus of this piece of work, there were 
8,680 inbound commuting workers, three times as 
many leaving as entering.  To a rough 
approximation.  There was also a question of 
people using more than one mode of transport, 
saying park to a Park and Ride facility and 
continuing via public transport, the report 
records what the longest portion of your journey 
is, if you drive five kilometres and train 50, it 
is recorded as someone who takes the train, that's 
the way it records people.  That's all the data 
questions.OK. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you.  Just for my own input, 
for what this survey does yet again, we had a 

previous survey, commuter survey a number of years 
ago, this is similar, what is really means is we 
need to get employment in County Wicklow and that's 
the only way of reversing the trends we see on it 
at the moment and that really, is up to ourselves 
and IDA, to bring the type of employment into the 
County Wicklow area and that's the only way we'll 
solve this particular problem.  Thank you.  
Moving on. 
OK now. 
>>:  Number 11.  Did you go back to it?   
MS GALLAGHER:  Are we ready for Number 11? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  If this is brief now.  Just one 
second. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Satisfied of the accuracy of the 
maps and having reviewed them with the legal 
department I am satisfied they are accurate and I'm 
proposing... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Who is nexting them?  Pat Doran, 
OK.  Cllr Cullen did you want to come in there. 
CLLR CULLEN:  That we would insert a caveat in the 
disposal, that at any future date, if these lands 
that we're now transferring ownership to the 
department are to be sold in full or part, that the 

caveat would be that they would first have to come 
back for approval of the elected council to 
safeguard the long-term future of the woods from 
being sold off at some future date.  I'm not saying 
that's the intention of this particular proposal 
is, as it stands but it is a possibility if we see 
full control to the department, that part of the 
department then will be Coillte and they are they 
sold 2,000 acres in Wicklow in the last couple of 
years, as a safeguard, that, we would do that.  And 
preferably would like this discussed at our Area 
Meeting on the 28th.  Into among the local 
councillors because it never came before the 
council, but I proposed that amendment just to 
safeguard that the long-term future of the woods 
would remain in public ownership. 
CLLR BEHAN:  I second that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You realise then this is putting 
off this, by six weeks.  Sorry, this is a whole new 
disposal, in regard to this.  So, and that means 
we don't go ahead with it what is proposed by Cllr 
Blake, did I get a seconder for that, Cllr Doran 
seconded that, and I'm going to take a proposal now 
by Cllr Cullen, that's the amendment to delay this, 

and see if we can, I don't know whether we can do 
that or not.  Sorry, I'm not asking you can we do 
it or not, I have to get legal ... 
CLLR CULLEN:  I suspect I know more about motions 
...  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'll have that argument with you 
any time.  Any time.  Right.  And I just want to, 
OK.  What I want is that I'm going to take the 
amendment from Cllr Cullen, seconded by Cllr Behan 
to delay this.  Sorry ...It is delayed.  Right. 
CLLR CULLEN:  It is delayed for six weeks, it has 
been delayed for the last 25 years, what's another 
six weeks. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  And then I'll take, obviously, if 
that's carried then that's fine, then I'll take 
Cllr Blake's proposal to go ahead and dispose of 
this, as per - and also, counsellor I said to you 
earlier on, you had an opportunity for the last 
fortnight to make this proposal and you didn't do 
it.  Right.  And that was one of the reasons why, 
it was you who brought up the proposals that you 
weren't getting told in time.  And, listen, Cllr 
Whitmore chaired the committee who brought in the 
recommendations, they are there, before you, and 

I specifically asked was anyone, had anyone queried 
here today and now you bring it up on today's 
meeting and make a proposal to delay, when you could 
have done this a fortnight ago. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Can I refer to section 183, at the 
first meeting local authority held after the ten 
days on which such notices, are sent or delivered, 
the local authority may resolve that the disposal 
shall not be carried out or it shall be carried out 
in accordance with the terms sped in the 
resolution, can you do two things, resolve the 
disposal shall not be carried out or resolve it 
shall be carried out.  If the local authority 
resolves by virtue of paragraph B, it should not 
be carried out, it shall not be carried out.  In 
the local authority does not pass a resolution, in 
pursue of paragraph B, it may be carried out.  So, 
there's no, you can't amend.  That's why you get 
ten days. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm going for a vote on Cllr 
Blake's ... 
 
CLLR CULLEN:  You're making it conversation. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Blake's ...Blake's proposal, 

second ...Go ahead and safeguard this disposal, I'm 
asking for this.  You should have done it a 
fortnight ago, you had a fortnight to do, and won't, 
you didn't do it.  You'll take that lecture from 
me. 
CLLR CULLEN:  I won't take any lecture from you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  For or against, Cllr Blake's 
proposal.  Cllr Doran second 
CLLR CULLEN:  Against. 
CLLR SHAY CULLEN:  For.  Corridor for. 
CLLR DUNNE:  For. 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  For. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Against. 
CLLR FOX: …(inaudible) 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Abstain. 
CLLR KENNEDY:  For. 
CLLR LAWLESS:  ... (inaudible) 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Abstain. 
CLLR MCDONALD:  Abstain. 
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN:  For. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  For. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Abstain. 
CLLR NOLAN:  For.   
CLLR DERMOT CULLEN:  Abstain. 

CLLR RUTTLE:  For. 
CLLR RYAN:  For. 
CLLR SNELL:  ... (inaudible) 
CLLR TIMMINS:  For. 
CLLR VANCE:  For. 
CLLR WALSH:  For. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Abstain. 
CLLR WINTERS:  For. 
MS GALLAGHER: Four against, five not present and 
six abstaining. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  In regard to disposal, there's a 
system there, and I appeal to any disposals in the 
next few months until the end of the council, 
counsellors would use that facility, it would be 
more beneficial to everyone, thank you.  And we're 
finished, we're moving on. 
CLLR CULLEN:  I asked to forward this information 
today. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We're moving on.  There's nothing 
got to do with this.  Right.  OK.  Sorcha Walsh.  
Thank you very much. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  It wouldn't be the first one that 
I checked, you checked every public document I 

signed over the last 30 years and that's not 
surprising to me, but every one of them were legal.  
Right.  OK.  Sorcha Walsh is waiting for the last 
hour.  Thank you. 
SORCHA: Thanks, sorry to give you another 
presentation this afternoon, you seem to have hit 
on some of the issues we talked about when you're 
talking about the commuter survey, but I'm going 
to run through what is in the draft, regional and 
economic plan was published last November.  And it 
would be circulated at the time, you were all 
invited last December, I think with a meeting with 
the Regional Assembly and I'm sure you've read it 
from cover to cover, so I'll move through this 
quickly, submissions are due next week as well. 
So, just to run through the background of this, you 
all know we have a new region, and enlarged region 
compared to our last regional plan, so our region 
now, comprises all the Dublin authorities, Louth 
Meath Kildare and Wicklow are called the eastern 
planning area, and then there's the Midlands area 
which is Longford, Westmeath Offaly and Laois.  
So, it is a wider region, there's 38 elected members 
coming from twelve local authorities and you know 

your own elected members are on that grouping, so 
it is challenging to get a plan through that would 
meet everybody's needs, in terms of structure, the 
regional plan comes in between Government strategy 
and local government.  So, as you know the national 
planning frame has been passed by the governments 
last year and linked to other national plans such 
as action plans for jobs and so on, at regional 
level you'll have regional plan but regional action 
plans for jobs and regional strategies.  These 
will influence at local level plans watch sincere 
county development plan and LECP which will have 
to be reviewed on adoption of regional plan.  In 
terms of the process, you're well aware of the 
stages that we've gone through already, but we 
started with the preparation of an issues paper 
would be last year and made submissions to that, 
and presentations were made to you Shearer here.  
There was public consultation, and once that was 
completed the regional team started preparing a 
draft plan, there was numerous workshops and now 
we're at the public consultation stage of the draft 
plan.  It was published on 5th of November last 
year, and submissions have to be in by 23rd of 

January, next Wednesday.  I sent around as wide a 
group as possible, both by the regional team and 
by the county team and obviously been on public 
display on website and so on.  Just moving on to 
the actual plan itself then.  The structure of the 
regional plan.  It set out in twelve chapters, 
introductions, strategic vision, growth strategy, 
people and places, Dublin Metropolitan area of 
strategic plan, economy and employment, 
connectivity, quality of life, infrastructure, all 
cohesion, implementation and monitoring.   
The plan starts with its vision, which is create 
sustainable and competitive region that creates 
support and wellbeing of people with access to 
quality, housing and travel and employment 
opportunities for all.   
They carried that vision forward into I think it 
is about 15 regional strategic outcomes which are 
on three themes, why healthy place making, climate 
action, and economic opportunity.  So, those 
themes run through the whole plan with regards to 
what chapter, it is dealing with. 
Moves on then to the next chapter which is the Youth 
Strategy.  So, you'll remember from previous 

regional plans, there's been maps and sketches like 
this, of the region, that try to show in a diagram 
what the actual growth plan is.  So, the growth 
plan for our region, is really about it is setting 
up four distinct but interrelated districts within 
the region.   
So, there's the Dublin City and suburbs in the red 
on the drawing are Metropolitan areas of which, 
Bray and Greystones form part.  The next area in 
blue there, is the hint at the land area and green 
area is the outer region, so, we're not in the outer 
region yet so we're, parts of the south-west is 
considered the outer region, but north east is 
considered Metropolitan area, the focus of the 
development is consolidation of the centre.   
And then within the hinterland and outer region it 
is consolidation of certain key towns within the 
areas.  There's particular focus, driving from the 
national plan on the Dublin to Belfast corridor, 
which you can see in the arrow there, and also, on 
the growth towns of Drogheda, Dundalk, Athlone.  
And people and place, related to the strategy, 
where are people going to live in our region, and 
where is economic opportunity going to be 

developed?  One of the first thing the plan does 
is it sets out what cause settlement to strategy, 
categories of towns, so it has Dublin city and 
suburbs, regional growth centres, key towns other 
towns and rural areas and sets out guiding 
principles for core strategies.  So, when it comes 
to the next stage, and do review county development 
plan what are the principles we have to embody in 
our plan or contain in our plan that reflects this 
strategy in so, just going to- just pause there, 
and those two chapters and go to the next slide 
which is to identify the key issues on those two 
areas, as we the executive see them.   
About the growth strategy and settlement strategy.  
And I'll just run through them as quick as I can, 
but some of them are a little bit, I won't say 
technical, but it is about population growth 
parameters and how we use the regional plan to 
develop our core strategy when we come to do the 
county development plan.  The first issue is that, 
the regional plan sets out that it will form a 
framework for our development plan, and it will 
help, guide us into how much land we zone for 
development in our development plan.   

However, we're concerned that the plan the draft 
plan as set out wouldn't actually provide 
sufficiently clear framework to determine 
population targets and the appropriate amount of 
residential zoning we need for the period of the 
plan.  And therefore, we feel that it will be 
difficult to develop our core strategy, and our 
county development plan at the next stage because 
there are some aspects of the plan that are still 
unclear.  I'll run through a few of these, but Cllr 
Vance in his presentation a few months ago, we 
flagged some of the issues, previously, and we 
still feel some aren't addressed in the draft plan.  
The first issue is this thing called acid-based 
approach.  And what this is about, is looking at 
eight characteristics, eight to ten 
characteristics of towns, and things like, the size 
of the town, the density of the town, the services 
available in the town, whether that is schools or 
sewage capacity, the amount of employment 
available in the town, and numerous different 
factors that allow you to assess the capability of 
a town to accept more growth, in particular more 
housing growth.   

So, there's a lot of time spent in the draft plan 
about what this acid-based approach is, what is 
missing from the plan is how they actually did it.  
We know what they say they used to decide how to 
identify our growth towns, but we don't know what 
data they used to measure each of the variables, 
we think this is very important because they say 
this approach they're taking, will, we have to use 
it to decide which towns we set as growth towns in 
our county development plan.   
So, if we don't actually know the methodology and 
data we use, they want us to use, then at the end 
of this process, the regional, adoption of the 
regional plan to county plan we won't know how to 
do new core strategy.   
So, we're suggesting in our submission, we ask for 
the clarity they show us, in detail their 
methodology and model, to are how they decide which 
towns should be growth towns. 
The second issue that's a bit of a problem, is the 
national infrastructure provides for population 
targets for every county, to stop short of 
providing it for towns but it did provide us with 
population targets, it also said, no withstanding 

the target they had given for Wicklow there was an 
extra allowance for 25% for head room which seems 
to be extra growth on top of the target they've 
given us, but they haven't been clear about what 
that means.   
Whether it's for the 2026 target or 2031, so we were 
expecting the regional planner to give clarity on 
things like this, that is missing from the draft 
regional plan.  And I suspect it is because the 
regional team felt that the national team had 
already provided these targets and it wasn't for 
them to interpret them.   
The second factor that may be, unclear, we feel is 
unclear, is that the national planning framework 
and the draft regional plan both set out that 20% 
of the growth allocated to Dublin can be 
reallocated to beyond Dublin industry and suburbs 
to wider Metropolitan area and that's what the 
national planning framework said, the regional 
plan takes it further and says, this extra 20% can 
be reallocated to Bray Maynooth and Swords which 
are designated three key towns in the metropolitan 
area, if they can have existing corridors, so they 
put a condition on that, and we're concerned that 

it is not clear what exactly is meant by that 
statement.  And whether 20% of the growth from 
Dublin could be allocated to Bray, or whether it 
might be allocated to Bray, and, we're not clear 
who is going to make that decision. 
So, we're going to suggest that we try to push the 
regional team into making that decision, so that 
once the regional plan is adopted, we know how to 
prepare our new core strategy.   
So, they're just some of the problems in terms of 
the figures.  So, while the regional plan says it 
is setting the basis to do new core strategy, we 
feel there's a good few gaps in it, that means we're 
going to be left in limbo at the end of the process 
and have aspects we won't have certainty to do the 
new regional plan.  In terms of the structure 
they've set out, Lisa, if you wouldn't mind going 
back a few slides and showing the drawing of the 
region.  Yeah.  So, the region set up as four zones 
so to speak, and has identified key growth towns, 
our key growth towns are Bray, and Wicklow Rathnew.  
And the plan is silent on all other towns other than 
saying there's other categories of towns and we 
have to decide what categories are the other towns 

going into.   
As you see, the drawing identifies Dublin to 
Belfast corridor, because that's identified in the 
national plan, we feel there's an opportunity here 
for regional plan to include a corridor approach 
for other corridors other than the Dublin to 
Belfast corridor, and we feel particularly, that 
the Dublin to Rosslare corridor should be 
emphasised in the regional plan, we don't see any 
particular reason why the regional plan can't have 
a second tier of corridors if the Dublin to Belfast 
corridor has to retain primacy. 
This, corridor, Dublin to Rosslare corridor would 
take in Bray, Wicklow, Arklow, and downs like Gorey 
and Wexford designated as growth towns in the draft 
southern regional plan, so we feel there's an 
opportunity there to have interregional 
connectivity and the two regional plans aligning 
with each other and the southern draft, draft 
southern plan includes objectives in that regard, 
so we feel that isn't a major policy shift to ask 
for that, there could be benefits and spinoffs for 
the east coast of Wicklow to be part of an economic 
growth corridor there. 

Moving on Lisa, if you wouldn't mind.  Into OK, so 
settlement to top polling, I said for rising of 
towns in categories, it mentioned below the key 
towns of Bray and Wicklow, Rathnew the next tier 
is medium to large towns and then small towns and 
villages, it doesn't mention by name any of those 
towns, and we feel that, that's a big gap in the 
regional plan, there's an opportunity to identify 
towns that can play an important role in the 
strategy, without diluting the focus on our bigger 
towns and city.   
And for example, a number of our towns outside of 
that highest level have had quite a lot of 
investment in infrastructure or are about to have 
a lot of investment in infrastructure, like Arklow 
for example.   
So, we would feel strongly in setting this 
hierarchy, they should give us more scope to 
identify towns of the middle tier, and perhaps even 
mention these towns in the regional plan itself. 
 
Finally, with regard to key growth towns I 
mentioned that slide, Bray and Wicklow Rathnew are 
the key growth towns, there's a small paragraph on 

each, this means it is selling the towns short and 
this plan should be an opportunity for us to promote 
these towns and show what assets they actually 
have.  We feel say an international investor were 
coming to our region, this might be a document that 
they return to look where should I locate in the 
region?  We feel there's more needed to describe 
the assets and capabilities of Bray and Wicklow 
town if they are to remain our two key growth towns.  
We've lots of text available for the regional team 
to use, we will suggest some, but from talking to 
them, they're going to put some attention to that, 
and perhaps reward that.   
Finally, just with regard to rural areas, as you 
will recall the national planning framework has set 
some new parameters for rural housing that will 
have to be integrated in our development plan when 
we come to review it.  The new policy, Government 
policy on rural housing is anywhere that's is under 
urban influence, social and economic need 
prevails, which is as per our current county 
development plan.  Anywhere outside of urban 
influence, social and economic need is not 
relevant, it is house siting and design.  So what 

you have, what we will have to do for county 
development plan is which areas are under urban 
influence and there's a new methodology, the 
regional plans showed the influence of Dublin 
extends to, and looked at the influence of the towns 
in our region a we're a little concerned it hasn't 
shown influence of towns south-west of our county, 
such as Carlow mentioned in our discussion on 
commuting and towns in Wexford may have on our 
county, so we'd like to ask the regional team to 
give clarity on that, to know where we stand on that 
policy.  If I move on to, the plan also includes 
met pot tan area strategic plan, and this is a plan 
for, the metropolitan area which Bray and 
Greystones form part, there is a sketch of it there, 
and, what it does, the it is mainly identifying 
large scale strategic areas with capacity for 
growth, and to look at the infrastructure that's 
needed in the region to realise that growth.   
You know, we certainly welcome this Metropolitan 
plan, but we feel it could be stronger.  And in 
particularly with regard to investment and 
priorities and public transport which you 
discussed when you're discussing the commuter 

satisfy in, we consider it vital the regional plan 
promotes significant improvement and investment in 
rail and all public infrastructure, in the Dublin 
Metropolitan region and not limited by the existing 
NTA strategy, which was based on a knew superseded 
plan.   
And in particular, we think the regional plan 
should promote and stride to deliver major 
enhancement to our rail services and not just 
maintain the status quo, so, we'll in our 
submission, be making a few points in that regard, 
it is essential the regional plan includes this.  
With regard to roads in the metropolitan area, the 
plan includes a list of roads that it says are 
priorities.   
Unfortunately, it seems to be Dublin-centric and 
I suppose this is a Metropolitan area plan, but 
there are a number of schemes listed in the plan, 
that seem to be localised in relation to sites in 
Dublin, and we feel we should fight more strongly 
for all of our schemes as well in the metropolitan 
area.  It is very important that schemes get listed 
in the regional plan, because will be the basis for 
funding decisions in the future, if you're lucky 

enough to have a town listed in the plan, you're 
half way to getting the funding, and we would 
certainly be looking for extra schemes to be put 
into the MASP plan with regard to our met pal ton 
area settlements.   
A couple of other things with regard to 
Metropolitan area plan, it mentions that 
development should be in consequences manner from 
Dublin strategic city centre out and it seems to 
suggest that growth in the metropolitan area, key 
towns like Bray, Maynooth and Swords will be 
secondary to growth in the city centre, which is 
contradictory of that policy of allowing up to 20% 
of the Dublin growth to go out to towns, so we need 
clarity.   
So, we don't have to wait for Dublin to be built 
out before we're allowed to develop Bray which 
would be obviously illogical.  Moving on then. 
A key focus of this plan is employment 
degeneration, in shows going through existing 
 
strategies for employment creation in the region, 
and there seems to be a lot of them.   
We feel there should be more of an emphasis overall 

on the economic development, in the MASP area on 
building up employment in Bray, Maynooth and 
Swords, the key growth towns, but moving on to more 
general sense.  We feel that the section on 
economic development is very much focused on the 
eastern region bundled in with Dublin, and you 
don't see Kildare, Meath, Wicklow and Louth coming 
out strongly in this, talks about the assets of our 
area, it talks about Dublin, and Wicklow and 
Kildare and Louth all together, but it mentions 
what sections are strong, we're bundled in 
together, what sections to promote, we're in it 
together so it loses focus and nothing in 
particular about Wicklow in the economic strategy.  
 
So, we will certainly be asking for there to be more 
done on the profile of the eastern region, they're 
not going to count I did not know level but look 
at the profile of eastern region, separate from the 
Dublin region.  In particular, the regional plan 
for jobs, does do that, there are documents that 
would allow them to put focus on the eastern region.  
There's a section on specific sectors and drivers 
for growth, and the ones that are mentioned, are 

retail, tours and agriculture and the marine, we 
feel there's an opportunity to get the film 
industry mentioned, there's a scant references to 
it in the plan overall, and if sectors such as 
marine and tourism are mentioned, we feel there's 
an opportunity for Wicklow, if we get the film 
industry included in there. 
Moving on. 
Climate and environment, the regional plan 
obviously has to do a strategic assessment, flood 
risk assessment and these contribute to making sure 
the plan contributes towards cleaning and healthy 
environment, there's a particular focus on 
transition to a low carbon economy and a lot of 
focus on green and blue infrastructure and 
recreation. 
We would have some concerns though, that a number 
of the green and blue assets in Wicklow aren't 
mentioned in the regional plan, and for example, 
maritime towns and beaches, Wicklow town isn't even 
mentioned 
The River Slaney system isn't mentioned, the 
Blessington Greenway isn't mentioned on the main 
table on this, so we feel we need to make a strong 

submission to identify assets we want to promote 
in Wicklow in subsequent section in the plan. 
 
Blessington Greenway gets a scant mention and I 
think that was through, the work of the counsellors 
on the Regional Assembly who insisted it mentioned 
of the Blessington Greenway, but it is stuck in a 
paragraph that you would miss it, we suggest we give 
more information on the Blessington Greenway and 
ask for it to be promoted and heightened in its 
status in the plan.   
 
With respect to climate change, again, that's a 
real focus on the plan.  This plan seems to have 
veered into areas that perhaps we feel maybe it 
shouldn't have.  There's a lot of objectives and 
suggestions about how we should deal with climate 
change at a local level, but at the same time, each 
county is required to prepare a local climate 
change adaptation plan which is guided by the EPA, 
and work has started on that.   
So, I think we should make, point it out to them, 
there's a lot of overlap, between different bodies, 
we're saying we should do one thing and we need to 

be clear about where we get our guidance from.  
This sort of pervades the whole plan that 
suggestions are made how we should do development 
plans and things like that.  
Whereas it is Government guidelines how we dictate 
to do plans, wherever we see inconsistency there, 
we can point that out.  In terms of infrastructure, 
this is obviously going to be absolutely critical, 
and I mentioned infrastructural project listed in 
the plan are more likely to get funding as we move 
forward in the next few years, in terms of 
infrastructure what the plan sets out is guiding 
principles for integrated transport and planning, 
sustainable transport and resource management, 
communications and digital infrastructure, and 
international connectivity.   
I've mentioned rail infrastructure, but in terms 
of priority, again, I think we need to emphasise 
major investment is needed and that will republic 
sector the submission we want to make Dublin to 
Rosslare corridor.   
Again with respect to roads, I think, very 
important we get all the road schemes in we want 
and Park and Ride is essential one we get in, 

exactly as you mentioned in your previous 
discussion, that, we bring in bus Park and Ride and 
we really promote that, given that you have single 
track railway line and not great rail service on 
the east coast of Wicklow and no rail on the 
Westside of Wicklow, bus Park and Ride has to get 
some mention, it is not mentioned in this at all.  
 
And again, I suppose, we might be facing a situation 
where the regional teams say it is not in the NTA 
plan for the region, we feel strongly the regional 
plan shouldn't be bound or limited by the existing 
NTA strategy, which should be updated to reflect 
the new regional plan. 
 
If you move on.  Coming towards the end of the 
regional plan, chapter on quality of life, and 
deals with quality of housing and jobs, health care 
and services, high quality environment, arts, 
culture and health, heritage, language and 
however, one area that seems to be completely 
missing is commuting.  And, it is mentioned in 
there with regard to transport, and transport 
chapters, but in terms of the quality of life 

chapter, there isn't a focus on commuting, there's 
a focus on the recreation and heritage side of 
things.  
We consider very strongly that, there needs to be 
a subsection, in this plan about commuting and we 
will certainly send our commuter survey, to show 
them what we're talking about, and this has to link 
back through all the chapters of the development 
plan, because it is the one big thing missing in 
quality of life, it is extremely important.   
 
And in terms of promoting health and active 
communities:  There's a lot of focus on making it 
a healthier region, but not a lot of the focus on 
the role of the LECP and LECP on promoting health 
and communities, so they've missed a connection 
there, they're putting all the focus on us being 
part of the next county development plan, but LECP 
will have to be updated to reflect the new regional 
plan as well.  And finally, then, the regional plan 
deals with, the funds that are going to be 
available.  So, the funds are absolutely critical 
because this is how they're going to insure we in 
member of parliament the regional plan properly, 

we don't get money if we don't do things properly.  
 
So, there's four billion announced over the next 
ten years, and you know some of them already, 
European election, technologies climate action 
fund, and other funds that are out there, and the 
regional team will play a key role in helping not 
determine whether the funds or how they're 
allocated but in directing and prioritising 
funding.  So, it is obviously vital we get what we 
want in the regional plan as far as possible, and 
because, funding decisions will be based on it.  
Just finally, remind you of the public 
consultation, is finishing on the 23rd of January, 
and they're the details where you make a submission 
of the executive of the county council will make 
a submission to these things like we always do, and 
we will make a stand alone submission if required 
or integrate in our submission, any other points 
that you want to raise today.  But you're certainly 
able to make your own stand-alone submission, 
either as individual or group you represent.   
So, anything, any points you want to raise today, 
we'll take a detailed note of and draft in a 

submission on your behalf and get it in the Regional 
Assembly next week.  I'm sure some points will 
overlap on the ones we feel is important, anything 
in addition you want to bring to our attention, that 
we haven't mentioned today, it was a quick 
overview, I was trying to do, but anything you want 
to bring to our attention, we can certainly draft 
it into a submission and debt it in for you next 
week.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Counsellors, the screen is 
lighting up here.  And, this is not a county 
development plan now, this is a regional plan.  So, 
obviously, keep the comments in regard to regional 
plan, because it tends to go into a county 
development plan and really, it's a question and 
answers, to get as much information as we can.  See 
what from Wicklow's point of view, can we make this 
better for the members going to the meetings, the 
plan has to be in by the - the submission has to 
be in by the 25th, the timetable is very, very tight 
in regard to the Regional Assembly, they hope to 
have this through by the end of April. 
And obviously, before the councils in May.  So, it 
is very ...23rd, sorry, 23rd of January.  So, it 

is vital, that if anyone is putting in a submission, 
they put it in.   
And obviously, the submission the executive will 
put in will be made available to all the members 
and will be made available to the members of the 
recent assembly so they can take it to them as well.  
In regard to that, can I put on record, my 
appreciation of Sorcha and the team, in her 
planning department, they've done a huge amount of 
work, not alone on this presentation today but over 
the last number of months in regards to regional 
plan, because Wicklow is coming out of it very 
serious problems in regard to housing, and we were 
lucky enough to get a lot of amendments in agreed 
by the last meeting of the Regional Assembly to go 
out for public consultation.  That improved a lot.  
It hasn't improved it that much we can't make more 
improvements on it as well and certainly I'm a 
member of it, and willing to go ahead, on that for 
obviously more improvements and clarification of 
what is in the plan to make sure that obviously, 
Wicklow benefits to its fullest in regard to this.  
So I'm asking members, now remember, members, 
there's data protection thing, on here, next, that 

we postponed from the last meeting, and also, which 
I think is vital as well, the N11, and M11 junction 
as well, so people take that in mind when they're 
making their contribution, and it is really, I 
think it is a question and answer, if you stick to 
that, then, we can get to all the necessary items 
by 5.00. 
CLLR FORTUNE: …(inaudible) 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Information I have:  I know it is 
important.  The information I have on that, I don't 
know, I mean, I have information from Cllr Matthews 
that indicated, Hitachi is pulling out of that.  
So, I'm just saying, but we have items there, and 
I'm trying to move on.   
CLLR FORTUNE: It looks like we're going to run out 
of time and that has to be dealt with today or it 
is too late. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  The information I have on that is 
that Hitachi are pulling out on that. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Miss Gallagher followed out on 
that.  And we do need to discuss it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  The latest information, hasn't 
been confirmed yet but Hitachi the information is 
that they're not going ahead with this 

CLLR FORTUNE:  There's eight plants, so there's 
others involved, it does need to be discussed and 
my opinion is that, if we don't discuss it today, 
we've missed it. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm in people's hands here, it is 
up to the members, I stated, it is up to the members 
they go quickly through the agenda. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I'm flabbergasted this is not seen 
as so important.  Either by ourselves, 
collectively or by media I'm flabbergasted. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  You asked me before December to 
put it on the agenda, I put it on the agenda, without 
going through a normal type of process protocol and 
everything else, we discussed it, we said we'd come 
back in January. You can't have any better service 
than that.   
In regard to this, there's not one item on this 
agenda today that's not extremely important.  Are 
we're in control of in Wicklow? We're not in control 
of this, I'm trying to move on.  I know your 
concern.  That is not by problem.  I'm doing the 
best I can up here.  I'm doing the best I'm worried 
about the people in Wicklow and the things that are 
in front of us.  That's in your opinion, 

CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thanks.  OK.  Thanks, Sorcha is 
this a document that you think we could summit to 
lobby for electrification for Wicklow for Luas to 
Bray and include DART underground it because none 
of the trains will make sense unless there's DART 
underground.  South-east corridor, presumably it 
is part of the south-east network and would be 
retained in that.  The funding, there's two 
billion in infrastructural funding and 500 million 
climate change funding, to we have to be really 
accurate when we're summiting to which fund, we're 
going for?  And do we have to be very - have they 
given us good clarified lines how we should put it 
in the different funding streams.  I'll leave it 
at that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Thank you. 
CLLR WHITMORE:    Thanks very much Chair, and 
thanks to Sorcha and the planning team and members 
who are on the Regional Assembly because I know 
there's a lot of work gone into this.  The one area 
that jumped out on me, someone mentioned it, it is 
really weak from a, outside the retail tourism, 
maritime, Ag area and we should be putting forward 
our capabilities as ICT and hi-tech employer.  

When we looked at the results from the commuter 
survey, a huge number of people who live and commute 
out of Wicklow every day are in that sector, and 
we have the type of environment that those kind of 
companies would absolutely like to come and be 
based, we're close to the city, we're close to UCD 
and Trinity, and you know, we, it is Wicklow is a 
lovely place to live as well and we should really, 
be selling ourselves as a potential base for those 
kind of companies and I don't think this document 
does that.   
I welcome the IDA site in Greystones was mentioned, 
it was singled out as a site, that was mapped and 
I hope because of that IDA takes it seriously, it 
is unbelievable it hasn't been developed yet and 
because of this, also more emphasis on those jobs 
and that site, that they will do something about 
that site because it is an awful waste it is not 
developed for the purposes for which it was set 
aside. 
 
So that that's essentially my comments thank you 
very much. 
CLLR MURPHY:  Yeah, some of the issues I agree with 

Cllr Whitmore it is a black circle really, because, 
we've all sat in districts and have IDA come down 
and say, we don't have to standard of industry that 
they want, they need housing for the staff to come, 
we don't have that.  It is a black circle. 
The lack of housing, the lack of renting the lack 
of for you know, the IDA to come in, invest money 
in our county, and then we don't have the housing 
stock for their requirements of their staff and 
whatever.  Also, it is very disappointing to say 
that Arklow is not going to be improving.  We will 
improve.   
Once the sewage system, we hope to increase our 
population by 10,000 or more.  So, that's a big 
thing, also, the tourism, I think there's a lack 
of tourism initiative in this document, I haven't 
really read it detail to detail, but from what I 
hear today, Wicklow is the garden county.   
And I mean, we've just published tourism strategy 
document which I think is very, very strong, so I 
think there's a lot of problems in this document, 
and I think, I'm sorry to bring it up, but it is 
contradicting our development plans in lots of 
ways, in quotes of the house improvement and all 

areas of everyday living in our county.  So, I 
would be very worried about this document. 
CLLR SHAY CULLEN:  I'll be brief as always.  First 
of all, it is a little disappointing that Wicklow 
as a county maybe isn't given more of a reference 
as a county rather than being bundled in which other 
counties.  A few points after reading the 
document, there's a couple of lines about the 
enhancement and expansion of Wicklow Port, I would 
like to see this maybe you know, teased out more.  
I think Wicklow, at the moment, has a stagnant port, 
it needs huge investment, but, in that investment, 
I think it could prove to be a very worthwhile given 
proximity to Dublin and given we have a port access 
road in place at the moment, so it is certainly 
something I would like teased out.  As spoken about 
earlier, our tourism in our county, I would like 
to give references to the Greenway from Wicklow to 
Greystones, I don't think there's a mention of 
that.   
 
And we are starved of accommodation within our 
county and we've discussed this on so many 
occasions.  I think we're going to have to change 

our approach to accommodations whether it is rural 
accommodation, whether it is Agri-based 
accommodation, we will have to promote our county 
and we certainly need accommodation to be at the 
forefront of that.  The acid-based approach to 
growth towns, that you spoke about Sorcha, as we 
know, we've discussed it for long enough here with 
regards to towns not having adequate sewage 
capacity.  And I suppose, the point is if a town 
hasn't got adequate sewage capacity can that growth 
development be transferred to a town that does have 
adequate services?  And I think that's important, 
if we can identify areas, for example, Wicklow 
town, Newtown, that need further growth that have 
services in place. 
So, I knows, and my final point Chairman would be 
as we've discussed earlier, the traffic issues 
within our county I think again, they need 
particular attention, whether it's bus service, 
whether it's Park and Ride, whether it's rail 
improvement, I think all this need particular 
attention, because obviously they're major 
concerns for the county.  
CLLR MCLOUGHLIN: Thank you.  Sorcha, thanks for 

your presentation, as normal it is so articulate 
and you've hit all the boxes except one thing I 
don't understand, Greystones.  They call it a 
Metropolitan area but I don't see anything in the 
plan that makes us different, that adds to where 
we are, Bray is mentioned, the growth towns are 
mentioned and all of a sudden there's a couple of 
bits about the IDA land as Cllr Whitmore mentioned 
but other than that, I don't really know what is 
the advantage or disadvantage in Greystones being 
in that area, and if there is a disadvantage, I 
would like to know about it, so maybe we can make 
a submission about that. 
CLLR WALSH:  Thank you, the concern over the lack 
of the references to the Dublin Rosslare corridor,  
there is a reference to the emphasis seems to be 
on the Belfast economic corridor and identified 
Drogheda and Dundalk as growth centres with Brexit 
looming down the tracks and approaching swiftly, 
the corridor to Rosslare will have, take up added 
interest, and added importance and significance, 
so, and with the increased investment and that, 
that will benefit towns along that route and 
improve our spine road through the N11 so emphasis 

should be on that, pushing that in the submissions, 
but also, has there been any references to that in 
the southern draft plan?   
You know, bearing in mind that where Wexford is in 
the southern areas, was there any references to 
that in the southern draft plan thanks. 
CLLR O'NEILL:  Thanks Clarke and Sorcha for your 
presentation, I'm inclined to agree, that looking 
at the plan, it looks like west Wicklow has been 
left out of it completely.   
So maybe, that should be considered in this 
submission.  I too, will be worried about our local 
town plan, when we can move on with that issue.  And 
also, the knit in with Blessington and Kildare.  
But I would be concerned with the plan itself, it 
likes like a glance, it has taken a lot of power 
away from local authorities.  I don't know whether 
we need planning in a few years times but it is 
looking at page 42, when they go back and say that 
existing plans can be changed you know, in taking 
in considerations like Census so there's nothing 
set in stone, so I would be worried about more power 
leaving our local councils, and being directed by 
the powers that be.  

CLLR MITCHELL:  Thank you.  I just want to say that 
probably the prime failure of regional planning in 
the past is they haven't built apartment numbers 
in the centre of Dublin and that's where all the 
housing crisis comes from.   
Many European cities have very much higher 
densities, not necessarily this tall buildings, 
Copenhagen has six storeys all over the place in 
the centre, and that's why, we have this spreading 
out of population.  So, we shouldn't be taking 
hardly any of the blame for the situation.  We're 
housing these people.  There's one comment made 
earlier we should not support, the comment was "we 
should support the rail tunnel in the centre of 
Dublin" but, unfortunately Irish Rail intends to 
use this to provide I think a six-minute DART 
service to Bray, but there will be no space from 
trains from the rest of Wicklow, and it is 
absolutely essential that a plan is producing to 
leave space on the tracks from Bray to Dublin for 
the trains to Wicklow further south.  The density 
of population along the DART is actually low in most 
places, if you look at some of the stations, very 
few people actually use them, in many of those 

stations.   
So, I don't think it justifies a Metro-type 
service, and I think that, until Irish Rail 
produces a plan which shows that they're going to 
provide us with a better service, we should not be 
supporting the tunnel which I think will end up 
providing us with a worse service.  
CLLR FORTUNE:  Yes thanks.  Just before I ... 
>>:  Can you extend the meeting by fifteen minutes.  
Well whatever it would take. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Agreed, OK. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Just a few points, thank you for the 
presentation.  I like, Cllr O'Neill I had a quick 
look through the draft plan and I felt that, Wicklow 
was not going to win a lot of benefits from it 
probably driven to a great extent by the lack of 
infrastructure we have.  So, I think we need to 
have a really important section put in there, 
covering all the lack of infrastructure we have and 
where we need it.  For example, like, Sorcha the 
rail infrastructure that should run from 
Greystones to Arklow, I think that needs to be 
highlighted importantly.  The Greenway, Cllr 
Cullen mentioned it, the Greenway from Greystones 

to the east coast, that's an important project and 
I get the impression from what is said, if it is 
not included in it, we're unlikely to get the 
funding or stuff like that, so that's really 
important.  And then a question I'd have then is 
when we talk about we seem to hit on areas, Arklow, 
Wicklow, Bray, Greystones, when we talk in terms 
like that, like Greystones, are we talking about 
Greystones Town in the Old Town Council sense or 
Greystones district  as there are villages on top 
of it that are part of the district that are 
important they don't lose out in it.   
And when we talk about the healthy and quality of 
life which I think is very important, and just 
making an observation, is somebody like An Bord 
Pleanala, when a plan is approved, are they subject 
to it when they make decisions?   
As a comment, I would make the recent decision with 
regard to Kilcoole village, planning permission 
wouldn't reflect ethos that Sorcha outlined so I'm 
curious how that impacts it.  The other question 
I'd have is, who actually decides what is done 
properly, you were saying how things are done 
properly, who decides that?  And it touches on what 

Cllr O'Neill was saying it would appear the way 
severing developed along the way, that the local 
authorities are being more and more taken out of 
the equation.  And I think that's a serious attack 
on local government and it should be addressed.  
But the key point here, I think from a Wicklow 
perspective is infrastructure.   
So, we need, we really need to have a very important 
section or emphasis within the, what is going back, 
to highlight that, and while the executive, who are 
mostly, who are all professional individuals, 
addressing this kind of activity, rather than just 
doing it yourselves and then individual 
counsellors who have certain levels of expertise 
or skill sets in different areas, it would be much 
stronger if the submission was going in as combined 
submission from the executive with the members.  
So, we're all fighting the same battle and pushing 
the same boat.  So, I would strongly recommend 
that. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  Just briefly, I'd like to 
compliment the members from this council who 

succeeded in having the N81 inserted in the draft 
plan, and on the link of the R747 to the M9, that 
important link in south-west Wicklow they'd been 
included, and I would like to emphasise that they 
don't get excluded in the final version.  So, we 
want to make absolutely sure and put emphasis on 
that, that Westside of the county is not completely 
ignored.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Just before I let Sorcha in, a lot 
of works has gone into that from the regional county 
and Regional Assembly, and we have major changes 
like Cllr Timmins said, and we will look at the 
submission in regard to what the executive is 
saying, and taking into consideration what the 
counsellors have said here to see if it is possible 
at this late stage to get them in.  
But this is a recent plan, major infrastructural 
development that is going to be strategically 
targeted to particular areas of population, and 
various things like that, and almost everything, 
that has been mentioned here today has been brought 
up at the Regional Assembly over months and months 
of discussing on this as well.   
But there are areas that need clarification, and 

Sorcha has stated there's a number of areas, that 
certainly I would be very keen to bring them up, 
the next meeting of the assembly is on the 15th, 
but in the submission they have to be in by the 23rd 
and then submissions are discussed on the 15th and 
certainly, I would certainly be very much 
appreciative of getting the submission from the 
executive and obviously having a look at it with 
our fellow colleagues on the assembly doing what 
we can to make sure that it they're included in the 
plan.  But there's significant changes in it, from 
Wicklow's point of view, compared to what it 
started out at. Sorcha. 
SORCHA: Just to repeat something that the 
Cathaoirleach said, we bear in mind this is 
strategic and regional plan, and if you go in with 
a wish list of all Wicklow projects they're not 
going to be put in there, because with you' dealing 
with twelve local authorities, who all have a wish 
list, so we have to focus on the key strategic 
projects.  And push for the key strategic elements 
we want included in this plan.   
For the most part the plan will include principles 
that we will carry forward in our county plan, and 

in terms of getting funding for projects, I 
suppose, it is important that projects are listed 
in the regional plan, the bigger strategic projects 
we look for major funding, but a local road 
improvement isn't listed, doesn't mean there will 
never be funding for it, there's more funding for 
things less strategic, so we have to keep focusing 
on the strategic aspects of the plan.   
Just in terms of all the other bodies that do plans, 
whether that be Irish water, or tourism bodies, 
they all have their own plans, and the regional team 
are keen not to do an alternative tourism plan than 
the tourism bodies are doing, because what would 
be the point of that?    
So, while tourism is mentioned it is kind of 
mentioned that there are other bodies that do 
tourism plans and we will compliment them and 
support them but they're not trying to write a 
tourism plan because this is not a tourism plan.  
Similarly, water investment infrastructure Irish 
water there do strategic investment plan, but they 
will be guided by the principles of the regional 
plan, so we have to be cautious about where we pitch 
our submission, if we start listing everything, we 

lose our effectiveness.   
I'll go through some of the questions.  In terms 
of making a combined submission, if we can, we will, 
but unfortunately, like even from listening to you 
today, there isn't a meeting of minds from all of 
you, bi-about what you want to see in the regional 
plan, so it is difficult to do a plan that is 
speaking in one voice, when you don't agree, 
necessarily, always with each other's points of 
view, so that's one of the reasons why we often do 
it as separate submission.  
But we will look at the points to see if that's be 
to. A couple of you mentioned that, it doesn't seem 
Wicklow is getting a lot out of the plan, it is a 
regional plan, and if you do a search for the word 
"Louth" or "Kildare" it is as mentioned as many 
times as Wicklow, so they're trying to avoid it 
being a county, a lot of the focus on the county 
but looking at it as a region.  Cllr Mitchell you 
raised transport issues and again, the crossover 
there with the NTA strategy and regional strategy 
and I suppose we need to be cautious how to pitch 
the submission, the regional team so far have been 
saying the transport strategy has been developed 

by the NTA, but yet the acts, say the NTA have to 
have regard to regional plan and vice versa, keep 
it at strategic level, but if there's new projects 
that have never been on the radar of the NTA or not 
been feasible, that may lose effectiveness in 
getting the projects we do want.  In terms of west 
Wicklow, I agree, there's little on west Wicklow, 
there's little on north Kildare and south Kildare, 
there's very little on everywhere except can he 
growth towns and lots of principles. 
So, we'll have a look at, if we can bring in more 
emphasis or more mentions of west Wicklow and south 
Wicklow, because there's few mentions of Arklow, 
in terms of Greystones it is hard to snow whether 
this is better for Greystones or worse, the current 
plan Greystones is designated as growth centre.  
At the moment it is not in the draft regional plan, 
it is a town, that existing in the Metropolitan 
area.  And that's about it.  
That's all it says for it, so it doesn't have a 
particular designation, and in our county plan, we 
will have to determine what the status of 
Greystones will be, but it does have the heightened 
status because it is in the Metropolitan area.  

So, it has that going for t but again, it is a 
decision for us so make at a later stage, so that's 
the point I was trying to raise at the beginning 
of the presentation, it leaves a lot for us to 
decide later on and in some areas, it is not clear 
what we have to do. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  It is strategic number one 
recommendation for that.  Which is, that never 
happened before.  That's why.  
SORCHA:  In terms of the site, as part of the 
Metropolitan Area Regional Plan, the team asked us 
what are the key strategic sites in Bray and 
Greystones in housing or employment?  And both of 
them, and we took the strategic sites to be the 
large-scale sites so in terms of Bray, we 
identified the Bray Golf Course and Fassaroe as 
being vital in terms of housing.  Greystones 
there's housing sites but none of the scale of 
somewhere like Bray golf course or Fassaroe so in 
Greystones it would be better to prioritise 
employment site.  So, keep the numbers of sites 
small so we get more emphasis on them.  So that's 
the strategy with regard to the IDA site. 
I think I'm nearly there. 

Cllr Murphy with regard to Arklow, completely agree 
with you there, we should put in submission about 
selecting the assets, if investment has been made 
or about to be made, then, that investment would 
be wasted if the towns aren't designated for some 
kind of growth, if it is not the same level of growth 
as previously, but we will make a strong submission 
on that. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I brought that a number of times 
because of the sewage situation they didn't want 
to discuss it, but obviously, I would say this is 
on stream within two years and we have to be 
prepared with that in the plan, they have accepted 
that as well. 
SORCHA:  With Cllr, White Horse Woods PowerPoint 
with ICT sector and I mentioned we would like to 
put forward the film sector, that's a good point 
and commuter survey shown that, so I can work with 
economic development team who are here listening 
to your point to add more on working submission on 
that.  And then finally, Cllr Matthews, you 
mentioned about funding, and how do we apply for 
different funds, the two funds that have been 
funding has been released as far as you are been 

regeneration fund, I don't think there's a call yet 
for the climate fund but I'm not 100% sure on that. 
>>:  We weren't successful on that one, but we were 
successful on the urban one but haven't results of 
the rural one. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  These were schemes, there will 
be applications every year, but we will learn each 
time, the guidelines for each application process, 
the forms are detailed and difficult to complete 
actually so it is an area all local authorities 
should improve their capacity in filling in these 
forms and knowing what needs to be in them, but we 
will keep working on that.  With regard to some of 
the transport project you mentioned the 
electrification of rail and DART underground, we 
will, I think make a strong submission with regard 
to investment with rail infrastructure south of 
Bray and I think it is absolutely vital.  But we 
have to deal with this, problem, we're going to hit 
with, which takes primacy, NTA or regional plan?  
And we will always push, you know this from regional 
years, regional takes primacy, but we keep hitting 
on the wall, but we'll keep pushing on that.  I 
don't know whether Sean or Frank wants to come in.  

I answered that.  
>>:  Fundamentally, when we come to ... 
(inaudible) 
Interview or when we come to review our county 
development plan and core strategy, I think the 
transfer of growth to the wider Metropolitan area 
will be key to it, because that will determine what 
pressure is on us, to distribute the population 
that we have, if we get a chunk of population from 
the metropolitan area that takes the pressure off 
us and allows us to grow our towns, so, we have in 
the submission, we've saw clarity on that, and 
hopefully get it because that will be crucial to 
our own core strategy which will start this year.  
CLLR BEHAN:  Have we given up the ghost of looking 
at a Luas from Fassaroe?  
>>:  You mention it had earlier, we can take that 
as ... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Did we put that in the submission, 
I would be very supportive of that? We're moving 
on. 
>>:  References to Rosslare corridor.  
SORCHA:  Submission that we're working on at the 
moment, we intend to put that quite a bit of 

emphasis on that.  Both in terms of economic 
corridor and rail and road infrastructure along 
that corridor, in terms of what - you asked whether 
there's anything in the southern regional plan 
about that, and they do actually have a strong 
policy on it, which is, it's on a section, 3.8 of 
the southern plan, develop connection to Dublin 
Belfast corridor in connection with eastern and 
Midlands assembly, and relevant public bodies with 
extended corridor from Gorey and Wexford, as key 
locations in the corridor, that's in the southern 
plan, so they have that clearly, they have a couple 
of other policies, actually similar to that, so 
they have more in the southern plan, about this 
corridor than in our plan.   
Now, we have mentioned it, to the regional team at 
one of the workshops they had, and they're open to 
that, the idea, about you we have to keep pushing 
on the open door. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  There's significant support in 
the Regional Assembly for this, this wasn't brought 
up, until we brought it up in Wicklow, I brought 
it up and sided it, inward to the status, there was 
a route going from Belfast to Rosslare, and then 

suddenly the emphasis was on Dublin to Belfast and 
with Brexit and everything else, and the use of 
Rosslare, obviously as the one of the Euro routes 
directly in Europe, I felt this was a weakness in 
it, and, because it had been in the national 
planning framework, they wouldn't allow us to put 
in a proposal to make it part of the Euro route but 
we got it in through a different section, in regard 
to prioritising the route from Dublin to Rosslare.  
And since then, Wexford have come on stream as well.  
And also I believe in the latest submissions I 
believe Fingal in Dublin recommended there should 
be a Euro route from Dublin as well, so that's 
important from Wicklow's point of view, and 
Wexford's point of view as well and this will be 
pushed, pushed very strongly, but the reason they 
wouldn't, upgrade it to a Euro route was the fact 
it hadn't been in the national planning framework 
and that's something might have to happen at 
Government level.  OK. 
  
Thank you very much.  OK.  Liam is next.  While 
Liam is coming up here, there's a couple of items 
to note.  18, is just to note the local government, 

and the services, got their annual declarations 
they have to get in. 
MS GALLAGHER:  In relation to that, the local 
elections disclosure of expenditure and donations 
that has to be in by 31st January, and annual 
declaration form, 28th of February. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  So we'll leave that then.  And is 
there agreement on the taking in charge of Carrig 
Mill estate in Greystones, 
CLLR FORTUNE:  There is, and basically, the 
council here, and they're happy for it to go ahead 
subject to the boundary being sorted out as they 
have discussed, the boundaries need a lot of work 
and it is agreed that work will be done, I think 
we have a bond as well.  So, based on subject to 
... 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Yes absolutely. 
CLLR WALSH:  I'd like to second that, there is a 
number of outstanding issues and we have discussed 
them at the time.  But, consultation of the 
developers so there's no reason why ... 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Is that agreed then?  OK, agreed 
right.  Back to 15. 

LIAM:  Thank you very much for the opportunity to 
talk about GDPR I'm sure it is a topic that is very 
current and very much for over the last while.  I 
think people when they hear about GDPR they think 
about a new legislative framework introduced 
twelve months ago.  But, history of EU data 
protection goes back to the 50s when there was 
concern privacy, and this came out in the Europe 
European Union treaty, article 108, eight 
principles for protecting personal data.  Again, 
that comes all the way through into 1980s, when we 
had our initial data protection legislation, right 
up to 2003, so this is something that has been very 
much to the forefront in everything you have done 
as elected members and everything we as the 
executive has done as well. 
And one of the biggest changes then, one of the 
consultations of legislation, in 2016, the GDPR was 
introduced and that was given a two-year 
implementation plan.  Given two years before it 
was implemented.  But, that two years afforded 
local authorities, data controllers and 
processors, the opportunity to develop their 
compliance with GDPR. 

And that has come into effect since 25th of May 2018 
and that's the one a lot of people feel is important 
from a data protection perspective 
These, the eight rules of data protection, 
whichever review business one of you knows, every 
one of you has seen, ever review business one of 
you have been observing over the last, since your 
election as public representatives.  This is 
something, that, it happens, it happens in the 
course of your daily business.  Everything you 
don't if collecting data for various purposes, you 
collect it for your representational function, to 
make representations to the council, to canvas 
which is allowed all that sort of stuff.   
You have a very good approach then in terms of data 
security.  It is not something that you will sell 
datasets to other organisations.  And again, a lot 
of this is when you look at Facebook cases and 
Twitter cases and all that kind of stuff, there's 
a greater awareness, but this is stuff we have been 
doing, and you have been doing, all the time.  The 
GDPR the main point of GDPR, and they're kind of, 
these are dates of where we are and what we have 
done, but, what it does, it is personal data must 

not only be protected it must be seen to be 
protected so there's an onus on you, in terms of 
data protection.   
There's a new process for mandatory breach 
notifications so that in the past, you could get 
away with, a later process for breach notification, 
but now there's a legal onus on you, as soon a you 
become aware of the breach, you must notify the data 
protection commissioner, there's a new process 
called data protected processes, and then there's 
the appointment of a mandatory data officer who 
must have appropriate knowledge and training and 
again.  
This is a new part of the GDPR because it 
recognitions the importance of personal data, but 
it also recognised how important it is, that you 
can conduct your business, that the local authority 
can conduct its business, and that the person's 
personal data is protected.   
And then, one of the big ones really, I suppose is 
the right to compensation in the event of a data 
breach.  There is, there is the provision of law 
for come ten pen says to the individual and 
financial penalties if the doesn't adhere to GDPR.  

Sorcha had twelve chapters, the GDPR has eleven 
chapters, 99 articles and 173 recitals, but chapter 
four is important from how to conduct business, we 
have controller and processor obligations, 
security of personal data, privacy and code of 
conduct.   
So, the eight core rules of data protection, this 
is the real meat of what is covered by GDPR.  And, 
you know, everything there from security of 
personal data, they're all covered. 
Now a very good resource for anybody with an 
interest in this topic is the website of the data 
protection commissioner.  And it's, this was a new 
website launched just before Christmas.  And it 
was kind of as part of GDPR implementation, the data 
protection commissioner refined the website 
itself, and kind of tailored it so that people there 
who are seeking answers can go for the individuals, 
for organisations, for guidance and law, news and 
media and pre-GDPR and there's a huge wealth of 
information there about it. 
Rights of individuals:  And again, we go back, we 
start with the rights of individuals personal data 
is a person's personal rights, or personal 

property.  And we as local authority and we as 
working in the public sector are very aware and have 
to make sure to protect it all the way through.   
 
A lot of the stuff there, in terms of consent, in 
terms of why we are collecting data, if we're 
collecting data, just for the sheer hell of it, we 
can't do that, because that's not necessary for the  
performance of a function.  And that's why the a 
this is why GDPR has refined the whole data 
protection system.  It has codified what we want 
to do in terms of personal data and how we protect 
it, and how benign and keep it secure.  And under 
the rights of individuals, we have there's, 
particular, specific document, dealing with 
specifically with the rights of an individual, it 
is a long document but concentrates on the data we 
collect, why we collect it, and how we use T and 
how we mind it, and handle it from the personal 
point of view. 
 
There's also, as part of this, the responsibilities 
of organisations under GDPR and again, they come 
back to the same sort of conditions, and same sort 

of obligations on us as a local authority in terms 
of data security.   
Again I'm not going to go through those, but when 
we go to the guidance side of it, we have first of 
all the direct marketing, and the direct marketing 
electorate and canvassing data marketing, there's 
specific documents here that deal with canvassing, 
deal with the reason behind it, canvassing, and 
guidance for what you do in terms of your 
constituency offices, if terms of the personal data 
you collect, how you interact with the local 
authorities and so on. 
And in December, just gone the data protection 
commissioner issued three new documents in 
relation to the elected members.  The first one 
there, is elected representatives, GDPR and the 
Data Protection Act, this again, it recognised the 
fundamental role that the elected members have in 
terms of collection and minding personal data for 
your consultants, or for your constituents.  It 
recognises that, and again, you saw today, you're 
dealing with personal cases but you're also dealing 
with national policy issues, you're dealing with 
stuff that can have a huge impact on people into 

the future.   
And this is why kind of the importance it comes back 
to personal data, people you're dealing with, 
they're personal information, how you have, and the 
responsibility's on you in terms of minding it, and 
how you protect it, and how you use it. 
 
No, the middle one there then, is tunes offices and 
best practice, again, there's a wealth of 
information there, but this sets out, it identifies 
and targets specific interest groups that you may 
have.  Say for example, voluntary workers who have 
doing canvassing on your behalf, what information 
can you give them?  How do you protect them?  And 
protect the personal data that's coming from your 
constituents?  You also have staff, staff working 
in your office, how do you actually manage what your 
staff do?  You have a responsibility as a data 
controller, in terms of staff in your office, what 
they do, is somebody selling all your, all the data 
that you're collecting and your clients, in Google 
Analytica, you're collecting personal data about 
services made available.  And some of the cases can 
be quite, quite important and personal to people. 

 
Then, you know, you need to understand the data, 
understand data security, and the one, the one of 
the major things about it, it is risk-based 
approach.  If say for example, you have a schedule 
of where, now, I think there's an election coming 
up this year, but schedule of where people are going 
to be canvassing for you, if that's lost by a 
constituency worker, maybe not that important, 
but, if you have a case file of personal data that 
you've been making representations in terms of the 
housing function, there's a different story of the 
data you can lose and this is the GDPR, risk-based 
access, and in terms of access, and accountability 
and subject to access requests, people under GDPR 
are entitled to get, to find out what information 
you hold with them, but also, get that information 
back and have a right of, have that corrected.  And 
all of these put an onus on you as public 
representatives. 
 
The other side then, is the guidelines on 
processioning your personal data, and again, this 
is in terms of the data you collect and services 

that you're working on behalf of people, what 
information you have, are the people happy with the 
information you have about them?  And that you're 
sharing with maybe the local authority or maybe 
with another service provider in terms of that 
information?  As I say, there's a lot of stuff 
there, we could go for a while.  Now ... 
But we won't.  
Again then, there are specific documents there in 
the guidance notes for data controllers, when you 
go down the list, you've everything from backup 
systems, data security, CCTV, guidance documents 
and marketing employment, medical education, all 
these have specific guidance notes there for 
themselves. 
Now, what I've been saying, in terms of the guidance 
notes, where a public representative makes a 
representation on half of the constituent, the 
organisation can generally assume the constituent 
has given consent.  And this is one of the areas 
where, Wicklow County Council, and you as members, 
have done quite an amount of work about this in the 
past, Wicklow County Council, generally accepts 
you're acting in bona fide in terms of, but there 

are certain cases we have to make sure to protect 
you and ourselves in terms of the type of reps, are 
you happy the member of public, that they're happy 
that either you or us have their personal details?  
And this is why, we have kind of certain checks this 
relation to that. 
And again, this is again, in terms of security and 
access to information and terms of your staff, you 
have very specific obligations for data protection 
under data protection legislation.  Now the AILG 
have done a lot of work recently, both in terms of 
training for elected members and in terms of 
liaising with the CCMA and data protection 
commissioner in terms of dividing their policy, and 
if, people are interested, there was a specific 
training session provided by the IALG for the 
members which dealt with GDPR. 
The personal data as well, personal data is any data 
which can identify a living being, but also, any 
data which in conjunction with anything else can 
identify a living person.   
So, this is it is not just limited to Liam 
Fitzpatrick, address, date of birth, occupation, 
but it could actually be, personal data relate to 

Liam Fitzpatrick and employee of Wicklow County 
Council, might not be named but the data in terms 
itself Cllr Pat Fitzgerald could be personal data, 
even though it is anonymised.  
So, again, it is something we have to be careful 
of in terms of information that is out there. 
Section 39 is the general one about the making 
representations and what's OK in terms of your 
representational role and dealing with people.  
Again, the standard principles of data protection, 
the eight rules of data protection, in terms of you 
know, you seen them at the first slide or second 
lied and they're very much current all the way 
through.  Section 40 is the processing a of 
personal and this is where you receive data and it 
is lawful to have representations of the general 
public, but you do your risk-based assessment of 
the type of information and whether it is 
appropriate how you have it how you mind it and deal 
with the local authority in terms of the data. 
 
Now, as I mentioned earlier, the IALG are doing work 
with the data protection commission CCMA and data 
officers group to actually look at the policies for 

your relationship with the public, your 
relationship with the local authority, and how what 
personal information you have and how it is shared.   
 
Looking at developing privacy statements say for 
your own information in terms of if somebody 
provides you with information, you're in a position 
to tell them that, this information is only going 
to be used for this purpose, it is not going to be 
sold on or used for any other purpose.  Proposed 
council data protection, the AILG and CCMA are at 
early stage of finalisation of this, so, this is 
something which, if there are concerns that you 
have in terms of this, it will be brought through 
to the AILG, or through the Chief Executive in terms 
of managing that. 
  
This is the consent form that we currently have in 
place in Wicklow County Council, this again, it 
kind of reflect the data protection implications 
of having and holding and storing and making reps, 
we would consider that we will keep this in place, 
until such time the AILG and CCMA and Data 
Protection Commissioner have final, I see 

automated discussions in terms of final policies.  
One of the other things is from GDPR the Chief 
Executive established the GDPR governance group to 
look at Wicklow County Council how it functions, 
what privacy policies we have here, and how it goes 
you know, our own privacy policies, our own data 
storage, data security policies and how they mean 
to facilitate you working, protect personal data 
and make sure that people can be happy all personal 
data is protected. 
 
That was community-based CCTV, again there's 
particular set of I thought I had taken that one 
out - data protection impact assessment is this is 
where I'm saying, about going through the system 
of data protection impact assessment - it is a 
continuous process of evaluation of risks, looking 
at with a personal data you hold, what you're doing 
with it, and now one of the onuses, DPIA here was 
in terms of CCTV in a public area.  
 
And, it goes through the processes of you know, what 
is the impact?  Who does it impact?  How does it 
impact them?  How do we mitigate the effects on 

people?  And that's the data impact assessment, 
all the services as we in Wicklow County Council 
will be subject to the DDIA process, so we can be 
sure we protect personal data, we can be sure people 
know how it is protected and do a continuous review 
what we're doing and how we go through it.  That's 
the last slide.  Thank you. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Observation, you're actually, Liam it 
is very good presentation but the council is 
completely beyond their powers on consisting with 
that form, what the data protection officer said, 
there is, should be an assumption by the 
management, that we're writing in good faith when 
we're making representations and only in cases when 
you have a doubt.   
I'm saying today that that form should be 
withdrawn, and if you have difficulty with a 
particular representation you are entitled to ask 
us, have we permission, it is completely 
unacceptable to continue with that form, as far as 
I'm concerned, and we should abandon it from now.  
That's my proposal.  No right to do it.  None. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Like it is late in the evening now.  
I'd like the officials to have a look at this, we'll 

get information on it.  Cllr Curran the form that 
we've been using will be rolled out to all local 
authorities now, its discussed at national level 
and something similar will come as template all 
local authorities will use in particular with 
planning and housing. 
>>:  This is the whole idea, the form protects you 
as an elected representative, it protects the 
member of the public.  But it also protects ... 
CLLR BEHAN:  You are making an assumption we're 
making representative, I don't care what the chairs 
group has decided to do …  
>>:  This is the AILG. 
CLLR BEHAN:  You think they have been rolled out 
across the whole country, it doesn't have to be 
rolled out in this county, we should object to it, 
we should not have to accept this. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Before I'd even accept that, we 
would have to have a full meeting with the council 
with regard to that, if that's what you want 
counsellor. 
CLLR BEHAN:  What's this? 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  There's members here who don't 
even know, I know it is on the agenda. 

CLLR WALSH:  With relation to going through this 
I did think the session after the presentation, I 
did explain to them what we're doing this with 
relation to the data protection and the form, the 
in case I got these forms, were going to be 
introduced across the board with the various 
councils, and this was something we're going to, 
that's just, that was the message delivered at that 
particular session. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I think we'll leave it.  Right OK.  
Going to move on.  Thanks Liam again, you put a lot 
of work into that, but we're gone, crazy in this 
country, in regard to this section, and regards to 
this general protection, it is absolutely 
ridiculous.  It gets to a stage you won't be able 
to represent anybody in the place.  I know that's 
the point I'm making, this is coming on high as 
well.  We're moving on. Right the 16. 
LIAM: Waiting on slides. OK, it is late in the 
evening so I'm going to keep this brief, it's a 
quick run - to give an overview, the scheme is the 
main M11 and N11 from junk 4, to junction 14, 22 
kilometres, 40 junctions, 33 structures, 160 
million provisional budgets at this stage.  That's 

an overview of the bodies driving this and in the 
middle, there, you have TTI, the sanctuary 
authority, sanctioning the funding the scheme is 
run by withdrawn and we have a section 85 about 
Dunlaoire, already, what's has been identified as 
a significant challenge on this scheme will be the 
environmental aspects of the scheme and we've SPAs, 
SACs, and heritage areas so they're listed on 
there. 
To date to give up-to-date where we're at and what 
has been done on today's scheme, we have part A 
planning process which was approved here last year 
for the first part of the advanced part of work at 
Kilmac service road, we've had a section 85 signed 
with Dun Laoghaire, Rathdown county, the engineers 
were appointed last November, and we had a public 
consultation day held in the Glenview Hotel on the 
11th of December and there was almost 200 people 
attended that.  And there's a website, launched at 
and that's to keep people up-to-date as the project 
develops.  So, what are we at?  We've approval at 
the moment to advance phase one to four of the 
project and these phases are set out in the TII 
project management guidelines.  So, essentially, 

phase one, commenced in November and that's the 
priority of that is to identify the need for the 
scheme and establish the structure and how it will 
be developed.   
Phase two then is the option selection, so look at 
all options, and as to what can be done to deal with 
the issues that have been identified and then 
preferred option is chosen.   
Phase three is the design and environmental 
evaluation, and at the end of all that, we have a 
design report and environmental report which will 
be prepared for statutory process.  And strategic 
projects process is presenting the findings of all 
that work to planning authority which in this case 
will An Bord Pleanala.  As mentioned earlier by the 
Chief Executive, our allocations from TII have been 
announced earlier, an issue will be receiving 
almost 9.3 million, so we received significant 
support from TII.  Just, I know if you can see the 
overhead, briefly what we got is 2.5 million for 
Kilmac slip road scheme which will be onsite this 
error, a million provided to advance the main 
scheme, consultancy fees and work that is 
happening, we've had significant funding for N81, 

for the Knock Row bends and we got funding for a 
number of overways, there are four projects, 
similar to the Knock Row Bends, which we've been 
given like the N11 Phases 1-4, so that is 
significant, four schemes on the N81 and that's 
essentially it, any questions?  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Any questions. 
No, listen, we'll have further updates as we go 
along with regard to that.  All right. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thank you very much.  It is nice 
to see something happening, the commuter survey 
demonstrated how essential it is, I'm wondering do 
we have any dates for say the start of phase two, 
or is that still quite fluid? 
CLLR MITCHELL:  It is good to see this, taking 
place, one thing that is interesting, going to 
public consultation day, was we're looking for 
alternatives to the roads, better rail service or 
express bus service, it is important if we put our 
other in in terms of wanting those things as well.  
So, it is not just a follow-on study to the one 
finished about two years ago.  
>>: Phase two of this particular year, we got to 
get through the phase one.  We have indicative 

programme in place here, and, all four phases we 
would expect to have completed by the end of 2020.  
So, it was something like, if I see it 59 weeks to 
this phase. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  OK fine, we're on to 17. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I suppose the first thing I'm 
wondering why I'm getting myself all worked up and 
excited, I seem to be, there doesn't seem to be much 
concern about it, but let me make a few points that 
I feel very serious about it, so, my basic question 
would be does anyone care?  I believe seriously, 
we should care.  I mean the UK Government 
identified up to eight locations for construction 
of nuclear plants by 2025, and five of these will 
be built on what they describe as the Irish Sea 
coast.  And their principle findings are, I think 
this is serious, given prevailing wind direction 
in Ireland, radioactive contaminants in the air, 
either from routine operation of the proposed 
nuclear power points or accidental releases, will 
look at the words "will most often be transported 
away from Ireland" when you move further down, 
there's other points, move down on routine 
releases, as these nuclear power plants have not 

been built yet it was necessary to make a number 
of assumptions, regarding the time of reactors and 
number of reactors to be developed upon, upper 
bound assumptions were used in the assessment, 
whatever that means as to the amount of radioactive 
that could be released per year during routine 
operation.   
Now I think this is very iffy the way it is 
described.  At the last meeting I highlighted 
concerns I had, and I also highlighted concerns 
that I was contacted by a constituent who would be 
more knowledgeable about that than I am.  And I 
asked that we would, I address it had to the Chief 
Executive and I felt this was so important, that 
we need today have a full meeting of executive and 
members, and put in a submission to this, from us 
all kind, I know the quick answer is if members want 
to put their submission, off you go and do t I know 
that.   
But I think, it is more important than that.  And 
to be honest, you know, we've, there has been, 
someone will also say there's been nuclear plant 
in Wales for years and now that's closed down et  
cetera, but we also know, there is serious concerns 

along the east coast and has been for decades with 
pockets of people with getting certain cancers and 
different cancers, and there's been the concern 
that it is coming in the prevailing winds in some 
instances, now that, that has been discussed as 
many papers written on t I just think this is 
probably I said this at the last meeting, as far 
as this is concerned, this is one of the most 
serious issues to be facing this country for a long 
time.   
Not only will it affect the east coast but the whole 
country.  They're talking about the area of 
nuclear plants along the thing, we're told, they're 
great, modern, they've done this, and done that, 
about if you read the principle findings, when they 
talk about it the prevailing wind direction, will 
most often be transported away from Ireland, what 
the bloody hell does that mean? I can only describe 
that.  Again, Chair what I'm asking for, I'm 
pushing a border up a hill, I'm asking that, if 
necessary, let's convene a meeting on it but, I said 
the last day that there will probably expertise 
inhouse than around the table here. We sit down 
collectively and put together a submission to this 

particular project, because it has massively 
implications for this country, and it may not 
affect anyone in this room but it could very well 
have severe effects for the future, we know what 
happened in Russia, and the fallout is still going 
on.  We see it in media and programmes even to this 
day, I feel, if we as a body, don't react to this, 
and don't put in a substantial submission on it, 
I don't think we're behaving properly.  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thanks Cllr, Cllr Fortune is right 
to raise this matter, it's a see serious matter 
potentially, however as you said at the start of 
the meeting, it looks like the developer has pulled 
out of it, and it is not confirmed yet, but it is 
strongly suggested they're going to put out of it.   
However, I still think the proposal is still live 
in that another developer could step in, but I 
wonder if I could ask Cllr Fortune, he obviously 
read this document and seems to have background and 
knowledge of it, would you circulate any submission 
you've put together so far. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I haven't, sorry, so far, but, Ms 
Gallagher, has on the 20th of December.  It was a 
very good document that has a lot of detail in it. 

CLLR MATTHEWS:  Sorry, I thought you had that 
information from the document, if you put in 
submission, I would be willing to put my name to 
it, if you were willing to do that council later. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm not going to cut across. 
CLLR WINTERS:  I do actually think we should put 
in a submission as local authority rather than as 
individual councillors. 
I know this particular plant may not go ahead but 
it may be developed again in the future, or they 
may get a different person to develop it.  I do 
think it should be on record, every time one of 
these proposals go ahead, what the views of this 
local authority are, and I do think that we should 
prepare a submission.  Although the prevailing 
winds might most of the time go away from Ireland, 
the water flows, ebbs over and back every day and 
some of the nuclear fallout from Japan has been 
found in the west coast of America, it travelled 
four, five, six thousand miles and gone as far as 
Alaska, it has been detected.   
So even if the wind was going the wrong direction, 
the water will always come this way along the east 
coast. I also, see that the UK are have allowed 

fracking and fracking actually leads to, or 
anecdotally, I'm no expert, but anecdotally it can 
lead to a larger number of small earthquakes and 
the last thing we would need with a nuclear plant 
is earth quake, so it would be extremely important 
we make a submission against the development of 
nuclear action along the east coast the west coast 
of England. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'm going to let the key executive 
in, we're coming up to 5.15, I will let the Chief 
Executive in. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  I propose we put in a submission as 
I outlined. 
Chief Executive:  There isn't expertise inhouse, 
you referred to the two document by the 
radiological Institute of Ireland and they looked 
at the, your references, the proposed nuclear power 
plants in UK and implications for Ireland and that 
sets out the impact in terms of routine operation, 
what they're saying, there's no measurable 
radiological impact, whether you say it what you 
agree with it or not the severe accident scenario, 
which is different occurrences, the one in 50,000 
and 33 million each year, the food controls, 

agricultural protective measures would be required 
in Ireland to reduce exposure to the population, 
to mitigate the potential and long-term affects, 
that's the one with lower probability.   
The one with 33 million, chance of staying indoors, 
in general the accidents higher impact in Ireland 
is the ones that least likely to occur.  It said. 
the discharges to the Irish Sea, found large 
release of radioactive equivalent to that of the 
Japan accident.  Resulting in radiation of people 
who eat large quantities of fish and shellfish 
would be less than the radiation does for the 
public.  It is a long and detailed report and 
that's the typed thing, it followed up then, you 
got this as well, the ESRI, the potential economic 
impact of nuclear impact.  If there was a severe 
accident, the worst-case scenario would be 163 
billion approximately that's the cost of the Irish 
economy, taking into account reputational damage 
and damage to food et cetera and they go through 
the different scenarios, scenario one when there's 
no contamination, four billion and scenario two and 
three, that's the best advice, and you've been 
given a copy of that.  So ... 

CLLR WHITMORE:  We are a council in Wicklow and we 
have the absolute, not only, we have a moral 
responsibility and responsibility to the people of 
Wicklow to make our opinions known, whether or not 
we have expertise, we can have a read through the 
documents, we may not be nuclear physicists but we 
can have an opinion on it.   
There's a greater risk post-Brexit, that the sort 
of controls and regulations and in nuance on the 
UK having these sorts of facilities, you know what, 
will our input be on this, so as Cllr Fortune said, 
we need to get our machine on this, on the record, 
we need to represent our county with this record. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  A proposal. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  First of all, is there a date in 
this?  Cllr Matthews said this is not going to go 
ahead.  Just wait a second, it is not going to go 
ahead, so we put in an observation on something that 
is eventually not going to go ahead. 
We do? 
>>:  Yeah. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  That something that won't go 
ahead.  We don't have expertise inhouse, that's 
the chief expertise, 

>>:  I mentioned some of them, if there's a severe 
accident, there's severe impact and economic 
impact as well.  
CLLR FORTUNE:  That ignores the comment when they 
talk about natural or accidental releases, will 
most often be transcript away from Ireland, that 
totally ignores that, it is contradiction in terms, 
and all I'm saying, if we don't have the expertise 
and picking up what Cllr Matthews was saying, some 
will be better at writing up like this than some 
of us, if somebody drafts something, I will put the 
Tom Fortune on it, and circulate it. I would at 
least do that, as far as I'm concerned, CEO with 
all due respect of agenda, to me this is the most 
important thing on the agenda, and here we have a 
handful of people on the tail end of the meeting.  
This is my opinion. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  This is outside of our control and 
there's a number of items there, I can tell you now, 
that are very important for Wicklow, and so 
important, that most of the chamber wanted to 
comment on them.  Unlike this one, to be fair, 
like, very few, twelve or fourteen people left the 
chamber when they knew this was coming up, that was 

how important some people felt it was.  We're 
talking about the importance of this. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  So important, we put it on number 
17 on the agenda. 
>>:  I can only assume you're objecting on this 
with the negative findings in the report, if 
there's severe accident there's impacts on food and 
human life and economic impact. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  If you look at the wait it is 
written, you're intelligent, you would have to 
query the way it is written. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  He will with he a draft it up and 
send it to you, send it to all the members here.  
If there's any comment, if anyone has any comments 
to further add to it or anything like that, get in 
touch with the executive. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Submission is 26th isn't it. 
>>:  Yeah, Friday week isn't it yeah? 
>>:  Thank you very much I appreciate that. 
  
END OF MEETING 
