 
1
 
NON-VERBATIM TRANSCRIPT OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL 
MEETING, HELD ON MONDAY, JULY 1st 2019:  
 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon, everyone.   Good afternoon and 
you are all very welcome to our first full meeting of the Council. Just 
before we start, I note the induction day all the new members got their 
packs and what have you, I would draw everyone everyone's including 
the previous members to one of the things within the, the rules, it's a 
maximum of three minutes speaking per member on a topic okay and 
I am going to really try and enforce that.  
 
If you know something is on the agenda and you have read it and you want 
something to say on it, you should be able to prepare it and be able to say it 
within three minutes and obviously occasionally there will be things that will 
be beyond that, but it's as much as possible keep it to the three-minute 
limit. I would love it if we were finished, instead of running out of time, if we 
were always finished before time and we got through the agenda and that is 
what I want to try and do and I know all previous chairpersons have tried to 
do that, but it doesn't always work, but we will do our best.  
 
First, we are going to take votes of sympathy.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Okay, Joe Cleary, former GSS in the Tinahealy area. 
John Maher, brother of our colleague, Stephen Maher. For Geraldine, 
Forristal, Pheilam Byrne. For Margaret Messett, sister of our colleague 
and for Conor Teevan.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Councillor Fortune.  
CLLR FORTUNE: I would like to pass sympathy to the Byrne family in 
Greystones on the passing of their son, Pheilam in tragic 
circumstances. He was very involved in his local community our own 
GAA club and there was all kinds of activities in all areas, so I found 
out this morning, it's a very sad occasion, but I would like to pass on 
condolences.  
CLLR O'NEILL: I would like to ask sympathy to the people of 
Blessington to someone who lost their life tragically in Dublin last 
week. She was a great character in the town and a great person of 
work within the community, through the newsletter there every week 
in the church, she was very cared and she had three young children 
there, who are left now without a mother, so, I, on behalf of the 
people of West Wicklow would like to offer our sympathies to the 
family.  
CLLR BLAKE: I would like to join with the members in condolence with 
Joe Cleary. Joe, apart from working in Wicklow County Council, he was 
also a great sportsman in his day, he won many hurling and handball 
titles from minor level up to senior, himself and Pat Leahy from Arklow 
had a great history together and won many all-Ireland titles in Croke 
Park in the 70s and 80s: 
CLLR DUNNE: I would like to reiterate it for Connor Teevan. He was a 
town councillor for 30 years so I would like to pass those condolences.  

 
2
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, to confirm and sign the minutes of the 
ordinary meeting Wicklow County Council held on Monday 29th of 
April. Proposal Gail Dunne and seconded by?   
CLLR O'NEILL: To confirm and sign the minutes of the annual meeting 
of Wicklow County Council held on Friday 7th of June, copied attached. 
Proposed by [INAUDIBLE] and seconded by councillor Gerry Walsh. 
Okay, to consider the proposal of the freehold interest in the property 
comprised, folio number WW32L being 14 Mellows Avenue you would 
all have got this notice circulated previously.  
CLLR BOURKE: I second it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Seconded by Cllr Bourke.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?   
>>: Agreed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Then to consider the proposal of the freehold 
interest in the property comprised in WW25753L in 1' Connell Terrace 
to Mr. Michael Russell and Kay Redmond personal representatives of 
proposed by Pat Fitzgerald and seconded by Sylvester Bourke.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To consider the disposal of the freehold interest in 
property Hawthorn, Tomacork to Mr. Aidan Kinsella proposed by 
Vincent Blake and seconded by Cllr Dermot O'Brien.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Is that agreed?  Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item number 6. To consider the report in 
accordance with Section 179 of the planning and development act as 
amended part 8 of the planning and development regulations for 
Glendalough, Laragh Visitor Access.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: So this is a project really that improves the visitor 
access and signage in and around Laragh and Glendalough. It's about 
pedestrian access, improving the aesthetics as you come into it. We 
are looking at this in conjunction with car parking. That is phase 1 and 
there is a multiagency group looking at this between ourselves and 
Failte Ireland and the OPW.  
 
Failte Ireland have approved for funding do with the strategy for visitor 
management and orientation plan for northern Wicklow, include 
Glendalough, Laragh, Rathdrum and right out to there, taking in the 
Blessington lakes. We are looking in phase 2, but looking at the wider area 
and they have permitted nearly 65,000 for funding for that strategy.   
 
The third part of that is we are sitting down and looking at a visitor centre 
and whether you have one or two and there is grants available from Failte 
Ireland, this is phase 1, if you like.  
>>: Right, so this is, this presentation is, this presentation 
summarises the feedback received from the public consultation that 
was done in relation to this scheme. The period was conducted up to 
12.00 noon on the 24th of June with the intention of obtaining the 
views of the public and all interested parties in design aspects of the 
speak. Wicklow County Council commissioned a high level review of 
access considerations in Glendalough, by publishing the report of 
visitor access arrangements in April 2012. The proposals confirmed the 

 
3
proposals in this report, conform with and support the policies and 
objectives of the Wicklow County Development Plans and 
supplementary the Glendalough Laragh tourism plan. This includes 
pedestrian modes focussing on the established key objectives. 
Laragh/Glendalough is an area of scenic archaeological and 
architectural importance: 
 
[ Presentation ]  
 
>>: That is an overview lay out of them. Anything in red is the 
junction we are proposing to do. The first one at the top is the 
Glendalough green Limes Junction and the petrol station and next you 
have the Wicklow Gap junction and then the visitor centre junction and 
then the junction, the works that go through Glendalough village. Just 
to give a couple of the, the more detailed design, that is the first one, 
the Glendalough Green Junction. You can see what we are doing is 
moving this zip road, there is a kind of a slip road between the R755 
and Military Road and we are trying to get that into one T junction that 
will be safe for pedestrians and slow traffic coming into the area and 
improve the public realm and the amenity of the area as well. People 
sit out with slower traffic going through and you will only have one line 
of traffic there as opposed to two. So it will make for a safer junction. 
Then we have the separate alignment junction. This is really tightening 
up the junction to make it a more public realm area, slowing traffic 
down and making it more accessible and safer for pedestrians and 
cyclist.  
 
Then the third is the petrol station. That is a pedestrian crossing point and 
slowing traffic down coming into that area and try to formalise the foot path 
through there, that the pedestrians will be able to see clearly where they are 
supposed to walk and cars will feel that as well. Then the next junction is 
Glendalough, the Wicklow Gap Junction, so this will be improvements which 
involve some land from the National Parks and Wildlife, this will make it 
easier for buses to manoeuvre at that junction. At the moment they are 
doing that turn in three or four manoeuvres, so this will mean they will be 
able do it in one manoeuvre, you won't have that backlog, it will help relieve 
the traffic congestion while you are waiting for buss to turn. The next 
junction is the new entrance at the OPW visitor car park. We are trying to 
create, this has been the real entry into Glendalough. I will show you 
pictures in a moment and it will look like a more impressive entranceway 
into that OPW centre and then you have works going through the village, 
which is really trying to improve the public realm going through the village, 
slowing traffic down and making it safe are for pedestrians and cyclists.  
 
Then, getting into some visuals of, to give you some visuals of it, the top is 
the existing and the bottom picture is the visual of what it would look like. It 
gives a sense of a slow traffic down, more public amenity area and the 
second one is McCoy's junction, same again, in terms of having it all car 
focussed, it's more pedestrian and public realm space that can be used. 
Then we have the petrol station at McCoy's, so it's more formalised for 

 
4
pedestrians and a greater sense of it's a pedestrian area rather than a 
car-enhanced area. That is just a picture of one of the Wicklow Gap Junction 
which shows that the, the widening out of that junction will make it ease 
area for the traffic to get through that, the buss in particular. Then the next 
junction is the entrance into the Glendalough lower car park, you can use 
that central island and it will make a more formal entrance to the OPW car 
park. Visitors will see it clearly that they are entering into a heritage area, 
not that Laragh is enhanced of what Glendalough is entering into and what 
will also be a benefit is that cars that are turning left into the Glendalough 
OPW car park, if it's full it will mean they can turn and go back, rather than 
clogging up traffic sitting there waiting to go in, they will be able to turn 
around again and hopefully, as the Chief Executive pointed out, what we will 
do is make Laragh within the hub so if you are turning back you have other 
areas to go to in the area. Not just heading back to the N11 again. Then the 
last one is the Glendalough village. It's just really improving public realm 
here and again people will be able to enjoy the public space.  
 
So, just moving on to the feedback that we received from the submissions. I 
received 35 submissions on public consultation. General support for making 
Laragh the visitor hush/base providing services and facilities for visitors to 
Glendalough and improving the visitor environment, but highlighting the 
need for a large visitor car park, which came across strong on the public 
consultation workshops we did and the submissions.  
 
[ PRESENTATION ]  
 
>>: So, hopefully that gives you a summary of what the submissions were 
and our responses to the same.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: John Snell.  
CLLR SNELL: I want to commend you and your team, first and 
foremost for going out into the community and engaging with the local 
residents and indeed the people who use Laragh and Glendalough the 
most. I was at that public meeting up in the centre and certainly they 
answered to best of their ability any queries and it's nice to see it 
reflected in the presentation today.  
 
I like to note in regard to going through item by item, the junction at the 
Wicklow Gap, Glendalough, I don't think is contentious at all and it's 
something that is widely supported by everyone in the community and 
indeed I would imagine everyone in the chamber here today, that is the 
R756 and the R757. I think that is something that needs to be welcomed 
and I know going back over ten years ago there was a priority list done of 
20 projects in the hub of Laragh and Glendalough because of the, I suppose 
the need for to make sure that visitors to the area, that they don't encounter 
what had been happening which is a lot of traffic congestion and I think this 
would be vital for people coming over the Wicklow Gap. So I don't think that 
is contentious at all, Martha.  
 
In regards to the Glendalough Visitor Centre and the entrance at the R757, I 
think it would be important and we all know there is an issue in regards to 

 
5
parking in Laragh/Glendalough and I would love to see that tackled in the 
near future, but today is not about that. We need to be restoring the right of 
way on to the main road rather than the right of way as currently into the 
car park. I would like to see that changed at some stage and I can't 
understand why it was changed. At McCoy's store and the location of the 
pedestrian crossing and again that would be brought back down to the 
Laragh side.  
>>: Yes.  
CLLR SNELL: I think that is something that the community are looking 
forward to, certainly people who live locally. It's just to note in regards 
to Lynham's Junction, I suppose this would have consumed a lot of the 
debate on the evening at the centre, when they are talking about 
changing the landscape outside Lynham's public house, it's more to do 
with the management issue than what you are presenting today in the 
situation where you have outer seating and chairs, that I suppose to 
many staff at night time and the evening time it's something that 
needs to be addressed perhaps more locally than here in the chamber, 
but certainly we have to be mindful that it is a residential area and we 
wouldn't want to be causing the residents who live there any untold 
hardship late into the early hours of the morning.  
 
I do have to put on record in regards to outside of the what was presented 
at that meeting and indeed today in regard to the roundabout is going to be 
going from outside of the two houses there. One of which have a special 
needs son who accesses the house, quite dangerous access in and out of 
that property on to the road. They don't have the capacity to turn a vehicle 
in the yard and as we know, that young man actually will be dropped off at 
the house by a bus and I know that you factored into that account and 
dialogued with the family, but just to let you know that is very important 
that that is accommodated in this plan.  
 
Secondly, in regards to the two houses, one of them houses is actually my 
inlaws and having frequented that house for almost two decades I can tell 
you that with the kerbing outside of those properties, traffic does tend to 
park on that and it's quite a high kerb, we are now going to be reducing it to 
the low kerbing to accommodate the bus and I welcome that, I think that is 
vital to this plan and again it's to do with the management of the cars 
parking outside there, we have to be very mindful that Laragh is an area 
that visitors attend all year around and whether they be on motorbikes or 
push bikes, or the hill walkers. They park all around there and again it's not 
to disturb the residents in that. They have to get about their daily lives, it's 
more down to management and I know you are mindful of that, but it's 
something I want to put on record.  
 
I suppose the contentious one and it's one you would be looking to make an 
amendment to would be the Glendalough Green and in regard to the 
movement of the time capsule and the drawing that was presented. The 
original drawing was about removing the time capsule and closing access to 
the Military Road. People saw that that was going to potentially cause issues 
and I think that we should put an amendment here today to that and have 

 
6
an it drawn, that is something I would like to recommend that the access 
record be reinstated as two-way traffic, single lane in front of the village 
green, access on to the R755. Time capsule will not be touched. This will 
reinstate the use of the Village Green as a roundabout and access for the 
larger timber lorries for the R755 towards Rathdrum, Laragh. I think it's very 
important that that particular junction that the new drawing would be 
adopted here today rather than what was presented at that public meeting 
and hopefully that could be put on the screen.  
>>: I brought some copies if anyone wants to have a look at it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: John Snell you were late at the beginning of the 
meeting, okay, no problem, what I said was I of going to enforce the 
three-minute rule so you are well over the three minutes now, so just 
wrap it up as soon as possible.  
CLLR SNELL: It's just to be honest, Cathaoirleach, I genuinely believe 
this should have been discussed at the Municipal District before full 
council chambers, but because of time constraints in regard to the 
monetary aspect of it, I am prepared to let it be discussed here, 
because it's very unfair on a lot of members here who have little or no 
interest in what is happening here, they don't understand, it's the first 
time they have heard of it.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Keep going.  
CLLR SNELL: As the only member in this chamber who was that at the 
public meeting, I believe I am entitled to speak on it, I don't want to 
go over and above, but I think it's important.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Keep going.  
CLLR SNELL: I think it's important. Are you making a proposal?  
CLLR SNELL: I am making that proposal.  
ADMINISTRATOR: To adopt the scheme amended according to the 
map circulated.  
CLLR DUNNE: I think Cllr Snell has given a good account, this is 
positive for Laragh and Glendalough. Anyone who visited the area over 
the last number of years will know there is carnage up there on 
Saturday and Sundays, the traffic calming you proposed are gladly 
welcomed. Just on one thing, on the Glendalough works, confirmation 
is needed that the works will not impinge on the casual trading 
activities in the area. Maybe you could answer that. I will be seconding 
Cllr Snell's proposal, I think it's good for the area. Traffic in and out of 
the area is congested and it badly needs to be sorted out. The fact 25 
there is funding available for it, we should take this opportunity with 
both hands and, like I said, I will be supporting this.  
CLLR WALSH:  Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you for the presentation 
as a member of Wicklow Tourism I would like to say that the Blue Sail report 
which was commissioned almost two years ago which fed into the strategy 
plan identified Glendalough as the jewel in the crown in terms of tourism for 
Wicklow. It did also highlight the significant problems that it, that needed to 
be addressed in terms of traffic congestion, etc, so this report is to welcome, 
it feeds into a long-term vision for Glendalough and indeed the tourism 
strategy, a subgroup of that has been tasked with master plan for the 
Glendalough area, so this is to widely welcome and I am glad to hear that 
the local concerns, some of which have been addressed by Councillor Snell 

 
7
are to be addressed, so, again, thank you for the presentation.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Just in relation to the 
village green area, you see where it says the existing guide, it goes 
into the old mill on the left-hand side and talking about the new 
drawing now. Just at the bottom of the village green. It shows that the 
monument, then it shows and the slip road you are talking about is 
done away with. What is that grey area there?   
>>: Well, I suppose it can, like from looking at it there I would like to 
think we could restore it back to a green area, it's kind of, at the 
moment it's down as a public realm space, so we possibly could bring 
it back to a green area again.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: I am wondering there is an old mill in there.  
>>: We will probably have to keep some access into that on to the 
road.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: But there is, sorry go ahead.  
>>: There is a, it seems to be, it's quite wide the existing entrance so 
we probably have to find some way to connect it on to the road all 
right, on to the road network.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: The parking proposed to the left-hand side where 
the gate is, would that be interfere with future planning in relation to 
sight lines for future planning for that whole site?   
>>: I would imagine you won't be able to bring a junction out on to 
the main road, you would have to bring it out on to the, you know the 
little spur going up the Military Hill, you would have to bring it into 
that. I am not sure whether that would interfere with planning for the 
old mill area. I don't, I know we wouldn't be able to bring out on 
access directly on to, sorry, that is my opinion, on to the R755.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: So in your opinion, if that was to be developed at a 
future date, that entrance gate now is coming out on to that road, on 
to what is the main road now.  
>>: On to the military hill road.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: That is going to be done away with.  
>>: No, on to the new, sorry, maybe I will just, it will have to be 
brought on to this road (indicating? . ( 
CLLR KENNEDY: Right. That is all, I just wanted an application on that.  
CLLR BEHAN: Cathaoirleach, really, I suppose the point of order really, 
has this project ever been discussed at Wicklow Municipal District?  
Never?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: No.  
CLLR BEHAN: Not in the precursor to this report?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: No.  
CLLR BEHAN: Well that moo beats me that the local members of the 
last council and five or six of them are here on this council have never 
had a chance to discuss such a major project in their own Municipal 
District. I think there is a weakness therefore in the discussion when 
quite a lot of the members of the Wicklow Municipal District have 
never discussed it in their local council.  
 
I pay tribute to the members who have looked at it, gone and have made 
points here, but we specifically made a decision in the last council that par, 

 
8
par dates where as far as possible to be discussed and decided by the 
Municipal Districts in which they are based. And we are already now starting 
this new council and the first par date we have which is a Municipal District 
base and a number of the members haven't even, well none of the six have 
ever discussed it before. I think that is a serious weakness. However, sorry I 
am not finished. The second point I want to make is that obviously welcome 
improvements to the whole living environment as well as the tourist 
environment in Glendalough and Laragh, but inherent in this proposal 
basically is to keep cars out of Glendalough, as far as I can see. And that 
may or may not be a worthwhile thing under some headings but I think it 
has, it is going to have some effect particular willy for older people who 
might want to visit Glendalough, unless there is really seriously enhanced 
and improved public transport facilities to get older people from Laragh 
down to Glendalough and we don't have any detail on that here today, which 
I think is unfortunate and the last point I make and it's a point that comes 
up at every single consultation that I have certainly listened to over the last 
number of years which is that the public always say there should be more 
consultation, the public are always feel that okay, there might be a 
workshop meeting and maybe 30 people went to it or whatever, 30 people 
made submissions but even in the report that we have been given here 
today, one of the points that she didn't mention had in her presentation, but 
it's in the document is that there was a request by local people for more 
consultation. Now, I would like more information as to where, what, can 
nothing else be done to ensure that there is full and adequate consultation 
with local people before this is decided?  Thank you.  
CLLR SNELL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  Again, I thank Cllr Behan for 
expressing his views there and it is something that obviously I am sure 
we all share, but in this regard there was public consultation and there 
was an invitation to all public representatives, national and local level 
to attend and buy that this and I think because of the time constraints 
that is something we certainly don't want to hold up this project and 
something that I know the Cathaoirleach and myself would have been 
discussing over ten years ago and it's something that there was a 
priority list for renewing the position where there is funding available, 
if we can get in it on time and start addressing this, not just from a 
local perspective, but from a tourism and a heritage perspective.  
 
We have to avail of the funding that is potentially there to move these 
projects on and I wouldn't like to see this going off the agenda because, I 
believe that to be in on time, obviously there is no more meetings between 
now and September, public representatives did have an opportunity to feed 
into this and I would love to see the way it has been discussed that it goes 
in front of the Municipal District, but on this occasion, I certainly don't want 
to see any delay or hold up and I think it is there for everyone, if they 
wanted to be proactive on this issue, at times. Unfortunately time 
constraints don't allow that, but I think, Cathaoirleach, I don't want to see 
any delay and certainly from the Municipal District from a tourism and 
heritage point of view, anyone who has what to heart this the chamber 
should address this and put to a vote today.  
CLLR DUNNE: I agree, it's why I would like to have seen it at Municipal 

 
9
District level discussed before. Unfortunately the timeframe for this 
and I think we have to deal with this today, but I understand what Cllr 
been was saying, it's the first time I thought about it myself. There is 
another local from Wicklow to Laragh. It's been well-used by the 
community within the areas and in relation to the Roundwood and 
coming down to Wicklow to Laragh, so there is that local link bus there 
and it is being well used.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Can I just have a quick question, is it intended 
that the visitor centre will be a pay for centre, as in more, which to, in 
my opinion has actually ruined the Cliffs of Moher, now you have a 
sprawling car park and bus rides to the centre, you have a visitor 
centre which is quite expensive to visit and it has turned into an 
expensive day out for people, where as the beauty of Glendalough 
used to be that it was free for everyone to see. The other thing that I 
want to mention is that a couple of years ago at the Municipal District 
level we spoke about the possibility of having a parking facility, a mile 
or two away from the centre and a park and ride which would keep all 
of the traffic out of the village and it would mean that the people living 
in the village wouldn't be inundated with this ridiculous amount the 
cars coming into the area and it seemed like a good solution at the 
time to the problem of excessive cars in Glendalough. I just have a 
terrible feeling in the pit of my stomach that we might end up with 
something that becomes not in keeping with the character of the place 
which is an old and historic site and the last thing we want is a 
glamorised into an all-seeing, all-doing computerised centre. I am just 
a bit wary about that, that we might lose something of the character. 
So if you could just, if the CEO could confirm if it's going to be a paid 
for visitor centre in time?   
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Just in relation to Visitor Centre, it's a separate 
project and it's at the very early stages and it's between the OPW and 
National Parks and Wildlife. So there is no discussion on what will be 
charged or whether it will be one centre or two, that is at the very 
early stages. This is a pre stage process. The first one we are looking 
at is in the public realm and improving access and getting into Laragh.  
 
In relation to parking we have advertised for people who are interested 
in providing car park spaces and part of that, particularly outside the 
village would be park and ride and there would possibly be an electric 
coach associated with it. It's a separate project and we are going to 
talk to the people who came back to us.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, no one else has any comments we want to go 
for the vote, including Cllr Snell's amendment.  
ADMINISTRATOR: So proposed by Cllr Snell and Cllr Dunne to adopt 
the scheme in accordance with the map.  
 [ VOTE TAKEN ]  
ADMINISTRATOR: That is 32 30 for and two not present. Thank you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Item 7, to consider the Chief Executive's Monthly 
Management Report.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, just to highlight one or 
two areas. The good news on the greenway in that we got a grant of 5 

 
10
million so we will move that to the next day with the detailed design. 
The contract was signed earlier today for the in Wicklow town and that 
starts construction immediately. Tenders are due back shortly for that 
and we will be looking to get on site there as soon as possible. Tenders 
are back also for the [INAUDIBLE] building and the upgrade of that in 
Arklow for the business centre planned there. The contract with that 
later on the road, there is also one on the N81. One of those is a €1 
million scheme in Blessington.  We have submitted our projects, there 
is nine in measure 2, four in measure 2 up to 400,000 and 3 in 
measure 3 which is over 500,000. They are gone in and they will be 
assessed similar to last year. The town and village enhancement 
scheme, again there was a lot of interest from various community 
groups around the county. There is 11 project submitted so we will see 
what comes back on that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Edward Timmins.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Thank you, just briefly I would like to welcome the 
investment and commend the management and the executive for all of 
the contribution they have made to make this project come to 
hopefully fruition in the near future. Can I ask what the remainder of 
the funding coming, my understanding is the funding is going to be 
about 10 million altogether, we had a 5 million announcement the 
week before last, so just to get an indication of how that might be 
funded, a couple of other minor things, just briefly on housing in 
Blessington we have 30 acres there and we have a new site. I think we 
should, we need to move ahead with looking at building houses on that 
council land, the land is sitting there and there is a massive 
requirement for houses in Blessington. Lastly you mentioned Knock 
Row bend, that has been going on for three years I would like to see 
shuffles in the background as soon as possible, a very dangerous 
bend, still no sign of action, I would urge that is moved forward.  
CLLR MATTHEWS:. Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I would a like to thank 
the report a clearly well-laid out report. I have two questions. One is 
on staff numbers, I see between quarter 1 last year and quarter 1 this 
year we are down about 15 professional and technical staff and I 
wonder is there plans to try and fill the gap?  And the second question 
is on the register of electors and I want to compliment the staff for 
their own work they did on the register. Could we get a report, just a 
brief report on how the register is billed and what the process is for 
removing people from the register?  You just find out what the 
process is for that?   
CLLR DUNNE: Thank you. Just the report, I am delighted to see the 
contract for the Livery has been signed for Wicklow town. We have 
been working out of a small area for a long number of years and it's a 
good news story for the town. It's a good news story for Wicklow Town 
and it's important that we follow with these projects and get them 
finished as quickly as possible. But again very happy over these two 
projects, thank you.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I like to give a compliment 
on the team that put the Countywise together, again I enjoy them 
coming through the letterbox and there is particularly on domestic 

 
11
waste. One question in relation to the vacant site levy and page 22 of 
the report that the demand for the 81,000 in Bray just an update on 
that if will is one, please.  
CLLR WALSH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach and thank you to the Chief 
Executive again for a most comprehensive report with a lot of positive 
stuff in there. One concern I have there in reading the housing supply 
section page 7 in reference to the Kilbride Lane project, there is 
reference to the delay of six weeks behind that, partly due to a lack of 
availability of skilled workers. And reading that is a slight concern, 
when you look at the number of projects that are in the Pipeline, is this 
something that is likely to have a knock on effect on other projects 
and it's not just Wicklow that is affected by this issue, but just to, I 
would appreciate it coming from the Chief Executive.  
CLLR FORTUNE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. It's an excellent report, I 
think in fact the more I read the various reports coming out from the 
Chief Executive, I think more of our meetings we should be focussed 
on that little report because it covers every aspect of what is going on 
in the council and all of the stuff on our positions. I want to make an 
observation more than making a vocal point. Under the housing, under 
the homelessness, I fully acknowledge the excellent work being done 
by our housing section under extreme difficulties, I just, my sense is 
that through, maybe through nobody's fault, but that the homeless 
situation is going a bit under the radar in that it may not be, I am not 
just talking about the Wicklow County Council, in fact the whole 
system may be missing what is happening out there.  
 
I listened to a discussion on radio recently where they were discussing the 
HAPS scheme and the concerns and challenges that are coming up there, 
basically landlords, the whole market is in a state we are all familiar with, so 
it's more attractive for them to be going in a different direction. With the 
best will in the world, I am not interested in knocking anyone, I think the 
danger is that there is people getting lost in it and people are being put 
under pressure by landlords to get out and to be fair to people, everyone is 
not maybe, has the skill sets to deal with that pressure and my naively 
agree to something that is making them homeless and we are as a system 
there supposed to find something and we don't have anything and I just feel 
that it's a hole that is getting bigger and I would ask that, I said I wouldn't 
make a proposal, but I would propose that there is a working group from the 
members here put together so as we can particularly look at homelessness 
and look at all of the attributes of it and how they are happening and why 
they are happening and how we can help people and as I say, I just think 
it's an area that, particularly where children are concerned, I think that, I 
don't care what we have to do in that situation, I don't care who is right or 
wrong, if there is kids involved we have to be really big and make it happen 
in some fashion and prioritise it. I think to be fair, the way the system is 
working from the Department coming down to us in the system I think we 
are being given a ball that is hard to control and the end result is that things 
are going under the radar through nobody's fault, but I am conscious of a 
few bits and pieces going on and I would like to see it addressed and maybe 
the only way to address is to put a working group together, to sit down and 

 
12
talk it through and make sure that, on either side we are not missing 
something or making a mistake, I think it's urgent.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Again thank you to the CEO 
for the report. There is an issue in West Wicklow maybe you could look 
at. It's absolutely unreal where there are three local improvement 
schemes at a standstill. This is affecting quite a few dozens of people 
and it's down to the fact that if there was one objection on a laneway 
from approval that overrides the fact if there was 15 houses on the 
laneway, one person objects and that puts a stop to it. It's happened 
on three occasions in the last 12 months in West Wicklow so, it's a real 
serious issue, affecting a lot of people in rural parts. So if that be the 
case, that we can't how it works I would like to get real clarification on 
this once and for all, it's very, it's destroying small communities from, 
so maybe this along the line, very soon.  
CLLR McMANUS: Thank you very much for your report, as a newbie it 
was very accessible, so I appreciate that. I have a question and maybe 
a comment, so, well I will start with the comment. Would it be possible 
to maybe get a presentation or put it from the new HAP place finders 
employee here, I know a lot of us are finding, we are getting a lot of 
people contacting us struggling with accessing HAP and finding a place 
with HAPS, so that might be useful. I will leave it there.  
CLLR BLAKE: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I to would like to welcome the 
Greenway, certainly the 5 million is a great start up there and for the 
community up there as well, particularly the Blessington forum and the 
town team up there and the work they have done and I know we have 
had some disappointments in the past it in terms of the announcement 
of it, but certainly they are persistent. I think, no doubt the work 
everyone has done in relation to those and we are not giving up at the 
end of the day. One question in relation to page 26 of the report. In 
relation to the framework Directive, national monitoring programme 
and there was 26, 26, yeah. In relation to the sampling of water taken 
of 36 rivers in the county, I would like to know do we have access to 
those reports?   
 
Because of the fact we have, the EPA have upgraded their standards in 
terms of what can be discharged in rivers and it's certainly having an 
adverse effect on planning in the county as well and I would like to 
know if we have access to those reports and see where we are going in 
relation to them. Equally so the inspection programme, I know will be 
carrying out a number of them each year and I just thought today, 
what total number of inspections were being carried out over the years 
in relation to private supply and private systems and we have any 
failures in that particular area, thank you, chairman.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. Thank you for the report, 
again as a new person, the first time reading an executive report it 
was very clear and informative, so thank you for that. Two brief 
comments one on the environmental awareness, I noted a talk on an 
Education Together school I was wondering whether that talk was 
available online and if there was a plan to roll out similar talks to other 
schools around the county and just a comment regarding the homeless 

 
13
figures which is very sobering when you see it in black and white. Just 
a note that figures that won't be included in those, but just to note 
there are a number of temporary accommodation centres for people 
seeking refugee and asylum status in the country in various sites that, 
as I said, is under the County Council's remit, but members of the 
community are involved in supporting them as well.  
CLLR MULLEN: Cathaoirleach, just in relation to the Blessington 
greenway I would like to welcome that, but also Cllr Blake's 
contribution in relation to Irish Water and the way it communicates 
with the council in a do not consume notice which we have had in west 
Wicklow, it leads a lot to be desired the way Irish water communicate 
with the local authority and the Municipal District staff so maybe we 
could investigate how that reporting process and how they are fixing 
these problem as we go forward.  
CLLR CRONIN:  I would like to welcome the news of Blessington Greenway. 
Just if you have any information on when it might start the work, or an idea 
of the timeframe of the work.  
CLLR CREAN: Thank you, again, thank you for the report, it's great to 
have the detail. Ask I can some questions on housing and one question 
in relation to the committees that were built. In relation to housing my 
concern would be the over reliance on subsidised social housing 
through the private sector. So I have a question about, like there was 
a report on a departmental level review we are building in Ireland and 
they did say there was an over, in that area we shouldn't prioritise the 
building of social houses, I suppose my first question is in the report, 
in the pipeline developments. The two proposals Killincarrick, 156 units 
were not listed and they are now building, so I am interested in what 
is happening on them. That is my area.  
 
My second question is in relation to that, that the people who don't 
qualify for social housing, are there plans for affordable housing or to 
look at the cost-rental model.  
 
Then, the final question I had in relation to the committees was there was a 
committee listed in the initial list we got of the AGM, number 18, special 
purpose vehicle company for the Greystones Harbour, so I suppose I am 
asking does that exist because we didn't discuss it and if it does exist who is 
on it, who are the reps on it, is it up for review and when it will be next and 
will they be discussing the commercial fishing for Greystones.  
CLLR LEONARD: Thank you for the report and I am new and I am a 
little bit unsure of how to go about things so excuse me if this is the 
wrong platform for it. It's in relation to page 29 of the OPW relief 
scheme, which is very relevant to me and why I got elected. The two 
projects, the Arklow Sewage Treatment and the Flood Relief Scheme in 
Arklow are interlinked and I am conscious of the timelines, the sewage 
is due, An Bord Pleanála decision is due next month, but there has 
been kind of a bit of a gap in the public consultation for the flood relief 
and because the projects are interlinked they will be going in for 
planning in the last quarter of this year, so I was wondering if there is 
any plans for a public consultation for the local people and the other 

 
14
Municipal councillors before that goes ahead.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, just in relation to, I think it's 
page 7 under the housing report, just Section 3 on the social housing 
stock, just a figure that jumped out at me is to do with rents, whether 
4,353 tenancies occupied at the 25th of May 2019, but the figure that 
jumps out is arrears at the end of May 2019, over 1 million, so as a 
new councillor I would like to get a breakdown about that, those 
arrears, which seem to be very huge, considering when the minimum 
rent is €24 per week and the maximum rent is €275.50 a week. So I 
would like to get a breakdown as to where that figure came from and 
how long has this been going on. Thank you. Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Now, Chief Executive, I will give you definitely more 
than three minutes to answer all of that.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE: Thank you. Councillor Timmins, the question of 
Greenway we, will be appointed consultants which will determine the 
actual costs of it. It depends whether you go 4 or 3 metres. If you go 3 
metres it's something around 8 million but we will have to check. In 
relation to all of the schemes I mentioned, we are getting grants, the 
balance usually comes from development contributions but we need to 
see, we night have to cut our cloth to suit what we have got. We will 
see in the detail and we may go back for further funding.  
 
The site is included in the next round of the PPP schemes. If they are 
willing to take if on we will go with that, if not it will be a rapid build, 
where it is being worked on and it's a priority. Councillor Matthews 
again all of those technical professional posts have been filled. There is 
not as much, but we are filling out one of them. I might ask Tom 
Murphy to give us an are review of the election process, today or if he 
wants to come back I will come back to him on it. In relation to the 
vacant site levy, I will ask Sean Quirke to give an update on that.  
 
In relation to Kilbride Lane, it is behind, now we passed it and there is a lot 
of activity on site and it's well on track, but there is nationally becoming a 
lack of skilled workers now. The rapid build addresses that to a certain 
extent and it comes on but there is definitely a need for more apprentices 
and more skilled workers and it's affecting us in Wicklow as well. In relation 
to the homelessness, we do have an action plan for homelessness, which 
obviously action plan and team for homelessness. It's an issue for the 
housing SPC also and there is a lot of work and a lot of work with Tusla and 
the Gardaí in preventing homeless.  
 
It's a real issue particularly with rents increasing no doubt about that. In 
terms of the local HAPS officer who finds people at risk of homelessness is 
something that will come up again at the SPC.  
 
In terms of the ISs that are at a standstill, if Colm Lavery wants to make a 
comment on that. In relation to the Water Framework Directive, I can't 
comment on that, we will get a report back, we do have the information in 
relation to the assembly and we assist the EPA and Irish Water in getting 
those, the septic tank inspection reports, so we do have the results and we 

 
15
will come back with a report on that. The environmental awareness, the plan 
is to roll it out to other schools. I doubt if it's available in video format.   
 
Again, the homeless figures, it's a real issue, but again the homeless HAP is 
the action team and the SPC and our work with particular agencies. Irish 
Water, again the communication side of it, we will take that up with them to 
ensure that that works better next time around. Cllr Cronin in relation to the 
Blessington Greenway, the plan to prepare a brief for consultants so that will 
be done around August/September and they will start work on the detailed 
of design which will bring them into April of next year, 2020. Again that goes 
to tender for contractors and could be back around August/September of 
2020 and we are allowing a year-and-a-half for construction, so November 
2021 will be the final day. That is where we are at now, but it's going 
through the detailed design stage.  
 
In relation to Killincarrick, I will move back to members in relation to that. 
There is a lot of work being done in terms of taking on board submissions 
coming in. Cost rental is something that will come to the housing SPC. There 
is was a conference on it last week. In relation to the Greystones, I might 
ask Sean Quirke to comment on that in relation to what is happening on 
that. In Arklow, you have, the decision is due this month in An Bord Pleanála 
and the sewerage scheme. On the [INAUDIBLE] scheme there is 
geomorphology study being done at the moment sew that will determine the 
line of the route of the scheme. There is a study being done on the marsh so 
as soon as that is done we will be close to preparing our environmental 
impact assessment report and there will be a consultation with the local 
elected members in particular, a kind of an informal consultation before that 
goes into An Bord Pleanála. Just in relation to the arrears, I might ask Joe 
Lamb to see if he has a breakdown on that.  
JOE LAMB:I don't have that, but I will get it for you. That wouldn't be 
current, a lot of those would be historic and held over in the accounts to 
have them, but I will get a breakdown, I will date it for you and get a 
breakdown.  
CLLR FERRIS: That would be great. If I could get a breakdown and, 
because it is.  
JOE: I will do it.  
CLLR FERRIS: Also what the council is doing to recoup the money. 
Thank you.  
JOE LAMB: I will do that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Tom, do you want to do the review of the 
electorate.  
TOM: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I will be very brief. The register of 
elector process is continual or a cyclical process as well and the next 
draft register date is the 1st of November. We have approximately 30 
field workers on our books at the moment we are arranging to 
interview for two or three vacancies. Each of the field workers are 
charged with calling around to every household in the county and that 
is a very big task. They call around at least twice, sometimes three 
times and if they can't get any response they will leave a card behind 
or they will leave a form behind.  

 
16
 
We have, I would say one of the best register of elector teams in the 
country, it's led by Helen Purcell who is now being led by Fiona Flynn and I 
think it's widely acknowledge as well that we have one of the most accurate 
register of electors in the country and they would stand up to comparisons 
to any of the other local authorities/register of electors. I suppose ultimately 
the responsibility is on the citizen to ensure that details of his or her family 
are there on the register and there is this confusion out there that we 
continually knock people off the register, but at the end of the day it's up to 
each citizen to fill out the form each year and I know it's a bit of a pain, but 
that is the process that we have to comply with and until it's changed at 
national level they are the rules we have to comply with. Thank you, 
Cathaoirleach.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Behan this is in relation to this.  
CLLR BEHAN: I want to propose that we change the way we do it. We 
don't take people off the register unless we have a written request 
from them to take them off. The huge problem is people are being 
taken off and they say and they may not be right, but they say they 
haven't received notice. If they exist they are entitled, their most 
fundamental right is the right to vote. I think we should, even as a 
trial, on a trial basis, this coming year, adopt a new policy where 
unless we are actually asked by someone to take me off the register 
leave them on it. Instead of going through this whole rigmarole every 
year where everyone has to reregister if they happen to not be in 
when a person from the council calls. I don't see what is wrong with 
that, all we are doing is facilitating people's vote.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you very much, chair, in relation to the 
franchise group, they are a really active group and I have seen the 
work they have done in the last year in particular, it's excellent. Just, 
for the last local elections in county Dublin you could register to vote 
online, now apparently this was a pilot scheme, but it seems like quite 
a large pilot scheme, I was wondering are there any plans to roll that 
out, because that would be a useful tool if people could go online and 
do it, they don't have the same thing of getting a Garda stamp and 
dropping it down and I am wondering if Tom is aware of any plans and 
if there isn't plans can we write to the minister and ask they push 
forward to have that rolled out, if not across the country, certainly that 
we want to see it in Wicklow.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I just agree with. 
Cllr Behan. I have heard all kinds of horror stories about people being taken 
off the register. They didn't know until they went down to vote. It's easy to 
say, well, at the end of the day it's everyone's responsibility, I actually 
checked the register myself, but I checked it too late, so that had I been 
taken off it, myself, assuming because I was on it because I had been on it 
for years that I wouldn't be able to vote and I was running in the election 
and it suddenly dawned on me, we are flippant when we say it's up to you to  
check out the register, there is ads on the radio and the paper, but 
sometimes people just don't even think they might be taken off it.  
 
So I think that, I concur with Cllr Behan, don't take people off, you still have 

 
17
to prove when you get a vote, so there will be no impersonation at the polls 
if people were asked for ID. We now live in an era where we have housing 
apartment blocks with electronic gates, sometimes people can't get in to 
access them and we have people now working longer, more people are out 
during the day than ever before, we have places that are just inaccessible to 
census gatherers, just because you don't hear back from someone doesn't 
mean they were notified whether they still reside there. I think we have to 
be very careful and maybe.  
Cllr Whitmore is right, maybe we should start looking at an easier way 
for people to register other than to try and get forms filled in and 
signed.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay.  
CLLR FERRIS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, I absolutely agree with. 
Cllr Behan and I would second your proposal, it's better to be safe than 
sorry, to assume that people are still alive or still living in the place as 
Councillor Kavanagh said we all live busy lives and have people coming in 
our door, pizza offers or whatever, free newspapers and notices from the 
people who go around updating the electoral register can often get lost. I do 
agree that they are doing a great job and have done so for all of the years, 
but and I also agree that it is up to the people, it is a citizen's responsibility 
to actually check to make sure that they are on the register, but it doesn't 
always happen, so I agree that unless someone writes in and says I am 
moving or I am dead or whatever, please take me off the register, that we 
should leave things as they are.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Hard for them to write in and say they are dead.  
CLLR FERRIS: Well, something, but I second the proposal.  
CLLR TIMMINS: I don't know how successful Cllr's Behan's proposal 
would be, I would see problems with it, the register could become 
massive because people are not going to bother to take me off. What 
is the motivation, they don't say they should be left on it, they are 
hardly going to write to say they are being taken off? If you have been 
taken off could they be written to, people might take that seriously, 
because you might respond and put them back on. A lot of people are 
shocked they are not on the register and they say they were never 
informed. If your name has been taken off you should be written to, at 
least that way people will take it seriously and might respond and put 
their names back on.  
>>: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. This is very much a national issue, 
Cathaoirleach, there has been much discussion about the reform of the 
register of elector process for many years now and there has been 
talks of rolling registers and talks about registering online, there have 
been talk about using a PPN. We don't remove anyone from the 
register without firstly advising them in writing. That is the last 
resource, up to then we get the field worker to call once, twice, 
sometimes three times. We are all very busy people, but the reality is 
that the field workers are making calls to the best of our knowledge, if 
not we address the situation, we keep a very close eye on this, but 
there is the other issue then, Cathaoirleach, that there are, will is a 
cohort of citizens who don't want to be on the register of electors for 
different reasons, so unless there is a change in policy at national level 

 
18
we have to operate within the parameters as set by the Department on 
this. So we continue to treat this very seriously, we continue to carry 
out the checks and so on and as I said, we don't remove anyone from 
the register without firstly alerting them in advance. I don't have the 
figures off the top of my head, I think around November time we spent 
maybe 4,000 or 5,000 letters out to originals that we can't get a 
response to them and we are advised them we are proposing to take 
them off the register and we gave them a period to come back to us. 
So we don't get any joy in removing people from the register, but we 
have to operate within the parameters set by the Department another 
to keep that relevant and up to date.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you very much.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Just on the roll out of the voter registration on the 
online registration.  
>>: We will look into that, Cathaoirleach.  
CLLR BEHAN: I will settle, could rewrite to the Department and say 
"look, this issue is a recurring issue."  Cllr Whitmore has made a point 
that in Dublin they were able to get around the rules for the local 
elections. I don't know how they managed it, but they were able to 
have a registration process online with a supplementary register up to 
ten days before the election. We couldn't do that, people in Wicklow 
couldn't do that, how did Dublin circumvent the rules?  They obviously 
had some influence. So the bottom line is we should have insisted, 
that our view was taken on board as well. It would save a lot of time 
for the staff if you didn't have to send out 5,000 letters because many 
of those people should never have been taken off. To my mind it 
should be the way it used to be and the way it used to be is people 
were left on the register unless the council were informed by a relative 
that someone had passed away or it was discovered that someone had 
moved. Now, automatically you are taken off, if you haven't got the 
letter or you haven't responded to it. So the thing has been turned 
upside down and that is where a lot of the difficulties are. I would 
accept that we write, as a compromise, rather than insisting that we 
break the law which would be a terrible thing to do naturally, but 
Dublin seem to have been able to do it with the agreement of the 
minister.  
CLLR LEONARD: I am wondering is there a reason why it can't be 
linked to the PPS number?   
>>: I didn't get that one.  
CLLR LEONARD: Is there a reason why it can't be interlinked with a 
PPS number?   
>>: I think that is a national debate and you would be opening a can 
of worms unless we got a steer at national level from that, because a 
lot of people hold a PPN number close to their heart and they feel it 
shouldn't be used for anything other than a certain purpose and so we 
have never been able to get a clear advice in relation to that.  
CLLR LEONARD: Just to be on the register, you know, once you get 
it...  
CLLR TIMMINS: Sorry, chairman, there was no response to my 
proposal that you get written to if you are taken off the register.  

 
19
CATHAOIRLEACH: You do get written to.  
CLLR TIMMINS: No, before you have been taken off, but after you 
have been taken off, is a letter like that sent saying you are no longer 
on the register.  
>>: Off the top of my head, Cathaoirleach, I can't say for sure, as I 
say, I wasn't, I don't have the precise detail, I will check it out.  
CLLR TIMMINS: I suggest that is done, because that is a serious letter, 
people say we are going to take you off, to say you have been taken 
off, people might take it more seriously. Just a discussion.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sean Quirke, if you want to give an update on the 
vacant site levy and the fisherman...  
SEAN QUIRKE: Thank you. The vacant site levy referred to the 
[INAUDIBLE] site. That was levied after the result of an arbitration 
process. So the invoice hasn't been taken as of today as far as I know. 
When the proceeds of that comes in, 90% goes to capital 
[INAUDIBLE], just in case you were looking to spend it. The harbour, 
the harbour company, it's not a committee, it's a company, it's a 
leader of a conveyancing of land it doesn't have any financial 
transactions at all, it's very difficult to explain, but the land that the 
houses and the apartments are being built on where transferred by the 
County Council to the designated activity company and the designated 
activity company transferred it to the financial owner. There is, the two 
directors, the two councillor directors are Derek Mitchell and Gerry 
Walsh. So, it's not something that you nominate on to, there are 
directors of the company, there are three officials on it, myself, the 
Chief Executive and the Finance Officer. But it doesn't trade as a 
financial company, it's a real, it's for the convenience of conveyancing, 
because other than that each transaction would have had to come 
back to council for a Section 183 disposal notices and it just wouldn't 
work, it would be clogged up with disposal notices in here. So, it's not 
a committee.  
CLLR CREAN: I have read the history and the purpose of that, I 
understand. It was more so around the democratic aspect of it, there 
is two -  democratic aspect of it. There is, like every other company, 
and partnership companies as well, is it open to new members and 
also if it isn't or is to know why not?  It might be like you were saying 
just for ease of getting the work done, but equally when does it meet?  
Are there minutes of those meetings?  Because I suppose commercial 
citizen is an issue, for me I need to be aware of where is being 
discussed and who is discussing it and for the next meeting if that 
could be put on the agenda.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Thank you, chair. Just in relation to that, is it 
possible each time that a transfer occurred that Greystones District are 
notified. We have been asked, we ask for updates every month and 
sometimes it's quite limited in what we get, but we never know, even 
the phasing of it and my understanding is this company essentially a 
phase is complete, is that right, that it transfers it over. Is it possible 
we get notified when that transaction happened as such at district 
level, because since that committee is set up the District Council has 
received no notification about what has happened?  

 
20
>>: It's not a...  
CLLR WHITMORE: Or a company.  
SEAN QUIRKE: It doesn't transfer in the way you think it does in 
phases or anything like that. It's signed off, the transfers to each 
individual is signed off by the company, so [INAUDIBLE] Section 183 is 
done here. Now, I would have to do a bit of research as to whether we 
can release the names because it's a designated activity company and 
you are talking about releasing the names then to a Municipal District, 
so I am just not 100% clear whether we can legally do that.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Each time a 183 is conducted.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: There is no.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Or the equivalent. This was set up so there is no 
need for 183s but yet the district council is not being informed when 
any transfer or transaction happens or any.  
SEAN QUIRKE: Is the information you are looking for who is buying the 
houses?   
CLLR WHITMORE: No, is it done on a house by house basis?  So even 
if it was X percentage, even if we get percentage of transfers.  
SEAN QUIRKE: Sales. That is in the report of the Municipal District, 
they usually put that into the report of the Municipal District, the 
number of sales.  
CLLR WHITMORE: As a percentage of the entire?   
SEAN QUIRKE: Well that is only a fraction.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can I just say, is this something that could be 
discussed at the Municipal District meeting?   
SEAN QUIRKE: Just to get back to Councillor Behan, the nominations 
were made by the Council, it wasn't the committees, that was the 
decision at the time.  
CLLR CREAN: That is not up for review?   
SEAN QUIRKE: Unless one of the directors wants to resign we will 
nominate someone else.  
CLLR CREAN: Just asking.  
CLLR MITCHELL: The directors have a very good involvement of with 
the running of this company and there should be an annual report 
which maybe could be public, summarises what has been done in the 
year and if we haven't really, if that hasn't happened I think it would 
be a good idea. Really the only pieces of land that were transferred to 
this company were the ones directly being sold to the final customers 
of the houses and apartments, so as I understand it, the public land, 
etc, was not transferred to this company and so it's only the ones 
which each individual is going to pay money for to be his home, if we 
want to get someone to spend 70 million on the sea walls there has to 
be some guarantee they could sell the properties to that, while at the 
same time we didn't want to give the long-term freehold which you 
would have to give to houses for the harbour to a private company, so 
the land was segregated and given to this company, with the idea that 
it would be given a potentially freehold to those that paid the money 
for the houses and it wouldn't be giving the freehold of the area to the 
company which built the sea walls and the harbour facilities.  
SEAN QUIRKE: The idea of the special purpose vehicle company came 

 
21
up as part of the debate and basically the bidders didn't want a 
situation where sales would be held up in August when there is no 
meeting of the council or they didn't want to wait, you know, they will 
be waiting on Monday to sell the houses, so they wanted a mechanism 
that would allow them to complete the sales and this is the 
mechanism. It's not terribly complicated, there is no financial 
transactions in it, but it came up as part of the bid process. They 
needed certainty there wasn't going to be any political in inverted 
commas, process that would was going to frustrate their sales.  
CLLR BEHAN: Cathaoirleach, a number of councillors at the time 
expressed reservations about that whole process, because what it 
effectively are doing is selling off public property, however I 
complement Mags Crean for raising something very fundamental is 
that two members which were put on that SPV by a previous council 
seem to be there as a personal right, because it's, as Mr. Quirke has 
said they can stay on it as long as they want until they decide they 
don't want to be on it anymore. That most definitely would raise 
questions about the democratic accountability of two people nominated 
by this democratic body and I furthermore say it could raise questions 
about the legality of any more sales that are going to happen under 
that particular company, if the two people that the Council nominated 
didn't come before this body for ratification. I certainly think that 
should be examined, I think we should be getting legal advice on this.   
 
I compliment Cllr Crean for spotting this as a new councillor. We should not 
have a situation where a previous member or a member is a member as of 
personal right. They are only a member because a previous council voted for 
them at that time. At the very least that should have been ratified it should 
have come up on the agenda. I didn't spot it at the time, but now it's been 
mentioned I don't we can ignore it and I think we should get legal advice on 
it.  
SEAN QUIRKE: The members, the directors of that company that 
comes with its own responsibilities the same as the directors of any 
company. They were nominated by the members of the Wicklow 
County Council and agreed by the members at the time. I don't think 
we would have a situation where you would be changing directors 
every year or every five years, but look it, if there is people who are 
interested in being directors of the company and some of the members 
want to step down, that is matter for yourselves and there isn't, as I 
say, there is no remuneration for being a director of the company, 
there are no financial transactions, it's merely a conveyancing tool, but 
if the members want to step down and members want to nominate 
someone else it's a matter for them, but I would be wary about 
questioning the legality of the company and the legality of transactions 
that have happened to date or that might happen in the future 
because that could have a lot of implications for everyone.  
CLLR BEHAN: Sean, you might be wary about it, but the point is an 
important issue has been raised as to whether these members are 
nominated by this current council and they are not. In my opinion they 
should be.  

 
22
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can I say that a similar situation had previously 
arisen in the Wicklow Enterprise Park where people who have been 
nominated by Wicklow Town Council remained on it even though they 
were no longer member it took with a change in the memorandum and 
articles of the company to get that changed, which happened after 
nine years of that, so it is, it is what it is up to, until you get the 
memorandum and Articles of Association changed, so I suggest the 
board members actually talk about it and come back maybe and 
discuss it at the next meeting, but it's something that the board should 
be looking at themselves from a governance point of view.  
CLLR WHITMORE: Sorry, just on that, chair, my understanding is 
Wicklow Tourism that each of the public reps that are elected on to 
that are also directors of the company, is that correct?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: It depends what is written in the memorandum and 
Articles of Association. That was the difficulty with Wicklow Enterprise 
Park and they changed theirs, so this company would have to do the 
same. Now, Colm Lavery, in relation to the water results and the LIS.  
 
COLM LAVERY: Just in relation to the local improvement scheme, 
unfortunately as you know, the local improvement scheme was to 
carry out improvements to private roads and as such the agreement of 
all the landholders is required to allow works to be carried out on 
privately owned property. I can understand the frustration where if 
there is not agreement to do that and unfortunately then the council 
can't, if you are on, they can't go on to privately owned land without 
the permission for the works to be carried out by the landowners. 
Unfortunately other local improvement scheme projects do go ahead 
where there is full agreement by the landholders.  
 
In terms of Cllr Mullen raised the issue of the public water scheme and 
communication with Irish Water, they were to update in relation to the 
progress, the Irish Water have applied to the HSE to lift the boil water 
notice, unfortunately the EPA has requested more results on nitrate levels 
are made available before they accede to that request. A new nitrate level 
was commissioned last week and they want to test that following on from 
the commissioning of that filter. So hopefully in the very near future we will 
see the do not consume notice lifted, maybe while I am at it, just to update 
on Avoca as well, we are very close to applying to the get the boil notice 
water lifted. The EPA raised issues in relation to the ultraviolet sensors on 
the plant, which the contractor has serviced last week, so following on from 
updated results after the servicing of the UV treatment we should be in a 
position shortly to apply again to get the boil water notice lifted. In terms of 
communication with Irish Water I suppose this is an issue that comes up, 
particularly around issues such as do not consume and boil water notices 
and how much information and how up to date we are kept.   
 
I can assure you in the background that at official level we are in constant 
contact in relation to progress, but also Irish Water do offer clinics, normally 
four clinics per year for councillors in Wicklow. I know it's probably been a 
while since one was held in Quarter 1 of this year. They also have a 

 
23
dedicated email and phone number for councillor and reps to make contact 
and again in relation to these two issues in Kiltegan, we requested that 
members so wish they could attend a future meeting at the Municipal 
District to brief on the update, but hopefully events will overtake that and 
we will have the noticed lifted in the near future.  
CLLR O'NEILL: Just on one point, it's a privately owned, it's right away, 
the three laneways that are being objected to are being objected to by 
one or two individuals, of right of ways, you and I can walk these lanes 
any day of the week.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Maybe that is for the Municipal District?  To bring 
them.  
CLLR O'NEILL: The engineers are as frustrated as I am with the fact 
that they want to do these lanes, there are people on these lanes who 
are seriously elderly people can't get in and out of their home. They 
are right of ways and a lot of the land says seemingly so, that is what I 
want to check out, one individual can say no, there was one lad, on 
environmental grounds he said the Tarmacadam wasn't 
environmentally friendly. A lad came down from Dublin living there for 
ten years, he put a stop one lane, there is people trying to get in and 
out of these rural roads but it's right of ways we are talking about, it's 
nothing to do with these people. It's nothing to do with them. This is 
going on and on and the engineers are as frustrated as Gerry O'Neill 
and other councillors in our area and what we want to do is once of all 
nail this, that people, because people are paying their money upfront 
and even if an individual doesn't want to contribute to the scheme and 
on the three occasion I know, they are not even being asked to 
contribute, other people are doing it for them, yet they put the heels in 
and they say it's environmental not friendly on the Tarmacadam laid, I 
would like to see this carried right through, a solution to this, because 
as I say, it's right of ways it's not right of roads.  
>>: I can understand, Councillor, the frustration where there is 
objections to works being carry out and the engineers do share your 
frustration and there is a lot of logistic engineer meetings with 
management.  
 
In relation to the particular circumstances we will look into those and 
see what the objections are and whether they can be progressed, but 
again where there is not full agreement to carrying out of works, it's 
very difficult and in relation to carrying out the works.  
CLLR O'NEILL: I fully understand what you are saying, if it's the law of 
the land, it's another land, it shouldn't change.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To consider the Wicklow County Draft Strategic 
Policy Scheme.  
ADMINISTRATOR: The statutory basis for the establishment of SPCs in 
the local Government Act. It was circulated with the draft SPC and the 
cover note on the 26th of June. The committees are as follows: 
 
So, the draft scheme separates out the functions of the SPCs. SPC 
meetings and procedures, proposal number and configuration, 
proposal sector and the number of representatives from each sector 

 
24
for the committee. Principles applying in relation to the appointment of 
members, representatives and the nomination process. So the 
corporate policy group, at their meeting this morning considered the 
SPC scheme, so they made one amendment which is on page 6 of the 
scheme and they have circulated it before the meeting, so it's the 
configuration scheme, climate, biodiversity and climate biodiversity 
SPC and additional members not including the pharma sector.  
 
So, if the members adopt the draft scheme today, as circulated, it's 
proposed then to commence the process in relation to the process to allow 
for organisations to comment on the scheme, as well as we write to each 
individual elected member, seeking an indication of their preferred SPC. 
Public notice will also be given to the effect that the Wicklow County Council 
has considered a draft scheme and is invited submissions from interested 
parties. At the conclusion of this process then we will revert to the elected 
members at the meeting of the 2nd of September to finally adopt the SPC 
scheme, having considered the submissions received over the summer and 
then we will be writing out the PPN and the national ski stakeholders to 
nominate -  key. The elected representatives as set out in the adopted 
scheme.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Matthews wants to propose and Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: I want to ask a question, are these the updated 
guidelines from the Department or are we expecting another in the 
future?   
ADMINISTRATOR: We worked on the guidelines. The guidelines that 
were worked on, this is the 2014 scheme but we have had regard to 
the draft guidelines that come down from the Department which don't 
deviate really from the original ones. We are proceeding, as all other 
local authorities are doing, we are not waiting.  
CLLR BEHAN: Just in looking at the guidelines, one of the points that is 
made is that they are supposed to be a more informal arrangement 
than the formality of a council meeting and there is also supposed to 
be flexibility in terms of the number of people, number of members of 
any SPC and I would just like that we retain that flexibility when we 
come to actually making a final decision in September. Like one of the 
things I see with this and it happens with a lot of stuff coming out from 
central Government, unless you are a member of a particular 
organisation or a pillar as they call it, you don't have any rights to be 
on an SPC. There may well be people out there in the county who 
might have an expertise or an interest or some point, something they 
would like to devote their time to and what I would like to say, see is 
that we would keep open the possibility in the ask, that if there are 
people out there, if they have a genuine interest and they have some 
experience of the area, whatever it might be and it's covered by the 
SPC, that they could express an interest in being considered and we 
retain maybe two positions on each SPC for members of the public to 
who are not necessarily members of any particular organisation, just 
to ensure the democratic accountability goes as far as possible.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: I second that proposal and in terms of people with 
expertise in research and people from academia and people who have 

 
25
been informed that the work of the SPC is and bring it to a level where 
change-making is possible and they can contribute very much to the 
agenda of the SPC.  
CLLR WHITMORE: I agree, I think it's really important as well, these 
policy groups are really powerful committees as such and I think we 
need to get that message out in and really tell people what they do as 
well. I only found out today that the minutes for the SPC are online, I 
wasn't even aware of that. But it is important, I think most people 
wouldn't know these bodies exist and they are meant to be the main 
drivers of policy development within the council and they don't know 
how to feed into it or get involved in it, it's important that in the next 
five years we really get that message out to people that they can get 
involved, what they do, what is involved in the work they do is really 
important that we explain that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: So I have a.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Before we move off that, I want to refer to the 
appointment guidelines in relation to the appoint of sectoral 
representatives. So it talks about the principles we should be 
respecting, the selection of the roles and the guidelines do outline the 
pillars which are the PPN for the environmental pillar, the community 
pillar and the social inclusion pillar. Then for the business and 
commercial you have the business pillar which consists of the 
chambers of commercial, etc, etc, then also there is the pharma pillar 
and then the union pillar, so we have to respect those four pillars. It 
does talk about groups and associations should be active in the area 
and have a county-wide impact. So when we are reaching out to the 
public we will be asking for groups, associations and it should be up to 
new members to go to AGMs. Single interest groups should be eligible, 
but campaign focus groups and disabled or elderly people, similarly 
issue groups should not be considered for inclusion in the sector. So if 
the SPCs are county-wide they shouldn't be single issue focus groups 
but it is open to the elected members to look at local issues and, for 
example, the economic development and enterprise SPC did have 
regard to the west of the county in having a representative from there, 
so the PPN is the Public Participation Network and the nomination of 
sectoral representatives is the sole responsibility for each particular 
sector. But we will leave a window open, but just to.  
CLLR BEHAN: If you say they have to be in a sector, or they have to 
be in an organisation that rules out any individual who might have an 
interest or a capacity to contribute and all I am saying is, I am not 
saying anything about those pillars being affected, they can still have 
their members as agreed, I am saying that we should maintain the 
option for one or two places for members of the public who we 
consider might have something to contribute, a lot of people don't 
want to be in their pillars or organisations, they might have a view that 
Councillor Whitmore could help us. I don't see why we couldn't put it 
in, if there are individuals with a particular interest or experience or 
expertise, please let us know as well.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, it's within the remit of 
the SPC from time to time to invite someone in to present to them so I 

 
26
asked the question this morning of people from academia, the climate 
change experts out there I would like to see come in on our SPC, the 
climate and biodiversity. I take Cllr Behan's report that there may be 
people outside of the group and if we were aware we can invite them 
to the SPC. It's my experience if you are a member of a group or 
forum or some sort of organisation you have a commitment to that 
organisation and you will tend to turn up for meetings. A lot of the 
time there is committee where people don't turn up. So it does help 
when someone is fort of a group. You shouldn't exclude them and that 
is open to the chair to provide an expert in, or an expert that any 
member of the SPC is heard of. So that scope exists within the plan as 
far as I would be concerned.  
CLLR BEHAN: I would still like to propose what I proposed, 
notwithstanding what Stephen Matthews has said. That could still be 
done. I am saying give us the flexibility, we can have flexibility and we 
should exercise that flexibility. I would like to propose it, I think Cllr 
O'Brien has seconded it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: The public notice will look for submissions on the 
scheme. Once the scheme is adapted here in September then we will 
be going out for nominees, so we are not looking for nominees, we are 
looking for, at this point in time, we are looking for comment on the 
scheme, which includes the make up of the.  
CLLR BEHAN: I thought we were adopted in draft form the scheme 
today. I am saying the scheme should allow for this flexibility. I 
understood something was being proposed to us as a draft scheme?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Correct, just the ordinary... it will go out as is and 
the submissions will come in and you get another bite of the cherry.  
CLLR BEHAN: Can I not have a bite of the cherry today.  
ADMINISTRATOR: You have to put something out for public display in 
accordance with the guidelines.  
CLLR BEHAN: As long as we are not ruling out the option that is fine.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Five years ago we got submissions from the Simon 
Community and they were included, which was outside, so it will, you 
will find it.  
CLLR BEHAN: I am talking about individuals now, not groups. Thank 
you.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, so Cllr Matthews, do we have a seconder?  
Councillor Whitmore. To establish the Audit Committee of Wicklow 
County Council.  
JOE LAMB: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. The Local Government Reform 
Act requires that each council must establish an Audit Committee 
within three months of polling day. So, as you know, as members here 
with will be aware, the other committees play an important role, they 
have a key role in advising the council on financial reporting processes 
and internal controls on risk management and on other audit matters. 
The Local Government Audit Committee regulations provide that the 
Audit Committee shall consistent of three members and shall include 
not less than three external members and not more than two serving 
or retired elected members. Nominations for appointment to an Audit 
Committee shall be made by the corporate policy group to the Council, 

 
27
following consultation with the Chief Executive. Appointment of 
members of an Audit Committee is a reserve function the outgoing 
committee advised Mr. Tom Cregan, former regional manager of FBD 
Insurances,... Miss Mary Savage, Councillor Edward Timmins and 
Councillor Gerry Walsh. The outgoing committee were extremely active 
and met five, six times annually. Over the last five years a committee 
presented their Annual Report to This Council, generally during the 
first quarter of each year and that Annual Report set out and detailed 
their very busy workload. Just to give you a flavour of the type of work 
programme that the committee is engaged in, they were involved in 
periodic meetings as required by statutory regulation, consideration 
and approval of the annual audit plan, dedicated meetings with 
members of the management team, an annual training day that they 
each had to sit in on that.  
 
Consideration of the internal audit reports, including those prepared in 
connection with the public spending code, consideration of reports 
issued by the National Oversight and Audit Commission, NOAC for 
short.  
 
Consideration of relevant department and value for money reports. 
Review of the annual financial statement and meeting with the Local 
Government Auditor and consideration of the Statutory Audit Report. I, 
in preparation for this I made discreet enquiries of the outgoing five 
members of the committee who all meet the criteria and have the skill 
sets set out in the various regulations. They have all agreed to allow 
their names go forward for a further period unless there are other 
nominations. The matter was listed as was required to be done for 
consideration by the corporate policy group, just before lunch. I think, 
Cathaoirleach, the corporate policy group agreed to nominate the 
outgoing members for consideration by this council unless of course 
there are other nominations coming from.  
CLLR BEHAN: I want to nominate Councillor Mary Kavanagh who has a 
lot of experience in the financial sector and would be an excellent 
member of the Audit Committee and if she is willing to serve I would 
like to propose her.  
CLLR SNELL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach.  Again it was discussed this 
morning at corporate policy and I think the three people we have from 
the general public are excellent candidates and they have been here 
for a number of years and the one thing about this is that every 
member of this chamber gets an opportunity to question the Audit 
Committee every year. I said it this morning and I say it again, they 
are very open and transparent and I do believe that there won't be too 
many people out there in the public domain, but their expertise and 
who will volunteer to come on to that committee, in regards to the 
public representatives, it was indicated this morning that one they 
were prepared to stay on and hopefully two, but certainly the Audit 
Committee have done a Trojan job and I fully support them.  
JOE: Do I have a seconder for Councillor Kavanagh?  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Snell.  

 
28
CLLR BEHAN: Sorry, Cathaoirleach, we are not saying that we are 
going to restrict a member of the council from being on the Audit 
Committee by having a vote?  Like, what we should be doing here is 
making sure that public elected representatives are on the Audit 
Committee and if there are two places left, if three members of the 
council want to be on that committee they should be on the committee 
and if there are two outside people after that, they can be added in 
and we can vote on which two we want. We are surely not saying that 
an independent elected public representative has to be kind of 
compete against someone from outside the council to be on the Audit 
Committee. I don't think that is good enough, Cathaoirleach, I am 
proposing that the three councillors, the two who were and Councillor 
Kavanagh should be on the committee, first of all, then we can fill the 
other two positions.  
CLLR SNELL: In conjunction with the three people were the public who 
have been here for the last ten years. It's a committee of circumstance 
rather than five.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can I say we had this exact situation two years ago, 
or three years ago when I wanted to go on the Audit Committee and 
Gerry Walsh was proposing and Pat Casey came off it and we weren't 
allowed three elected members because the regulations lay down that 
it can be only three outside people and two, say three external people 
and two internal and that is the way it was two years ago so it hasn't 
changed. So we this had exact vote three years ago.  
JOE:  Cathaoirleach, this is up to the members, but the regulations 
are that the Audit Committee shall consist of five members and shall 
include not less than three external members and not less than two 
existing members...  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Can I ask a question, is the period for five years 
or can we share or is it up to the people whose name is put forward to 
maybe negotiate whether they would do a shared period or something 
like that?   
JOE: It's not prescribed Cathaoirleach, but it is fair to say it is a special 
iced committee and there is a lot of reports to read. It takes a while to 
get up the pace with the various requirements of the position, so I 
would suggest that if you are to split it that it would be for a minimum 
of two years, Cathaoirleach, because there is a lot of training, it is 
specialised and there is loads of reports to be read and it is probably 
one of the most hard, one of the harder working committees of the 
council.  
CLLR BEHAN: Anyway, my proposal stands, I propose councillor 
Kavanagh.  
CLLR WALSH: I was at a CPG this morning and I replaced Councillor 
Casey on this committee two-and-a-half years ago now and again in 
relation to the outside members there, I must concur with Cllr Snell's 
comments, they were most effective and totally in tune with the 
council and it was an enjoyable committee to work on and a learning 
curve from my perspective. I did indicate if there were other members 
who want to go on in my place I have no problem with that. In relation 
to Cllr Kavanagh's proposal to share the position I don't know if that is 

 
29
practical, if it is I would be open to that.  
CLLR TIMMINS: Thank you, Chair. I am note hung up about being on 
this committee, I have been on it for the last ten years, it's not a very 
good and serious committee. It deals with a lot of very sensitive 
information, you could be looking at pay roll and recruitment and 
expenses, so it's, the confidentiality aspect of it is very important and I 
emphasise that to people when we are deciding what we are going to 
do and what is possible. As I say, I also think committees like this 
should be freshened up, there should be a variety of people on it, I 
have no objection to that at all. But by its very nature, the committee 
has to be a committee for questions that asks hard questions but 
equally respects the confidentiality of the office and from that point of 
view, I have no issue with stepping back or sharing, whatever the 
members here decide today I have no issue with it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Okay, well, members, we have councillor Mary 
Kavanagh proposed by Joe Behan and seconded by John Snell. Any 
other proposers and seconders?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Cllr Timmins, are you saying you would prefer to 
step off the committee?   
CLLR TIMMINS: I am not saying that explicitly, but...  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Can we not do a sharing arrangement, surely that 
is possible?  If we can't do that for local Government will get enough 
of them, so we should be able to share those positions?   
ADMINISTRATOR: We will just go through the formal proposers and 
seconders and then decide on the sharing arrangement.  
ADMINISTRATOR: I propose councillor Timmins.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Seconded by councillor Flynn.  
>>: Gerry Walsh proposed by Pat Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr 
Dunne.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Do the three of you want to sit down and chat with 
Tom Fortune and work out the sharing arrangement?  Okay. To 
receive the presentation on the Local Community Development 
Committee and to consider increasing the number of elected members 
on the LCDC from three elected members to four elected members 
which was agreed on the annual general meeting on Friday 7th of 
June. Director Michael Nicholson.  
 
MICHAEL NICHOLSON: Thank you, Cathaoirleach. I am going to give a 
presentation on the LCDC, but just before I do that, just to remind the 
members what happened at the AGM. The LCDC has 19 members, we 
have ten on the committee side and nine on the public side.  
 
On the public side of those nine three of them are elected members. You 
agree that the AGM to increase that to four, which you are entitled to do, 
which means I have to drop some other non-elected member from the public 
side. I have circulated to you a revised list of the LCDC make-up and I have 
brought this to the CPG this morning to endorse it, so I know you have that 
yourself as a fully elected council. I also agree this morning CPG that I would 
come up with a mechanism to better inform the wider elected members of 

 
30
the activities of the LCDC, we do put a piece in the monthly Chief Executive 
report, but the feeling was that it doesn't give enough detail of what the 
LCDC does. So I will come up with a mechanism whereby I will give you a 
better report every month of what exactly the LCDC does. I am constrained 
somewhat in what information I give and a lot of information is of a 
confidential nature, but I will find a mechanism on giving you a better report 
every month, aside in what you are getting. So if I could have a proposer 
and an agreement to the make up it would be appreciated.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposed by Dermot O'Brien and seconded by Anne 
Ferris.  
>>: Is that agreed?  Thank you very much.  
CLLR SNELL: Fully agree with that, but just for the record, in regard to 
the directors giving an indication that he will go to the PPP or PPN in 
regard to representatives from east Wicklow, because east Wicklow is 
not represented on the LCDC. Two elected members from Arklow 
district and we have two from Bray, one from each district of Bray, it's 
just to make sure that is something that will be followed up on. Thank 
you, Cathaoirleach.  
>>: Yes, that is, I suppose in the IT world, you would probably have 
one member from each, but it hasn't worked out like that, I have 
agreed, with one vacancy on the community side so I have asked, I 
whether ask the PPN to try and pick someone from the east, sorry the 
west of the county, because the west is... [INAUDIBLE], or the east, 
sorry, the east. Okay, so I am going to give a preparation, there is a 
lot in this. This will be new to the new members, some of the other 
members will have seen it before. This will be circulated to you after 
the meeting, I don't expect you to learn it all today. There is a lot in it. 
We often speak a different language at the LCDC, you have to get used 
to it, I will go through it as quickly as I can.    That is what the LCDC 
does: 
 
 
 
Presentation presented.  
 
 
>>: I have sent this to you and you can read it at your leisure. Any 
questions or are you all completely baffled?   
CLLR SNELL: Thank you, Cathaoirleach, just a general question in 
regards to the PPN, how many people are employed through the PPN 
and are they employed by the County Wicklow Partnership or what 
way does it work?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: Any other questions?   
CLLR MULLEN: Just a quick question, you mentioned at the start of 
your presentation, about the programme, my understanding was it 
would be a national programme, did that ever happen, I know the arts 
centre were anxious about it, it doesn't seem to have been brought out 
nationally?   
>>: No, there was supposed to be a national programme, we haven't 
seen it, I will keep you posted, as soon as I hear you will hear. The 

 
31
PPN has two employees and they are paid contribution from the 
Department and a contribution from the county council. The way it's 
summed up the Department have taken on of staff themselves in 
Wicklow they were taken on through Ceart organisation and basically 
we employ them and we recoup Ceart. They prefer it, we prefer it and 
it works very well, so we have two employees a full time administrator 
and a part-time assistant.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay. Thank you very much. Michael. Number 11 to 
ratify the appointment of Gerry O'Neill, Baltinglass Municipal District 
and Stephen Matthews, Bray Municipal District, and any Municipal 
Districts not represented on the corporate policy group.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposed Cllr Snell and seconded by Cllr Blake.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Agreed. 12, to ratify the 14 elected members to the 
Wicklow County Council Joint Policing Committee.  
ADMINISTRATOR: They were referred out to the relevant Municipal 
Districts and they were listed there 1-14, but there is, there are, there 
is scope for 15 elected members so, I am throwing it out there, 
Baltinglass has two, all of the other districts have three, it's open to 
that district to nominate another one.  
CLLR BLAKE: Sorry, at the meeting Gerry O'Neill did talk about the fact 
he was already on it and it was my understanding he was going back 
on it as a third member of the Baltinglass constituency, but he is not 
here to verify that.  
ADMINISTRATOR: No, the notification from the Municipal District 
administrator just gave two names because the nomination was for at 
least two members, so I think that is where the confusion lay, it's open 
to you if you want to nominate a third member from the Baltinglass 
district.  
CLLR BLAKE: Can we nominate Gerry in his absence.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Proposed by Vincent Blake and the seconder, John 
Mullen.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Then the ratification for 15 members.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Can I have a proposer. Aoife Flynn Kennedy and a 
seconder?  Councillor Dermot O'Brien.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Thank you very much. Okay, 13.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To ratify the appointment of the following five 
elected members to the local traveller accommodation consultant 
committee. Joe Behan from Bray, Lourda Scott, Greystones, Irene 
Winters Wicklow and Peir Leonard from Arklow. Can I have a 
proposer?  Proposed by Tom Fortune and seconded by Paul O'Brien. 
Agreed?  Okay. To ratify the appointment of three elected members to 
the Bray area partnership, that is Grace McManus, Aoife Flynn 
Kennedy and Lourda Scott.  
CLLR FERRIS: I propose.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Proposed by Anne Ferris and by Cllr Ryan. The three 
elected members to the East Coast Drugs Task Force.  One John Snell 
and three Tommy Annesley from Arklow. Proposed by Pat Fitzgerald 
and seconded by Rory O'Connor. Agreed?  Okay. 16 to ratify the 
appointment of the following five elected members to Wicklow County 
Tourism Limited Melanie Corrigan from Bray, Gerry Walsh from 

 
32
Greystones and Paul O'Brien from Wicklow and Patsy Glennon from 
Baltinglass and Miriam Murphy from Arklow. Proposer?  Proposed by 
Gail Dunne and seconded by Cllr Paul O'Brien. Agreed?  17 to ratify 
the appointment of the following one elected member to Bray Tourism 
limited, Cllr Aoife Flynn Kennedy. Proposed by Anne Ferris. Agreed?  
18, to ratify the appointment of the following six elected members to 
the Greystones/bray Cliff Walk management authority. Melanie 
Corrigan, Rory O'Connor from Bray, Tom Fortune from Greystones and 
Derek Mitchell from Greystones and Gerry Walsh from Greystones. 
Proposed by Dermot O'Brien seconded by [INAUDIBLE]...  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Lourda Scott. Agreed. 19 to ratify the appointment 
of the following two elected members to the Bray Harbour Joint 
Development Committee, Stephen Matthews from bray Municipal 
District and Anne Ferris from Bray Municipal District, proposed by Paul 
O'Brien and seconded by Grace McManus. Agreed?  20 to ratify the 
appointment of the following two elected members to the Bray 
Swimming Pool Committee, Anne Ferris and Aoife Flynn Kennedy Bray 
Municipal District and there is a third person to be appointed?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Yes, it's Bray will come up, we will come back.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: So if we can have someone to propose the two that 
are there, Stephen Matthews and seconded by Derek Mitchell. Agreed?  
21. To ratify the appointment of the following two elected members to 
the Ballynagran area. Proposed by Paul O'Brien, seconded by councillor 
Mary Kavanagh. To consider the appointment of two elected members 
to Comhairle na nÓg. Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: I propose Tom Fortune.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Seconded by Cllr Snell. Do we have any other 
proposals?   
CLLR FERRIS: I would like to propose Cllr Grace McManus.  
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY: I second that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Any other proposals?  Okay, well I deem the two of 
you elected. Cllr Behan.  
CLLR BEHAN: Just on 23, if you are finished?   
CATHAOIRLEACH: 23 to consider the appointment of four elected 
members to the Maritime Business Development Group, one from each 
the Municipal Districts.  
CLLR BEHAN: I want to propose Peir Leonard.  
CLLR WHITMORE: I second that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR CORRIGAN: I propose Derek Mitchell.  
>>: I second that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Sorry, Cllr Snell.  
CLLR SNELL: I was just wondering should item 23 and 25 not be put 
back to the Municipal District?   
ADMINISTRATOR: I think, it forms part of the work of the county and 
both [INAUDIBLE] is considered on today's meeting, if that is a 
separate to the members.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, so at the moment we have.  
ADMINISTRATOR: We have Peir Leonard proposed by Joe Behan 
seconded by Anne Ferris, so then we have Derek Mitchell proposed by 

 
33
Melanie Corrigan and seconded by?  Gerry Walsh. That is two.  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  
CLLR P O'BRIEN: Paul O'Brien I nominate Gail Dunne.  
>>: I second that. (Unknown councillor.)  
CATHAOIRLEACH: That is Arklow. We need someone from Bray.  
CLLR MATTHEWS: I don't know if anyone is interested, we did the first, 
if no Bray member is interestedly put my named for.  
CLLR D O'BRIEN: I will second it.  
ADMINISTRATOR: So Peir Leonard, Derek Mitchell, Gail Dunne and 
Stephen Matthews.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, item 24, to consider the nomination of an 
additional elected member to the County Wicklow Partnership 
committee?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Can I say at the annual meeting of the Wicklow County 
Council, the following two members were nominated Avril Cronin and Paul 
O'Brien.  In addition, they proposed a third nominee and ask that the 
council write to facilitate the third member which at that time was John 
Mullen, but now Brian carte CEO has confirmed to Wicklow County Council 
that we have four places on the board of the County Wicklow Partnership for 
councillors in Wicklow County Council and looking for us to confirm the 
names of the nominees at your earliest convenience. We have Cllr Cronin, 
Paul O'Brien and John Mullen, we are looking for a fourth.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: Can I propose, unfortunately he is not able to be 
here today, but Miriam Murphy.  
CLLR P KENNEDY: I would like to second that.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Agreed?  Okay, to consider the appointment of five 
elected members to the county Wicklow Heritage Forum, one from 
each Municipal District. 
CLLR MITCHELL: I propose Aoife Flynn Kennedy.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: I will take them as you appear on the screen.  
So, Patsy Glennon.  
CLLR GLENNON: I propose John Mullen for the position in Baltinglass 
area.  
>>: I second that...  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay, all the lights have gone out, so you have 
stopped proposing people.  
ADMINISTRATOR: We have Aoife Flynn Kennedy proposed by Derek 
Mitchell, seconded by?  Melanie Corrigan. Then John Mullen proposed 
by Patsy Glennon and seconded by Vincent Blake.  
CLLR SNELL: Again I would have preferred it was put back, but it 
obviously didn't explain that, as a sitting member of the county 
Wicklow Heritage Forum, I think it's a hugely important committee, I 
think it's probably a little bit disingenuous the way it's happened if we 
had been given a more of a forum to discuss it. The amount of work 
that goes on within that through our district, is huge and indeed the 
chair himself, Noel Keys who was a former chair of the tourism board 
puts a huge amount of effort into it. I know that really it's been 
brushed over today, at the last minute, but certainly I want to remain 
on that committee, if there is no interest coming from that district, but 
I think we will hear over the next five years about heritage and the 

 
34
importance of that, but I am disappointed with the way it's been 
handled through no fault of anyone.  
CLLR DUNNE: I propose Cllr Snell.  
>>: I second that.  
CLLR FITZGERALD: I am going to propose Peir Leonard.  
CLLR ANNESLEY: I second that?   
ADMINISTRATOR: Just to respond to that, it doesn't appear on the 
annual meeting, those nominees were appointed during the year so it 
didn't come on the annual meeting radar, so the heritage officer asked 
for it to be list add at today's meeting, so that is how that happened.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Maybe for five years’ time we will make sure it's on 
the AGM.  
ADMINISTRATOR: We have four at the moment, one from Greystones, 
one from Baltinglass, sorry, one from Bray, one from Baltinglass and 
one from Arklow, so we are looking from someone from the 
Greystones area. So anyone from Greystones area that would like to 
be on the?   
CLLR SNELL: I propose Cllr Fortune.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Cllr Fortune proposed by Cllr Snell and seconded by 
Cllr Fitzgerald.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Okay we have no notices of motion this month, so, I 
hope you all have a lovely summer and we will see you in September.  
ADMINISTRATOR: Before you go, the 12 member of the protocol 
committee can you stay here, if you wish to stay here and have your 
meeting or alternatively you can go to the Wurzburg room.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: A vote will be taken on and it was recorded that 
32 people voted there is only 30 members present.  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Two absent, 34. It's 30 people voted for it and two 
were absent.  
CLLR M KAVANAGH: Okay because it said 32...  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Yes.  
 
 
 
