1 
 
ORDINARY MEETING OF WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL HELD AT 
WICKLOW COUNTY BUILDINGS, WICKLOW TOWN ON 
MONDAY, 4th November 2019 AT 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MYCLEARTEXT LTD: 
Certify the following to be a transcript of the 
stenographic notes in the above-named action for 
communication support.  
Elaine McCarthy 
Elaine McCarthy 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
NON-VERBATIM TRANSCRIPT OF COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 4TH 2019 AT 2PM:  
 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Good afternoon members. 
Good afternoon members.  There is an option here.  
Just turning up the mics a bit.  OK, so before we 
start, we'll have votes of sympathy.  Lorraine 
Gallagher yes for Noel Belton father of our 
colleague Shane Vaughan and Francey Holland 
related to Cllr Dunne  
CATHAOIRLEACH: To confirm and sign the meeting of 
special meeting of Wicklow County Council to 
consider the Local Property Tax and setting of the 
Local Adjustment Factor, proposed by Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald and Cllr Stephen Matthews.  And to 
confirm and sign the minutes of the ordinary 
meeting held on Monday 7th of October.  Cllr Gail 
Dunne seconded by Cllr Vincent Blake.  Thank you.  
Item three to consider the disposal 3.68 hectares 
of land shown at situated at Bog Meadow in 
Enniskerry for a period of 20 years, as per the 
notice previously circulated and I think Mr 
Nicholson is going to give us a brief talk on that. 

3 
 
Mr NICHOLSON:  Thank you.  On the face of it this, 
is not a normal disposal resolution so I thought 
I better introduce it, especially for those members 
who are new, and those who might not be familiar 
with the what we consider here as the 'saga of Bog 
Meadow', which has been going on for a long number 
of years, we were asked to take over the file in 
2015 to unravel an unsatisfactory situation but 
from the users, the community and council 
perspective, their interest, no leases in place, 
users were effectively stressing on county council 
property and nine acres of land in Enniskerry used 
by the community since 1977, there was a shared 
clubhouse that no club wanted or could have 
exclusive use of, a lot of work was done down 
through the years by former Councillors John Ryan 
and Christopher Fox and Cllr Stephen Matthews and 
in recent times Cllr Melanie Corrigan to resolve 
this long-standing issue. 
And trying to find a workable solution to what was 
a big problem.  But the series of lengthy meetings 
held with the council and users groups and wider 
community for the past number of years.  And this 
culminated getting senior counsel advice to what 

4 
 
was the best way forward and the senior counsel 
advice was sporting leases would not be appropriate 
in this case, and the advice given was management 
group should be established with nominees from each 
user group and wider community to control and 
manage this facility.  This could be the county 
council would lease the entire lands to this 
company who would be a proper established company 
with book of accounts and AGMs and would manage the 
facility on behalf of the community to ensure it 
was used by the community and by the community and 
ensure no-one club got control over the one 
facility the county council always retained 
ownership of the lands and the entire facility is 
always and will always be available for the whole 
community of Enniskerry, each club could apply for 
individual grants from their parent organisation, 
and the company itself could apply for grants for 
example for leader funding when the council can't 
apply a company could apply in its own right.  
Shared facilities, there was a clubhouse on the 
land and that would be managed by the company, 
because no one club was managing that.  Also, of 
course, a lot of investment is needed in the area.  

5 
 
There are issues, talk about a playground for 
example, and this will allow the company itself to 
apply for funding for that.  This is also modelled 
and can be used elsewhere, I was asked about it by 
colleagues in Bray, Ballywaltrim in Bray, there was 
a shared facility and I've been asked to talk to 
the Bray MD about using this approach in Enniskerry 
to solve that issue in Bray as well and happy do 
that.  I recommend the approval of this disposal.  
Cllr Melanie Corrigan.  The Bog Meadow is an area 
of land in Enniskerry village, it is used 
extensively by the local community, it is multiuser 
facility the football club, which is the largest 
club in Enniskerry and leading clubs in the country 
for girls soccer and has over 380 children in the 
club.  The two schools use it for sports facilities 
on local sports days and Enniskerry and Kilmac 
games for training, the Enniskerry walking club and 
boxing club, they're a community tennis courts on 
it with 80 to 9  members in the club, small 
all-weather pitch which is unusable for six months 
of the year and clubhouse which isn't presently fit 
for purpose, there's a walking trail around the 
perimeter.  By way of lease to the Bog Meadow 

6 
 
Management Company, this will enable the new Bog 
Meadow committee made up the user groups to 
maintain the grounds for all the users in the 
community.  There are currently no common 
community facilities, no playground and no proper 
community hall, and no functional all-weather 
facility.  Crucially this process will allow the 
committee, made up of the user groups to apply for 
national grants to develop the grounds to match the 
funds already raised by the community to improve 
the facilities and develop new ones protecting this 
area, for all its user groups.  Thank you. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Thank you Cathaoirleach and the 
director of report.  We want to attribute to the 
people involved in all clubs and organisations in 
Enniskerry and throughout the county for the work 
they do on behalf of their communities. 
But, you know, what's interesting about this is 
that this was never discussed at Bray Municipal 
District.  Mr Nicholson's, there's another area in 
Bray that he's been asked by Bray Municipal 
District to sort something out.  I don't remember 
us deciding that Mr Nicholson should be sorting 
that out either.  And, what I'm suggesting, what 

7 
 
I want to propose is amendment to Cllr Melanie 
Corrigan's motion is that this matter be referred 
to Bray Municipal District for fuller discussion 
rather than taking up everybody's time here today, 
while I accept the motivation of Mr Nicholson and 
council and all of the people, Cllr Melanie 
Corrigan has referred to and I know Cllr Rory 
O'Connor has been active in this matter as well, 
as I would see it, stepping back from it for a minute 
this is Wicklow County Council walking away from 
a public facility and saying leave it up to whatever 
clubs want to get involved, they can apply for the 
grants, we're getting it off our books.  And you 
know, the model that was in Charlesland I think is 
the model we should be having everywhere, that's 
a public facility available to the public and 
guaranteed to the public forever.  And, if money 
is needed, well money can be found, and grants can 
be applied for and so on.  I don't like the trend 
of privatising, even though it is not privatising 
for profiteering motives it is privatising a public 
facility to individual clubs, and while the term 
of the lease is 20 years, who knows how many of those 
very well-intentioned people involved today are 

8 
 
still going to be involved in 20 years' time.  So, 
there are a lot of issues that the other, final 
point I'll make is senior counsel's advice was 
sought, we haven't seen it, and don't think we 
should make a decision on issues such as I think 
if it is quoted for other sports facilities in the 
county without seeing this senior counsel advice, 
my proposal is that we refer it back to Bray 
Municipal District for fuller discussion and come 
on the agenda then again at future meeting thank 
you. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks very much.  And thanks for 
the presentation Michael.  I think one of the 
issues that has come up over the last day really 
is I think we have all been contacted by a local 
resident in the area that isn't aware of the plans 
and seen there's a Motion of Notice now to dispose 
and so there's concerns I think from a community's 
perspective about the level of consultation.  Now 
I don't know anything, I haven't been involved in 
the process at all but, if there's that feeling out 
there, the community haven't been involved, I think 
that's important that's addressed.  The model 
that's been used, I know Cllr Behan was saying the 

9 
 
Charlesland was the way to go, I would caution that 
because that's a private company managing that and 
what we're finding is community groups cannot 
afford the rates that are being applied to this, 
so I don't know whether that's necessarily the 
right model either. The model Bog Meadow is 
applying for we're going to apply to Greystones 
area but there's reps from the local residents 
association and community on board hopefully and 
we're looking to start that now and that might work.  
But I think from a community consultation 
perspective, I think I would urge, you know, 
caution and if it is brought back to the Municipal 
District that would enable a level of consultation 
of the community could engage with, and I would 
support that.  Thank you. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thank you, I'd like to second Cllr 
Melanie Corrigan's proposal, I'd like to thank Mr 
Nicholson for the amount of work they've put in this 
over the past four and five years, a huge amount 
of work put into it and the user groups in the Bog 
Meadow have been very much involved in it, and the 
Enniskerry Forum Group, there's huge awareness 
this was the idea that was being proposed, and huge 

10 
 
support for it as well.  And the director has 
outlined it very well, this disposal will allow 
this then to go through to a contract stage, so this 
disposal is formality to allow the contract to be 
presented. 
The contract is restricted in what can be used, it 
is only for sporting and those groups and there's 
a community management structure there in place, 
made up of members of the community and those user 
groups up there, and that membership can change 
over the years as Cllr Joe Behan has said, that's 
a good thing, but it allows the situation to be 
regularised the it is fantastic facility.  That's 
why I got involved four years ago to make it better 
and Cllr Fox, Cllr Ryan and Cllr Melanie Corrigan 
and Cllr Rory O'Connor are involved now, that point 
is important.  And allowing them to go for funding 
is also extremely important to sports groups and 
having security of the new contract that is relying 
on you to secure tenure is imperative to apply for 
leader funding or any funding stream and that's 
what these sports groups need - the security and 
ability to apply for funding.  And by proceeding 
with the disposal today we can do that, regularise 

11 
 
the situation and allow the Bog Meadow to be 
improved for all users in Enniskerry.  And another 
point, I was glad to see it, was the public right 
of way to the Bog Meadow has been maintained in this 
document and that's clearly shown on the map, so 
I'd be happy to second the proposal.  Thank you 
Cathaoirleach. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thank you.  Well, like I 
completely appreciate all the work that's been done 
up to this point in terms of the Bog Meadow, someone 
who sits on the LCDC, I appreciate the intention 
and the vision for what the potential is for the 
Bog Meadow going forward.  But I suppose as an 
elective rep, I would it would be remiss of me not 
to represent the fact that people have contacted 
me about the issue including the user group who 
didn't know about the process up to this point, so 
I kind of feel that there's, there is in the 
interest maybe of the integrity of the process, the 
cohort of people in Enniskerry who haven't been 
consulted and I know there's talk of a public 
meeting and that's a very healthy approach and it 
almost feels like one thing has come before the 
other so I support Cllr Joe Behan's proposals that 

12 
 
a good conversation is had at Bray MD, and the 
people of Enniskerry have an opportunity to listen 
to the vision for this, and to buy into it. If people 
don't buy into something at stage one there's a risk 
factor so there's no harm in putting it back for 
a month and kind of ticking some extra boxes in the 
interests of integrity and healthy process. 
CLLR CREAN: I'd like to support Cllr Joe Behan's 
suggestion to delay it, I suppose I only have the 
one page document here to make a decision on and 
I don't think I'd be making an informed decision, 
it raised a decision for me,  something in MD that 
impacts on the elected reps and other MDs and who 
they represent and their electorate so I don't feel 
I have the information. I think it would be a better 
process if it went through Bray MD first, 
discussion takes place, OK they can't make a 
recommendation but if something came more in 
writing than the one-page document that came with 
the disposal notice, I would be comfortable making 
a decision. I hear all the different points, they 
all sound relevant but I haven't met people on the 
ground or spoke to the community groups so I don't 
feel I can make that decision about another MD area 

13 
 
and raised a bigger issue about the centralisation 
of local government because I'm asked to make a 
decision on I don't have enough information so I'd 
support motion to go back to Bray MD first and then 
I'd be happy to make informed decision on it. 
CLLR WALSH:  This hasn't been discussed with the 
current municipal membership in Bray so it would 
make sense to run this through there first, the time 
line, does it make a difference if it is put back 
for the next meeting it would seem the sensible 
thing to do at this point?  
MR NICHOLSON:  No there's no timelines.  Whether 
it is this month or next month the sooner the better 
is all I could say because they're anxiously 
awaiting application for funding but no timeline 
as such no.  Just couple of issues that were 
raised.  This is four years getting to this stage.  
There have been public meetings, there have been 
lots of consultation with community groups, the 
people on the management committee representative 
of the wider community as well as the user groups.  
It hasn't been brought to Bray MD, I can confirm 
that, it was done between the local community 
senior counsel and we trying to get this across the 

14 
 
line.  And that's really it, there's nothing else 
that came up that I was asked to comment on, I don't 
think the Charlesland model would be a good model 
for the reasons stated, this a unique situation 
with so many users using the same piece of ground.  
And a shared clubhouse this was seen to be the only 
model and that's been confirmed by senior counsel 
that is working in this particular case.  
CLLR MATTHEWS:  Thanks Chairman, just to follow on 
from what the director has said, there's a huge 
amount of work done on this and I think if I know 
Cllr Fox and Cllr Ryan are gone now but they would 
concur there is wide consultation on this, it seems 
to fit exactly what the bog users, Bog Meadow users 
want and to put it back by another month and delay 
something, when people come late to something I 
understand their concerns, but there has to be an 
element of trust that the public representatives 
have gone out here and tried do with the director 
and legal department and users are satisfied and 
I wanted to move this along, I don't want to see 
it delayed because all we're delaying is sporting 
groups and user groups in Enniskerry being able to 
apply for funding and regularise their usage and 

15 
 
making good facility far better for the community 
in Enniskerry and I don't want it delayed to that. 
>>:  Someone says there's a lack of clubs in the 
area, and I see there has been contact used by the 
soccer club and tennis clubs, who are the Bog Meadow 
Management Company who, do they represent, who do 
they represent? 
MR NICOLSON:  All the user groups, it is a soccer 
club, tennis club, there's a boxing club who are 
on the committee, they haven't located there, 
they're hoping to move back from Bray and a couple 
of community reps on that, I don't want to list out 
the names that would be unfair. 
>>:  But there's various people on the committee, 
and they will know this will happen, I will support 
it I don't think delaying a month will change 
anything. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, I just think if there's so 
much work done on this to date why didn't it come 
before the Bray Municipal District, it is in their 
area and I find it hard to believe that it didn't 
come before them.  So I don't think a month will 
make any difference whatsoever, if there's been so 
much work put into it, well, we might as well go 

16 
 
the whole hog and tease it out and let people have 
their say and have some kind of a public a and allow 
people to have input in it.                      
CLLR FERRIS: Cllr Stephen Matthews put it clearly, 
this is going on four years and our respective 
former councillors they have put in a lot of work, 
and you know the committees dealing with this 
particular issue have put in a lot of work and 
indeed Mr Nicholson, it is right it hasn't come 
before the Bray MD, but, you know, I will take in 
good faith what Cllr Stephen Matthews said and you 
know other councillors have said, this has been 
worked on, and has been brought to this stage now 
and I think we should all have faith in that 
process.  That disposal of notice, that was posted 
out to us on 23rd of October, and if members I think 
around the chamber here didn't know what it was all 
about, they had plenty of time to get on to the 
council to find out what exactly disposal notice 
was about and inform themselves rather than waiting 
until it is on the agenda today, and then making 
queries about it.   I, I'm quite I will take the 
bona fides, what Mr Nicholson has said and I think 
it will be great for Enniskerry, if we put it off 

17 
 
next month we will be back here next month and 
voting in favour for it, I don't think putting it 
to Bray MD will make changes in it, I congratulate 
the people who worked on it for past four years, 
and I know if I had been here for four years working 
on it and I wasn't sitting here today I would be 
a bit annoyed that people didn't acknowledge the 
work that the councillors have been put into it.  
So, I have no hesitation in supporting the motion.  
Thank you. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks Chair.  I don't think 
anyone here is discounting any of the work that's 
been done, we know to get this far in a process takes 
an awful lot of time and energy and work but 
sometimes it can happen that people outside the 
process may feel they haven't been involved.  And, 
whilst I would have been perfectly happy to vote 
with this today, on the recommendation of the local 
district councillors from Bray, I think the fact 
there has been quite a lot of discussion on-line 
with many people saying they weren't aware of it, 
and we have been directly contacted by some as well 
saying they weren't aware of it, that is ringing 
alarm bells with me.  And I suppose, I think it is, 

18 
 
a good model and to have all the different user 
groups is the way to go.  But I think it is 
important so that the community on the ground also 
have an opportunity to hear what the model is about.  
And I don't think if it is four years in process, 
I don't think another month will make or break it.  
I'm just wondering, just to have a better 
understanding, has there at any stage been a public 
meeting held on this issue?  And are there any 
councillors on the committee, because I know the 
one in Greystones we have three councillors on the 
committee and our role will be to engage with the 
broader community and the community reps are they, 
from the my understand something that this area was 
open to be used by the community as such, are they 
the people who are now represented on the 
committee?  How are the community reps chosen I 
suppose would be my question, thank you. 
CLLR FLYNN KENNEDY:  Thank you.  I just wanted to 
support Cllr Melanie Corrigan's motion, I have been 
up to the Bog Meadow myself and seen the facilities 
it is very clear that co-ordinated approach to the 
use of the land and the clubhouse up there is 
needed.  I'm only a very new councillor on Bray 

19 
 
Municipal District but fully aware of the process 
and history behind it.  And from a personal point 
of view, wouldn't benefit from being brought to 
Bray Municipal District and back here again, I've 
kept myself informed about it and I visited the site 
itself so I would be very proposed to supporting 
it.  I also, welcome the fact that the lands of the 
clubhouse will be used for community use and that's 
going to be built in the lease agreement and I think 
that the safety net and securities there in terms 
of the community and the facilities are being 
protected by that way.  So, I would not like to see 
it go back to Bray Municipal District just to come 
back here in a month's time 
CLLR CREAN:  I wouldn't doubt the good work that 
happened and research that's taken in 
consultation, but as a new councillor I certainly 
think there's needs to be a different process 
making MD areas, I'm not taking the time, I only 
took a week, about you it is difficult to get out 
on the ground to talk to community groups and see 
what the different peace processes are.  So it is 
not the doubt the good work that happened but the 
process going forward, I wouldn't like to think a 

20 
 
decision that impacted heavily on the people on 
Greystones and wider environment was going to be 
decided at the full council meeting and proper 
consultation hadn't taken place, even though I 
respect the fact it has taken place, there's 
disquiet among other people to think it hasn't, in 
the interest of good practice and good forward it 
is respect for that, and not undermining any good 
work that's taken before. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  I take Cllr Anne Ferris's 
point about the notice and the time line, so I 
totally also would like to acknowledge that the 
district manager of Bray makes himself available 
in this regard all the time but, to be honest, this 
landed yesterday for me, so I'm not sure how 
comfortable he would have been if I made a call on 
a Sunday, but, I can imagine myself being there to 
pitch this idea to all the user groups and community 
of Enniskerry as positive and transformative 
initiative, that's I have a comfort zone for 
imagining that but at the same time when numbers 
of people are contacting me asking that they be 
given this amount of time, to be involved one month 
I think that's worth considering.  

21 
 
>>:  I suppose people and members have all been to 
the fore in that regard.  And I would be supporting 
this, until I got an e-mail last night outlining 
that some of the groups who use this facility, know 
nothing about this process, and that begs the 
question, if they're using the facilities, why are 
they excluded or feel excluded today to a certain 
degree, I would urge all members four weeks in the 
life of something so important, is not a big issue 
and I think this could go back to Bray MD, eight 
councillors there could decide on this, you still 
have time to make a public meeting, I know there's 
been trojan work going on for four years and I 
commend the people who put the should are to the 
wheel on this, but it is more important for us as 
32 public representatives to make sure that 
everybody is included, we always hear about public 
consultation and the importance of openness and 
transparency, and I think this is our chance to say 
put it back for four weeks and on the agenda it can 
be item one or two of the agenda in a month's time 
and I think the support is here, everyone in this 
chamber will support it, once that consultation has 
taken place.                                     

22 
 
CLLR FORTUNE: As I say, we only got correspondence 
on this last night, obviously we were aware what 
was coming up on the agenda and you would make 
assumptions based on this, but this information 
comes up, when you look and talk about the model 
going forward if the property going forward is 
vested in the total Enniskerry community that it 
isn't down to a company X or Y in the community, 
in other words it is vested in Enniskerry, every 
man woman and child of Enniskerry has ownership and 
no-one is excluded and board of directors in to 
manage it and the thing runs smoothly, to me that 
would be the model I would strongly recommend 
 
CLLR O'BRIEN:  Having travelled around the country 
as a referee and changing on the side of the road 
I recommend this, because especially children 
shouldn't change on the side of the road, four years 
of work has gone in this, and we should trust each 
other in the chamber for the work we've done, if 
it was put back about four weeks, I hope people 
don't make politics for this to make a headline and 
then put back four weeks and four weeks, the only 
people who suffer are the users of the ground so 

23 
 
I hope we get the vote on this shortly to be honest 
with you and move on thank you. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Having listened to the news here 
and my knowledge of the previous councillors, Fox 
and Ryan, both having good contact with the village 
of Enniskerry, and what's being said is going on 
for a long time, I'm sure they would have a good 
knowledge of what is going on there, also, and other 
councillors who have spoken here, and Cllr Melanie 
Corrigan who proposed it would have excellent 
knowledge what goes on in Enniskerry and Cllr 
Stephen Matthews has been involved earlier.  And 
I would trust the judgment of the of those local 
councillors who have been involved, and this, they 
have been speaking about this for much of the 
community in Enniskerry and I think we should get 
on with it and improve the sporting facilities in 
Enniskerry and on a proper basis going forward for 
the future and do it now. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  Thank you I too appreciate, and I 
can see clearly how much work has gone on to this, 
by councillors new to the process and doing 
research and people on the ground for a long time.  
For me it feels like we're so close to something 

24 
 
really, really brilliant, but, we're just not quite 
there yet and it is what principle will guide this, 
will the majority Cllr Stephen Matthews said the 
majority of Bray MD support or if we have leave no 
someone behind and have everyone on board with 
this, and for the sake of four weeks we can bring 
it to be something better, I don't know what 
political gain there would be playing politics for 
trying to make something just a little bit better, 
closer to being the excellent project it could be.  
So, that's my perspective. 
CLLR CORRIGAN:  Sorry, yes, I've only got involved 
in this since I got elected but as a parent whose 
children have always played and for the last 30 
years have been playing football on this pitch, 
I've known about it for a long time and there's 
considerable public meetings over the last ten, 
fifteen years about this. Just on the committee, 
there are representatives from the schools, from 
the walking club, local reps through the forum, the 
community games and the boxing club, they've all 
been involved, since I've certainly got involved, 
they've all been in the consultation process. 
 CLLR LEONARD:  I'm just wondering, at this stage 

25 
 
when so much work has been done and there seems to 
be a group of people that seems to be excluded could 
we past this today but put in a sort of like a clause 
the people who have been excluded be afforded the 
clans to pit sit on the committee as part of it.  
The community groups that use it. 
Mr Nicholson:  The legislation, is quite 
clear - the local authority says the disposal 
should not be carried out until - there no other 
options, you pass it, or you don't pass 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We have proposals from Cllr 
Melanie Corrigan and Cllr Joe Behan if we take Cllr 
Melanie Corrigan's first and we end up and it passes 
we won't be taking Cllr Joe Behan's and if we take 
Cllr Joe Behan's first, we have a second vote. 
MS GALLAGHER:  About the legislation, and I defer 
you, it says the first meeting of the local 
authority held after the expiration of ten days 
after the which is notice are sent or delivered the 
local authority may resolve the disposal shall not 
be carried out, be carried out or that it should 
be carried out in accordance with the terms in the 
resolution.  Paragraph D, if the local authority 
does not pass a resolution to paragraph B the 

26 
 
disposal maybe carried out.  I just caution 
against voting for disposal resolution, if it 
fails, well, it can't be revisited for another six 
months.  So, Cllr Joe Behan's is a new proposal it 
is not amendment so, if the elected members want 
to vote for the deferral first and then:  Rather 
than have the resolution, what do members feel. 
>>:  There are people who want to support this, but 
perceived not supporting the overall project by 
voting for Cllr Joe Behan's four week delay, I will 
support this, but want the people who sent that 
e-mail last night as part in a process, if you take 
the vote, obviously I won't be voting for the first 
proposal, because I want the four-week delay but 
the public will see Cllr Joe Behan and myself and 
others who vote against it as not supporting the 
project.  That's not true.                                       
MS GALLAGHER: It would require a new disposal 
resolution for next month to comply with the 
regulations. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  Take Cllr Joe Behan's first. 
  
  
MS GALLAGHER:  So that's nine for, 20 against and 

27 
 
two not present.  So, sorry three not present so 
we proceed with the vote on the disposal resolution 
as circulated proposed by Cllr Melanie Corrigan and 
seconded by Cllr Stephen Matthews. 
CLLR FORTUNE:  Can I make an observation, I have 
a problem with what we've just done and I'll explain 
why, we have a structure in place where we have the 
32 members in the council and five municipal 
districts and Municipal District is integral part 
of the decision process, and I think it is totally 
wrong that this particular item today has happened 
without being properly processed through the 
Municipal District and I just want that recorded 
it shouldn't be the case, we fight foot and nail 
to have proper representation and we shouldn't 
willy nilly allow it to be side-stepped.  There's 
a process, and it should be followed properly, and 
municipal districts need to get more respect, I 
said this before, it is a matter of public record 
the way councillors are treated and integral part 
of our system and should be treated with respect. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  We received funding under the 
village in respect of Aughrim, an upgrade of the 
amenities, installation of new lighting and 

28 
 
handrails in Delgany facility feasibility study 
and design plan, Dunlavin walking trail at historic 
route and Red Cross in enhancement to the district, 
through the village.  Just mention one or two other 
items, you got notification in the commencement of 
the review of the Wicklow Development Plan to 2016 
to 2022.  It commences on Wednesday 6th of 
November, the started a process a marked by 
invitation to public and subscribe bodies 
regarding the review, submissions will be accepted 
in Wednesday 6th of November 2019 to Friday, 10th 
of January.  So that's being advertised on their 
website and Facebook page, Twitter and public uses 
et cetera to assist the process we have prepared 
a webpage through which the public can view and 
download the development plan and process for 
making the plan which will be live from Wednesday.  
Submissions can be made directly will you the 
website via invitation port and submissions by post 
and e-mail there, there's issues booklet available 
to view and download from the website, copies by 
the council office and public information days by 
13th of November, Greystones, a 20th in Bray MD, 
and 21st County Hall Wicklow, 27th Arklow municipal 

29 
 
office and Blessington library, there's a public 
information day also in relation to the N11, and 
M1's junction 14 improvement scheme, there's 
second public consultation and they will be there 
to inform the transportation office options 
developed to date problems constraints identified 
to date and the programme of advancement of the 
project.  So, that's taking place on the 12th of 
November, from noon to 8pm in the Glenview Hotel.  
There's also, consultation in relation to 
BusConnects and the redesign of bus services, that 
consultation will take place in Royal Hotel in Bray 
on 18th of November, 11.30-5.30 on the nineteenth 
of November.  I'll take the rest as read. 
CLLR TIMMINS:  These reports have very welcome and 
they should form a central part of our meeting and 
should, I think the bulk of the meeting should be 
taken up by it, not when we get caught up in other 
stuff that takes up excessive time. This is the core 
of what the council are about, and information that 
we should be the Bible about what is going on here.  
But I'm going to raise one issue and it is on page 
16, town and village renewal, what we were applied 
for, the results from out last Thursday of the 

30 
 
allocations, I congratulate the five villages or 
towns that got funding.  But I have to - was 250K, 
but just from the printout of all the counties, 
we're the lowest in the whole country, correct me 
if I'm wrong and that's a record now for four years, 
predating your time management, I know you've done 
a lot to do the funding that Wicklow gets but we 
applied for 750K from page 2016, we're the lowest 
in the country, could we have a review what is going 
on, I don't think we've that much less towns and 
villages, OK, it excludes the big towns, the four 
big towns like smaller counties with less villages 
and towns like Carlow, they consistently outscore 
up in terms of funding, two or three to one, maybe 
this time a little less, but we need a review where, 
we're going wrong, why are we failing to get our 
share of funding in village renewal, it is not a 
one-off year it is consistent outcome, and I'm 
concerned Wicklow is not availing of the funding 
it should be getting.  Thank you.                    
CLLR PAUL O BRIEN:  thank you and the Chief 
Executive for his report, can I welcome the funding 
for Red Cross village, for a small villages it 
brings visitors with the brewery and caravan park, 

31 
 
I want two items to discuss, I want to also welcome 
the new public, sorry, BusConnect routes in 
Enniskerry Bray and Greystones but the south and 
west of the county seem to be ignored.  We have a 
133 service, although improving because the 
Wexford coach it is still not the service that 
should be being provided by Wicklow Town and north 
wise, but what I'd like to see and I know Cllr 
Jennifer Whitmore and I commend Cllr Jennifer 
Whitmore for meeting the NTA but it is time we 
brought the NTA Bus Eireann down to the chamber here 
to grill them what is happening, because all the 
consultation processes they're carrying out but 
the services don't seem to be improving, so I'd like 
to propose we, invite representatives of the NTA 
and Bus Eireann down to a council meeting to hear 
from them directly and question them, and we have 
an excellent bus service going now from Wicklow to 
Glendalough, but I can't seeing it being utilized 
as good as it should be in the winter months so I 
propose in the winter months to transferring the 
bus from the Glendalough to Greystones in rush hour 
which would provide another option for the people 
of Wicklow to get to Greystones to get to the DART. 

32 
 
My second point then would be in relation to Brittas 
Bay and as we all know from reading the papers 
there's great interest in in it and it is one of 
the top attractions in County Wicklow not just 
Wicklow Town, but it is a corroding and it is 
falling into the sea.  But from someone who uses 
on a frequent basis, I notice there's a lot of cars 
parking outside of it, in the wintertime, and the 
reality is that it is 4 Euro to park in the depths 
of the winter or height of the summer, or people 
going for a walk or run they won't pay 4 Euro for 
half an hour, so I would like to propose reducing 
the parking for Brittas Bay in the winter months, 
if the barriers can be recalibrated to reduce it 
to 1 Euro it would take the traffic off the road 
which would alleviate the congestion out there, and 
get away from the accidents that could possible 
happen out there.  And it would raise much needed 
funds for Brittas Bay because people would spend 
one Euro to park in Brittas Bay but not 4 Euro, but 
that money should be ring-fenced to protect Brittas 
Bay or have better amenities, but we should protect 
our amenities better. 
 CLLR BOURKE:  Yes I want to congratulate the 

33 
 
manager on comprehensive report as well and just 
to ask the town and village renewal scheme he 
highlighted I welcome the funding for Aughrim and 
for Red Cross but there were other applications 
there for Avoca, and Barndarrig and the groups are 
disappointed they weren't disappointed, will they 
be rolled over to the next round or have to make 
a fresh application.  
CLLR SCOTT: Thank you Cathaoirleach and Chief 
Executive for your report, I want to congratulate 
Delgany for receiving the funding for town and 
renewal scheme, and want to compliment you on the 
rolling out of the age friendly parking initiative 
I think that's really beneficial.  A couple of 
clarifications, in the housing section, the 
references to pipeline schemes, when looking at 
potential units coming on stream for social 
housing, have I'm looking to clarify if planning 
permission is granted for the schemes and if not 
I wonder if it is noted if planning permission is 
granted or not for clarification.  The second 
question I have in the planning section, which is 
listed other developments, I wonder can we clarify 
what they say are and whether they include AHD 

34 
 
applications or not?  
CLLR MCMANUS:  Go raibh maith agat.  I just want 
to focus on it caught my attention immediately at 
the start of the report that in the 30 days of 
September there was 60 children in Wicklow 
presented as homeless.  I don't know about 
everybody else, I went back and looked and I think 
that's up 11 since August, that's not obviously 
including vulnerable children who are in direct 
provision centres in Wicklow and I couldn't take 
in the rest of the report when I was trying to read 
it, because that's shocking to me, and I don't know 
whether we're becoming de-sensitised by the 
figures we're all the time we're bombarded with 
them, for me that's a priority, absolute priority 
and emergency, and I was thinking if you know, we 
had unexpected snowstorm we wouldn't be here we'd 
be out with shovels and 60 children in the county 
that's an absolute emergency.  So, what I'd like 
to know, I looked underneath and appreciate the 
Chief Executive puts time and efforts putting the 
information we need to I think there was 46 between 
emergency accommodation and B&Bs so where are the 
other 11, what happened to them?  I would 

35 
 
appreciate the picture what is the pathway out for 
children in the emergency accommodation and B&Bs 
and housing HBS I'm on it, for these 60 children 
that were just a month-and-a-half ago here in the 
building, what is the pathway out for them?  And 
I would like to know if the Chief Executive and the 
housing department are having problems or coming 
across barriers, they want us to know about, in 
addressing that crisis, what do they need from us 
as councillors to do about that?  And, maybe I 
don't know, do we need housing to be a consistent 
and child homelessness consistent answered item 
for us, until that figure is zero, because for me, 
we should never lose sight how shocking that 
actually is and how we should be emotional about 
that, and start to do something, that's a priority 
and emergency.  So, Thank you. 
CLLR BEHAN: Well said Cllr Grace McManus I think 
everyone in this room would thoroughly agree with 
what you said and support what you've proposed as 
well.  Could I take the opportunity first of all 
to publicly single out a number of members of staff 
of this council for their sterling work on behalf 
of the council and behalf of the community I'm 

36 
 
thinking in particular on this occasion of Tamara 
Mulhall and Mr Bourke and they deal with people in 
disabled grants, they worked remarkably 
sensitively and speedily on cases where this is 
extreme you are Jenny and hardship for families 
throughout the family and because they're working 
quietly the work is never really fully discussed 
here but I just want to take the step of 
acknowledging those two people particularly, 
because many, many families in this county are 
grateful to the sensitive way they're handling 
their cases at a crucial time in their lives and 
I just want to make that point.  And I want to make, 
to thank publicly Michael Flynn, I don't know if 
he's here today for the manner which he dealt with 
the residents I raised at the last meeting the local 
residents from Kilmac who had big worries and big 
concerns about a programme of work that's going to 
happen near the garage there, and he they came back 
to me to say how grateful they were with the 
courtesy and the way he dealt with queries.  And 
hopefully we will get a resolution of those 
particular queries OK.  So that's the good part of 
what I want to say, but moving on to slightly less 

37 
 
positive if you like, and I'll be very brief.  
There's energy efficiency scheme operating in this 
county at the moment which is grant-aided by the 
Government.  About two years proposed here or 
asked the Chief Executive appointed an additional 
engineering staff to housing section to get on with 
this, work because they're national grants 
available to this council and work is proceeding 
at pace in Dublin with this particular scheme.  
Separately I had been making representations for 
a family of a person who has special needs who 
desperately needs some kind of insulation in his 
council house and I cannot believe having work, 
having progressed and agreement been sought this 
house is by passed now when the work is beginning.  
Having made representation consistently, 
privately, that this particular individual who has 
special needs has been by passed I am not going to 
give detail publicly, I am asking the Chief 
Executive to talk about the housing department to 
talk about this issue.  There's a vacancy in the 
Silver Bridge halting site that needs to be filled.  
We had a job problem over the summer where there 
was incursion in the halting site by illegal 

38 
 
encampment. 
And, there was a lot of money spent on security 
because of it there is a family already approved 
waiting to go into that site, can we please get on 
and get that allocation completed this week.  
Because again, we're going to have a lot of problems 
on our hands if it is no.  And finally, could I ask 
the Chief Executive to expand on few lines, in 
relation to the Whitestown dump decision in the 
court.  Because what I read in the paper doesn't 
really reflect what he gives in the report.  To 
read your report Chief Executive you might almost 
think we won some kind of aspect of this case as 
a council.  I don't think we did, and either the 
judge's comments were taken out of context or the 
judge didn't make comments, but I certainly read 
the judge was quite critical of Wicklow County 
Council's involvement with the saga from the whole 
life of this dump.  I would like to know where does 
the council stand in relation to the financing of 
the clean-up?  And the cost that will be attached 
to the council as a result of what has happened 
here?  
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Mine was just one that I brought 

39 
 
up in September, and it was basically to do with 
the housing figures.  Nobody would sit down to look 
at a set of accounts without looking at the previous 
year's accounts to see whether you made a profit 
loss or basically maintaining the same levels.  I 
think it is unfair to sit here month after month 
and be presented with figures that are sitting 
there in isolation, we can't compare them to 
anything.  We know our housing homelessness 
problem is growing, it is growing country-wide, we 
need to know if it is growing in the county as well.  
And in October, there were comparative figures for 
the previous year and I commented on it and thanked 
the Chief Executive now we're back to single line 
figures again, I would like to see the previous 
month and the previous years' reflected because we 
need to know are we reaching, we'll say are there 
peaks and troughs in homelessness and things that 
contribute to it?  What causes the increase that 
Cllr Grace McManus referred to there?  We need to 
highlight these or see them highlighted so if we 
could see those please thank you.                           
CLLR MATTHEWS:  
Thank you.  I'd like to thank the Chief Executive 

40 
 
of raising the issue of BusConnects and the NTA have 
listened very well to the first round of 
consultation, so it is very important people take 
part in the second round of consultation as well.  
And Cllr O'Brien spoke about, what it is fine for 
the north of the county but what about the south 
county, the other transport spine is the rail line 
and I see Irish Rail have gotten funding for 
delivery of 41 carriages recently.  I don't 
believe any of them are earmarked for the Wicklow 
line even though there's a demand there and I think 
the frequency needs to be increased to especially 
from Wicklow up, anyway.  So, I would ask that this 
council writes to the Chief Executive to the NTA, 
and Chief Executive of Irish Rail and Minister of 
Transport to allocate carriages to of the Wicklow 
line they take delivery of in 2021.  Secondly, on 
the last executive's report last month asked if the 
Chief Executive could engage with the ESB to see 
about a timelier response to network faults, I'm 
wondering has that approach taken place and do we 
get response back from the ESB on it?  And 
following on from that, in terms the LED upgrade, 
energy efficient up grade, throughout the county 

41 
 
as we remove sodium lamps and replace them with LEDs 
we will get increase in energy capacity on the 
circuits, could the council look at feasibility of 
fitting a pole mounted car chargers, where we free 
up from sodiums and go to LEDs? And I would suggest 
we look at Greystones as priority because it 
doesn't have any electrical vehicle charging 
points, could we look at that with the LED roll out. 
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks for the Chief Executive for 
the detailed report, it is the first thing I go to 
every month because it gives a general round up on 
hills the town and villages.  While I congratulate 
the towns and villages that did get grants this year 
and in fairness to see the amount of applications 
put in by the community section in the council, was 
also a big indicators to measure improvement on 
previous years, but again it is staggering as other 
councillors have said how low down the pecking 
order rural Wicklow is to getting the funding, and 
Mayo, 838,000.  Limerick, 585,000, Laois, 
437,000, smaller counties with smaller rural areas 
are getting far larger sums of money, so there's 
something not going right here.  And we do need to 
investigate what is happening with this, because 

42 
 
there are communities in rural Wicklow that are 
crying out for the funding, they're working night 
and day with the community facilities here and 
staff here going out of their way to get the 
projects and they're going in and getting back and 
we're getting the bare minimum of funds - that's 
something that needs addressing, because it is 
consistent at this stage, year in and year out. A 
question in relation to another project that's 
important to rural Wicklow and west Wicklow in 
particular to the Blessington Greenway has there 
been development on that front since?  Because I 
heard there was meet that, councillors should be 
made aware of, because this is a local authority 
involved project and we should all be informed in 
developments on the Blessington Greenway. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Can I first play 
a compliment the team that put together county wide 
decision and it is like the Chief Executive's 
report, but more light shall we say, about us it 
is a very, very informative publication. I have two 
quick things - talking about the county development 
plan, I feel or have a feeling that this could be 
the most important county development plan we've 

43 
 
ever made so I would really hope that it will be 
the whole process will be resourced and that you 
will - councillors will play a significant role in 
the architecture of that, and my second point is 
the housing first, I understand Peter McVerry has 
been given the contract and for an organisation 
that isn't based for you and haven't a contract 
record here, how confident are we they'll hit the 
ground running when they land.                           
CLLR WALSH: Thanks for a comprehensive report, just 
observation, looking at the housing support 
figures and the number of people availing of HAP, 
again has increase interested 14,089 to 15,018 
again that's a reflection in my view of the 
tremendous work done by the staff and staff dealing 
with HAP at the housing section.  Just a query 
again on the rebuilding Ireland loans maybe of 
responded to this in the past but again looking at 
the figures, 115 received to date, 17 approvals and 
there's a gap in the figures there, really is my 
question, I know there was issues of the funding 
in that particular scheme earlier in the year.  But 
we're told it is resolved but I'm wondering there's 
a gap in the figures, and lastly on the section of 

44 
 
the refers to the local enterprise office I want 
to highlight the work done for local business a 
Brexit preparations, there's a number of meetings 
with the local businesses and workshops and 
seminars, and maybe it is something we could raise 
at our next meeting to have a feel how the local 
businesses are prepared for Brexit and what 
experiences they're having, I know nationally 
there are issues and concerns still out there, but 
I think the Local Enterprise Office are carrying 
out their role in assisting people at this point, 
we might get a report in the future on that.  Thank 
you. 
>>:  I have a few points, have we received any 
information on the electric vehicle charging point 
funds that was announced in August?  I think there 
was funding for a thousand points across the 
country announced but I haven't heard anything 
since and I think it is important that we move 
quickly on this, particularly as Cllr Stephen 
Matthews mentioned areas like Greystones and west 
Wicklow don't have charging points so we need to 
get that infrastructure in as quickly as possible, 
in relation to the EVs, there was a suggestion last 

45 
 
week that bus lines, be used for electric vehicle 
cars, and I think this would be a big mistake to 
actually clogging up our bus lanes, particularly 
if we get a bus line on the N11, that that bus lane 
should be for buses and public transport and door 
pooling only and we shouldn't facilitate private 
cars on it in any shape or fashion, we need to make 
that clear as a council, that's not something that 
we would support.  And I just finally like to thank 
the officials, we had our first, climate and 
biodiversity action, SPC last week, and I'd like 
to thank the officials all the effort they put in 
to bring in that committee together, it was a very 
positive committee.  And I think, you know, one 
thing we're doing is that we're wanting to get this 
committee working across the county so, each of the 
committee meetings that are scheduled for the 
coming year will be held in district offices across 
the county and I suppose I put it out there to all 
the councillors, even if you're not on the 
committee you're more than welcome to come in and 
sit on the meetings, it is important because it is 
such an issue, that is really I suppose captured 
everyone's imagination across the county it is 

46 
 
important that you're involved in that process in 
some way as well, so I would absolutely encourage 
you to do that and welcome that. 
CLLR FORTUNE: I would like to thank the executive 
for the report.  Like Cllr Edward Timmins it brings 
focus to our meetings, a couple of items, The county 
development plan process as he says is kicking off, 
and what I would say at this stage as we quick it 
off I hope when we deliberate on the development 
plan, and we agree that certain actions should take 
place and are voted on by members, and are in the 
plan, are adhered to then by the system and we don't 
just ignore it, and willy nilly allow things 
happen, that totally flaunt in the county 
development plan.  There's I have a very good 
example of it, I'm sure people are very aware of.  
The item, I'd like to raise as well, at our recent 
prelim on the Budget, I requested we look at certain 
areas, and not wait until the of December, to have 
a kind of a race-through meeting with nothing 
properly discussed, now obviously the Chief 
Executive on the day took a lot of wind out of what 
I was saying.  But, I think there's a serious 
issue, that I'd like to get some answers on and Cllr 

47 
 
Behan raised it, I'm sure members read it in the 
national media, I'd like the Budget implications 
are resulting from the recent Supreme Court case 
in regards to the decision in whites town.  I noted 
from the report that we were to have three years 
to clean up and resolve it.  And there's obviously 
implications in that, and I'd like to know what they 
are, and maybe if I could ask, we're told or led 
to believe we could be talking over a three-year 
period of 100 million plus of cost.  There was some 
remedial work done in the past that cost a lot of 
money, so that money now is wasted because 
obviously, what was done is now a part of existing 
contamination.  What legal fees have been paid and 
what legal fees are still due?  And what is the 
amount of them and what is the budget implications 
for that?    And could the findings of the Supreme 
Court, we've a lot of new members in the chamber, 
who probably are not clued in for all kinds of 
reasons for this, it would be good if the findings 
of the Supreme Court would be circulated to us, 
because it is a matter of public record now.  And, 
what about the accountability around all of this?  
Is there going to be, are the Gardai going to be 

48 
 
involved or what's going on, this to me, based on 
what I think I know now, and I did take the trouble 
to sit through one of the - bear with me, - to one 
of the court hearings and listen to what was being 
said so I'd like to get answers on that, because 
it could have serious budget implications for us, 
and we need to get clarity on it and also, we need 
to know, how it is going to be made accountable. 
CLLR DUNNE:  Again, Chief Executive thanks for 
your comprehensive report, two issues for me, one, 
county-wise, I have to, let it was decision and 
anybody who read it, there's so much information 
for the members of the public and I want to 
congratulate everybody involved, the sector thing, 
public lighting, it was mentioned at CPG meeting 
this morning, I can only talk about my area and how 
disappointed I am that a number of lights within 
the area have not been fixed and this is going on 
over a month for me and any of them that have been 
fixed.  So some of them have gone out again and I'm 
hugely disappointed with the clocks changing, you 
know, the darker nights coming in, people like 
walking the roads, going out in the evening time 
and I am sea seriously concerned over the lack of 

49 
 
lighting within Wicklow Town especially, so maybe 
he could look into this and maybe I'd have some kind 
of answer on that. 
CLLR MITCHELL: The issue of transport in Wicklow 
was discussed at great lengths and concerns were 
expressed in east Wicklow in particular, and the 
traffic jams on the N11, and the also, the lack of 
Irish Rail seems to have decided to ignore Wicklow 
as far as the public announcements are concerned.  
And that doesn't seem good enough, it seems that 
Irish Rail is quite content to keep the rail line 
empty at rush hour, this line is maintained at great 
expense of the taxpayers and there's two short 
trains at rush hour.  It is essential that we get 
some of the carriages which have been ordered for 
it.   And, I wrote a paper on this two years ago, 
and Irish Rail certainly ignored that, and we do 
need to make quite a considerable fuss, it is 
absolutely daft to have empty rail line on a full 
N11.  In addition to that, there was also, a 
proposal for, improving doing some physical work 
on the tracks to provide more darts to Greystones 
I would act as a better transfer location, and also 
for the growing population of Greystones, and that, 

50 
 
Irish Rail ignored that too, but at least the NTA 
did get another engineering company to say that was 
feasible.  So, we need to ensure that gets into the 
medium-term plans and we're not to bed off.  And 
this, it is absolutely mad to have an empty rail 
line at rush hour.  So, that was certainly 
discussed and we have been asked to meet the various 
authorities, I think this council should request 
a meeting with the minister and with the NTA about 
this, because, there's also a relevance to the N11 
and trying to get the bus lanes on the N11 to get 
express buses to take the load thank you. 
CLLR LEONARD:  I would like to concur with Cllr 
Grace McManus and Cllr Joe Behan on prioritised our 
most vulnerable in County Wicklow, we can go 
through all the other things that link into that, 
but the intention of the day that's the utmost to 
alleviate any citizens, the library service is 
fantastic, it is brilliant and become our new 
community spaces, as someone who sits on the music 
generation committee I'd like to see the musical 
instrument scheme extended maybe to Bray and 
Baltinglass, it is currently in Arklow and 
Blessington, so that would be great to see that 

51 
 
extended and maybe part-funded.  In relation to 
the destination towns and tourism Arklow is 
fortunate enough to have some Chief Executive and 
Michael Nicholson putting tremendous work in 
trying to get the Arklow pottery museum off the 
ground, this will be a key part of regenerating 
Arklow and creating jobs in Arklow and I would love 
to see Arklow being supported fully in become ago 
destination, tourist destination towns, we have 
maritime and heritage so I would like to see that 
supported, in relation to the maritime business 
committee, I would love to see the on scene recovery 
of our coastline be regenerated currently there's 
an Oyster regeneration project and Stephen Cafe is 
heading it up with Maritime Business Committee and 
I would like a presentation to be presented to the 
full committee so they can see what is happening 
and fully support that, and a development, heritage 
biodiversity plan, there's tremendous work done on 
Brittas Bay beach but I would like to see that 
extended to our other poor beaches throughout the 
years, particularly our southern beaches which 
have been devastated by coastal erosion, industry 
and a bit of neglect as well so I would love to see 

52 
 
the regeneration of the dunes to be extended to the 
other beaches in Wicklow as well as Brittas Bay. 
CLLR GLENNON:  I'd like the report.  Three minor 
points, it is nice to see some money came to west 
Wicklow on the town and village renewal, we're 
forgotten about to when it comes to funding, the 
second point I'd like to make is what has been 
raised by Cllr John Mullen, disturbing to think if 
there was a contract signed here during the week 
concerning the Blessington Greenway, that no-one 
had the courtesy to inform the chair of the 
Municipal District, Vice Chair or any councillors 
therein, I would think that's a breach of protocol.  
I think that the democratic involvement in the 
Greenway largely comes from the involvement of 
municipal councillors in it. I think it would be 
democratic deficit these proceedings without any 
municipal authority and I know the chair was not 
informed so I want to put that on record, and 
thirdly, I'd like with some amusement and no 
disregard to any of the points made Cllr Stephen 
Matthews is looking for additional rail carriages 
and Oliver O'Brien is looking for additional buses, 
west Wicklow can't get the bus to stop for lack of 

53 
 
a bus stop, that serves in Hollywood Dunard and 
Dunlavin, it is outrageous that hasn't been 
addressed, I know the Chief Executive has been 
trying to make assistance on the matter but 
something should be done, it is ridiculous what is 
going on. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thank you.  Just in relation to 
Cllr Edward Timmins, town and village, yes there 
was some schemes that went in that weren't 
approved.  Now, community section was out with all 
the various Municipal District in the year talking 
to towns and villages in terms of applications a 
lot are working on applications they got last year, 
they were working how the recreation and leader 
schemes and didn't have the application to come in 
at this point in time but we will provide them with 
every assistance any application that wasn't 
successful and pointing them in the direction of 
schemes likely to run on the town and village so 
we're going to keep that under review, like we did 
do very well last year, better than most of the 
country in terms of URDF and outdoor recreation, 
the community needs to be together, be supported 
by us and we'll keep it under review and we'll keep 

54 
 
a note to that. 
I don't know if Mr Nicholson wanted to add to that.    
I will come back ... 
 
Mr Nicholson:  Thank you in relation to town and 
village we go out at the start of the year we meet 
the groups Tidy Town groups, every group to shake 
the trees and get applications in, the scheme works 
against us slightly in that there's two categories, 
0-5,000 and 5,000 plus, and we have one town that 
qualifies so it is not ideal from the Wicklow County 
Council point of view, if you look how we did from 
the other schemes they come from the same pot of 
money, I'm hoping we didn't do particularly well 
in town and village we will do under the recreation 
scheme as we did last year and toes RDF, those not 
successful we will put in next year and work and 
try and make them better than they were. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Thanks Michael.  Just, Paul 
O'Brien yes, we can invite the MTA down in relation 
to the bus service in Wicklow down and surrounding 
area, Brittas Bay, yes, if we refer to the SPC, in 
relation to the lower charge in the winter it might 
work out better for us as you say.  Cllr Lourda 

55 
 
Scott in relation to the pipeline of the scheme, 
we have as presentations previously, 13,050 from 
20 and 21, but we will outline in the report the 
ones that have the part A planning and when the aid 
is coming through.  Planning other developments, 
we will have a look at that, to see if we can be 
support specific on.  It Cllr Grace McManus in 
relation to the homeless, there's a lot of work 
going on in preventing homelessness and providing 
emergency accommodation in terms we have the 
housing first coming through now first and the 
homeless app has been successful.  So, Jackie if 
you give more information on that. 
Ms. Jackie Carroll:  Cllr Grace McManus said 60 
children in the statistics this month and that is 
unfortunate but that's a number of families 
comprising 60 children and not necessarily the same 
60 that may be included in the statistics in the 
previous month.  That's a fluid figure, what you 
see is not necessarily a static figure, they may 
not be in homeless accommodation, it could be 
notices to quit or waiting for HAP tenancy to come 
up, so it is not necessarily as stark as in the 
stats. It is a gruelling statistic but nonetheless 

56 
 
we have the lowest figures in the mid-east region 
for children in emergency homeless accommodation 
and the Chief Executive has said it depends on the 
as we said in the presentation previously.  That's 
the homelessness. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE:  Cllr Joe Behan the special needs 
one you mentioned I follow up on that and 
Silverbridge halting site, in energy efficiency 
scheme we have extra staff in the housing section 
in we have two senior engineers, previously we had 
one, we've two country surveyors and we've 
architects et cetera and working on a lot of other 
things, but, there is a grant here of 600,000 of 
energy efficiency, that's phase two, phase one is 
completed, I know they're working on St Peter's 
place Arklow and Wolfe Tone Square in Bray and 
there's executive engineer working full time on 
that, so we should see progress, I don't know if 
Declan wants to add to that, that's basically where 
they're at but there's a focus and work going on 
in relation to that. 
Relation to Whitestown, the Court of Appeal, that 
came out last week was really an appeal by the 
owners of the site in relation to two issues, one 

57 
 
was the timelines in relation to the remediation 
works to be complete.  The Court of Appeal ruled 
the timelines were, claiming they were too long, 
Court of Appeal ruled the timelines were necessary 
and appropriate, and didn't make any change to 
that.  The second one was relation to costs, 
particularly to module one and Court of Appeal 
didn't make change in relation to that.  They did 
make some changes in relation to costs preferential 
to other modules and you know, but the significant 
issues were the two issues I just mentioned and 
ruled expectantly in favour of the council.  
There's a lot of work going on and consultants have 
been appointed and he has completed the 
geographical survey, river sampling, groundwater 
survey, full site investigation, and so the 
remediation plan and environmental assessment are 
done due to be completed in May of next year, and 
at that point of in time we'll know what needs to 
be done in terms of remediation, we don't know until 
then.  The costs involved, again, will be talking 
to the department about that, we've had various 
meetings that welcomes this.  They've covered the 
costs of the consultant costs to date, which is 

58 
 
250K, they have it identified for Capital plan, but 
we can't discuss it until we have the remediation 
plan and agreed with the owners of the site and 
possibly the High Court will be signing off on that, 
so we're working our way through that at the moment.  
Cllr Mary Kavanagh, yes, the comparing to previous 
year, we'll include that in the future reports.  
Cllr Stephen Matthews, in relation to the lighting, 
we're still pretty much at about 2-2.5% which is 
national standard but we have been on to the 
contractor, SSC, they have put more staff and 
resources into it, we have been working with the 
ESB in terms of expediting the response of this. 
And I don't know if Michael Flynn wants to comment 
but we are working for LEDs which will come on 
stream which will be cost effective and eliminate 
the problem to significant extent of lights being 
out.  In relation to the pole mounted car chargers, 
yes something we should look at, Cllr Jennifer 
Whitmore said we have correspondence to the grant 
scheme so he was engineers working on the locations 
for those and we will be making submission in 
relation to the grant.  Blessington Greenway the 
progress that's made today, obviously we got the 

59 
 
funding allocation.  We have appointed a 
consultant, which, we do, we don't generally do 
publicity surrounding consultant, sometimes we do 
for large schemes but usually have the photoshoot 
and around the signing of the contract and we'll 
do that when we're ready to go for contract for 
Blessington. What was signed was the appointing the 
consultant and they'll go off and do a 
topographical survey of the entire route, and do 
ground investigations, and then they will look at 
details in terms of the design of the route and the 
design of the drainage and any issues around 
bridges and couldn't at the lever bridges so they 
have a good body of work to do now, and what we will 
do is produce an information booklet for the public 
and keep the councillors, particularly councillors 
in Baltinglass regularly what is happening in the 
detailed design work which needs to be done.  Just 
in relation to Cllr Dermot O'Brien, the housing 
first Peter Mckever has a significant amount of 
experience in this whole area, housing first is all 
about getting the homeless people getting in the 
home first and following up with the wrap around 
support so I will be confident in relation to that.    

60 
 
And Cllr Gerry Walsh, the homeless HAP has 
increased, you're right there and there's 
significant work 
CLLR MCDONALD:  That that, in terms of rebuilding 
Ireland, funding has been resolved, anybody 
approved funding in the system that is processed, 
sometimes you have applicants who apply to us and 
local authorities Name so even though we grant it, 
they may disappear, so that explains the distortion 
in figures.   Cllr Derek Mitchell yeah, we can pass 
on that information to Irish Rail and write in 
relation to that.    The maritime, Cllr Peir 
Leonard, mayor time, business committee, and 
making presentation on the outdoor restoration 
project, we will have a look at that, and heritage 
biodiversity plan to other beaches and towns, 
definitely and something for the climate change SPC 
that we can work on that and Blessington Greenway, 
but provision of the bus stop, again we've done a 
design and submitted TII. I might ask Colin if he 
has any reply on that, but that's where that is at 
the moment.  Thank you 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  To a brie presentation 
>>:    Sorry, just on the bus stop, there's a firm 

61 
 
of consultants appointed to look at locations for 
bus stops, we've obviously made Atkins are the 
names of consultants that are looking at bus stop 
locations nationally so we've made the case for 
Hollywood stop, parallel to that, we're also 
meeting with the landowner we've met him and in 
relation to obviously the footpath issue as well, 
the same landowner owns the land in relation to the 
proposed location are to the bus stops to we've 
engaged with the him and will progress those 
negotiations in relation to getting the necessary 
plan for the footpath and bus stops as well.  Just 
in relation to the public lighting, I suppose, as 
the Chief Executive mentioned there's LED retrofit 
programme which is currently on going, we're part 
of the eastern region which is led by Kilkenny 
county council, there's a meeting in week in 
relation to bringing that forward so we'd hope the 
LED reality retrofit would move quickly and we'll 
start hopefully, next year in terms of retrofitting 
here in Wicklow County Council area, I understand 
this time of the year it is particularly difficult, 
it is more noticeable that the lights that are out.  
As Chief Executive said on average, we are, we have 

62 
 
the 2-3% of lights out although any one time which 
is in line with the national average, we are work 
with the contractors to speed that up, we're 
focusing on the areas where most lights are out, 
trying to get those fixed so that we can bring the 
numbers down, I would just say that obviously the 
report directly to the contractor, the lights where 
they're out if they are particular areas that are 
particularly bad or a number of lights out in a 
group if you let us know in the directorate we will 
take it up with the contractor and try that and get 
them fixed as quickly as possible. 
NIAMH ODONELL: Hello my name is Niamh O'Donnell, 
I'm Artistic Director of Mermaid Arts Centre and 
appreciate the opportunity to sit and explain some 
of the programmes and activities that we have in 
the Mermaid, year in and year out. I know your 
agenda is busy so I will keep this short and sweet 
as I can and move quickly through the slides.  It 
is a registered charity, we're established with 
Bray Municipal District, and within that we've 
grown the range of programmes and activities we 
present. We have extended our reach through the 
county and I'll talk about that in detail later.  

63 
 
We've vastly increased and informed people who 
attend the centre and we have established extensive 
engagement and participation programmes to 
different communities.  And alongside that, we've 
worked not only the local profile but local and 
international profile.  It is important to state 
that the Mermaid is for everyone.  We are an open, 
inclusive and community-driven organisation.  So, 
we're not just a venue, we don't just present work 
in Mermaid, yes we present a lot onsite but we also 
make work and create it, and we get it out on the 
road and we have a huge number of education, 
Outreach programmes and have as many activities as 
we can across the five Wicklow districts.  So, I'll 
talk you through some of the statistics.  We have 
366 events this year with just under 
44,000 people engaging in our activities, we run 
44 events outside of the art centre and we have 3 
over 3,000 children attending shows, we have more 
coming to music, but one of the things I shout 
about, while we're run regular educational 
programmes what our children deserve is to be 
inspired and enthralled not just to be educated.  
And we, do one of the things that is most important 

64 
 
in the work we do, is we try to engage for people 
who don't attend cultural activities ongoing 
basis, we're trying to tackle the perceived barrier 
to the arts, so we have 7,000 people attending 
events for free.  So, we also support a lot of 
amateur work and it is something that is really 
important to us, we're not just about the 
professional arts, so it is about supporting local 
children, we have just under 1,500 children 
performing on our stage and showing how talented 
they are.  We run a programme of community tickets 
where we target and specifically try to engage 
people from disadvantaged areas or vulnerable 
people, we work with addiction task force, and 
there will be more, 648 free tickets to families. 
42 talks, tours, workshops with under 2,000 people 
attending, I'm going to talk more about the 23 
performance for children with complex needs 
because it is an area we're working on a lot in the 
last year-and-a-half.  But something I'm proud of, 
is we partnered, almost all work we partner and 
network with people, so we partnered with Jack and 
Jill Foundation and a company called Helium.  To 
a family in Wicklow Town and Greystones, where the 

65 
 
children have terminal illnesses and there's 
nothing they can do, and we go to them, and that's 
something we hope to expand.  Instead of me telling 
you all how great we are, I thought I might put in 
a couple of quotes from our own reviews from the 
Arts Council.  So, Mermaid in last year's review 
was identified best example of the Art Centre Model 
in the country and recent years it set new standards 
what the arts centre can achieve.  I see my graph 
isn't so clear there, so I'll talk you there you 
it.  It is really important you understand the 
context that we work.  So, that is outlining the 
population, age between 15 and 64, and we are 
constantly benchmarked and compared with art 
centres like Pavilion in Dun Laoghaire and Civic 
and Blanch and we compete for funding from the Arts 
Council. And if you look at the total figure there, 
the reality is that we punch above our weight, 
Mermaid achieves more because we have half the 
population they have to serve, and we have a much 
deeper or larger county.  And also, the reality is, 
that presently we're getting between 25,000 and 
35,000 more from the Arts Council because of the 
artist development programmes we run and our 

66 
 
community project.  So, Wicklow Count Council is 
one of our key stakeholders and we're hugely 
appreciative of the support we get and try to 
deliver substantially on the support we get.  One 
of the questions I'm regularly asked is are we not 
a commercial enterprise and one of the things I 
would hope to explain today is yes we are there's 
a lot of things we're registered charity but a lot 
of activities we do that are commercial, Christy 
Moore makes money from the Mermaid and we pile that 
money back into the structure and Damian Dempsey, 
all those people, we're making money on those 
events. But when we get subs what we do is to make 
sure that we're able to do a lot more than that.  
So, what the Wicklow support gives us, is the 
ability to offer a broad range of work to Wicklow 
audiences not just the commercial work and popular 
work but artists emerging, example was we were the 
first to book Foil Arms & Hog and now we're too 
small, now they're selling two weeks in Vicar 
Street, if you don't support that work, it just, 
you know, we need to platform them. 
Also, our educational programme workshops and work 
with young people with disabilities, or complex 

67 
 
needs, all of our engagement programmes that is 
what Wicklow allows us to do, it allows us to reach 
through the county to present outside of Wicklow, 
district even down as Arklow and certain extent in 
Baltinglass but I'll talk about that later.  And 
I thought it was important to try to explain we 
don't plan our programmes in isolation, our 
programmes are designed to support and fulfil the 
key goals of the Wicklow County Council Development 
Plan and as well as the Arts Plan and we would work 
on an ongoing basis with the arts office in Wicklow.  
So, a lot of our work really is about community.  
It is about health and wellbeing, active 
citizenship and social participation, so, we do I 
a lot of work offsite in the public realm and that 
bottom picture is a picture of the lovely Paul 
Timony in a school where we worked for six weeks 
and it is so successful now this year we can trust 
ourselves and we'll be sending him to Blessington 
Community College to work with students there. 
So, we obviously believe in creativity for 
everyone, and democracy, equality and diversity 
are our main principles, but we talk our county 
remit seriously.  And how we generally implement 

68 
 
that or the most successful way to do that is 
through a schools programme, so, at present we're 
working with 72 schools approximately and have 
about 7,000 schoolchildren attending or 
participating in events.  The reality is of course 
I can't deny our geography, it is much easier for 
us to serve schools and/or public in Bray, east and 
west and we work with 28 schools presently but we 
also work with ten schools in Wicklow and we try 
to keep that nice and broad, we go to Newcastle and 
Rathnew and Roundwood and also have schools in 
Kilpeddar, Kilcoole in the Greystones district and 
it is harder for us to serve Baltinglass but we work 
in two schools in Arklow and we put programme 
initiatives in place in order to try to connect with 
people because it is too difficult to get them over 
the mountain range so we programme, so we partner 
with different organisations and we programme and 
try to run residencies in those areas.  So, these 
are just a couple of examples, I can't run through 
them, because if I went over nine minute, seven I'm 
told - nine.  So, we develop work and present with 
the courthouse and present work that say the 
courthouse can't afford themselves so for example 

69 
 
I am BABA we're working with a Wicklow based theatre 
maker with children.  And we have supported 
activities in Glencree and artists and residents 
there we're trying to relocate them, we're going 
to Shaking the Bog we work with Chapterhouse and 
present in power security and Avondale house, we 
didn't manage to do that this year but will next.  
And other, this year, we tried, we try always to 
be instigators or facilitators of interaction, so 
Bray test value was not only in Bray, we went to 
Arklow, Blessington and Tinahely so that's 
something we're trying to expand next year.  
Again, so I've talked about the local or the county 
work we're doing, in brief, only parts of it, but 
also something that we've been working on is 
building the profile of the art centre and the 
county.  So, there's a quote from the theatre 
adviser to the Arts Council, he said:  (quote on 
screen)                                           
I'm going to give a couple of examples, this is one 
where this is an idea of where we're able to invest 
a small amount of money for work to be made, so we 
decided on an artist, they had a beautiful idea for 
a theatre piece, we gave her a small bursary to 

70 
 
write and then we got more money - 46,000 to make 
in the Mermaid and Abbey and Peacock stage and 
negotiated with another producer to take it to 
Edinburgh, we did 26 performance, four stars in The 
Scotsman and originator is on all this material, 
R Terek’s loved it, funded it and recorded and 
broadcast in September and in February, it will be 
back to Mermaid and we're going out on a 14-venue 
tour nationwide and one example we commissioned 
three artists to make a film and this an example 
where we, because of the investment we're able to 
make in work.  Then we're able to leverage more 
money, so we got an additional 56,000 to go on tour 
to bring that work to Clare, Mayo and Sligo and we 
submitted into a couple of international film 
festivals and I cannot believe but we won three 
awards in New York! Unfortunately, I wasn't able 
to go but, and Mexico, but we're very proud of it.  
And then, this is a work that we, as I said earlier, 
we're focusing on working with people with 
additional needs or groups with additional needs 
and ultimately in our plan we identified these 
people are just not served so I'm going to talk over 
this piece, but it is a Wicklow artist, her name 

71 
 
is Anna.  We partnered with the arts office, and 
also with the Riverbank Art Centre in Kildare and 
with the civic and the can't think of the last 
organisation, we made a piece, partnering with 
Enable Wicklow and also, working in St Catherine's 
Newcastle, creating a piece for young people with 
profound complex needs, it was one-on-one 
performance, one young person their guardian and 
one performer for those, and we had the most 
incredible response to the work.  A 
physiotherapist contacted us after the show where 
she works with this beautiful young girl who has 
the therapy in the hydra pool and is not allowed 
to go into the pool with anybody else because of 
her behavioural issues, and she was so afraid of 
bringing her because she wouldn't get in, but 
Ciara, got in, because she was mesmerized, didn't 
notice anyone else in the pool and now when they 
go for her therapy she sings.  For me on regular 
basis people say oh well the value of the arts or 
impact is a magical thing or mysterious, it isn't, 
because I see it every day and all of why you are 
support is that makes that happen and I want you 
all to be proud of the art centre and come and visit 

72 
 
us, and if you have anyone that you think I should 
work for me, I will come to you and meet for coffee 
and put a plan in place.  We will pause that.    
And I am done.  Did I stick to time.                             
CLLR CREAN: Thank you for an excellent 
presentation, as someone new on the board the first 
thing I was struck for is community engagement, 
scope and number of schools, I really was shocked, 
I didn't realise that amount of work took place so 
that's why I'm delighted to see the presentation, 
and for me, really, I suppose, it is the role of 
the arts in our community and what makes the Mermaid 
as an art centre different from commercial 
enterprise in Wicklow is that potential you talked 
about there and access piece and build and capacity 
piece and I think at community level for us as 
public reps, in the way the GAA plays that cultural 
role for sport an art centres, they offer us the 
potential, to build that community level and 
definitely the inclusion piece is critical going 
forward.  And I know, I certainly took that no 
pledge 2020 with the Children's Rights Alliance 
before I ran for the election and massive piece of 
with a they're trying to put at national level is 

73 
 
the right to cultural experiences for young people 
who are usually excluded and I think that's really 
important going forward and something the Mermaid 
Arts Centre can do, and there's potential around 
climate change and using the arts for communication 
with people, and building education awareness, so 
for me, that's the beginning of something, the role 
of the arts and the role of local authorities and 
support at community levels.  So, it is great to 
see the presentation here and for fellow 
councillors to see it as well and I am certainly 
delighted to support at something like this.                     
CLLR LEONARD: Congratulations, amazing, I have a 
small studio in Arklow, no comparison, and I'd love 
what you're doing expanded in the wider community 
and it needs to be supported.  Music, art, making, 
design, everything from a pen that is designed, it 
links into everything, in enterprise, everything, 
it is the ability to heal, I've seen your video 
there, I've seen people speak for the first time 
with hands and lump of clay, a guy that was 
nonverbal in his 20s, and that just, that pure 
healing. I've seen it full circular economy through 
the arts as well.  With minimal funding and support 

74 
 
to the wider community, you could have many little 
hubs of artist studios being supported, I feel that 
the a lot of artist and creators and makers, are 
working from their back garden, there's very few 
platforms for them to even show their creations or 
to sell them even or be supported, and I'd love for 
Wicklow County Council to widen that support 
through the wider community through the Mermaid 
Arts Centre, and thanks a million.                               
CLLR MATHEWS:  Thank you and your presentation 
which was delivered with your usual my paced 
enthusiasm and commitment and my ambition you have 
for the arts thank you for that.  As someone who 
serves on the board of the Mermaid for the last few 
years, it is a privilege to work with you, and to 
see how much that you generate out of that theatre 
with a small staff, and a small budget and yet you 
manage to produce so much.  And the other theatres 
that you benchmarked against and measured against, 
it really shows that you know, you've put Wicklow 
on the map compared to all those other places that 
are names of theatres that are just people are 
familiar with, and there's our Wicklow Mermaid 
Theatre up with them, and that's something we 

75 
 
should up be proud of.  You touched on the 
commercial part of it, and while it is not easy to 
pick a commercial showing and know what you'll make 
out of it, it is probably easier the other stuff 
you do, which is harder to put a value on, where 
it is the Outreach, it is the working with people 
that might not normally have access to the arts or 
mightn't be included in the arts, or as we've seen 
this, people with special needs, and I think we're 
all blown away from that.  And when I saw that first 
presented, I thought this is what it is about, and 
if we do a little more of supportive of that.  And 
no matter what artist out there, whether it is 
musicians or poets or artists or film makers they 
all need a place where they can be nurtured and 
encouraged and given that break earlier on, in 
their careers, that elevates them to that high 
success like you mentioned.  So, thank you for the 
presentation and thank you for all the work you've 
done. 
>>:  I have four presentations; can you keep it 
short. 
CLLR SCOTT: Was that directed to me?  I'll be 
quick, thank you very much for the presentation, 

76 
 
I really enjoyed that, I wish you could come down 
every month and give us all a boost by the amazing 
work you're doing.  I want to echo particularly the 
inclusion of the work you're doing, it can't be 
underestimated, I've families I know with children 
with very complex needs and anything that includes 
them and gives them a little shaft of light on their 
grim days otherwise at the valuable there's not a 
monetary value that you can put on that. Just a 
comment, we were talking about the number of 
homeless children in Wicklow county and is there 
any Outreach you do with children in emergency 
accommodation, homeless? And we have children 
living in direct provision centres in temporary 
accommodation and direct provision centres, is 
there anything the Mermaid you could do? Or if you 
need assistance with that, do let me know. 
CLLR MCMANUS:  I will second both proposals, I 
would love you to come every month to boost our 
energy, everyone has a connection to the Mermaid, 
mine is to the best choir in the world Voices of 
Bray, because I'm in it and my parents are too. I 
have fond memories of going down, every year to see 
the community choir and see the fundraising they're 

77 
 
doing, the space, there's art on the walls looking 
at what is coming up next, what am I interested in, 
and it is a fabulous space.  I wanted to say thank 
you for I think, you highlighted the importance of 
storytelling and accountability, if we fund this, 
you're taking it seriously and saying this is the 
story of the money you give - here is where it 
travels and that's very important in terms of 
transparency and accountability.  But more so, the 
stories you've shared, show the human impact and 
the real positive work that is going on, and that 
is really inspires expiring, so I want to say a 
heartfelt thank you for that. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  I don't know if there's 
anything left to say after Cllr Grace McManus. I've 
seen my children on stage in the Mermaid, very much 
amateur, hip hoppers.  And again I think it is that 
thing, you could nearly the Mermaid was being that 
was ambitious and exceeded the ambition, again and 
again, and again, and I think, it is one of those 
things you could test degrees of separation for 
anyone in terms of connection to the Mermaid and 
everyone has one if not more than one. My youth 
projects benefited from the ticket price reduction 

78 
 
which again is invitation for people who may not 
be have opportunity to be enthralled and inspired 
and that model of always looking for another 
opportunity to increase engagement, and to build 
connections, there seems to be no end to that.  So 
again, I would say that a thank you from us, and 
keep doing it and hopefully there is more ambition 
and hopefully we will absolutely support that. 
  
 
CLLR FERRIS:  Thank you and I would like to thank 
Niamh and welcome her here today.  I think Oliver 
O'Brien said there, Mermaid has just gone from 
strength to strength down the years.  And indeed 
it was the very idea of Mermaid or the County 
Wicklow art centre was the brainchild of former 
colleague of mine, Cllr John McManus, of what was 
the Bray Town Council and was supported 
unanimously, and enthusiastically by all the 
councillors at the time, and I think perhaps Cllr 
Joe Behan and myself are the only two members who 
would have been at the original odd turning for the 
Mermaid in Bray.  And you know, what was I suppose, 
from the beginnings and the hope and dreams of the 

79 
 
people involved, just blossomed year after year, 
and everybody involved with the Mermaid, I was on 
the board at one stage,  you can't help but be 
inspired by the enthusiasm, and I would certainly 
I would recommend that people go to Mermaid as much 
as possible.  There are all kinds of varieties of 
shows on, again as Dermot said his children on the 
stage, I had still have a daughter who goes on the 
stage from time to time, but there is so much 
community involvement there, and I think it really 
has from the various things that happened, to 
happen through the years to the Bray Jazz Festival 
who have their yearly weekend there in May.  It 
really has put Bray on the artistic map, and I would 
just like to congratulate you Niamh, all the people 
who work with you, and I look forward to seeing you 
again.                  
CLLR CORRIGAN:  Thank you was a fantastic 
presentation as a new member of the Mermaid board 
congratulations.  I look forward to working with 
you and your fantastic enthusiastic team, I 
reiterate what everybody has said, I watch my 
children in amateur performances which is 
fantastic, delighted to see you're working with the 

80 
 
Shaking Bog Association it is a fantastic thing not 
to be missed. I work with them as well and Lakers 
point of view I want to thank you for all the support 
you've given them over the years, they would be lost 
without you, the support not allowing but, because 
it is a local theatre that they can access 
individually.  It is very important for them a lot 
of their members would be regular customers in the 
Mermaid and the Monday Night Film Club you put on 
with quirky films it is incredible, thank you very 
much from a member of the public for all the work 
you've done thank you. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, thanks very much for your 
presentation, it was very enthusiastic, I have to 
say, I'm a big fan of the Mermaid and attend quite 
a lot of theatrical events there and a big fan of 
The Film Club.  One of the things that happens 
whenever there's a crisis, is that people look to 
the arts to help because the arts has such an 
overall beneficial impact on people and the arts 
is the area that is first hit whenever there's 
economic cutbacks and we've seen that over the 
years. I know quite a few writers and artist whose 
are struggling to make a living, most can't, they 

81 
 
have to do it on a part-time basis but one of the 
most important things that the arts affects is the 
area of mental health.  And I feel that without it, 
without places like the Mermaid and Pavilion and 
all those similar type multimedia theatres there 
would be a bigger impact on our young people who 
are suffering in unprecedented levels of mental 
health, one of the things I would like to recommend 
is that you dig a little bit deep and in particular 
in the area of we'll say articles as therapy for 
people with mental health issues, especially young 
people, because, we now have a crisis in this 
country, there is no money there for services for 
youth mental health and I know things like art leads 
to mindfulness which leads to creativity which 
really has a huge beneficial impact on people.  And 
congratulations again and well done. 
 
CLLR BOURKE:  Congratulations on your success, you 
mentioned Arklow you did Outreach work in Arklow, 
I was wondering did you have links with Asguard 
Theatre Group and if not, would you be amenable to 
helping them out. 
NIAMH:  Yeah.  OK, so, I really appreciate your 

82 
 
positive feedback, we absolutely agree that the 
arts is a fundamental right of every citizen and 
we try to do our best, we definitely would like to 
do more in Arklow, I don't know, I haven't got 
contact with, but I will now.  And I think, I just 
reiterate any uses that you have in relation to, 
because it doesn't always be a large investment it 
can be small to make a big difference.  In relation 
to the homeless children, we haven't actually any 
programmes but we are initiating a story telling 
programme within the direct provision centres to 
try to actually start there, and again it is a 
learning curve for us sometimes so we're working 
with artist called Felly Specks, and Mermaid knows 
we need to do more and there's always more to do 
and we'll do that.  Thank you for all I appreciate 
your time.  CATHAOIRLEACH: Now item six, to 
receive a general update of the time teams, so, it 
is lovely to have Grainne back. 
CRAINNE MCLOUGHLIN:  Ladies and gentlemen, I was 
going to say fellow councillors, can't say that 
anymore, but it is lovely to be back and thank you 
for the warm welcome I got early on.  So, 
Greystones 2020.  The term Greystones 2020 doesn't 

83 
 
mean that something is going to happen in a year, 
it means 2020 Vision for Greystones, and it was set 
up in 2016, a group of us got together because there 
was initial strategy for Greystones town around 
2013 and with the demise of the Chamber of Commerce 
nothing happened so we decided to get together and 
there was things we need today do for Greystones, 
things that weren't within the remit of the council 
and we would do it, so, we were then following that, 
given the title of Greystones Town Team in 2018 by 
Wicklow County Council.  It was just part of the 
general network and turning out to be a positive 
experience because we're actually learning from 
each other and meeting regularly, it is a platform 
to support and secure opportunity for development, 
social, cultural and economical, and we facilitate 
engagements at all levels. 
So, what exactly are we?  We're definitely 
non-political.  We encourage holistic town; we 
engage with all the community.  We support 
improvement of amenities, we improve pride of place 
for all in the community, and we partner with the 
public sector and particularly I suppose, 
Greystones Municipal District and Wicklow County 

84 
 
Council and I have to say, it was nothing to do with 
councils, we have fantastic support from 
Greystones and Wicklow because we couldn't do the 
stuff we do without the support.  We facilitate 
events, we're unlucky in Greystones so far as we're 
not like Wicklow gets 20,000 for the lights and the 
team don't have to do anything, we have to work for 
our lights in Greystones.  We get 5,000 from 
Municipal District and that includes the whole 
lights event we put on, so, we have to go and find 
it, so Greystones 2020 has taken over that, and if 
we didn't do that, there would be no lights in 
Greystones, we facilitate the Battle of the Bands 
and hope to put festivals on. I was involved in the 
arts festival those years ago and there's a push 
to do something new for Greystones and going 
forward we will do that.  We source funding for 
project that the council aren't able to do, 
because, for some reason Dublin decides it should 
be a Town Team that should go after them so we got 
15K for the bus stop that's age-friendly initiative 
and we're now, just achieved 38K for public plan 
I'll discuss that in a few moments. We manage and 
do secure those funding for the Christmas lights 

85 
 
which is the most awfullest job that anybody has 
to do, and I think the people and the team that do 
it are doing a great job.  If we look at Christmas 
lights, cost us 20K and historically when the 
Greystones Chamber were doing it, they found it 
easy to get the funding, we're finding more and more 
the shops are saying we pay high enough rates so 
they're balking at the idea of paying for lights, 
so I'm not sure what will happen going forward, 
about you as long as we're around we will get that 
money.  It is hugely important for the town, 
anybody who sees it, will see how beautiful it 
looks, it is on Saturday 23rd, everybody is 
welcome, we are twinned with Holyhead as you know 
and Holyhead Santa is coming over, it is supposed 
to be the Santa, so we have him coming along and 
we have 43 of Holyhead choir coming to join us and 
they will be partaking in the event as well.  So, 
another project we're working on is a new art 
installation and landscaping proposal for 
Greystones Railway Station.  If you go in the 
Greystones Railway Station which once got the award 
for the best train station in Ireland, well, it is 
certainly wouldn't get that now.  And it does not 

86 
 
portray accurate image of the town.  So, what we're 
doing is we're bringing up concept that initially 
started from the Tidy Towns and the proposal 
involved in effect the creation of a theatre set 
and drama as one approach the station by train. 
By providing very large portraits, two meets of 
famous and probably not so famous, people mightn't 
know who they are, people who had some connection 
with Greystones, we commissioned local artist, Mr 
Brush to paint them, we painted 18 so far and people 
such as Ronnie Drew, Samuel Beckett, Elizabeth 
Burnaby and others, so the real work begins. 
The images will be framed by a wave-shaped hedges 
which will the dual function of mirroring the 
coastal location of the town while unsecuring a 
unattractive fence.  In addition, a linear history 
board will portray the development of the town of 
chronological order as one moves across the 
platform, beds will created with later providing 
a myriad of beautifully coloured plants 
particularly to coastal region such as Greystones, 
elements of marine village will be located in a 
tasteful way within the overall design and series 
of in illuminated planters reflecting the colour 

87 
 
shape and material of the common sea buoy will set 
down the stage set and sense of place, it is 
important, because Greystones is at the end of the 
DART line and the amount of people coming out of 
the station, it is vitally important that if 
they're going from Greystones it doesn't matter 
whether they're staying or heading up the Wicklow 
hills we show Wicklow in the best form possible.  
Bray did a fantastic job of murals in their staying, 
it took, I don't know how many years, probably 20 
years to get them done so it is really important 
that Greystones has a fantastic station as well.  
So, as you can see, there's the one we've done of 
Ronnie Drew, so they're fantastic and you can see 
the list was them the cost of the proposal is going 
to be approximately 90K, and we are actively 
working with potential funders to secure funding. 
Irish Rail although happy with the proposal, will 
not support the project financially, they will 
ensure their guys will do the work, but we have to 
pay for the work their guys do, we've accepted 
that's the way it is.  And that is one of the 
reasons that we believe, that the Greystones 20 
Town Team can help in the development of the town, 

88 
 
using all resources and we are very lucky, we have 
people on the team who have huge resources and huge 
expertise, and nobody's on the team unless you can 
do something or offer something.  If you offer 
nothing only turn up at the meeting you would be 
ousted quickly.  We offer support to the local 
council and I feel because we do this, we get huge 
support back.  So the next billet we're doing is 
this main street plan for Greystones and contrary 
to perceptions, most people would think Greystones 
got everything and it looks fantastic, it doesn't 
and the main street of Greystones is very, tired 
looking, and before plans are designed for the 
town, because ultimately they're going to be 
designed, nothing's done on the main street in 
Greystones, of the Church Road in Greystones since 
'98.  We need to get overhead cables underground, 
but no point deciding to put up with plans by 
officials unless we have concrete ideas what we 
want the town to look like.  We secured funding of 
approximately 30K, from leader and support from 
Tidy Towns and Wicklow County Council we 
commissioned consultants after a lengthy 
procurement process to undertake a public rand, 

89 
 
what is it?  The parts of the town village or city 
whether publicly or privately owned available 
without charge for everyone to see, use and enjoy, 
including streets, squares and parks.  The terms 
of reference are approximately from the shoreline 
right down to the harbour, having said that, we're 
bringing areas in together so we're looking at the 
gateways in town, public space network 
connectivity and permeability, legibility, 
signage, history and heritage, tourist destination 
and parking travel and public transport.  And this 
is, and we feel that through public consultation, 
we will present Wicklow County Council because it 
is in connection with Wicklow County Council a 
group like us could not do a public plan unless you 
have the support of Wicklow County Council because, 
anything we do, we need Wicklow County Council to 
ultimately get the work done. 
So, we've very tight time frame we started in 
August, and we're hoping we'll have the completed 
document by December.  We've also had one public 
consultation meeting it went extremely well.  And 
it actually went so well we have people contacting 
us, saying I still want something else to put into 

90 
 
it, which is great because we're not perspective 
with that, the whole plan is out in December with 
the next consultation phase because we'll have a 
draft plan made on the 23rd of November, you note 
that's the same day as the Christmas lights because 
that's such a busy day in Greystones and the library 
is allowing us to do the public consultation there, 
so we'll hoping to grab the people and get them to 
have their say.  It is Paul Hogart a company from 
Belfast and Scotland, two are actually doing the 
work, they have extensive experience and won 
awards, I feel they'll do a fantastic job for us.  
The next thing that the next thing we did was a 
website for Greystones, and we were delighted to 
launch it in March.  This took huge amount of time 
and energy because we didn't have the money to 
actually go and give it to somebody and produce it.  
Our total website cost us only 7,000 which we got 
3,000 from Wicklow CC and we're obliged for 
councillors to agree to that, because God knows the 
Budget, we have in Greystones is small and we were 
lucky to get that.  They've agreed with in 
Greystones to give extra 3,000 per year for the 
marketing of the website and that really helps too.  

91 
 
But the website itself is fantastic, it is getting 
fantastic hits, and the reason how we were able to 
do it is we went to people who were experts in the 
field of design, experts in photography, anything 
that we felt that they could be expert in, that we 
need for our website we went and asked them to help 
us with their website. So although we produced 
ourselves content and uploaded the content, you 
know, can you upload all the content you like, but 
if it is not laid out properly, it doesn't look 
good, don't worry about it, you have this website, 
have a look and you'll see a really, good website.  
OK.  As I say, I got PC productions to do the work 
for us, it is really working I would recommend it 
for all the other town teams if you have a website, 
no point trying to do it on your own, get 
professional company to keep the social media 
aspect going and to provide constant content 
because that's the only way it works.  So, some 
additional project we did, we did a proposal in for 
the broadband County Wicklow working with the town 
teams on tourism destination project, we're 
working with Triple A Alliance to making Greystones 
autism friendly-town and we've developed a 

92 
 
complete development plan for 2020, that will give 
us key time frames in order to achieve certain 
goals.  We have a tiny budget, but we're achieving 
a whole heap and we are most definitely not trying 
to duplicate any of the work of the councillors, 
it is opposite we're doing additional extra to 
support them in their work and we work with Tidy 
Towns but don't duplicate their work in any way.  
We're definitely not Chamber of Commerce but like 
to be champions of the town and I'd like to thank 
you your town clerk and Michael Nicholson our 
manager because without the support of them and 
Rory and councillors, none of it would happen.  
Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH>>:  I'm going to take the 
presentation from Cllr Pat Fitzgerald so what I 
would say questions in relation to time teams bring 
them back to municipal districts. 
  
CLLR FITZGERALD:  Just at the end of 2016, the idea 
of a Town Team was first mooted for Arklow and in 
January, 2017, we had formed a Town Team and there 
were 29 measures there that night including 
councillors and others, and the stakeholders 

93 
 
represented on the Town Team are Chambers of 
Commerce, an Garda, clergy, business community, 
Tidy Towns, Wicklow County Council members and 
officials and the official statement for Arklow is 
that the Town Team independent tends to contribute 
to the improvement in the quality of life for people 
living in Arklow and enhance the attractive it is 
of the town of a place in which to live, work visit 
and invest.  The corporate objectives are to bring 
local interest groups together for benefit of the 
town to  enhance character and traditions of the 
town and promote it as clean, safe, welcoming and 
prosperous town for all, and to promote high 
standard and cost effective services, and to work 
in partnership with other stakeholders to achieve 
more for Arklow.  And the Arklow Town Team projects 
to date have Arklow in Bloom, Flower Basket Scheme, 
Town Centre Health Check which has been done. 
Ronnie Delaney Statue expected completion quarter 
1, 2020, the roundabout sponsorship scheme which 
we have eight in total and two have, three are 
maritime theme.  And Halloween Spook Tackler 
Festival and I'd slightly deviate, my grandson came 
to the night of the festival and asked me who is 

94 
 
that strange lad was over there, I said that's not 
a strange lad that's a Cllr Tommy dressed as a duck 
or whatever, sorry he was afraid of you. We had had 
an event to support International Women's Day, and 
audit which details strengths weaknesses and 
opportunities that the town has to offer.  Our 
projects, John coming are about to happen are, 
installation of CCTV we expect that to have the 
first quarter of 2020.  Shop front painting 
scheme, we have that every year, we percentage 
friendly programme, we got a rising star award in 
2018.  The other things we have a clean-up of 
Wooden Bridge and National Spring Clean Week and 
clean up the on-World Clean-up Day, some members 
thought it would be a good idea to light up the 19 
Archers Bridge, that's the longest handmade bridge 
in Ireland and considered a famous landmark.  
Arklow Town Team were awarded a dementia friendly 
garden medal at 2018, I want to thank the Director 
Nicholson with his involvement in that.  The 
development of the parade ground, new generation. 
28 million and matching funding, 625,000 from 
Wicklow County Council was required and that 
consists development of the street scape and 

95 
 
building realm in the historic core of Arklow, 
detailed design is finalised and should start, the 
work should start second half of next year. 
Refurbishment of Arklow courthouse required 
funding, works are due for refurbishing on ground 
floor for court services and at the same time we've 
had demands for office hub space and plans have been 
prepared to convert first floor in an office and 
digital hub space.  
The corner projects are we have received funding 
for three bus shelters in the district under the 
community enhancement programme for the 
age-friendly, digital screen for the town - in the 
process of organising that. We're involved in the 
Arklow Greenway, application for refurbishment for 
the running track, we're considering blue flag 
application and applying for charitable status and 
autism friendly town.  Current projects, I won't 
be too much longer.  We're organising events 
around a 2020 world under 16-21, ranking 
competition which is to be hosted in Arklow in 
October and I want to thank the council officials 
for the co-operation in this matter.  Arklow, 
Irish Ancient Town Project this will present the 

96 
 
heritage in the evolution in the town which leaflet 
link to the timeline map.  The Pottery Museum which 
I would be very enthusiastic about, and application 
has been submitted for 2.5 million, it is intended 
to develop Arklow Pottery and Heritage Museum on 
the ground of the Old Abby Graveyard which dates 
back hundreds of years, and is a case has been 
submitted under the 2019 community environment 
action fund that is biodiversity.  And I'll finish 
by, I just want to thank the officials of the 
council for their co-operation and I have to say 
it has been an eye opener to be on the Town Team 
and I think we'll have much success in the future.  
So, thank you. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH:  I'd like to thank you for the first 
presentation inside the allotted time, well done.  
Listen, if you do have questions, and it is great 
we now know the work that's done throughout the 
county with the town teams, if there's specific 
ideas you heard that you want to bring back your 
own town teams I suggest you do it at municipal 
levels.. 
Thank you both for your preparations. 

97 
 
OK, to receive a presentation on Be Winter Ready.  
And I think this is my second time in two days, to 
meet Sinead, can I say I was lucky enough to go to 
the presentation or the Conferring Ceremony in 
Arklow IT at the weekend and Sinead was one of the 
recipients of her business degree, but, along with 
that, she also won the medal for being the best 
student of the year. 
SINEAD:  No pressure now, I just want to give a 
brief summary in relation to the major imagine 
framework which outlines responsibility to Wicklow 
County Council in relation to, its context 
originates from national risk framework within it 
then identifies flooding, heavy know, severe 
storms and I mean prolonged cold weather events, 
the framework was published in 2009.  Part of that, 
is in relation to Wicklow County Council's context 
we are obliged to document major emergency plan, 
and our current addition is 2017 date, and two sole 
plans one in response to flood response plan and 
another severe weather plan. There's on-line 
training courses available if someone wants to 
become familiar with the content itself.  One of 
the key aspects is we would regularly meet with 

98 
 
local authorities, our neighbouring local 
authorities, and our partnering PRAs and other 
supporting organisations.  The because of that 
then, there's out of those there will be shared 
lessons and key, from the severe weather events, 
that previously, we have experienced in Ireland, 
I won't go into them in detail, but they're listed 
there over the years.  The coordination for major 
emergency events is co-ordinated at National 
Coordination Centre, representatives there would 
be from other agencies and parent agencies as well.  
This does facilitate a more focused timely response 
by all agencies. 
And you will remember back in 2016, that's 
Department of Education set a new level to red 
emergency events, this is the information 
emergency flow, from the national centre to 
coordination centre in the middle and all the way 
ought to onsite and there's the information flow, 
one of the key responsibilities for local 
authorities is that we have to have a severe weather 
assessment team to monitor weather alerts and they 
will come from Met Eireann and OPW, and our own 
crisis management team from the various municipal 

99 
 
districts will co-ordinate the information flow up 
through the various chain.  A few pictures from 
past events.  As quickly flick through them.  
They're representative of pictures and lessons 
we've learnt over the years and community 
resilience involved with them.  It is multiagency 
approach to co-ordinating our response, it does 
include Civil Defence, Gardai, and mountain rescue 
and RNLI and including National Coordination Level 
from Defence Force if and when required.  The 
Office of Public Emergency Planning are launching 
this week, they're public information in relation 
to promoting awareness for Be Winter Ready 
campaigns and there's a few available brochures and 
leaflets and Twitter page information.  So, I want 
to hand you over to senior engineer. 
CATHAOIRLEACH:  We'll hopefully not use the 30, I 
want to get the agenda cleared. 
Michael Flynn:  Thank you.  Just very quickly to 
run through our winter maintenance plan for the 
year.  Just first line there is winter service plan 
and that's available on our website and essentially 
that outlines our response to severe weather 
events, particularly snow and ice.  The season 

100 
 
runs from the 14th of October through the end of 
April, so this is in operation at the moment, it 
essentially outlines our place, the personal 
involved and equipment involved and all available 
on the site if you want to look at it a little more.  
Quickly, this is the map showing the routes that 
we treat, and essentially what we've got is a 
priority system the red there is the N81, from 
Baltinglass to Blessington, that's our priority 
one.  The yellow and green on the M11, N11, that's 
treated by the mark contractor and our priority 
two, are all the results in blue and they're 
essentially a regional road network and then we 
also have priority three, which is all footpaths 
as determined by the local engineer or overseer in 
Wicklow he can operate the ice system, it is from 
a group of engineers, and runs from 14th of October 
to 30th of April, we have engineer monitoring 
weather conditions and forecasts around the clock 
every day for the season.  And, included there a 
picture of a typical weather station.  These are 
dotted around the local network and they give us 
information in relation to temperature, wind 
speeds, cameras on it, and also sensors in the road 

101 
 
which will tell you the surface temperature and 
indeed whether the salt remaining on the road so, 
they're dotted around and we use those to inform 
us in relation to our decisions. 
That there is a typical screen shot it is from the 
Baltinglass Weather Station, you'll see on the 
left, the solid lined is and the dotted is 
prediction, we make decisions around that.  Just 
a bit of information around what some statistics, 
the length of road we treat on a typical night is 
over 500 kilometres. 
For a normal gritting run we put out. 5 
tonnes of salt, depending on the conditions, a 
typical rate is 15 grams, that depends how severe 
the frost or the snow is, it could be more than that, 
and we spend approximately on average 750,000 each 
season treating the road network.  That there is 
a showing you the locations we've six salt deposals 
strategically dotted around the country where we 
store the salt and where the lorries get loaded and 
deal with winter events.  And that there, is a 
picture of a typical salting truck, snowplough on 
the front and gritter on the back and the driver 
and helper that goes out on that, they go out at 

102 
 
all matter of hours day and night and respond and 
they work at a phone call or text away any time to 
respond to that.  So outdoor staff and 
particularly drivers and helpers do a Trojan work 
in relation to that. 
And again, as have been mentioning Be Winter Ready 
will be launched on Thursday.  And I suppose, just 
one final note regardless whether route is in a 
salting route or whether it is treated, drivers 
should always drive with caution, because, it is 
not an exact science, the fact we've salt a road 
in no way can guarantee it is free from ice so that 
warning should always go, no matter what routes are 
sapped there's the danger of plaque ice and drivers 
should drive with caution in salt, ice or snow 
conditions. 
  
 
CLLR MULLEN:  Thanks for the presentation, just 
two brief questions, one in relation to the 
instance of flooding, due to the change and nature 
of rainfall in Wicklow, on orange and yellow 
alerts, is there increased provision by sandbag 
provision in each area? Because there's residents 

103 
 
and towns and villages that are experiencing 
flooding in areas that have not experienced 
flooding before and it is probably due to change 
in rainfall so access to sandbags is something, we 
can do to alleviate that.  In second question in 
relation to know events and icy vents, just has the 
confusion cleared up whereby, if a local farmer or 
usually local farmer trying to clear his local road 
to allow neighbours get out that there's some 
allowance for that, in regards to permission 
they're not acting on their own 
trespassing - there's confusion over that over the 
years and prevented farmers from taking the decent 
action they always used to take over the years. 
CLLR BOURKE:  Just in following on there from 
previous councillor's contribution, farmers who 
have milk trucks coming in for collection during 
prolonged cold periods of snow and ice, find it very 
difficult to actually match up with the milk 
collection and have offered to go in the past to 
collect salt to keep their roads properly salted 
to that deliveries can come and go.  Will that be 
allowed for in this plan, because I'm thinking of 
Ballymoney for the last number of years, there's 

104 
 
been requests and pleas from the farmers will, to, 
have their road opened up and kept open rather than 
having to dump milk because they can't always meet 
a truck in Wooden Bridge and Kinavany there's a 
group of farmers who find it difficult to take 
deliveries of collections of milk trucks coming in 
because of the steep nature of the hill.  We don't 
prioritise those with our trucks as you know, so, 
will that be available if there's a very bad 
forecast, could farmer X or Y, pop out, get a 
quarter of a ton of salt for your depo and do it 
for us? 
CLLR BLAKE:  The farmers you're talking about, I’m 
sure maybe from now on in that regard, the usual 
question is our interaction with Wexford and Carlow 
county councils, particularly to the R747, we will 
do a certain section of it, and it runs part way 
in Carlow and back in Wicklow again, that's causing 
a problem down through the years, we have done our 
section but Carlow County Council often neglective 
in their aspects what level of communication do we 
have there in that regard with Cllr Doran, we have 
had both councils with interactions, that we done 
some roads and they have done as well so wondering 

105 
 
in the future, something we need to continue to have 
liaison with both local authorities. 
CLLR LEONARD:  Is there a dedicated line for 
councillors out of hours for imagination if 
anything occurs or is this just the general one on 
the website.  And also, is there a plan in place, 
for clearing drains for this time of the year in 
Arklow specifically in the flood-prone areas?  
>>:    Just to say those, in relation to the 
farmers clearing roads, this arose particularly 
through the severe snowstorm we had, and we got 
clarification from the department that provided 
the contact of the local engineer and advised them 
what they're doing, and it is done with 
consultation that they are permitted to do so and 
insured to do so, so we've clarification on that, 
and in relation to Cllr Sylvestor Bourke and 
farmers on routes, in addition to the routes I've 
shown on the map we have grit locations, grit stocks 
on hills located around the county and certainly, 
if there are particular hills causing problems, and 
again, contact the local area office or ourselves 
here and we'll try and deal with those. In relation 
to people coming and getting salt, certainly we 

106 
 
would help provide it, we have stocks available to 
do that, and that can be organised locally, by all 
means, but the first instance is have the hills have 
it in place before the event.  And certainly, if 
the locations, where that's not happening let us 
know and we'll arrange that.  And sandbags, yes, 
each area has a stock of sandbags, 
9000 per Municipal District and they're available 
so we start filling those, or we now have 
arrangement with a quarry in the west where we can 
get truckloads of them at short notice, so we don't 
have concerns in relation to supplies of sandbags. 
So just the clearing of the drains, you may have 
noticed there's a bit of work going on at the 
moment, we've had a specifically designated grant 
from the department for drainage which wasn't 
available previously, it was over 230,000 this 
year, they doubled it to 430,000, so there's a 
drainage grant for Municipal District and you'll 
notice there's inlet's and runners around the 
county with that.  In relation to, - the dedicated 
line, we have out of hours call service, so we call 
line dedicated outside of hours which is 
operational.  

107 
 
So, ring the number here you're through to a switch 
and that's connected so we have the out of hours.  
So then in relation to consultation with joining 
local authorities, we circulate that first slide, 
that's circulated to all joining local 
authorities, the contact details for the personnel 
managing winter services in the joining local 
authorities is contained in that.  And certainly, 
if they are there are particular locations like you 
mentioned, Carlow, we'll make contact and see if 
there's issues of in terms of some routes perhaps 
not getting the coverage they might do.  There may 
be an issue in terms of the timing of salt when you 
deal with it, our truck may not arrive at the same 
time as the Carlow truck or whatever, so we'll talk 
to them and make that call and see if we can sort 
those things out and if you have particular local 
knowledge in relation to that, let the Wicklow 
Litter Management Plan.  2019-2024. 
  
Jim Callery:  OK, good afternoon.  Back with the 
litter plan which was first presented to the 
council back in March, before it went to public 
consultation, and we have made a number of 

108 
 
amendments to it, and we're here to propose it, for 
adoption if you agree.  The plan sets out our 
policies and objectives as a local authority.  
Looking at enforcement and regulation with 
relation to litter, litter prevention and control 
measures, education awareness and community 
participation, so there's four main categories we 
look at in the plan.  The plan is requirement under 
section 10 of the Litter Pollution Act, 1997, all 
local authorities must prepare Litter Management 
Plan.  And the plan is there to assess, what are 
the main causes of litter?  What are the problems 
we're experiencing across the county?  What 
objectives we have to deal with those litter issues 
and how we can control that litter.  We've been 
through the process of drafting the plan, 
consulting with the staff across the organisation, 
and examining some neighbouring local authorities' 
plans as well and seeing what they're doing, 
looking at best practice and looking at the 
relevant legislation and policy changes that have 
occurred since the last plan and then as I said 
earlier we went out to consultation first of all, 
consulting with the elected members of Wicklow 

109 
 
County Council in March and going out to public 
consultation.  On the basis of that, we did a 
review of the plan, making amendments to it, and 
we now have that amended plan to present to you as 
members.  What the plan does is it sets out what 
the legislation is covering litter, it defiance 
what litter is, it sets out the response of 
responsibilities for different sectors, there's 
ourselves, the business sectors, general public, 
we all have responsibilities to work together and 
tackle the problem of litter.  It is evaluating the 
type of litter, littering instances that occurring 
around the county and establishing what the 
priorities are.  I don't think the priorities will 
be any surprise to any of you, we're all familiar 
with a lot of them, the things with the dog falling, 
the convenience packaging, take away packaging 
that we're finding, litter thrown from cars, and 
things like signage, dumping of things and there's 
a long list of different priorities we have in 
County Wicklow.  Getting on to the objectives and 
those of the plan, waste enforcement would be one 
of the four key areas we're looking at and our aim 
is to enforce visible presence with five officers 

110 
 
throughout the county, record and investigate all 
complaints received, from the public, and pursue 
all the waste activities taking action to stop 
them.  Collaborate with partners in tackling the 
issue of littering and dumping so they would be 
organisations like the EPA, the Gardai and WERLA 
and PURE and ensures compliance by all relevant 
sectors.  And increasingly, looking how we use 
technology to tackle the problem of dumping and 
littering.  We're looking at prevention and 
control, particularly municipal level, 
maintaining adequate bin numbers, adapting 
locations, as needed where the bins are, where 
they're needed and ensuring the bins are expected 
and serviced, and street cleaning in the towns, and 
added course is given to municipal courses with the 
bin services and street cleaning operations, 
monitoring and regulating event, that occur, in our 
district to ensure they comply with the regulations 
and they have, a waste management plan in situ 
before an event takes place and they have the means 
of cleaning up after the event and tackling dog 
fouling with signage and bins throughout our tunes 
and communities, and also monitoring litter black 

111 
 
spots, in our towns. 
The education and awareness campaign would be 
working on a range of campaigns to target litter, 
so specific campaigns on dog fouling, gum litter, 
graffiti, convenes waste issue and campaigns on the 
general litter.  We work closely with the schools 
across County Wicklow, particularly will you the 
Green Schools Programme but working with any 
schools that want to and providing they will with 
resources to looking at litter in the school and 
get the schools involved actively and tackling the 
issue of litter.  We work with local community 
groups working on the issue of litter, like Tidy 
Towns, and the National Spring Clean which is an 
effective campaign every year, this year there were 
over 140 groups that took part in National Spring 
Clean doing local, so it is a big campaign.  
Providing resources for the community and county 
of wide campaigns through the anti-litter grant and 
promoting a better approach to waste management and 
litter control in different sectors, in business 
community and householders, and again, using all 
relevant media to get that message out there, so 
using the press, radio, website and increasing 

112 
 
social media to promote engagement with the topic 
of litter.  Community engagement is a new section 
we added into this litter plan, it wasn't there in 
the previous plan, it is a key part of the work we 
do, working with local community groups and getting 
citizen engagement in helping to tackle the problem 
of litter. So, we have this section in the plan now 
and about encouraging engagement by a range of 
different actors, like Tidy Towns, PURE and youth 
groups, getting them involved in helping us to 
tackle the issue of litter, promoting and 
supporting National Spring Clean, providing the 
materials that groups need. There are a lot of 
activity with people on the ground doing clean-up 
events, we need to support them and provide them 
with equipment to do the clean-ups, working with 
Tidy Towns so they can deliver their own campaigns, 
if they know what is the key issue in their 
community that needs to be raised in an awareness 
campaign, so we work closely with them with working 
with their campaigns at local campaigns.  We have 
the annual awards, tidy towns estates and 
environmental awards which recognises some of the 
groups that have been active over the last year. 

113 
 
We also continue to fund and support PURE in the 
work they're doing and ensuring there's good 
liaison between council services and community 
groups across the county in tackling the issue of 
litter. 
Following on from the consultation, and revision 
that we did in March, there was a number of small 
minor changes made to the plan, as it was presented, 
we had two public submissions made and the plan was 
revised to take account of those submissions that 
we received both elected members and the two public 
submissions that came in.  So within the plan, 
there's now more references to the use of 
technology across not just enforcement but 
enforcement litter control and education and 
awareness, we've an addition of references to 
defacement of the public green with advertisements 
in several sections of the plan, and we have 
referenced signage but we were informed that 
defacement with stickers is quite prevalent 
particularly in the Bray area to so we've addressed 
that issue in the plan and focus on preventing 
waste, that was brought to us in the chamber that 
people would like us to take action on coffee cups 

114 
 
and plastic bottles, that was something we were 
doing, and we want to knit those together and put 
focus on preventing waste items to lead to English 
in in the first place and references to citizen-led 
initiatives and campaigns on preventing waste to 
match that goal.  OK. 
CLLR MATTHEWS:  There's two striking issues in 
that document that I see, one is that the number 
of fines prosecutions and fines paid in your four 
years has doubled which I this is testament to the 
hard work that's done in the section.  The other 
thing I see half of the litter is cigarette butts, 
that makes me question whether you're doing hard 
work but are the businesses, that their clientele 
contributing to the cigarette butts, we know the 
types of businesses, we see it outside pubs and 
bookies, we see it outside gambling places. Is 
there anything we can do to approach those? The 
rubbish is emanating from their clients, from their 
premises so surely, they have some sort of onus and 
obligation to address that littering issue.  And 
thank you for the hard work you're doing and the 
presentation. 
  

115 
 
>>: Greystones Tidy Town had contacted me about the 
issue, people aren't aware that the damage that 
cigarette butts can do, they're not aware they're 
littering the environment when you throw them down, 
but I was wondering, whether there are any plans, 
I don't see it specifically listed under the 
education programme, is there plans Bin the Butt 
Campaign, like Fingal has run, a public awareness 
campaign is important, whether that's community 
level at Tidy Towns or county-wide level so I'd like 
to see that happening.  Thank you.  Again on the 
data, while I appreciate the fines issue has 
doubled there's an interesting part when you look 
at fines issued for 2018 thirty five issued, 346 
paid and prosecution six, which means 99 just 
disappeared, as in they weren't taken any further 
or it is hard to believe that 99 fines issued from 
frivolous or so had there is a gap, what happens 
to all the fines when they're issued, are we 
following them through to the end, so I'd like us 
to get better that the that, there's a gap where 
99 were issued and nothing paid or prosecuted 
afterward.  On the PURE project we all know the 
value of that project to Wicklow, and has the 

116 
 
funding been confirmed for that, because it is a 
thing that's running out in December, so I hope that 
we, from here we all send our best wishes to the 
Pure project and it continues, because without it, 
I don't know how we tackle it, on heavy vehicles 
that aren't covered properly whether its quarry 
vehicles or farmers vehicles that are going through 
towns and sometimes offload debris, that is litter, 
and it could be a public information piece rather 
than prosecution piece, because sometimes it is 
busy times of year for farmers and construction 
workers, but if they're inadvertently shedding 
their load it is litter and causes danger as well 
as everything else. 
  
CLLR LEONARD:  One is related to the campaign, 
maybe we could incorporate some sort of a I 
awareness for registered legal waste collectors to 
prevent illegal waste collectors to pick up from 
houses, maybe on a website have a list of registered 
waste collectors and one in relation to green waste 
I've had a lot of constituents residents 
associations doing good work in their the community 
but they've nowhere to put green waste and maybe 

117 
 
localised composting scheme that would prevent a 
lot of you know, fines and stuff having to be issued 
if they had alternative to put the green waste in 
allocated area. 
CLLR DERMOT O'BRIEN:  Thanks again for the report.  
Very, comprehensive and balanced works points, one 
is in the community, engagement section I think 
adds value but it is in relation and challenge 
because if we invite community engagement we also 
have to respond to community engagement, 
particularly, like the circular economies in 
there, because, again the report is putting us into 
the future and flagging the important things for 
us going forward.  One question I have is that when 
the parking wardens are contracted to do the work 
in terms of looking at litter and taking a role 
there in terms of identifying maybe that's 
something that links with the cigarette issue is 
that is the parking wardens contracted to do this 
work is that working and something we'll continue 
to do?  Thanks. 
  
CLLR PAUL O'BRIEN:  Thank you for a comprehension 
you were with me, when we opened an orchard, despite 

118 
 
everything we do there's dog litter, it is of the 
no matter what the council do at types, I spoke to 
a Brittas Bay earlier on, there's massive skips out 
there, bins and still people leave their rubbish 
lying around.  What more can we do? Or what more 
can be done as a deterrent or a more publicity in 
terms of getting people to do the right thing?  
Thank you. 
CLLR BEHAN:  Thanks Jim for the report and all of 
the work officials who worked on it.  But just 
following on what Cllr Paul O'Brien did there, two 
of the biggest scorns in this county certainly in 
Bray is dog fouling and wanton litter generally and 
while we have this plan and it is great and go up 
on the website, we'll adopt it today, else, at the 
end of the day is it going to make any difference, 
without having some more serious national fines, 
plus imprisonment for people who carry on in such 
an antisocial manner.  And in particular, dog 
owners who allow their dogs to defecate in public 
areas particularly where children have access, are 
an absolute disgrace and should be condemned out 
of hand by every single public representative here 
today.  And I would like to know, have we ever 

119 
 
successfully pursued a dog owner for that 
particular practice?  Or how many have we do?  And 
can we target that particularly in the year coming 
ahead to really show and make an example of these 
people who are completely antisocial and 
irresponsible.  In relation to bins, for a long 
time in Bray the attitude in Bray has been no we're 
not going to have bins, people bring home their 
rubbish this, policy is different, this policy is 
encouraging the placing of bins.  I personally 
think, there should be more bins in towns such as 
Bray for people who want to use them.  I accept what 
Cllr Paul O'Brien says, maybe some won't but maybe 
some will, are we saying there's a change of heart, 
at official level with regard to this former clamp 
down of bins because there was too much trouble or 
cost to empty them.  Because I would welcome them 
if it is a change and what comments you might make 
on it, I would be glad to hear on. 
 
CLLR FITZGERALD:  We need to use more technology 
because his cases where I communicated with the 
council officials and obviously the people isn't 
know there was cameras there, the hidden cameras 

120 
 
but it served a purpose that obviously they must 
have got grasp of it and didn't come back, we're 
at the budget in November, and 2.3 million is to 
spend in preventing and controlling of litter.  
Throughout the districts, 207,000 in Arklow and but 
that's, we could do a lot with that, at the budget 
time in November.  But the fact is it will have to 
be spent and 77.,000 on controlling of litter, and 
I notice, the payments of fines are consistent 
since 2015, only 7%, 70% of the people pay, 70%, 
2015,16, 17, 18, so what's the use in giving litter 
fines if people don't pay them, 30%, what do we do 
with the 30%, do we pursue them, because I look 
here, there was about 200 weren't paid over the four 
years, and there's been, 22 prosecutions, now I'm 
aware, in the Arklow area, that there are illegal 
operators and I have property them to the council 
but I've seen nothing done about it. I have reported 
in previously, where one I seen it on Facebook that 
said the best person in Arklow to collect waste is 
person X, and I saw a person on a road getting 
rubbish and I asked them where they were going to 
south county Dublin, but unfortunately I couldn't 
catch them at the time, I couldn't catch they were 

121 
 
a bit quick for me.  But I really think, that I'm 
not casting dispersions on anyone, despite your 
good work we're losing the battle with the illegal 
operators in some places because it is happening 
in rural South Wicklow. 
CLLR WALSH:  Look I'm in the same vain as previous 
speakers, looking at the figures again, we spent 
considerable reverses, 2.3 million, and 2018 and 
most is spend on education awareness, prevention 
control et cetera, but the same point as Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald on the fine, I looked on that, the total 
fines generated 36, 00S there difficulty getting 
people before the courts with the fly tipping 
incidents, that's the one and the dog falling, 
again, just walked Greystones yesterday morning 
the seafront is evidence of dog fouling it is 
ongoing, it is disgusting to say the least, thanks. 
CLLR MITCHELL:  Yeah, I would like to say, greatest 
concern is about the dog dirt around the place, I 
think in Greystones and the sea road in Kilcoole, 
it can be a major problem, it is a disgrace with 
people leave it, and we don't apply fines to dog 
owners for this.  And the local collection rate of 
fines it seems that to be bear that in mind and the 

122 
 
council should be lobbying through the general 
county council's Association of Officials, to try 
and change the law, so we can actually apply these 
fines to people whose dogs litter the place and make 
sure the fines actually stick.  I don't think any 
other European society would tolerate such a low 
collection rate for fines. 
  
 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks very much chair for your 
presentation Jim, I think, the issue of dog 
fouling, we're all talking about it here, it is the 
one issue that residents will bring up time and time 
again, because it is the one issue we're failing 
to tackle and it is a very, very difficult thing 
to tackle I think.  A lot has to do with culturally, 
we need to be more prepared to top seeing it 
happening, so that it becomes unacceptable, on 
every front that anyone will allow their dog to 
dirty path.  But one of the things, when we raised 
previously in the grain stones district what we're 
told is under the current litter legislation it is 
difficult for someone so as they can, if they see 
a dog, defecating and it is not cleaned up, they 

123 
 
can actually give a fine - on the spot fine to the 
owner, but an awful lot of cases of what happened 
is the owner says that's not my dog or will give 
illegal dogs.  We have dog wardens that take a dog 
that's not in control but don't have litter 
responsibilities and I'm wondering is there a 
possibility to provide dual functions to litter 
wardens and dog warden so they both, both roles can 
actually give the fines and if someone says well, 
hold on, I'm not accepting that fine because that's 
not my dog they can take the dog because it is no 
longer under the control of an owner.  And I think 
that's something, that might actually remedy the 
gap in the legislation and I think all we would have 
to do is do that a few times and that sends a very 
strong message that we're coming down hard on this 
and it is unacceptable and people will have to start 
cleaning up after their dogs, I'm wondering Jim, 
if that is something we could consider. 
CLLR PAUL O'BRIEN:  I forgot one thing, we're 
talking dog littering and I mentioned Brittas Bay, 
but in Brittas Bay it is a problem for the horses 
that are going out in the carparks and beaches, it 
is disgraceful the amount of horse droppings out 

124 
 
there, which are considerably more than a dog's to 
be honest with you, so maybe we could look at that 
as well, my apologies as willing. 
CLLR ANNESLEY:  I'd like to commend the people that 
use recycling centres but then you have the shower 
who don't use them and that's with in with the Tidy 
Towns, the amount of litter that is he are 
recyclable, in Arklow we had bottles and can bins 
at the leisure centre and had them at Castle Park.  
They say had to be removed because of dumping left 
with them, so maybe when we have the CCT televisions 
installed we could replace these again or adjust 
the ones at the leisure centre, because there's 
some there.  The other point is the charity shops, 
all over the county, the amount of rubbish that's 
left at the doors of the charity shops at the 
weekends, I drove down the main street in Arklow 
and it was piled high.  Now, half the stuff, the 
charity shops don't want, they don't want 
mattresses left, so I presume that's up to the 
charity shops but surely there's something that can 
be done, whoever is dropping them will have been 
prosecuted as well.  The bins in Arklow, every 
Monday morning I see a gentleman at 7am going across 

125 
 
the prig with the big bag he comes back and it is 
empty, we tried to alleviate by making the holes 
smaller and smaller, in one case when the Tidy Towns 
were emptying the bin because of the judgment is 
coming up, there was a box, you know the biological 
powder was in the bottom of the box, he lift the 
bin up and put the box down on it.  I commend the 
work you're doing and especially PURE as well, 
because as Ian Davis said the amount of rubbish 
that's is dumped around and PURE is picking it up, 
it is onerous task you have but we have to get to 
the bottom of it somehow.  CLLR CRONON: Thank you 
for the presentation and we had an issue in Dunlavin 
as well, unfortunately we lost them because they 
were being abused, every rubbish was dumped there, 
it wasn't just recycling but we're trying to get 
that rectified, dog fouling is a huge issue which 
I recently been made aware of in every town and 
village across west Wicklow and I know you're 
talking about Education Programmes Dunlavin.  
Education with the kids and that's maybe something 
that the council can engage with and help them along 
the way.  In relation to PURE mile project it is 
the first time we got involved with it, not only 

126 
 
was it all of us getting out and picking up rubbish, 
but actually neighbours get together and we'd end 
up having coffee and lunch afterwards so ended up 
being a get together as well as getting out and the 
work done I know the funding is we only have up as 
far as December, so, I hope the council will 
continue to support there for the Pure project 
because it is a huge benefit to the towns and 
villages and of course our rural areas in Wicklow. 
>>:  Apologies, I'd like to come in on a few things 
that Jim, although he does great work he can't be 
everywhere, and one area is area enforcement, there 
was a question there, about the litter fines and 
the statistics which there seems to be a gap or loss 
of 90 fines every year, there's a reason, a number 
of reasons for that, main one is for us to make a 
fine stick, to make a fine successful, we need to 
prove that the person we've served that the fine 
is responsible and this comes to the dog fouling 
this a big area where we have difficulty and there's 
potential, what in what Cllr Jennifer Whitmore is 
talking about, working with the dog wardens, and 
it is best if we have a collaboration programme. 
We meet with the dog, or litter warden and dog 

127 
 
wardens, we will talk about that in future, it is 
difficult we've had years to address, we cannot sum 
militarily lift a dog, it has to be done under 
control of dogs legislation not litter 
legislation, unfortunately we can't mix the two, 
if you go in front of the judge, we would fail.  So 
one of the areas where we tend to drop a fine is 
where we attempt to identify the person, so for 
instance, if a car regular, often what we'll find 
with a car regular sincere it is in the process of 
being sold or go to the person who is registered 
owner and find actually they're no longer the 
registered owner, they sold it a week early earlier 
or address turns out to be the wrong address, 
there's no policing, so somebody enters an address 
as their registration, it is only when we go looking 
to find the person we find some of these can be the 
wrong address.. 
We have to take that although face value and on 
appeals, there are a number of appeals to succeed 
if somebody showings or proves to us they're not 
the person we thought they were, so there's a lot 
of failures.  And the other point is for us to bring 
a case to court after we've served a fine, if that 

128 
 
fine isn't paid, we serve a summons, it cost 650 
per process.  We're reluctant to do it unless we're 
happy to be successful, so we make a decision 
internally if we're not happy with the level of 
proof and often it is to do with identification of 
the perpetrator if you like.  And occasionally, 
we'll have some fines run out of time, we have 
six-month period between when we serve that 
summons, serve the fine, and actually serve a 
summons.  If we don't get an answer from registered 
mail or some of our searches, whatever in time, well 
then, we can't proceed with the summons and we lose 
it on time as well so that's the reason why there's 
a gap in the statistics as to where the cases don't 
go from a fine on to being a summons and only a small 
number, so only bring to court we think is 
successful and we have success, by and large when 
we get to court.  So that's the reason for the gaps 
and statistics, and that's the reason why the costs 
are significant, because a lot of cases we don't 
succeed with.  We take on board your suggestions.  
Jim you may - one other big issue that's mentioned, 
yes our PURE, our support is Pure Mile Project, of 
that has been sent to the department and there's 

129 
 
a request for extension of the funding for ten 
years, we hope we'll be successful and fingers 
crossed on that one, so there's an am a case gone 
in for further funding for the PURE Project 
 
JIM: The cigarettes are the most common individual 
item of litter, and we've done campaigns in the past 
and targeted the businesses that generate them in 
particular, the pubs, betting shops in particular, 
and what we did in the past we talked to them and 
gave stickers what they could put up to enforcement 
officers to visit businesses and remind the 
responsibility to keep them litter-free and it is 
something that, I know one of the officers recently 
came back to me looking for more stickers, and is 
doing a fresh sweep of some of the businesses in 
his area, so it is something we can continue to work 
on, targeting the businesses, where the cigarette 
litter is generated is very important.  Again I 
know the enforcement team have worked over the 
years doing inspections of heavy vehicles, 
carrying loads and making sure that they have 
adequate netting and cover to prevent spillage of 
materials, and again, we can look at doing a public 

130 
 
awareness campaign, on the transport of materials 
and avoiding littering from moving vehicles, the 
farming community and movement of goods.  On the 
issue of illegal collectors, it is something that 
we've just completed, it is actually at the 
printers of the moment under this year's 
antidumping initiatives, try to remember which 
grants we're talking about here, antidumping 
initiatives, we did a leaflet for the five biggest 
towns in the county and in that leaflet it looks 
at the issue of illegal collectors and outlines 
some services they have available, locally, so each 
of the five main towns in the county it tells them 
about the local bottle banks, recycle centres, 
nearest civic amenity site which may not be in the 
town itself and tells them which service providers 
are operating in that area.  It is trying to get 
that information into the community about what 
services are available to them, and also get the 
message out about not using the illegal operators 
that are out there, and I know as part of the 
anti-dumping initiatives there was some work done 
on actually trying to catch the illegal operators 
as well, so we're targeting that issue of illegal 

131 
 
waste collectors.  What's the next on the list.  
Dog fouling is one that it is the one that comes 
up most commonly as mentioned it is difficult to 
prosecute, and we're also working on new ideas, to 
raise awareness, it is a difficult one, and 
behaviour that's very difficult to change.  Dog 
owners, I'm one myself, it is not pleasant to pick 
up after your dog but once you get into the habit 
it is no biggy, but it is convincing those dog 
owners to do it is very difficult and challenging 
and they slip out of it easily we know the winter 
months the number of dog fouling increases because 
people think they can get away with it in the dark.  
And we've done a number of campaigns, audio devices 
I have a project I'm developing and hoping to roll 
out with Tidy Towns where we put in planters with 
signage on them about the issue of dog fouling and 
tree, in the planter, hanging bags from the tree 
joist to draw attention this is not properly 
behaviour, hanging a bag of dog waste and throwing 
it in the hedge, and we're rolling that out, and 
it is just about coming up with new ideas and 
keeping that message fresh.  There was mention 
about working with local groups with the local Tidy 

132 
 
Town groups and campaigns, in my experience that 
is most effective way. We've done it on dog fouling 
and plastic bottles thrown from cars and where 
we've done combined campaign and Tidy Towns groups 
are getting seriously good numbers in terms of hits 
on their social media, places like Wicklow and 
Arklow they're getting 6, 
,000 hits on their campaign, we will continue, and 
they can be more effective, and we'll give them that 
support, going forward to do it.  Bottle banks were 
mentioned as well, the issue of bottle pangs being 
removed and we're conscious of it, it is important 
service to communities, Arklow was mentioned 
there, just last week I was at a reception for Tidy 
Towns, for a the local Tidy Towns, and that was one 
of the issues they raised, they want one of those 
bottle bank sites brought back into the town, so 
I've been speaking to waste management to bring 
that in, once we have the CCTV coverage that's going 
in the centre of Arklow, we can put the bottle banks 
back in, and be able to catch anyone who is dumping 
them.  Same for Dunlavin we will put bottle banks 
and CCTV coverage in to catch the dumpers.  We've 
done it at a number of sites around the county, 

133 
 
using the technology and it helped us maintain some 
of our bottle bank sights so maybe it could help 
us to put a site back in like Dunlavin as well.  And 
charity shops they are important service to the 
community and it is all about reuse, it is a great 
reuse model in town centres to have charity shops 
to we'll work with them and if we have CCTV coverage 
that shows dumping on the public streets outside 
of a charity shop I don't see why we couldn't link 
up with the team and get prosecutions there, we will 
need to work with the charity shops with getting 
signage in place so that people are warned about 
potential prosecution if they leave something 
outside the shop.  But I think it is something we 
could be happy to welcome with the shop sector.  
Anything else I'm missing, I covered most of them.         
Cathaoirleach: Thank you very much. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Proposer and seconder, by Cllr Pat 
Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr Joe Behan, agreed 
by all, thank you.                          
Cathaoirleach:  While Deirdre is coming to get 
presentation ready, item 11 to improve overdraft 
of ... 
Proposed by Cllr Sylvestor Bourke seconded by Cllr 

134 
 
Pat Fitzgerald 
  
MS GALLAGHER:  Cllr Stephen Matthews proposed this 
council writes to the CEO, NTA and minister of 
transfer transport to ask 41 new carriages for 
funding allocated some deployed by the Wicklow 
route.  Seconder.  OK.  Cllr Derek Mitchell 
seconder, thank you. 
>>:  We have been asked by the asked to sign up to 
the Pollinator Plan.  I will run over it and tell 
you what that means, what is the All Ireland 
Pollinator Plan and what it means for Wicklow 
County Council becoming a partner and exampling of 
some of the actions we might get involved in.  So, 
it was produced in 2015, cross sector thing ... 
  
I've a few slides here but go straight to a three 
of minute video.  If that's all right and that's 
the three minutes, it is a project that myself and 
my colleague in Kildare produced with the National 
Biodiversity Data Centre, and explains the plan and 
what it is about. 
Video:    OK, so we're missing the whole voiceover 
for that, which is a pity, because it is a simple 

135 
 
way of explaining the whole thing, if it doesn't 
come up, I can do it. 
It should have come up by now.  I'll go back to the 
presentation because it is distracting.  OK, 
you'll have to listen to me instead.  OK, so 
basically, it was just to give quick introduction 
when we talk about pill Pollinator is most food and 
crops are pollinated by wild bees in Ireland, 
that's it.  Over three quarters of pollination is 
carried out by bees and rest by other insects, of 
our bees, everyone is familiar with honeybee we 
have one species of them, 21 species of bumblebees 
and 27 of solitary bees, those who don't live in 
hives, so we have 99 bee species. 
pollinators are declining, we lost a third since 
1980, and then, one-third wile bees are threat of 
extinction at the moment.  Why are they declining?  
There's a range of reasons basically because we're 
drastically reducing areas where they can nest and 
food and landscape that supports them so they're 
being made homeless, through habitat loss and lack 
of food crops and landscapes, so hunger and 
pesticide use and then climate change is impacting 
on them as well.  So, national biodiversity plan, 

136 
 
on the websites has all the different resources for 
different sectors, when I mention there's a role 
for all department to play, one of the sectoral 
advice produce asked for especially for councils 
and that was circulated, and that lists, in around 
30 different actions, that a councils can take, and 
for pollinators.  The reasons to do it are obvious, 
it is good general biodiversity and landscape and 
supporting food production, and economic value of 
that. 
And then supporting action on the ground like Tidy 
Town groups residents groups and all the work 
they're doing, and really a lot of those groups 
they're sector guidance and a lot of them have done 
lots in this area, so it is council maybe a leader 
of getting our house in order, and things like Green 
Flag award, Glendalough grave yard got the Green 
Flag award earlier this year, and so it would be 
great as another flag for that, that we could have 
that biodiversity, we're not asked to do all 30, 
but pick some of these actions that are practical 
within our own budget and management and see what 
we could do. 
I'll just whisk through a few of the action, first 

137 
 
is looking at areas which are most for nature, 
natural areas, rivers, coastline and protecting 
those, very basic, within others we mightn't 
associate as much, which is native hedgerows, dry 
stone walls and preserving those kind of areas 
because pollinators need food throughout the year 
so no point in having one species of plant that 
blooms in summer and that we need something 
throughout the year so you need the ivy and the 
winter and willow the start of the year and 
everything in between for supporting these 
long-term.  A lot of the actions, in the plan, that 
we've been asked for councils to have a look at is 
altering our frequency of mowing, so this is 
something that will make a big difference, so 
typically, a regime for mowing would be from verges 
and roundabouts, would be on 22 cuts per year and 
mulch the grass back in the plan is asking councils 
wildlife approach which is five cuts and removing 
grass and cost benefit analysis, it works cost 
neutral or better, if you do it this way, so change 
as mind set in each Municipal District we hope to 
have at one area we're going to say we cut five lifts 
per year which starts mid-April and continue on.  

138 
 
And then, can you have other areas you can cut on 
and lift a year, and this suits like large parkland 
areas where you let the vegetation grow long so 
typically you may have mode a path through it, and 
cut and lift once a year and put signs up to show 
people, verges, and the same kind of system.  Also 
this thing of you can have for road safety trim down 
where needed, on the road verges, but you might opt 
to do a layered system where longer vegetation in 
the background and that's a picture of all the 
things we're talking about, a parkland or field, 
that has long vegetation, and might have the other 
bit that's have has six week rotation and others 
that are mowed more traditionally, and using native 
seed is important, in approximately 
pollinator-friendly planting, native hedgerows 
and species are brilliant for this, consider 
putting in clever into the grass when we're 
planting up areas.  It is simple butting in that 
helps pollinators a lot.  The pollinator friendly 
planting, consider it in street trees or whether 
ornamental or native, there's ornamental trees 
that are good for pollinators and move away from 
the hanging baskets with the Buzzy Lizzies and 

139 
 
daffodils they do nothing for pollinators as all 
and there's a list of alternative plants that can 
be used in hanging packets and planters that are 
better.  Run bees are another area and I know 
there's progress in districts on this, on some of 
the round bees, really, they're a spot that would 
suit some of the planting regimes we're talking 
about here and management regimes.  Nesting 
habitats is important this overgrown hedgerows is 
providing vegetation for wintering insects and 
solitary bee, 62 of the 77 species have earth banks 
so they need the earth banks, so they're important 
and the whole idea of reducing the use of 
pesticides, eliminating it in places that don't 
need it, and then reducing it in areas that maybe 
it is essential, so, it’s changing the ethos again, 
if possible.  And then raising public awareness by 
putting up the signage and I know you see it all 
over the county, the manage for wildlife signs a 
really good way to let people know what you're 
doing. 
And working with groups and having workshops and 
so forth, so it is the kind of thing we're doing 
on the council website we have the animation you 

140 
 
didn't see here but if you look you can watch it, 
we have another one coming out shortly.  We've 
publications and lots of information.  The last 
thing that the Pollinator Plan we asked to do was 
to track what we're doing, so, there's GIS, system, 
on the website, you go in and set up user name and 
track where you're doing, where your local 
authority and doing action so then it can be 
measured every year.  So that's basically it, for 
us to sign up as partners we look to take on board, 
we say we're going to take on board the ethos and 
incorporate it things in county development plan 
climate change plan all plans and we consider, the 
first year we take on at least one action and five 
years three actions, so not looking for a huge 
commitment, just commitment really in ethos.  And 
then we report back, and we track what we do.  So 
that's it. 
CLLR WHITMORE:  Thanks very much Deirdre. 
And thanks for all your hard work on this, I know 
that a lot of the work you're presenting today, it 
is taken a long time to get to this point for the 
council, and I know, even across the districts, we 
are doing a lot of the work outlined in the proposal 

141 
 
but we haven't formalised it by becoming a part in 
the plan yet so it is great at that point today where 
we will get to formalise that partnership and send 
a strong membership survey out that Wicklow County 
Council is taking this issue seriously.  And it is 
important to get the message out it is not just a 
council initiative that on the All Ireland 
pollinator website there's actions and 
recommendations that every single person can take, 
whether as an individual garden owner or member of 
Tidy Towns or business owners, and that really, 
everyone within our community can play a role in 
this, and I think that's really important that we 
get that message out there.  So, I any I'm 
conscious of time as well, so thanks for owl your 
work on it Deirdre and I propose Wicklow County 
Council become a partner in the All Ireland 
Pollinator Plan, 2015, 2020. whatever type of 
works, this is what we'll judged on, I look forward 
to Wicklow taking a lead on these issues, thanks. 
  
CLLR BOURKE:  It is a very good plan and fair place 
to you for drafting it, we have a great opportunity 
with the new housing estates to incorporate it into 

142 
 
the landscaping and I'd like to see us do a bit more, 
especially in terms of the land we known, some of 
it, we're almost leaving derelict and we should 
incorporate that land bank into the plan as well. 
CLLR SCOTT:  Thanks very much, I really welcome 
this proposal, I called for this a lot during the 
recent election and I'm very happy to support it.  
A lot of people contact me asking for specific 
actions across the county reduce pesticide and 
produce wild flower meadows so that's incorporated 
so it is nice to see it on board and there's great 
scope in the document, for just, the section on 
raising awareness of pollinator actions, and 
that's important through the community and schools 
and residents associations and estates, if there's 
guidelines to them, particularly externally 
managed estate, to do so there's scopes for that. 
CLLR KAVANAGH:  Thanks, yeah, it is great to hear 
all about the plan. 
But, I hope to see an Action Plan drawn up and that, 
as well as talking about it, that it is actually 
implemented and even if we only start off small it 
is better than doing nothing, you know, even if it 
was like letting verges grow with wild flowers and 

143 
 
public areas, maybe one or two cuts a year and maybe 
if we have to put a little track through it, so 
people can walk in the public areas, that's what 
they do in the UK and it works well, round bees, 
things like that, I would like to see the 
pesticide/herbicide thing looked at, people say 
this is a difference between herbicides and 
pesticides and there are obviously, but, some 
people say herbicides which is what roundup is 
doesn't damage bees.  It mightn't kill them, but 
it does actually interfere with them, it interferes 
with their life cycle and digestive system. 
So, there's no point saying that we want to protect 
bees when we use chemicals that actual damages and 
kills them.  So, as I said, well done but I hope 
to see it implemented.  Thank you. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Can we have a proposer and seconder, 
is it agreed?  Open proposer, Cllr Jennifer 
Whitmore.: 
>>:  Thanks very much for the presentation.  
Reading from the royal geographical society, they 
were talking about the extinction of the bees and 
implications for humans. 
And just that this was a summary there, yeah, 

144 
 
solutions prohibit not reduce the use of toxic 
pesticides which you've included, promote natural 
agricultural alternatives and perform constant 
research welfare and conservation, it makes an 
interesting read, I was reading it last night. 
MS GALLAGHER:  Just before Tom presents, can I have 
a proposer and seconder for the meetings of teh CPG 
for the 4th of March, 1st Of July and 2nd of September, 
2019 circulated that was Cllr Rory O'Connor, Cllr 
John Snell and for the protocol minutes of July, 
September and October, criculated I if I could have 
circulated, Cllr Paul O'Brien and Cllr Stephen 
Matthews thank you very much.                                    
Tom Murphy:  I will be brief, the members have been 
circulated with soft copy of the NOAC indicator 
report of 2018 the report runs to approximately 12 
a pages this, is the fifth annual performance 
indicators published by NOAC the members will be 
aware that the council's corporate plan which is 
currently being reviewed, sets out the high level 
goals for the councils activities.  The corporate 
plan also provides a context and attract for the 
council's Annual Service Delivery Plan and the 
Annual Service Delivery Plan in turn sets out in 

145 
 
detail the services to be provided by the council.  
The standards to be expected and how the services 
will be monitored and measures. 
So, it is within that context really that we have 
the performance indicators which help local 
authority to monitor and measure the services that 
we provide.  NOAC which was established by the 
Government under the local government reform act 
is charged with scrutinising the performance of all 
local authorities against the relevant indicators, 
for 2018, there are 37 performance indicators which 
are increase from two from 2017, the 37 indicators 
cover a wide range of varies including housing 
roads, water, waste and environment, planning, 
fire services, library and recreation, youth and 
community, corporate finance and economic 
development.  And the results under each 
performance indicator are set out in this report 
in a series of tables spanning approximately 50 
pages.  Wicklow as performed reasonably well 
across the 37 indicators, we've had good 
performance, particularly in the area of 
collection rates and housing loans, they have 
improved.  The planning indicators are good, fire 

146 
 
service mobilisation times are good. 
Library visits are good, number of trading on-line 
vouchers are up at the top, number of clients who 
received mentoring from Leo is very, very high.  
And we have a very good performance, we're on 2.51%, 
which is one of the best in the country.  So, just 
to, to conclude then, NOAC in the report, encourage 
all local authorities to use comparators of 
performance when and where appropriate, to as to 
see what we can learn from one another and to assist 
us in improving performance generally, NOAC 
encourage local authorities to engage with audit 
committees, elected members and staff throughout 
the organisation in order to increase awareness and 
understanding.  The management team considered 
this report in the last four weeks, they went 
through each of the 37 indicators, highlighting 
good performance and areas where we improve our 
performance, it was considered by the corporate 
policy group this morning and due to be considered 
by the welcome with be welcome audit committee next 
month.  So, there's a lot of information this this 
report, so if a member has a query on the 37 
indicators that they e-mail me and I'll arrange to 

147 
 
get a response from the out to them as soon as 
possible.  Thank you. 
CATHAOIRLEACH: Unfortunately, we're out of time.  
So, I propose to take the notice of motions, there's 
two notice of motions I'm taking this as first items 
of the agenda on the December meeting, thank you 
all for your meeting.                                     
MS GALLAGHER: reminder we have the Budget meeting 
on the 25th of November, commencing at ten and lunch 
in the canteen and we'll go until we finish and then 
at the meeting of the second of December, we have 
presentations to the retired and non-retired 
elected members that will be at twelve noon and 
we'll have Christmas lunch and council meeting then 
at 2, but I will be writing out to you about that. 
Sorry. 
  
CATHAOIRLEACH: Thank you, sorry to Cllr Rory 
O'Connor and Cllr Joe Behan I was hoping to get done 
this evening.    
