MINUTES of SPC for Tourism, Rural & Community Dev. An Ghaelige & Cultural Services
Held on Wednesday 3rd December 2025.
Present
Cllr. Niamh McCooey
Cllr. Pat Treanor
Cllr Raymond Aughey
Cllr. Aidan Campbell
Cllr. Paul Gibbons
Fiona McGuinness
Emer Brennan
Noel Treanor
In Attendance
Nicola Payne
Patricia Monahan
Olga McConnon
Leona Keenan
Michelle Murphy
Dympna Condra
Lisa Connolly
Deirdriu MQuaid
Carol Lambe
Kara Ward
Catherine McKenna
Apologies
Cllr. Sean Conlon
Carol Smyth
Seån Ö Murchadha
Somhairle MacConghail
1. Welcome
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Business / Commercial (Tourism/Hospitality Sector)
PPN — Environment Electoral College
PPN — Community & Vol Electoral College
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan Sports Partnership
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
Monaghan County Council
SPC Chairperson, Elected Member Monaghan County Council
PPN — Social Inclusion Electoral College
PPN — Community & Vol Electoral College
Arts Officer Monaghan County Council
In the absence of Cllr. Sean Conlon, following a discussion amongst members, it was agreed
Cllr. Niamh McCooey would act as Chairperson for this meeting.
Cllr. McCooey welcomed everyone to the meeting and wished Cllr. Conlon a speedy
recovery. All members reiterated these good wishes.
2. Minutes of meeting 25th September 2025
Cllr. Pat Treanor informed the committee that Cllr. Sean Conlon asked that the SICAP
Disability Committee attend a future meeting to deliver a presentation on the role of this
committee, its programme of work and any areas where the Council/SPC can support.
Patricia Monahan informed the committee that discussions are taking place within the
Community Development team in relation to the Disability work programme and Disability
Network. An update will be provided at the next meeting.
On the proposal of Cllr. Pat Treanor and seconded by Noel Treanor, the minutes of the SPC
meeting held on 25th September 2025, were unanimously agreed.
3. Monaghan County Heritage Strategy 2026-2031 — Kara Ward
Kara Ward, Heritage Officer delivered a presentation to members on the draft Monaghan
County Heritage Strategy 2026-2031.
Cllr. Aidan Campbell thanked Kara for her presentation and all members concurred with
this.
Cllr. Campbell made the comment that a lot of work is being done, and this is a very
important aspect. However, Built Heritage can be quite strict and stringent against owners
of these buildings. Whilst it is important to respect and preserve these buildings, we must
also adopt a pragmatic approach that considers the needs and responsibilities of current
property owners.
Kara agreed with this and recognised that having a building in use is what everyone wants.
She also informed the committee that a Conservation Officer is coming on board with MCC
soon and that the current records of Protected Structures within the County are to be
reviewed.
Cllr. Treanor agreed with previous speakers that this is a very important area of work but
there are times when things need to move on at a quicker pace and a common-sense
approach should be used.
Cllr. McCooey asked what the timeline is for the Biodiversity Action Plan adoption. Kara
replied that Patricia McCreesh Biodiversity Officer will be going out to public consultation
shortly. Cllr. Treanor asked that we ensure that the Irish Language be included in the plan.
Kara agreed with this and ensured this was a strategic priority for the Plan.
Cllr. McCooey thanked Kara for her presentation and thanked her for safeguarding our
Protected Structures.
4. Treinfhir Clan — Noel Treanor
Noel Treanor Co-Chair of the Treinfhir Clan delivered a presentation to the committee
about the history and origins of the Treinfhir Clan.
Cllr. Treanor thanked Noel for his enthusiasm and commitment to the project. Cllr. Treanor
noted that this SPC has an important role to play in supporting this annual event, given its
tourism potential.
Dympna Condra reiterated Cllr. Treanor comments. She informed the committee that she
has gave advice to the Clan on different funding streams i.e from Failite Ireland and social
media campaign in connection with the library. In relation to the geneology side, Matt
Mohan is very interested in developing this diaspora engagement.
Olga McConnon commented that she recently spoke to Cllr. Raymond Aughey in relation
to the Gathering and they are very interested in bringing this further and replicating this
with other family clans. A follow-up meeting is taking place to discuss next steps.
Deirdriu McQuaid noted that Genealogy /DNA testing is an issue in relation to GDPR and
ethics. CMTEB host Genealogy Workshops quite often and the clans can contact CMTEB
in relation to this. The Library through Peace Plus has a project called 'Who do you think
you are" this is a 2-and-a-half-year plan for everyone across the County. Over 30 years
hosting these events. Caitriona from the Library receives 3000 + enquiries every year and
up to 5000 — 6000 queries are dealt with across the County.
Cllr. Paul Gibbons thanked Noel for a very interesting presentation. Genealogy Tourism is
very interesting. Cllr. Gibbons asked where he could point people if they enquired to him.
Noel replied that the Clan would be happy to help anyone.
Cllr. Raymond Aughey commented that this is big Tourism and this is a huge chance to get
to people to come to Monaghan and we need to grasp it. Cllr. Aughey noted that the trip
to Prince Edward Island was very beneficial to showcase what can be achieved.
Cllr. McCooey thanked Noel for his presentation and wished him and the committee well
going forward.
5. Peace Campus Update — Catherine McKenna
Catherine McKenna, A/Peace Campus Cultural & Development Manager provided the
committee with an overview of Monaghan Peace Campus and all its facilities. She advised
members on how to book these facilities and gave examples of some of its previous
successful events.
Olga McConnon said that they are delighted to have Catherine on board and they are
aiming to attract more people to County Monaghan and the Peace Campus.
Cllr. McCooey thanked Catherine for her presentation and wished her well in her new role.
6. Everybody Plays Policy — Carol Lambe
Carol Lambe presented members with an overview of the draft Everybody Plays Policy. She
advised members that this policy has been reviewed and updated in 2025 by the Social
Inclusion Officer and the Play & Recreation Officer in preparation for the publication of the
Council's first Play & Recreation Strategy.
Fiona McGuinness asked if there was a survey done on all playgrounds in the County, and
particularly Lough Muckno. Carol replied that carrying out a survey of each playground is a
large body of work and is included as a future action in the new Strategy. In preparation, Play
Services Ireland was recently engaged to carry out accessibility audits on three of the Council's
destination playgrounds, namely Rossmore, Muckno Park and Cara St in Clones. These audits
focus on how accessible an amenity is for people with a disability. The Council will review the
data which resulted from the audits before deciding whether there is a value in
commissioning more.
Cllr. McCooey thanked Carol for her presentation.
7. Agenda Items for Future Consideration
Cllr. Treanor requested that this committee ensure that we remember this SPC also has an
important remit to An Ghaelige. He also pointed out the role of the Irish Language Officer as
identified in the Workplace Strategy. Cllr. Aughey replied with members agreement this
should be added to the next Council meeting agenda. All members agreed with this proposal.
8. Date of Next Meeting
Members agreed to add all 2026 meeting dates to their diaries. The agreed dates are
outlined below:
• 25th February @ 3.30pm
22nd April
23rd September
25th November
Cllr. McCooey thanked everyone and wished everyone a Nollaig Shona and Happy New Year.
This concluded the business of the meeting
Signed
A/ Chairperson
Date:
o u 11