 
Minutes of the Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, M-Tek 
Building, Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan, on Monday 09 February 2026 at 10.00 a.m.  
 
 
Chair: 
Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, Cathaoirleach  
 
Present: 
Cllrs Aughey, Campbell, Carthy, Clerkin, P. Conlon, S. Conlon, S. Coyle, Flynn, Gibbons, 
Gilliland, Johnston, Keelan, McAree, McCooey, P. Treanor and S. Treanor.  
 
  
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. C O’Hare, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. O. 
McConnon, Directors of Services, Mr. N. O’Connor, A/Director of Services, Ms. M. 
McGarvey, Meetings Administrator, Ms. M. McMahon, Staff Officer. 
 
MS Teams:   Cllr Truell  
 
 
At the outset the Cathaoirleach, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, referred to a recent incident involving a Co. 
Monaghan mother, Joanne Appelbee, who is originally from Magheracloone, Carrickmacross but 
now living in Perth, Australia. The family including her three children were swept out to sea on a 
paddleboard by high winds whilst on holiday in Western Australia. He commended the endurance of 
the entire family, particularly, the heroic actions of 13-year old, Austin Appelbee who swam for over 
four hours back to shore to raise the alarm which ultimately led to the family being brought to 
safety. The Cathaoirleach concluded by emphasising the bravery, strength and courage shown by the 
family which resulted in an outcome worthy of a ‘Hero’s Welcome’ when the family next return to 
Ireland.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, it was agreed that a civic reception 
be afforded to the Appelbee family during their next visit to Ireland.  
 
Urgent Business  
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the members that he had received the following Notices of Urgent 
Business as follows: 
 
1. On behalf of the Sinn Féin group: 
 
‘That this Council notes with grave concern the severe and ongoing impacts of recent flooding across 
County Monaghan and calls on James Browne, Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage; 
Darragh O’Brien, Minister for Transport; and Kevin Boxer Moran, Minister of State with responsibility 
for the Office of Public Works, to urgently provide additional and targeted funding to Monaghan 
County Council for flood relief and flood prevention works, river maintenance including dredging and 
debris removal and the urgent repair and stabilisation of roads damaged and subsiding due to 
flooding. 
 
This Council further calls for sustained, long-term investment to ensure local authorities are 
adequately resourced to implement proactive flood prevention and infrastructure protection 
measures, in recognition of the increasing frequency of extreme weather events and the pre-existing 
poor condition of some roads in County Monaghan’. 
 
 
 

 
 
2. On behalf of the Fine Gael Group:  
 
‘That Monaghan County Council, noting the severe and widespread damage caused to the county’s 
road infrastructure as a result of Storm Chandra, agrees to write to the Minister for Transport, 
Darragh O’Brien TD, seeking the allocation of additional and exceptional roads funding to support 
urgent repair and remedial works. 
 
This emergency motion is submitted by the Fine Gael Members due to the scale of destruction to local 
and regional roads, the immediate and ongoing risks to public safety, and the significant unplanned 
financial pressures now facing Monaghan County Council.  
 
The current roads budget is inadequate to meet the cost of repairs arising from this extreme weather 
event, and additional support from the Department of Transport is urgently required to restore the 
road network to a safe and functional condition’. 
 
3. On behalf of Cllr S. Coyle:  
 
‘That Monaghan County Council demand of An Taoiseach, Micheál Martin, T.D. Minister for 
Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Marine, Mr. Martin Heydon, T.D., and the Government, the 
immediate dismissal of Larry Murrin as Chairman of Bord Bia, due to the importation of Brazilian 
Beef by Dawn Farm Foods Ltd., the company of which he is the CEO. This is a conflict of interests and 
hypocrisy at a time when exceptionally high standards are being demanded of Irish farmers.’ 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed to enter ‘into committee’ 
to discuss whether to accept the motions submitted as urgent business.  
 
Following a short discussion, it was agreed to take the motions of urgent business at the end of the 
meeting.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Coyle, it was agreed that the Council revert to 
public session.  
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 05 January 2026   
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr N. McCooey, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Council meeting held on the 05 January 2026 be confirmed. 
 
2. To consider S183 Sale of Property at Lower Main Street, Newbliss, H18 TE80 
In accordance with the Ethics Framework, the Cathaoirleach Cllr, PJ O’Hanlon declared a 
possible conflict of interest in relation to this item and withdrew from the meeting room. 
In the absence, of the Leas-Chathaoirleach, Cllr R. Truell from the meeting room, Cllr P. 
Gibbons presided as acting Cathaoirleach while the matter was being dealt with.  
 
Mr. C. Flynn, Director of Services, outlined the proposed Sale of Property at Lower Main 
Street, Newbliss, Co. Monaghan, H18 TE80 – site area 0.06 hectares.  He advised the 
members that the Town and Regeneration Team had acquired the property via a 
Compulsory Purchase Order to address vacancy and dereliction, and that the proposed 
disposal will place an obligation on the purchaser to redevelop the property within 24 
months. 

 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the sale of property at Lower Main Street, Newbliss, H18 TE80, in 
accordance with the terms of the notice dated 17th November 2025 and attached site 
location map in accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
3. To consider S183 Disposal of Lands at Cornamucklaglass & Knocknamaddy, Ballybay, Co. 
Monaghan – M&K Leonard  
Ms. O. McConnon, Director of Services, outlined the proposed disposal of lands at 
Cornamucklaglass and Knocknamaddy, Ballybay, Co. Monaghan to M & K Leonard. She 
advised the members that the proposed disposal is a regularisation that relates to a 
transfer of lands from a number of years ago.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Coyle, seconded by Cllr Gilliland, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the disposal of lands at Cornamucklaglass and Knocknamaddy, Ballybay, Co. 
Monaghan to M&K Leonard, in accordance with the terms of the notice dated 23rd October 
2025 and attached site location map in accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 
2001. 
 
4. To receive an update on BioConnect 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Johnston, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed that this 
Council approves providing a loan of €750k to Bioconnect Innovation Centre CLG for 
cashflow and working capital support.  
 
It was noted that whilst the CPG were in support of providing the additional cashflow 
support of €750k to BioConnect Innovation Centre CLG at this time, the recommendation 
was made that they would not be in support of providing any further funding in the 
future.  
 
5. To approve proposed amended speed limit bye-laws on the national road network, as 
per the 2025 National Road Speed Limit Review 
Mr. B. Braniff, Senior Executive Engineer, Roads, outlined the documents circulated with 
the agenda. He stated that the proposed amendments to the speed limit byelaws had 
been presented at the respective MD Meetings and the Speed Limits Committee and no 
objections had been made. He provided members with an overview of the proposed 
amendments at each of the following locations:  
 
1. National Road N2, north of the Corlat Roundabout on the Monaghan Bypass.  
2. National Road N53, north of Tullyvin Roundabout, Castleblayney. 
3. National Road N54, adjacent to Maple Grove Housing Development, Smithborough. 
 
Mr. B. Braniff responded to members queries.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr A. Johnston, it was agreed that the 
proposed amended speed limit bye-laws on the national road network (National Road N2, 
north of the Corlat Roundabout on the Monaghan Bypass), as per the 2025 National Road 
Speed Limit Review, be adopted. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, it was agreed that the 
proposed amended speed limit bye-laws on the national road network (National Road N53, 

 
north of Tullyvin Roundabout, Castleblayney), as per the 2025 National Road Speed Limit 
Review, be adopted. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, it was agreed that the 
proposed amended speed limit bye-laws on the national road network (National Road N54, 
adjacent to Maple Grove Housing Development, Smithborough) as per the 2025 National 
Road Speed Limit Review, be adopted. 
 
6. To ratify new representative on the LCDC 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Gibbons, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, it was agreed that Ms. 
Lorraine O’Malley, would replace Ms. Sharon Curran, on the Local Community 
Development Committee (LCDC) due to a change of roles within the Department of Social 
Protection. 
 
7. To approve Cllr S. Flynn as a replacement for Cllr P. Gibbons on the Local Water 
Monitoring Committee 
On the proposal of Cllr N. McCooey, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that Cllr S. 
Flynn would replace Cllr P. Gibbons on the Local Water Monitoring Committee.  
 
8. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group – 23 January 
2026.  
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 23 
January 2026, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 23 January 2026 and the 
recommendations contained therein be approved.  
 
In response to Cllr. N. Keelan’s query, it was agreed that the invitation to the Oireachtas 
Members to attend a future meeting of this Council to discuss the North South 
Interconnector, be renewed.  
 
9.  To receive Management Report – January 2026 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for January 2026 which had been 
circulated with the agenda. He advised the members that he had been liaising with his 
counterparts in Cavan County Council, Louth County Council and also An Garda Siochana 
in a bid to deliver a more impactful regional road safety campaign in 2026.  
 
The Chief Executive highlighted the significant increase in planning permissions granted 
for Housing figures in 2025 vs. 2024, as follows:  
 
The Chief Executive highlighted the success of the Croí Cónaithe Vacant Property 
Refurbishment Grant Scheme, noting that over €20m in funding has been approved to 
date. He stated that a total of 327 grants had been approved and 142 grants have been 
drawn down to date.  
 

 
 
 
He concluded by referring to the continuation of Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant 
with a renewed focus on tackling above shop vacancy which is scheduled to open by the 
end of Q1 2026 (March 2026). A grant of up to €95,000 will be available where one 
residential unit is created, with an additional €20,000 where two residential units are 
delivered and a further €20,000 where three or more units are provided. In addition, up 
to €5,000 will be available to cover expert advice on the conversion of these properties 
for residential use, bringing the total potential support package to €140,000. 
  
The members noted the Management Report for January which had been circulated with 
the agenda.  
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Gilliland, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed that this 
Council, conducts an urgent review of the R181 from Lough Egish Cross to the County 
Bridge passing through Shantonagh to urgently prioritise realignment works under safety 
and suitability. This road services some of the largest rate payers in the county, with a large  
number of HGVs (up to 400 per day) travelling on the R181 to serve Agri businesses, I urge 
this Council to urgently prioritise the R181 for much needed works and realignment.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, it was agreed that this 
Council factor into the Winter Maintenance Programme the inclusion of rural schools 
to a minimum of 100 metres from the school entrance on rural roads currently not included 
in the salting routes. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, it was agreed that this 
Council write to Minister Darragh O’Brien in the Department of Transport to review the 
criteria relating to the scoring system for Active Travel to take into account the projected 
population growth and also review the requirement to provide both footpath/cycle path 
where feasible.  
 
10. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events  
The members noted the reports from Cllr P. Treanor in relation to his attendance at the 
following conference/training events:  
 
- 
LAMA Autumn Seminar  - Amber Springs Hotel, Gorey, Co. Wexford - 16 & 17 
October 2025.  
- 
AILG Members Training, Module 6 (Planning) – Radisson Blu, Athlone – 15 November 
2025.  
 
11. Business Submitted by the Chief Executive   
 
St. Patrick’s Day Delegation to Boston  
The Chief Executive stated that with members agreement, he hoped to be part of the 
official delegation, alongside the Cathaoirleach – Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, Leas-Chathaoirleach -
Cllr R. Truell, Director of Services – Ms. O. McConnon and Curator – Mr. L. Bradley that 
would be afforded the opportunity to attend the 2026 St. Patrick’s Day Celebrations in 
Boston. He advised the members that the itinerary was still being finalised, however, the 

 
focus will be on promoting Monaghan and all there is to offer in terms of culture, economic 
development and tourism.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed that a delegation 
comprising of the Chief Executive, Director of Services – Ms. O. McConnon, Curator – Mr. L. 
Bradley, the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon and Leas-Chathaoirleach, Cllr R. Truell attend 
the 2026 St. Patrick’s Day Celebrations in Boston. 
 
Business and Tourism Awards 
The Chief Executive referred to the Inaugural County Monaghan Business and Tourism 
Awards 2026. He stated that the event is being organised by the Anglo-Celt in partnership 
with Monaghan County Council and associate partners. The awards aim to recognise 
contribution of businesses of all sizes and across all sectors, including tourism and  
hospitality, retail, Agri food, manufacturing, family run enterprises and emerging 
businesses. Entries are now open across a range of categories, including innovation, 
customer service, best family business and best newcomer. The closing date for entries is 
midnight on Friday 27th February 2026. The gala awards ceremony will take place on 17th 
April in the Nuremore Hotel in Carrickmacross.  
 
12. Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 05 January 2026  
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members. 
 
In response to Cllr Coyle’s query relating to planning permission figures, Mr. A. Hughes, 
Senior Planner, advised that he would review the figures and issue a response to Cllr. 
Coyle.  
 
There were no further matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 
05 January 2026.   
 
13. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
Mr. N. O’Connor, A/Director of Services, advised the members that he expects to receive 
the 2026 funding allocations in respect of both projects, by early next week.  
 
14. To receive update on North South Interconnector project 
 
Correspondence  
The following correspondence relating to the North South Interconnector project was 
received: 
- 
Letter from the Chief Infrastructure Officer, Eirgrid, Ms. Siobhan O’Shea regarding 
the North South Interconnector project.  
 
Cllr N. Keelan referred to the correspondence received from Eirgrid seeking a meeting with 
the Executive in relation to progression of the North South Interconnector and he 
requested that Members’ views and ongoing concerns regarding the project be raised 
during this meeting.  
 
15. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update on the Ulster Canal project.  
 
 

 
16. Correspondence 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting: 
 
- 
Resolution from Tipperary County Council regarding legislation for e-scooters and e-bike 
users.  
- 
Resolution from Offaly County Council regarding the Mercosur Trade agreement.  
- 
Email from the European Commission Directorate-General Environment regarding the 
extension of Ireland’s derogation under the Nitrates Directive.  
- 
Response from the Minister for Agriculture; Food and the Marine to representations 
Minister Smyth made on Monaghan County Council’s behalf demanding the extension by 
the EU of Ireland’s Nitrates Derogation. 
- 
Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, Mr James Browne, T.D. regarding an increase in the allocation of Housing 
Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability. 
- 
Response from the office of Ms. Norma Foley TD., Minister for Children, Disability and 
Equality regarding Rainbow Lodge. 
- 
Response from the office of Mr. Dara Calleary, T.D., Minister for Social Protection, Rural 
and Community Development regarding funding for Foras na Gaeilge. 
- 
Response from the Consumer Services Officer, HSE, regarding the request to expedite 
funding for the Errigal Truagh Special Needs extension. 
- 
Acknowledgement email from the office of Minister of State Minister for Local 
Government and Planning, Mr. John Cummins T.D., regarding the ongoing delays within 
the Land Registry. 
- 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister of State, Mr. Kevin 
Boxer Moran T.D., regarding the need for maintenance works of the River Blackwater. 
- 
Acknowledgement email from the Office of Public Works regarding the need for 
maintenance works of the River Blackwater. 
- 
Acknowledgement email on behalf of Superintendent Patrick O’Connell, regarding the 
request to increase an increase of Gardai presence on the N2. 
 
Additional Correspondence:  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda had 
issued was also circulated: 
 
• 
Response from the Private Secretary to the Minister of State, Mr. Kevin Moran, T.D. 
regarding the maintenance of the Bunnoe and Finn rivers. 
• 
Response from the Private Secretary of Mr. John Cummins T.D., Minister of State 
with responsibility for Local Government and Planning regarding pension liability 
payments to staff who are members of the LGSS. 
• 
Response from the Private Secretary of Mr. John Cummins T.D., Minister of State 
with responsibility for Local Government and Planning regarding the ongoing delays 
within the Land Registry (Tailte Éireann). 
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence:   
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that this 
Council, write to the Minister for Education, Ms. Hildegarde Naughton, T.D., and to the NCSE 
asking them how many of the children with special needs, of the September 2026 cohort, are 
currently not allocated an adequate school place/SNA and also to ask them what the 
Department of Education are doing to rectify this.’ 
 

 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, it was agreed that this Council, 
write to the HSE to ask if they have a contingency plan in place, should the new children’s 
respite unit not be built on schedule and before the two-year lease on the interim unit at 
Rainbow Lodge expires.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. McCooey, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed that this 
Council, again, calls on Minister Dara Calleary to initiate a comprehensive review of the 
funding model, in consultation with Irish-language stakeholders and representative bodies. 
This review should explore how funding mechanisms can be modernised to create a flexible, 
resilient, and sustainable framework that reflects the scale of demand and operational 
realities for Irish Language organisations on this island.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Road Safety Authority  seeking confirmation of legislation regarding the use of 
e-scooters and e-bikes on public roads asking is it compulsory to have lights on these 
vehicles, as well to ask for personal protection, does the user of these modes of transport 
have to by law wear hi-vis vests and helmets. In addition, to ask the RSA are they satisfied 
that the current laws in relation to e-bikes and e-scooters provide for optimum safety for all 
road users.  
 
  
17. Notices of Motion  
 
1. Cllr S. Coyle proposed, Cllr R. Aughey seconded: 
 
‘That this Council, all Local Authorities and Government make it very clear to Eirgrid that 
compliance enforcement of the conditions as set by An Board Pleanála in the granting of 
Planning Permission for the North-South 400Kv Interconnector, must be respected and 
fully enforced.’  
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
2. Cllr C. Carthy proposed, Cllr N. Keelan seconded: 
 
 ‘As agreed at the Municipal District meeting of the Carrickmacross-Castleblayney area on 
January 26th, we ask that this Council requests a meeting with representatives of the NTA 
to discuss the current and future plans for the rollout of public transport routes (Local Link, 
Bus Eireann etc) across Co. Monaghan’. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
3.    Cllr R. Truell proposed, Cllr S. Gilliand seconded:  
‘That this Council work in collaboration with Cavan County Council to examine the 
provision of additional car parking spaces at Erica’s Fairy Forest, as well as 
improvements to pedestrian infrastructure in the area.  In particular, I would ask that 
consideration be given to upgrading the existing footpath on the Cavan side and 
developing an additional footpath from the county bridge to the entrance of Erica’s Fairy 
Forest. These measures would significantly improve pedestrian safety and accessibility 
for those visiting the fairy forest, the Walkabout Café, and the various activities that take 

 
place in this popular area. The increased volume of visitors has led to higher traffic levels, 
and improved parking and footpath facilities would help to slow traffic, reduce 
congestion, and create a safer environment for pedestrians, families, and local residents.  
I believe a joint approach between both councils would be beneficial given the cross-
county nature of the location, and I would appreciate your consideration of this request’. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
4.    Cllr R. Truell proposed, Cllr S. Gilliland seconded:  
 
‘That this Council write to Uisce Éireann requesting that they investigate ongoing water 
connection and supply issues on the Lough Egish Regional Water Supply Scheme, which is 
currently under the control of Uisce Éireann and ask them to:  
 
- 
Provide an explanation as to why customers are not notified when essential 
works are being carried out that result in disruption to water supply.  
- 
Investigate and progress necessary infrastructure upgrades on the Lough Egish 
Regional Water Supply Scheme to prevent further interruptions and ensure a 
reliable water supply for customers going forward’. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
18. Questions and Replies 
 
Cllr. R. Aughey asked:  
1. 
Can I get an update on the land the council purchased in Scotstown village? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council has procured a Design Team to develop options for the plots of land 
recently purchased in Scotstown Village.for the plots of land recently purchased in Scotstown Village. 
Cllr. C. Carthy asked: 
2. 
What is the current status of the CCTV scheme for Carrickmacross – do we know when the project will 
be rolled out and activated?  
Reply: It is anticipated that enabling civil and electrical works will commence in March 2026, with the 
networked camera system expected to be operational by late Q2 2026. 
3. 
What progress is being made on the greenways previously discussed for south Monaghan 
(Carrickmacross to Dundalk via Inniskeen and Carrickmacross to Kingscourt)?  
Reply: The Carrickmacross to Dundalk Greenway has not progressed, and no funding source has been 
identified. A countywide greenway and active travel strategy is planned to help prioritise and secure 
future investment. 
4. 
Has any progress been made on the acquisition and/or construction of 1 and 2-bed properties for 
Carrickmacross & Castleblayney to deal with the Council’s housing list (and, in particular, the high 
number of single people and couples on our list)? 
Reply: Through the Competitive Dialogue tender, submissions have been made for 26no houses in 
Castleblayney. 10Nr of these are 2 Bed houses and are planned for completion 2026. A further 
submission has been made for Carrickmacross for 56no houses, which includes 14no 2 bed single 
storey and 4 no 2bed 2 storey dwellings. 
5. 
Has MCC been given the go-ahead to roll out the Affordable Purchase scheme in Carrickmacross yet 
(if so, when is it expected to be introduced/advertised)? 
Reply: We have not received approval from Government yet for the Affordable Purchase 
Development in Carrickmacross. Following formal approval, we will begin a marketing campaign 
including an information evening in Carrickmacross. 
6. 
Has a full review of MCC Retrofit scheme taken place on units that have already received energy 
upgrades; specifically, is the executive satisfied that works that have already been installed are 
saving energy and costs for our tenants? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council has installed over 800 heat pumps in County Monaghan to date, 

 
with over 400 heat pumps installed under the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme. The works are 
beneficial for tenants and Monaghan County Council alike, resulting in a consistently warmer, more 
comfortable home for tenants and ensure the properties are as efficient and modern as possible.  
Heat pumps are the most efficient way of heating a home. For every one kWh of electricity used the 
heat pump can deliver between 2.2 to 4.0 kWh of energy in return. The bespoke upgrade works being 
completed at each home achieve a minimum Building Energy Rating of B2 resulting in significant 
carbon and energy savings. Improvements including new windows and doors, external wall insulation 
(where required), and draft proofing improve the ability of housing stock to retain heat. The results 
of these upgrade works mean that tenants experience a consistently warmer home for less, when 
compared to using older heating systems.   
Monaghan County Council assesses the performance of heat pumps on an ongoing basis, using inbuilt 
technology, which allows for assessment of the energy usage. Tenants can experience increased 
electric bills, but this increase can be offset by removing the need to buy coal, oil and sticks to run old 
inefficient heating systems. Additional benefits to tenants include reduction in exposure to volatility 
within the fossil fuel market and carbon tax associated with fossil fuels. Tenants also experience health 
benefits from improved indoor & outdoor air quality and safer homes by removing the risks of 
chimney fires and carbon monoxide poisoning.  
Technology associated with heat pumps is continuously evolving, Monaghan County Council 
continually engage with specialists and are examining technology which allows for greater assessment 
of energy usage and performance.    
Cllr. P. Gibbons asked: 
7. 
Have all monies spent by Monaghan Country Council dealing with Storm Eowyn being refunded by 
Central Government? Consolidated response to similar questions has been provided at the end (Qs 7, 
25 & 29a). 
8. 
Are there plans for affordable housing provision in the Castleblayney area? How many of the 
expressions of interest in affordable housing received by the Affordable Housing team expressed an 
interest in Castleblayney? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council are exploring the option of Affordable Housing in all towns within 
the county. We have received expressions of interest for 28 people for Castleblayney.  
9. 
Can the current number of electors in each of the three Municipal Districts be provided following 
extensive recent work by Council staff on the electoral register? 
Reply:  
 
10. 
I note recent active travel funding announcements. Can an update be given on the status of the 
Castleblayney to Ballybay greenway, along with estimated timelines, if possible, on future progress? 
Reply: The Ballybay to Castleblayney Greenway is a proposed 11.5-kilometre walking and cycling route 
linking the two towns. Public consultation on the preferred route was carried out by Ballybay–Clones 
Municipal District in 2024. At present, no funding has been secured to advance the scheme. Requests 
for support from TII and the NTA have been unsuccessful.  
11. 
Can the number of people in receipt of housing loans from Monaghan County Council be provided 
along with the range of interest rates being paid and numbers on each rate? Can an overview of 
how housing loan interest rates are decided be provided, along with an overview of arrears? 
Reply:  
• 
MCC have 189 Active Housing Loans as at 25/12/2025 
• 
96 loans are on fixed rates (various fixed rates depending on loan) 
• 
93 are on variable interest rate  
• 
16 customers in arrears that are greater than one monthly payment 
How are housing loan interest rates decided: 
The Housing Finance Agency state that: “In order to support its lending activities, the HFA raises long-
term fixed-rate funding from the National Treasury Management Agency (NTMA), the European 
Investment Bank (EIB) and the Council of Europe Development Bank. The HFA determines the rates 
charged to its customers (Local Authorities, Approved Housing Bodies and Higher Education Institutes) 
based on the cost of this funding, which is not linked to rates set by the European Central Bank but 
rather by long term government bond yields. The HFA closely monitor what effect, if any, the ECB cut 
has on long term government bond yields”. 

 
Cllr. B. McAree asked: 
12. 
Can Monaghan Co. Council please clarify what funding will be made available for housing adaption 
grants, and when and if applications made in 2025 will be honoured? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council currently await receipt of their Housing Adaptation Grant Allocation 
for 2026.  We would be hopeful it would at least match the initial 100% allocation received in 
2025 in the amount of €1.9m. We subsequently applied for (and received) an additional €1.0m 
(total allocation of €2.9m), but the original allocation was €1.9m.  
All applications for 2025 are currently being assessed and processed.  
13. 
Can Monaghan Co. Council please confirm how many of the 33-house proposed for Scarnageeragh, 
Emyvale will be Part V? 
Reply: There are two Planning Applications that the above might relate to: 
Planning reference 24/60235 Forever Warm Homes Ltd application for 27 houses plus 6 domestic 
garages, five houses should be provided under Part V if the development proceeds. 
Planning reference 25/60502 Geda Construction Ltd application for 30 houses, six houses should be 
provided under Part V if the development proceeds. 
Part V is currently set by legislation at 20% of the number of houses to be developed. In general, the 
number is usually rounded to the closest whole number and the difference is accounted for through 
a financial calculation that affects the final price of the Part V house(s) provided.  
Cllr. A. Johnston asked:  
14. 
How many housing units are expected to be delivered in the next 3 years by MCC? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council are expected to deliver 435 social Housing units in the years 2026 
to 2028 with 97 planned to be delivered in 2026, 209 in 2027 and 129 in 2028. These are Social and 
Affordable units; figures exclude acquisitions & excludes mortgage to rent & excludes re-lets/ voids. 
The Housing Section is continually in discussions with developers and landowners in relation to further 
development opportunities with the hope to further add to these numbers. 
15. 
How many of these are allocated to affordable housing? 
Reply: There is no specific target for affordable housing at present but we are proactive in exploring 
the option of Affordable Housing countywide. 
16. 
What steps is MCC taking to alleviate flooding in Monaghan Town Centre? 
Reply: Under the Office of Public Works (CFRAM) Programme there were a number of structural 
measures identified to alleviate the flooding in Monaghan Town. Monaghan County Council have 
been seeking funding to develop and advance these measures. The culvert from the Glen Road to 
the rear of the Credit union is one of these measures. It has now been built to the edge of the Aldi 
site. Final design and funding are now required to complete the culvert.  
The council are in the process to complete an overall assessment/flood study of the flooding issues 
and the suite of alleviation proposals. Significant funding is required to complete all the measures to 
alleviate flooding.Currently the council are carrying out emergency works to Tullyhirm bridge due to 
a collapse of the bridge wall in December 2025. These works are well advanced and are due for 
completion in February 2026. These works will also assist to reduce the flooding. Further 
maintenance may be carried out on the Shambles River as the need arises.   
17. 
Are there arrangements in place to ensure Derelict Site levies are returned to MCC from Revenue 
Commissioners? 
Reply: Under the Delivering Homes, Building Communities plan, the Government will introduce a new 
Derelict Property Tax (DPT) to replace the Derelict Sites levy. This will be a self-assessed tax managed 
by Revenue and will follow normal tax collection and enforcement rules (including penalties and 
interest). Local authorities will still identify and register derelict properties, and it is expected that the 
tax rate will be at least 7%, the same as the current levy. At this time, the Council are not aware of 
any arrangement to claim or recoup the Derelict Property Tax from the Revenue Commissioners.  
 
 
 
 
Cllr S. Conlon asked:  
18. 
In relation to the Council’s Climate Action Plan (2024 - 2029) and specifically Action No. NEGI 4, what 
progress is occurring in developing a pesticide / herbicide usage policy that will aim to significantly 
reduce the use of glyphosate? And can assurances be given that glyphosate is not sprayed in areas 
of recreation and amenity such as playgrounds, residential green areas, and parks? 
Reply:  
A pesticide / herbicide/rodenticide guidance document is being progressed this year that will aim to 
significantly reduce the use of glyphosate in MCC. Alternative methods including hot foaming and 
vinegar and epsom solution have been trialled by the Horticulture team with varied success rates.  Use 
of a mechanical scuffer attachment on the street sweeper has proven effective in suitable areas.  

 
None of the MDs apply or use glyphosate in areas of recreation, amenity, playgrounds, residential 
green areas, or parks (except where invasive species such as Japanese knotweed is being treated). 
19. 
I ask of housing developments not yet Taken in Charge in the Monaghan MD, to list the date where 
the developer or residents initiated this process, and an update as to what efforts are being made 
to complete the Taking in Charge process at each location? Reply: The Table below references 37 
developments in Monaghan MD that have not been Taken in Charge. The Council has received 
applications to take in charge 8 of these developments. Currently 7 of these developments are under 
consideration, and 1 development is the subject of a new recently submitted application.   
 
20. 
Following the publication of the Killygoan Needs Analysis in April 2025, funded by the Social 
Inclusion and Community Activation Programme (SICAP), and overseen by the Local Community 
Development Committee (LCDC) with this Council’s support, what progress is occurring in realising 
the number 1 priority as stated in the report, in establishing a Community Hub aimed at 
reinvigorating the Killygoan/Pound Hill/ Connolly Park community? 
Reply:  A potential site has been identified by Monaghan MD and Monaghan Integrated Development 
representatives will attend the next meeting between Monaghan MD staff and committee members 
to further progress this matter. It is hoped that after this meeting a proposal could be made to the 
MD members at their monthly meeting. 
 

 
Cllr N. Keelan asked:  
21.  
Given the complete imbalance in the allocation of funding for proposed active travel schemes in the 
Carrickmacross/Castleblayney area, what action will the council take to ensure that this 
unacceptable situation is resolved? What is the process and who is ultimately responsible for 
making the funding allocation for active travel schemes?  
 
Reply: The National Transport Authority (NTA) is responsible for allocating active travel funding in 
County Monaghan. To help identify sustainable and effective Active Travel projects in Carrickmacross, 
the NTA has provided funding for the preparation of a Local Transport Plan (LTP) in 2026, similar to 
the plan completed for Monaghan Town. The LTP will outline investment priorities for Carrickmacross 
and will inform future funding allocations from 2027 onward. 
22. 
Given that the (NTA) national transport authority have refused to fund any proposed 
pedestrian/cycle bridge across the river fane in Inniskeen village, what action or plan has the council 
to progress the development of a pedestrian/cycle bridge at this location?  
Reply: The final report for the Inniskeen traffic study has been submitted to Monaghan County Council 
and forwarded to the NTA for discussion on 21 January 2026. The Council is awaiting the NTA’s 
response to determine the next steps. 
23. 
In relation to the Local Lane Improvement scheme (LIS), what is the up-to-date position in relation 
to the onsite assessment of the laneways? When is it hoped to have a list of eligible lanes put 
together and points allocated? Reply: The council received 305 applications and over 200 of these 
lanes were eligible applications. The majority of these 200 have been visited and visually assessed. 
There were a number of other applications that further information was requested, and this 
information is still being received. It is planned to have all the assessment of the lanes completed by 
end of February and points allocated by Q1 2026. 
24. 
In relation to the Government proposal to allow for modular homes of up to 45 square meters be 
built exempt from planning permission in certain circumstances, has the council planning section 
received any guidance on this important matter? Reply: The Planning Authority has received no 
guidance in respect of any new exempted provisions relating to modular homes. 
25. 
In relation to storm Éowyn that occurred twelve months ago, what was the estimated cost of the 
damaged caused in terms of council owned infrastructure etc, have we received full reimbursement 
from the relevant departments and are we now better prepared for a similar type 
event?  Consolidated response to similar questions has been provided at the end (Qs 7, 25 & 29a). 
Cllr S. Flynn asked:  
26. 
What progress has been made on the development and fit-out of the Monaghan County Council-
led Women’s Hub, which aims to support relationship-building and community engagement, help 
to heal segregation, and address the impact of the border on women locally, including women living 
in Monaghan after escaping conflict, funded through the €104,927.20 Monaghan PEACEPLUS 
Community Action Plan? Reply: Monaghan County Council, together with the Women’s Collective, is 
actively engaged in identifying a suitable premises for the Hub. This process involves assessing 
potential buildings that can accommodate the planned activities, ensure accessibility, and provide a 
welcoming and safe environment for participants. Once a suitable building has been secured, work 
will move to the design and fit-out phase to support programme delivery under the PEACEPLUS 
objectives. 
27. 
Can the Executive please outline what supports, services and funding is currently available through 
Monaghan County Council and/or in partnership with relevant agencies, to assist older people and 
pensioners to remain living independently and safely in their own homes? Please include details of 
any housing adaptation supports, grants and assistance schemes together with information on how 
residents can access these supports. 
Reply: There are three types of Grants available to applicants:   
Housing Adaptation Grants  
These grants are provided to help people with enduring physical, sensory, mental health, or 
intellectual disabilities make their homes more suitable for their needs. €40,000.00 ex VAT. 
• 
Downstairs toilet facilities 
• 
Accessible showers 
• 
Adaptations to allow wheelchair access 
• 
Stairlift 
• 
Extensions of level access bedrooms and shower rooms, sensory room 
Mobility aid grants  
These grants are provided to help with the costs of minor home adaptations for people with mobility 
issues, primarily older people and those with disabilities. Up to €8,000.00 ex VAT 
• 
Grab rails 

 
• 
Access ramps  
• 
Level access showers 
• 
Stairlifts 
• 
Other minor works necessary to help the mobility of a member of the household 
Housing aid for older people (for people aged 66 and over) 
Grants were provided to assist older people and help them carry out essential repairs and 
improvements in their homes, allowing them to continue living in their own residences. Up to 
€10,700.00 including VAT 
• Replacement of windows and doors 
• Rewiring 
• Provision of heating (where there is not heating exists)  
• Drylining 
• Structural repairs (Roof repairs) 
 
Age Friendly Homes Programme  
The Healthy Age Friendly Homes Programme is a strategic national initiative, delivered locally in 
Monaghan by the Council in partnership with Age Friendly Ireland. Elizabeth Doherty Mooney is the 
Healthy Age Friendly Homes Programme Coordinator for Monaghan County Council.  The programme 
is managed as a shared service by Meath County Council, with its national administrative 
headquarters located in Kells.  
This programme is designed to proactively support people aged 65 and older to continue living 
independently in their own homes, specifically aiming to avoid premature admission to long-term 
residential care. 
The Support Coordination Service: 
The local coordinator in Monaghan case manages a bespoke support package tailored to the older 
persons specific needs. 
 
The service programme provides expert "hand-holding" across six primary domains: 
• 
Housing: Guidance on Housing Adaptation Grants and rightsizing options. 
• 
Health: Linking residents to HSE services, GP visits, and primary care. 
• 
Community: Connecting to local social groups, befriending services, and Meals on Wheels. 
• 
Technology: Signposting and information on safety devices like personal alarms or fall 
detectors.  
• 
Climate & Energy: Providing advice on home energy efficiency, navigating SEAI grants for 
insulation or heating upgrades, and identifying supports to reduce energy poverty 
• 
Finance: Assisting older people in navigating their financial entitlements, including pension 
queries, fuel allowance, and local property tax (LPT) 
This is a free service and receiving this support will not affect existing benefits like pensions or medical 
cards. Participants can directly refer themselves to the programme. Online Referrals can be submitted 
via an online referral form via the Age Friendly Ireland website or alternatively contact the National 
office in Kells (contact details included below).   
Phone: 046 924 8899 
Email for Enquiries: healthyagefriendlyhomes@meathcoco.ie 
Email for Referrals: referralshafh@meathcoco.ie 
Postal Address: 
Healthy Age Friendly Homes 
Meath County Council, Kells Civic Office 

 
Headfort Place, Kells 
Co. Meath, A82 W2R3  
28. 
Can the Executive please provide details on how many social housing units are planned for delivery 
across County Monaghan in 2026 and provide a breakdown by Municipal District showing how 
many 1-bed, 2-bed, 3-bed and 4-bed units are planned within each MD? 
Reply: In 2026, Monaghan County Council’s projections are to deliver 97 new homes as part of the 
Housing for All program.  The Department’s target for 2026 is 62 homes.  Delivery is at 160% of target 
for 2026. See Table below for number of units, location and delivery breakdown. The sizes of units to 
be completed are as follows; 1 or 2-bedrooms 58%, 3 bedrooms 38% and 4 and 5 bedrooms 4%.   
These are Social and Affordable units. Figures excludes acquisitions & excludes mortgage to rent & 
excludes relets/voids. 
 
29. 
Following on from my motion submitted in February 2025 in relation to Storm Éowyn,  
can Monaghan County Council please confirm the following:  
 
a) 
Has Monaghan County Council been fully reimbursed for all storm-related emergency 
response, clean-up and infrastructure repair costs? If not, what funding remains outstanding? 
Consolidated response to similar questions has been provided at the end (Qs 7, 25 & 29a). 
 
b) 
Have backup power generators been installed at water reservoirs, pumping stations and water 
treatment plants across County Monaghan, and what is the timeline for any remaining works?   
 
Reply:  
Uisce Éireann, the utility with responsibility for water & waste water treatment plants, has 
provided assurances that contingency measures are in place to ensure temporary power supply 
during outages at key facilities. 
 
c) 
Has the Enhanced Winter 2025 Grid Resilience Plan been implemented in full in County 
Monaghan, and can a breakdown be provided of works completed and any actions still 
outstanding?  
 
Reply:  
The National Resilience Programme involving the process of installing changeover switches in 
designated community support centres has commenced. 
 
The first phase in Co. Monaghan involves identified centres engaging suitably qualified electrical 
contractors. These changeover switches will facilitate the connection of auxiliary power supplies 
(generators) during power outages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Cllr. N McCooey asked:  
 
30. 
Can Monaghan County Council consider taking in charge the Gola Crest housing development in 
Scotstown? 
 
Reply: The Planning Authority has not received a taking in charge request from the developer or the 
majority of the homeowners. Once a valid application has been received, the taking in charge process 
can be initiated. 
 
31. 
Can Monaghan County Council undertake a road safety survey at the Connolly’s Bridge/Rafeenan 
Junction, R186-6, in light of ongoing road safety concerns at this location? 
 
Reply: Monaghan County Council agree to undertake a survey at this location at Connolly’s Bridge on 
the R186.  Should works be identified considering the constraints of the bridge, a funding application 
will be made to future suitable funding calls.  
 
32. 
Following the closure of the Community Development Fund application process for 2026, can 
Monaghan County Council confirm: 
a. When successful applicants will be notified? 
Decisions will be made by the Council at their March meeting.  Applicants will be notified by email 
within 2 days. 
b. How many applications were received for the 2026 fund? 
139 applications were received 
c. How does this number compare with the number of applications received in 2025? 
114 were received in 2025 
 
33. 
Have Monaghan County Council received confirmation of its allocation under the Local 
Improvement Scheme for 2026, and if so, how many lanes does the Council expect to complete 
during the year?   
Reply: Monaghan County Council has not received it grant allocation under the Local Improvement 
Scheme for 2026. It is expected to receive confirmation of this allocation in February. 
 
Cllrs P. Gibbons, B. McAree and S. Flynn asked the following questions regarding the cost of Storm 
Éowyn and the status of the reimbursement: 
 
Cllr P. Gibbons:  
7) Have all monies spent by Monaghan Country Council dealing with Storm Éowyn being refunded by 
Central Government? 
 
B. McAree: 
25) In relation to storm Éowyn that occurred twelve months ago, what was the estimated cost of the 
damaged caused in terms of council owned infrastructure etc, have we received full reimbursement 
from the relevant departments and are we now better prepared for a similar type event?   
 
S. Flynn: 
29 (a) Has Monaghan County Council been fully reimbursed for all storm-related emergency response, 
clean-up and infrastructure repair costs? If not, what funding remains outstanding? 
Reply:  
Severe Weather Exceptional Costs Recoupment 2025 
Monaghan County Council submitted claims to the Department in respect of costs incurred in relation 
to the response, clean-up and necessary immediate works associated with Storm Eowyn and Storm 
Amy.  
  
The total cost incurred for Humanitarian Assistance, Emergency Response, Community Response to-
date is €1,365,221.27. (One project is on-going) 
Payment was received from the Department of Housing on 19th December 2025 in the sum of 
€1,284,033.26, the shortfall of €81,188.01 has been queried with the Department and we are awaiting 
their reply. The sum of €100,000 was received from Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) on 23rd 
December 2025. 

 
 
As we have been experiencing an increase in storm occurrence and intensity over the last few years, 
MCC are now in a better position with regards to preparedness and reacting to these events.  Lessons 
have been learned in terms of mitigation measures such as provision of infrastructure to limit effects, 
putting plans in place prior to an event and actioning these plans during and after an event.  A robust 
communication system has been developed to ensure timely and accurate information reaches the 
public.   
 
Additional equipment was acquired, for example, generators, chainsaws and wireless communication 
systems. The council have also taken a proactive approach assessing vulnerable trees and having them 
removed.  
 
With the aim of helping residents across the county, a Personal & Community Resilience Booklet was 
distributed to every home and business across the county, giving useful and practical tips on how to 
be prepared in the event of a range of emergencies, including sever weather events.  
19. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
• 
Grainne McNamee, Assistant Staff Officer – Planning Section on the death of her father 
and Teresa McGuirk, Staff Officer – Housing Section on the death of her brother, Eddie 
McKenna (Hughie), Carrachor, Scotstown, Co. Monaghan.  
• 
Janice Eardley, Clerical Officer, Finance on the death of her mother Bernadette (Bernie) 
Eardley, 27 Glenview Drive, Killygoan, Monaghan.  
• 
Cllr Bronagh McAree on the death of her grandmother, Sally McBride, 62 Churchfield Rd, 
Ballyvoy, Antrim, BT54 6PX.  
 
It was agreed that votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Glaslough Harriers on winning the County Monaghan Athletics Club ‘Overall Club of the 
Year 2025’ Award and also to their many members who won individual awards on the 
night.  
 
20. Conferences 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr. B. McAree, it was agreed that the 
Council be represented at the following training events by the members listed below: 
 
Promoting 
Authority 
Subject/Theme 
Venue 
Dates 
Members Selected 
AILG  
Training Programme Feb 26 – 
Local Authorities can offer 
support to Disabled people & 
ageing population 
Fairways Hotel, 
Dundalk 
 
 
Hotel Kilkenny  
19th Feb 2026 
 
 
 
21st February 2026 
Cllr S. Coyle  
Cllr P. Treanor  
 
 
Cllr S. Conlon  
Celtic 
Conferences  
Misinformation, Disinformation 
and Fake News 
O’Donovan’s Hotel, 
Clonakilty, Co. Cork  
06-08th February 2026 
Cllr S. Coyle  
AILG  
Briefing on New Housing Plan 
“Delivering Homes, Building 
Communities 2025-2030”  
 
Raddison Blu, Sligo 
21st March 2026 
Cllr S. Coyle  
Cllr P. Gibbons  
Cllr S. Conlon  
Cllr B. McAree  
Cllr S. Flynn  

 
Storm Chandra 
The Chief Executive provided members with an overview of the impact of Storm Chandra and an 
update in relation to the Council’s response and the recovery. Key points to note were:  
• 
Storm Chandra brought a prolonged period of severe weather to County Monaghan from 
26th January to 6th February 2026, characterised by, heavy and persistent rainfall, strong 
winds, widespread and significant flooding 
• 
At the peak of the storm, river levels—especially the River Fane—exceeded previously 
recorded levels, resulting in widespread impacts across the county.  
• 
Up to 43 roads were flooded at the height of the event, mainly in South & West 
Monaghan. 
• 
Several rural communities became isolated as water levels rose. 
• 
While conditions remained unsettled for several days, floodwaters gradually receded 
from 30 January onward.  
• 
The River Fane rose above historic peaks and remained elevated for several days. 
• 
Other rivers, including the Dromore River, also reached high levels. 
Emergency Response: 
• 
Road closures and temporary traffic management were maintained; delivered sandbags, 
temporary flood barriers; operated pumping systems; supported agricultural deliveries 
and coordinated a multi-agency response through daily Severe Weather Assessment 
Team meetings.  
• 
The Fire Service rescued people from vehicles trapped in floodwater and from flooded 
homes, assisted with pumping operations and responded to multiple incidents caused 
by motorists attempting to drive through flooded roads. 
• 
The Civil Defence team transported dialysis patients and vulnerable residents, delivered 
essential supplied to isolated households and conducted welfare checks throughout the 
event.  
• 
Dept of Social Protection: An Emergency Response Payment was made available for 
households whose homes were directly affected via local Welfare Office. 
• 
DETE (Irish Red Cross) Humanitarian Flood Scheme has been activated for small 
businesses and voluntary, community, and sporting organisations unable to secure flood 
insurance.  
• 
Throughout the storm, public safety advice was repeatedly issued via Social & Print 
Media, Northern Sound, RTE, etc.—and remains important during any future flooding 
events.  
 
The Chief Executive advised the members that as of 7th February 2026, most flooded roads had 
reopened, river levels were continuing to fall slowly across the county and weather conditions were 
expected to remain relatively settled, with low levels of rainfall anticipated in the coming days.  
 
The Chief Executive concluded by extending his thanks to the following for their support and 
cooperation throughout the event:  
• 
Elected Members  
• 
Residents  
• 
The Fire Service and Civil Defence volunteers 
• 
Partner agencies including the HSE, AGS, UE, ESB Social Welfare Office, Irish Red Cross 
• 
Local community members who assisted neighbours and vulnerable residents during the 
flooding.  
 
 
 

 
 
Urgent Business:  
 
1. Cllr S. Flynn proposed, Cllr N. McCooey seconded, that this Council notes with grave concern the 
severe and ongoing impacts of recent flooding across County Monaghan and calls on James 
Browne, Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage; Darragh O’Brien, Minister for 
Transport; and Kevin Boxer Moran, Minister of State with responsibility for the Office of Public 
Works, to urgently provide additional and targeted funding to Monaghan County Council for 
flood relief and flood prevention works, river maintenance including dredging and debris removal 
and the urgent repair and stabilisation of roads damaged and subsiding due to flooding. 
 
This Council further calls for sustained, long-term investment to ensure local authorities are 
adequately resourced to implement proactive flood prevention and infrastructure protection 
measures, in recognition of the increasing frequency of extreme weather events and the pre-
existing poor condition of some roads in County Monaghan. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the members, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
Extension of Meeting 
On the proposal of Cllr N. McCooey, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, as the time had reached 3.00pm, it 
was agreed to extend the meeting to 3.30pm to discuss the remaining agenda items. 
 
2. Cllr A. Johnston proposed, Cllr S. Gilliland seconded, that this Council, noting the severe and 
widespread damage caused to the county’s road infrastructure as a result of Storm Chandra, 
agrees to write to the Minister for Transport, Darragh O’Brien TD, seeking the allocation of 
additional and exceptional roads funding to support urgent repair and remedial works. 
 
This emergency motion is submitted by the Fine Gael Members due to the scale of destruction to 
local and regional roads, the immediate and ongoing risks to public safety, and the significant 
unplanned financial pressures now facing Monaghan County Council.  
 
The current roads budget is inadequate to meet the cost of repairs arising from this extreme 
weather event, and additional support from the Department of Transport is urgently required to 
restore the road network to a safe and functional condition. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the members, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
3. Cllr S. Coyle proposed, Cllr S. Flynn seconded, that this Council demand of An Taoiseach, Micheál 
Martin, T.D. Minister for Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Marine, Mr. Martin Heydon, T.D., 
and the Government, the immediate dismissal of Larry Murrin as Chairman of Bord Bia, due to 
the importation of Brazilian Beef by Dawn Farm Foods Ltd., the company of which he is the CEO. 
This is a conflict of interests and hypocrisy at a time when exceptionally high standards are being 
demanded of Irish farmers.  
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the members, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
The meeting then concluded.  
 
 
 
Signed:  
________ 
  
 
               Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________ 
Meetings 
Administrator 
 
Date: 
____________________ 
 
 
