 
Minutes of the Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, M-Tek 
Building, Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan, on Monday 13th April 2026 at 2.00 p.m.   
 
Chair: 
Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, Cathaoirleach  
 
Present: 
Cllrs Aughey, Campbell, Carthy, P. Conlon, S. Conlon, Flynn, Gibbons, Gilliland, Johnston, 
Keelan, McAree, McCooey, P. Treanor, S. Treanor and Truell. 
 
  
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Ms. C O’Hare, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. O. McConnon, 
Directors of Services, Mr. N. O’Connor, A/Director of Services, Ms. M. McGarvey, 
Meetings Administrator, Ms. M. McMahon, Staff Officer. 
 
MS Teams:   Cllr Clerkin 
 
Apologies: Cllr Coyle  
 
Sympathy – Dr. Rory O’Hanlon and Mr. John Keenan, RIP:  
At the outset the Cathaoirleach, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon paid tribute to Former Fianna Fáil TD and Minister 
for Health, Dr. Rory O’Hanlon and former Councillor, Mr. John Keenan on their sad passing – He 
extended the sympathy of the Council and sincere condolences to their families.  
 
The members joined in paying tribute to Former Fianna Fáil TD and Minister for Health, Dr. Rory 
O’Hanlon and former Councillor, Mr. John Keenan and associated themselves with the expression of 
sympathy.  
 
The Cathaoirleach adjourned the meeting for a short period as a mark of respect. 
 
Urgent Business 
The Cathaoirleach informed the members that he had received the following Notice of Urgent 
Business as follows: 
 
1. On behalf of the Sinn Féin group: 
‘That this Council expresses serious concern at the approach taken by Government to the recent fuel 
protests, which arose from genuine and widespread concerns about the cost of living and the rising 
cost of doing business. 
 
This Council condemns the aggressive and inflammatory language used by members of Government, 
which served only to heighten tensions, and further condemns the failure and refusal of Government 
to engage in a constructive and meaningful manner with those involved. 
  
That this Council, in light of the above, has no confidence in the current Government’s willingness or 
ability to adequately support workers, families and businesses during the ongoing cost-of-living 
crisis.’ 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, it was agreed to enter ‘into committee’ 
to discuss whether to accept the motions submitted as urgent business.  
 
Following a short discussion, it was agreed to take the motions of urgent business at the end of the 
meeting.  
 

 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, it was agreed that the Council revert to 
public session.  
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 02 March 2026 
Cllr P. Treanor noted a correction under Item 7 of the minutes of the Council meeting 
held on 2nd March 2026 to reflect his request that further opportunities for use of the 
Irish Language in general be explored.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Council meeting held on the 02nd March 2026, as amended, be confirmed. 
 
2. To consider the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for housing at old 
Castleblayney Fire Station site. 
Mr. T. Gourley, Senior Executive Planner, referred to the Part VIII report which had been 
circulated in respect of the proposed development of housing at the old Castleblayney 
Fire Station site, Co. Monaghan. The development comprises of the demolition of the 
existing fire station, salt store and outbuilding, change the use of the site to construct a 
housing development consisting of three new terraces and the refurbishment of the 
existing protected structures on site, providing 22 no. dwelling units in total.  He 
provided members with a brief overview of the five third-party submissions/ 
observations which were received during the public consultation period and have been 
addressed in the report circulated. Mr. Gourley recommended that members proceed 
with the proposal. 
 
Mr. Gourley and Mr. L. MacCinna, Senior Executive Engineer, Housing, responded to 
queries from the elected members.  
 
On the proposal Cllr P. Gibbons, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, it was agreed to approve 
the development of housing at the old Castleblayney Fire Station site, Co. Monaghan, as 
detailed in the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
Following a short debate on the proposal, a vote by show of hands was taken which 
resulted in, 16 For, 1 Against.  
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal carried.  
 
3. To consider Section 183 - Sale of Property of Assembly Rooms, Dawson Street, 
Monaghan 
Mr. K. McNally, Town Regeneration Officer, outlined the S183 circulated for the 
proposed disposal of Assembly Rooms, Dawson Street, Monaghan, Co. Monaghan– site 
area 0.095 Hectares to Ward Funeral Services Ltd. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr A. Johnston, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the disposal of Assembly Rooms, Dawson Street, Monaghan, Co. 
Monaghan, in accordance with the terms of the notice dated 7th November 2025 and 
attached site location map in accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
 

 
4. To consider Section 183 - Sale of Property at Church Street, Castleblaney, Co. 
Monaghan 
In accordance with the Ethics Framework, Cllr A. Johnston declared a possible conflict of 
interest in relation to this item and withdrew from the meeting room whilst the matter 
was being dealt with.  
 
Mr. K. McNally, Town Regeneration Officer, outlined the S183 circulated for the 
proposed disposal of property at Church Street, Castleblayney, Co. Monaghan – site area 
0.0047 Hectares.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Gibbons, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the disposal of property at Church Street, Castleblayney, Co. Monaghan, 
in accordance with the terms of the notice dated 8th January 2026 and attached site 
location map in accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
5. To consider Section 183 - Sale of Property at No. 4/5 Mill Street, Monaghan 
Mr. K. McNally, Town Regeneration Officer, outlined the S183 circulated for the 
proposed disposal of property at 4/5 Mill Street, Monaghan, Co. Monaghan – site area 
0.031 Hectares.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Johnston, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the disposal of property at 4/5 Mill Street, Monaghan, Co. Monaghan, in 
accordance with the terms of the notice dated 20th February 2026 and attached site 
location map in accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
6. To consider a Resolution to borrow up to €1.4m for the construction of a Monaghan 
County Council Depot at Teehill, Clones, in the Ballybay-Clones Municipal District.  
Ms. O. McConnon, Director of Services, advised the members that in accordance with 
Section 106 of the Local Government Act 2001, approval is being sought from the 
members to borrow up to €1.4m for the Construction of a Monaghan County Council 
Depot at Teehill, Clones, Co. Monaghan.  
 
Ms. J. McKenna, Financial Management Accountant stated that with members 
agreement, a 30-year fixed-rate loan would be sought from the Housing Finance Agency 
with an Annual Repayment of €73,871.63.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Gilliland, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that the 
Council approves the resolution to borrow €1.4m for the Construction of a Monaghan 
County Council Depot at Teehill, Clones, Co. Monaghan, in accordance with Section 106 
of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
In response to queries raised by Members in relation to funding of the 30-year annual 
loan repayment, the total repayment amount and a priority list for countywide 
construction projects, it was agreed that an update would be provided to the members at 
the next Council meeting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7. To consider Monaghan Co Council Draft Biodiversity Action Plan 2026-2031 
Ms. P. McCreesh, Biodiversity Officer, provided members with a presentation on the Draft 
Biodiversity Action Plan 2026-2031.  Key points to note were:  
 
- 
The Plan sets out a roadmap for protecting, restoring, and enhancing biodiversity across 
County Monaghan over the next five years, up to 2031.  
- 
The need for a Plan stems from the Dáil declaring both a Global Biodiversity and Climate 
Emergency in May 2019. In 2023, there was an amendment made to the Wildlife Act 
1976 (as amended) which placed a biodiversity duty on public bodies for the first time. 
This meant that public bodies must take account of the actions and objectives of the 
National Biodiversity Action Plan.  
- 
At the outset of the Biodiversity Action Plan process, in July 2024, various relevant 
parties were invited to join the Monaghan Biodiversity Working Group (BWG), which 
includes representatives from the farming sector, state agencies, community groups, 
county recorders, NGO’s, PPN members and biodiversity specialists. The first task of the 
newly formed group was the preparation of the Biodiversity Action Plan, and four 
Biodiversity Working Group meetings have been held to assist with this development, 
and to discuss the groups ambition for biodiversity in County Monaghan.  
- 
The 50 Actions set out in the Plan will be achieved through mechanism of community 
collaboration and sustainable management.  
- 
The Plan aligns strongly with national plans, policies, the Monaghan County Council 
Climate Action Plan 2024-2029 and the Monaghan County Development Plan 2025-
2031.  
- 
The role of the Plan is to provide a clear and consistent roadmap for how the Council will 
manage biodiversity across the County. It helps to set priorities so that efforts are 
focused where needed most, it ensures that biodiversity is built into the Council’s day-
to-day work and makes it easier for the Council to engage with national and external 
funding opportunities.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that the Draft 
Biodiversity Action Plan 2026-2031, as presented, be approved.  
 
The members acknowledged the volume of work involved in the development of the 
Biodiversity Action Plan 2026-2031 and conveyed their gratitude to Ms. McCreesh and all 
involved for their input.    
 
8. To receive a progress report on Climate Action Plan 2024-2029 
Mr. M. Coyle, Climate Action Coordinator joined the meeting to provide members with 
the 2nd update on the implementation of the Climate Action Plan 2024-2029 and progress 
to date. He referred to the following 3 ‘headline’ targets within the plan and how the 
Council plays a key leadership role in the delivery of climate action:  
• 
Transition to a Climate Resilient, biodiversity rich, environmentally sustainable, 
climate neutral economy by 2050.  
• 
50% improvement in the Council’s energy efficiency by 2030  
• 
51% reduction in the Council’s greenhouse gas emissions by 2030  
 
Mr. Coyle gave a brief overview of the progress to date in relation to the implementation 
of the 153 Actions from within the Plan; 93 from within the Climate Action Plan 2024-
2029; and 60 from the Monaghan Town Decarbonisation Plan. Key points to note were: 

 
- 
Two thirds of all actions have been completed. Many of the completed actions are 
recurring and have been embedded into the Council’s day-to-day operations.  
- 
There has been a significant reduction in actions not started.  
- 
The Council wide Climate Action Team, which is led by the Chief Executive, continues 
to meet quarterly with representation from each section taking the lead on actions 
for their respective areas.   
- 
In terms of Energy Efficiency, our position is strong overall. A minor decline in the past 
year highlights the need for continued monitoring and increased Solar PV projects to 
improve efficiency of council owned buildings.  
- 
Fossil fuel emissions exceed baseline estimates. Progressing pathfinder projects, 
particularly decarbonising the heating in Monaghan Leisure Centre will be essential 
to achieving targets.  
- 
While fleet emissions remain high, they are expected to decline in the next energy 
report, with 61% of HGVs now operating on HVO. Additional EVs were introduced in 
2025, and together these measures are expected to positively influence the 2025 
energy report. 
- 
To adapt to the climate impacts that we are already facing, particularly flooding and 
severe weather, key actions include; embedding climate risk into the Major 
Emergency Plan & Flood Plan.  
- 
Significant progress has been made across all Municipal Districts in terms of drainage 
and road maintenance directly reducing surface water/flooding risks.  
- 
Nature based solutions have been embedded in planning policy to ensure that new 
developments are more resilient by design.  
- 
By the end of 2025, 55% of social homes across the county had achieved a BER rating 
of B2 or higher, rising to 59% within the Decarbonisation Zone.  
- 
Key Active Travel projects - Monaghan Town Greenway and Horseshoe Pedestrian 
Bridge that were completed in 2025, contribute to improving public health, 
connectivity and reducing car dependency.  
- 
Biodiversity is a core part of climate adaptation response. The biodiversity team led a 
strong programme of community outreach with high levels of engagement through 
the development of the Biodiversity Action Plan 2026-2031.  
- 
The Local Enterprise Office have been active in supporting local businesses to reduce 
emissions and there was a very strong demand for the Green Business Grants and 
Supports. Over 60 local businesses attended a Decarbonization Event in the Peace 
Campus as part of Enterprise Week, demonstrating strong interest in climate action 
among the business community.  
- 
The Monaghan County Council Climate Action Unit, in partnership with Cavan and 
Leitrim Local Authorities are leading on the District Heating project. 100% funding was 
secured through the SEAI Pathfinder Programme for the feasibility stage. Following 
identification of two high-potential district heating opportunities, Monaghan County 
Council submitted an EOI to SEAI’s District Heating Pre-Construction Fund.  
- 
There were over 1600 participants at events raised as part of Climate Action Week 
2025 which took place from 13th – 19th October 2025.  
- 
As part of Phase 1 of the Community Climate Action Programme, 16 Community 
Groups are being supported to deliver Climate Action projects to the value of 
€789,880. 37 applications were received as part of Phase 2 of the Community Climate 
Action Programme demonstrating demand of more than 3 times the available funding 
(€1,379,124 requested €392,000 allocation). 18 groups were recommended for 
funding to the Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment.  
 
 

 
 
9. To approve Monaghan County Council's Annual Report 2025 
The members considered the Draft Monaghan County Council Annual Report for 2025 
which had been circulated with the agenda for the meeting.  
 
Ms M. McGarvey, A/Senior Executive Officer, outlined the main elements of the Draft 
Annual Report for 2025. The comprehensive report, which had been prepared in 
accordance with the Local Government Act, 2001, provides an overview of the activities 
and progress made by each of the Directorates within Monaghan County Council during 
2025. Ms. McGarvey thanked Ms. M. McBride, Senior Staff Officer, Corporate Services 
and the Executive for their cooperation and assistance in the preparation of the Annual 
Report 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, it was agreed to adopt the 
Draft Monaghan County Council Annual Report for 2025 as presented. 
 
10. To receive Local Government Auditors Report for year ended 31 December 2024 
Members noted the Local Government Auditors Report for year ended 31 December 
2024, which had been circulated to the members. 
 
11. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group – 25th March 
2026.  
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 25th 
March 2026, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 25th March 2026 and the 
recommendations contained therein be approved.  
 
In response to a query raised by Cllr. N. Keelan, the Chief Executive, advised that if 
members wish to meet with Oireachtas Members on an annual basis this could be 
facilitated. He noted that the statutory requirement places an obligation on the Council 
Executive to meet with the Oireachtas Members on an annual basis.  
 
12. To receive Management Report – March  
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for March 2026 which had been 
circulated with the agenda. He advised the members that he had received confirmation 
of funding support of €950k from the Department to support the Roads Maintenance 
Strategy.   
 
The Chief Executive provided the following update in relation to the Affordable Purchase 
Scheme at Sean Ghairdíní, Carrickmacross, Co. Monaghan which includes 4 
two-bedroom homes and 6 three-bedroom homes:  
- 
35 applications were received via the Portal. 
- 
House sales will commence later this month and into May with starting prices 
from €240k.  
- 
 
The Chief Executive concluded by referring to the Affordable Housing Survey which aims 
to assess the level of demand for future Affordable Purchase and Cost Rental schemes in 
County Monaghan. He advised the members that over 150 responses have been received 
to date and the survey remains open until 5pm on Friday 17th April.  

 
 
The members noted the Management Report for March which had been circulated with 
the agenda.  
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland, it was agreed that this 
Council reviews the current status and potential use of the civic building in Ballybay.  This 
building was originally intended to accommodate Ukrainian refugees, however, to date, it 
appears unused. Given the ongoing need for community facilities, consideration should be 
given to repurposing the building for public use for the benefit of the local community in 
Ballybay. The building would serve as a valuable space for meetings, community events 
and other local initiatives. If Departmental approval is required to repurpose the building, 
then this should be sought and an update provided to members on the building’s future 
use.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, it was agreed to write to 
the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., 
seeking a further allocation of funding to enable this Council to reopen the Housing 
Adaptation Grant Scheme.  
 
13. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events  
The members noted the reports from Cllrs S. Conlon and Coyle, in relation to their 
attendance at the following Conferences/Training events: 
 
- 
AILG Elected Members Training Module 1 – Fairways Hotel, Dundalk – 19th February 
2026.  
- 
AILG Elected Members Training Module 2 – Raddison Blu, Sligo – 21st March 2026 
- 
LAMA Spring Seminar – Connacht Hotel, Galway – 28th & 29th January 2026.  
 
14. Business Submitted by the Chief Executive   
There were no matters for consideration under this item.  
 
15. Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 02nd March 2026  
There were no matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 2nd 
March 2026.  
 
16. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
No further update on the N2 National Primary Road.  
 
17. To receive update on North South Interconnector project 
In response to Cllr N. Keelan’s query regarding the minutes of the recent meeting 
between the Executive and representatives from Eirgrid/ESB, the Chief Executive stated 
that draft meeting notes had recently been circulated to all attendees for their 
agreement.  
 
18. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update on the Ulster Canal project.  
 
 

 
19. Correspondence 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting: 
 
- 
Response from the Office of the Minister of State for Local Government and Planning, Mr. 
John Cummins, T.D., regarding funding for an Access Officer.  
- 
Response from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., regarding thresholds for social housing.  
- 
Response from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Darragh O'Brien, 
T.D., regarding funding for Active Travel.  
- 
Response from the IHA Manager Cavan/Monaghan, HSE regarding Rainbow Lodge.  
- 
Letter from Monaghan Older Persons Council requesting Council support regarding Access 
to Bus Éireann services for non-digital service users.   
- 
Correspondence from Senator Robbie Gallagher forwarding the response he received 
from Office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Mr. Martin Heydon, T.D., 
regarding Bord Bia.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the Office of the Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and 
Employment, Mr. Peter Burke, T.D., regarding a request to re-introduce the ICOB Grant 
for all SMEs for the calendar year 2026 and beyond. 
- 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the 
Marine, Mr. Martin Heydon T.D., regarding the roll-out of an Economic Compensation 
Scheme to protect poultry farmers’ income when they are impacted by Avian Influenza 
outbreaks.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the from the Private Secretary to the Minister for 
Transport, Mr. Darragh O'Brien, T.D., regarding funding for regional and local roads.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary the Minister for Rural and Community 
Development, Mr. Dara Calleary, T.D., regarding increasing the provision of Irish-medium 
education.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to Minister for Education and Youth, 
Ms. Hildegarde Naughton, T.D., regarding increasing the provision of Irish-medium 
education.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from Uisce Éireann regarding Taking In Charge applications.  
 
Additional Correspondence:  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda had 
issued was also circulated:  
 
- Response from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Darragh O’Brien, 
T.D., regarding additional funding for roads following severe weather events.  
- Response Senator Robbie Gallagher received from the Private Secretary to the Minister for 
Transport, Mr. Darragh O’Brien, T.D., regarding the request for additional funding for local 
and regional roads.  
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence:   
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, it was agreed that this Council, 
forwards the correspondence received from Monaghan Older Persons Council, to the Chief 
Executive Officer of Bus Éireann and also to the Minister of Transport, Mr. Darragh O’Brien, 
T.D., in order to address the issues raised and request that a response be issued to the 
Council.  
 
 

 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, it was agreed that this 
Council, write to Minister Norma Foley, T.D., requesting that she engages directly with 
Errigal Truagh Special Needs with regards to her recent request whereby she asked people 
locally to communicate the availability of respite or where they think there might be 
opportunities to do so.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that this 
Council, write to Minister Normal Foley and the HSE requesting that Rainbow Lodge 
remains open and operational alongside the new unit at Urbalkirk when it opens.  
 
20. Notices of Motion  
 
1. Cllr P. Treanor proposed, Cllr N. McCooey seconded: 
 
 ‘That this Council recognises that the reunification of Ireland is an objective of Bunreacht 
na hÉireann; and there is a growing national discussion around constitutional change with 
people from diverse backgrounds now exploring the possibility of Irish unity.  
 
This Council notes that the Good Friday Agreement 1998 provides the democratic and 
peaceful means to achieve reunification through the provision of unity referendums;  
— the significant Joint Oireachtas Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday 
Agreement report "Perspectives on Constitutional Change: Finance and Economics", 
recommends the establishment of Citizen Assemblies and other relevant forums, a 
designated Joint Oireachtas Committee and a Government Department to take 
responsibility for planning and preparing for constitutional change, received cross-party 
support.  
 
This Council writes to the Office of An Taoiseach, seeking the Irish Government to plan and 
prepare for Irish unity, through the following actions:  
 
• 
establish an all-island representative Citizens' Assembly or Assemblies, to allow for 
informed debate, and a Joint Oireachtas Committee on Irish Unity to enable careful 
planning;  
• 
produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with civic society and key 
stakeholders;  
• 
engage with northern protestant and unionist opinion about the future of Ireland; and  
• 
work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in the Good Friday 
Agreement’. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
2.    Cllr A. Johnston proposed, Cllr S. Gilliland seconded:  
 
‘That this Council write to the Minister for Finance, Mr. Simon Harris, T.D., requesting that 
the Government introduce cost of living and cost of business supports due to the impact 
of the Iran war on energy prices. Such supports should be targeted at those individuals 
and business/community/sports entities and sectors that are most affected and should be 
introduced in advance of the budget’.  
 
Cllr A. Johnston requested that his motion (20.2) be deferred.  

 
3.  Cllr A Johnston proposed, Cllr S. Gilliand seconded:  
 
‘That this Council write to the Minister for Climate, Energy and the Environment, Darragh 
O’Brien, TD requesting that the Government review the current electricity pricing 
structure to eliminate the market clearing price so that cheaper energy producers can 
pass on cheaper prices to their customers.  
 
Currently energy prices in Ireland are based on the most expensive source required to 
meet demand. Given that Ireland relies heavily on natural gas for energy production, 
wholesale electricity prices strongly track global gas market fluctuations. This results in 
customers of cheaper produced energy such as renewables paying a disproportionately 
high electricity price compared to its production costs. Natural gas accounted for 40% of 
energy production and customers are subjected to price distortions based on geopolitical 
factors.’ 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
21. Questions and Replies 
 
Cllr. R. Aughey asked:  
1. 
Why is the Department of Heritage making us spend more money on houses that are in poor repair in Clones 
and Monaghan, that could be used to deliver many units for our housing lists rather than trying to save 
buildings that are unsafe and unsightly, and if other people own them, we could issue them derelict sites 
notices and a levy?  
Reply: Conserving existing historic buildings sustains the established urban grain and character that make 
town centres legible and attractive for residents, businesses and visitors, which is a stated aim of 
Monaghan’s regeneration agenda. Planning and heritage policies require proposals that respect original 
fabric and streetscape. By maintaining authentic facades and plot patterns while accommodating 
contemporary use behind them, projects can add homes and services without erasing the architectural 
language that gives a street its identity.  
 
Heritage-led approaches also support place-based economies: Monaghan’s tourism materials explicitly 
anchor interpretation and walking routes in historic streets and monuments, demonstrating how intact 
townscapes underpin cultural value and footfall. Public-realm proposals linked to regeneration—wider 
pavements, improved cycling and pedestrian connections, new civic spaces—work best when framed by 
conserved buildings that provide enclosure, continuity and a recognisable sense of place.  
From a delivery perspective, sensitive rehabilitation reduces planning risk in heritage contexts where 
demolition can trigger statutory objections and more intensive assessment; conversely, proposals that 
retain significance while introducing appropriate new-build to the rear have been advanced as pragmatic, 
policy-aligned solutions in Monaghan. This model, where we restore the front and add capacity behind, 
meets housing need while safeguarding streetscape significance, and reflects the balance that national 
guidance expects between development and conservation.  
Conservation aligns with the broader public interest embedded in local policy: it protects designated assets 
recorded in the Record of Protected Structures, keeps town-centre living viable by reusing well-located 
buildings, and complements strategic regeneration that prioritises active travel, high-quality public space 
and sustainable servicing. Rather than starting over, working with what is already there respects statutory 
protections, secures community support rooted in identity and memory, and delivers new homes and 
amenities in a way that strengthens, rather than weakens, the character that makes the urban cores of 
Monaghan and Clones distinctive. 
Considering the two houses at Old Cross Square in Monaghan town for example: 
Following consultation with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage we procured a 
new design team that includes a conservation architect.  The new design team recommends that the two 
houses be made into one house plus five new apartments to be constructed to the rear following demolition 
of the building behind the original two houses, please see initial concept sketches below.   
This proposal aims to achieve the requirements of the Department while also delivering 6 dwellings (one 
house and 5 apartments).  The conservation / heritage aspect of the development will only apply to the 
house, the apartments will be new build… achieving a good blend of conservation and new build while 
preserving the historic and important urban fabric of Old Cross Square. 

 
 
 
Cllr. B. McAree asked: 
2. 
Playground – Emyvale  
What funding streams, if any, are currently available to upgrade or refurbish the existing playground facilities 
in Emyvale, and whether the Council has any plans to seek such funding in the current or upcoming capital 
programme? 
Reply: Regarding funding opportunities to upgrade or refurbish the existing playground facilities in Emyvale, 
an application for €22,000 has been submitted to the Department of Children, Disability and Equality for 
the development of a Teen Hangout space at Cois Locha playground. If the application is successful, the 
project will be requesting an additional €14,000 in match funding from the MD. Further refurbishment 
works, if required, may also be eligible for support under the CLÁR Programme. 
3. 
Proposed Play Park – Tydavnet 
Has the Council considered the development of a new public play park in Tydavnet, and whether any feasibility 
studies, site assessments, or funding applications are planned or underway? 
Reply: At present, no site has been identified for the development of a public play park in Tydavnet.  
Without an identified site, the Council is unable to progress to the next stages such as feasibility studies, 
detailed site assessments or planning/landowner permissions. Before any funding application can be 
submitted, all necessary permissions and approvals must be in place, including confirmation of site 
availability, suitability, and planning. 
Once a suitable site is identified and the required permissions are in place, there would be potential to 
explore funding opportunities under DRCDG programmes.  Depending on the overall scale and cost of the 
project, funding could be sought under the following schemes: 
CLÁR Programme – funding of up to €100,000 available 
Town & Village Renewal Scheme – funding up to €500,000 available for large strategic projects or funding 
up to €300,000 for smaller scale projects, depending on the scope and cost of the proposal. 
 
4. 
Traffic Calming – Mullan Road, Emyvale 
What measures, if any, are planned to address traffic speed and safety concerns on the Mullan Road in 
Emyvale, including the potential for traffic calming interventions, further signage, or speed monitoring? Reply: 
The most recent speed survey completed at Mullan Road Emyvale showed a marginal exceedance of the 
speed limit.  Since this speed survey, Monaghan Municipal District introduced additional road markings to 
include edge lines, a centre line, and SLOW painted on road in line with the adopted Traffic Calming 
Policy.  The road was resurfaced in Q4 2025, and as part of these works these measures have been 
reinstated.  Monaghan Municipal District will monitor this road by carrying out speed surveys now that the 
6-month period will have passed since the road was resurfaced and the re-introduction of the previous 
measures in line with the adopted Traffic Calming Policy.  
 
5. 
Vacant Social Housing – County Monaghan 
How many social housing units are currently vacant across County Monaghan, the reasons for these vacancies, 
and the expected timeframe for their allocation to applicants on the housing list? 
 

 
Reply:  
There are currently 10 vacant social housing units in Monaghan County Council, with re-letting works in 
progress. See the tables below for details. 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  
6. 
When is it expected the design team for the Carrickmacross Swimming Pool Project will be selected and what 
timescale is envisaged for them to bring design proposals to the Council?  
Reply: Stage 1 tender documentation for the appointment of Design Consultants was advertised on the 
eTenders platform on February 10th. A total of eight tender submissions were received by the closing date 
of March 19th. The evaluation process in relation to suitability assessment and prequalification of tendering 
candidates under Stage 1 is currently ongoing. It is expected that Stage 2 of the procurement process will 
be advertised in early May.  
7. 
Has there been any further updates in relation to the Clos na Droimainne unfinished estate in Carrickmacross? 
What plans are in place to get something done to complete the development or, if delays are going to continue 
indefinitely, what can we do to force ownership change?  
Reply: For the purposes of addressing the issues associated with the Clos na Droimainne unfinished estate 
in Carrickmacross, under the Derelict Sites Act 1990 (as amended), it has been divided into 4 sections. On 
18th July 2025, each of these sections were entered onto the Derelict Sites Register.  Properties entered onto 
the Derelict Sites Register, are liable for the Derelict Sites levy of 7% of the market valuation. The demand 
for the Derelict Sites levies due in respect of this site, €216,650, were issued in   February 2026. The Housing 
Agency received a Repair and Lease proposal from the current owner of Clos na Dromainne.  Unfortunately, 
the derelict apartment block is not suitable for Repair and Lease as the proposal would require some 
demolition before the 14 apartments could be brought into use.  The Repair and Lease proposal to bring 
the 12 unfinished houses into use was considered in detail by the Housing Agency, North and East Housing 
Association (NEHA) and Monaghan County Council.  Unfortunately, the Repair and Lease proposal is not 
financially viable for either NEHA or Monaghan County Council so there is no possibility of bringing the 
dwellings into use under the current Repair and Lease scheme.  The Council will continue to liaise with the 
owner of the property to seek payment of the outstanding Derelict Sites levies and ensure that they identify 
a solution to bring the property back into use.  
8. 
Following the recent announcement of the 2026 allocation of LIS funding, how many roads does the Executive 
envisage completing this year? And how many laneways remain on the list to be completed?  
Reply: Monaghan County Council has received an initial funding allocation of €385,880 for the Local 
Improvement Scheme in 2026. It is estimated that this allocation will complete 9 lanes, subject to tender 
rates. Tenders have been uploaded to SupplyGov with a closing date of the 13th of April. There are 155 
eligible lanes applications on the current list. There are other applications that further information was 
requested, and this information is still being received.  
9. 
Considering that all 41 houses in Ard na Radhairc, Carrickmacross, are owned by Monaghan County Council, 
has the developer engaged with the council to begin the process of Taking in Charge the estate?  
Reply: To date, the Local Authority has not received a written request by the developer or residents to take 
in charge the services and structures of Ard na Radhairc, Carrickmacross, Co. Monaghan. 
Cllr P Clerkin asked: 
10. Are there plans to install a pedestrian crossing in Tydavnet Village? 
Reply: There are currently no plans to install a pedestrian crossing in Tydavnet Village.  Prior to any plans 
to install a pedestrian crossing, a needs analysis would be required to identify pedestrian movements and 
desire lines.  There are plans to complete a Community Plan for Tydavnet Village on or before 2028 at which 
time the needs of the village will be identified and there will be consultation sessions with the community. 
11. Has Monaghan County Council considered installing new public lighting in Monaghan Town, like the new 
street lighting installed in Carrickmacross in recent times? 
Reply: There are currently no plans to install new street lighting in Monaghan Town.  Monaghan Town 
recently has had new street lighting installed at St Marys Boys School Clones Rd, Upper Courthouse Car Park 
and Park Road.  Any issues with defective street lighting should be reported using the Deadsure App.  
12. When does Monaghan County Council plan to begin the consultation process to give the public the 
opportunity to have their say on the future use of Moyna’s Field in Scotstown Village? 
Reply: The land in question in Scotstown village was purchased with the intention of providing social 

 
housing, parking and a small playground.   Some is identified as being at risk of flooding in 100-year and 
1000-year storm events. A design team has been procured to examine how best to develop the land.  The 
proposed development will follow the usual statutory Part 8 planning process that applies to developments 
by Local Authorities. 
Cllr S. Conlon asked: 
13. For the purpose of availing of the European Regional Development Funding (ERDF) Local Authority 
Decarbonisation Zone scheme, applicable to Monaghan Town, which includes measures aimed at flood 
mitigation works, are this Council engaging with the North West Regional Assembly in efforts at securing grant 
aid that provides an initial allocation of €2.5m for Local Authorities within the NWRA area?  
Reply: Monaghan County Council has engaged fully with the North-West Regional Assembly (NWRA) in 
relation to the Decarbonising Zones Scheme, which provides 100% grant funding for eligible local authority 
climate projects within designated Decarbonising Zones. 
As part of this process, the Council has submitted two applications for Monaghan Town’s Decarbonising 
Zone: 
A Green Infrastructure Framework for the Monaghan Town DZ. This proposal will: 
•   Strengthen connectivity between existing public green spaces, urban parks, and greenways, improving 
routes for active travel and biodiversity. 
•   Support climate mitigation and adaptation by identifying and prioritising nature-based solutions across 
the town. 
•   Provide a clear implementation roadmap to guide future investment and ensure strong alignment with 
ERDF, URDF, Active Travel and other national/regional funding streams. 
A SuDS Tree Pit & Urban Greening Upgrade within Peter’s Lake Car Park. This project delivers: 
Replacement of existing damaged tree pits with new Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) tree pits, 
improving stormwater interception and filtration. 
Installation of additional tree pits in locations selected for maximum hydrological and ecological benefit. 
Creation of two Rain Gardens, enhancing water retention, biodiversity, and flood-mitigation capacity. 
Landscape and urban greening improvements at the lower end of Peter’s Lake car park, revitalising the area 
and contributing to improved microclimate and public amenity. 
Strong alignment with the Town Centre First (TCF) Plan for the Peter’s Lake area and wider public-realm 
ambitions. 
This project directly supports local flood-mitigation objectives while delivering high-visibility 
climate-adaptation benefits. 
14. With recent additional funding provided by Monaghan County Council that secured the future viability of 
BioConnect, has a timeframe been established for this Local Authority driven project to commence 
operations? 
Reply:The Bio-Connect Construction Project will reach substantial completion before the end of April. 
Operations will commence, shortly thereafter, following the inspection, design certification and assigned 
certified compliance under the Building Control (Amendment) Regulations (BCAR) process and handover. 
15. With the Industry, Enterprise, and Employment zoned lands at Annahagh West along the N2 bypass 
committed for purchase and development by identified businesses, which has substantially reduced the 
Council’s land bank for this purpose, are the Executive actively pursuing lands for the purpose of establishing 
additional serviced sites that will attract investors to the Monaghan town area? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council are actively sourcing suitably zoned industrial land, not only in Monaghan 
Town, but across the county. Details of lands acquired, can only be made available following the execution 
of contracts. 
16. With the recent cuts by Government to this Council’s roads budget, in particular the withdrawal of funding 
for the award winning  Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement Programme, how have the Section 86 agreements, led 
by this Council with counties Cavan, Louth and Cork, evolved that will spread the budget impacts on advancing 
this innovative initiative, especially in regard to the purchase or leasing of specialised batch mixing and 
production machinery?  
Reply: The current Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement Programme (RAP) contract is in its final year in 2026, and 
the rates tendered under the original procurement process continue to be honoured for the full duration of 
that contract. The Section 86 agreements with Cavan, Louth and Cork continue to function effectively, and 
the collaborative framework remains in place. The RAP trial phase has now been completed, and a formal 
specification for this material is scheduled for publication later in 2026 by TII. As part of the Council’s 
five-year pavement maintenance strategy, this material type has been incorporated to ensure continuity of 
the innovation developed to date.  
17. What level of engagement is occurring between the Council’s Housing Section and the North-West Regional 
Assembly in relation to availing of the Warmer Home Scheme budget of €55 million, as well as the Social 
Housing Scheme with a budget of €34 million, both which provide for 100% funding? 
Reply: The Warmer Homes Scheme, funded through the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and 
delivered nationally by the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI), provides free home energy 
upgrades to eligible low income households, including attic and wall insulation, draught proofing, lagging 

 
jackets, energy efficient lighting, and in some cases renewable heating systems and window replacements, 
with priority given to the oldest and least energy efficient homes particularly those with BER ratings of E, F, 
or G to improve warmth, comfort, and energy affordability. Monaghan County Council has no direct 
engagement with the Northern & Western Regional Assembly (NWRA) in relation to the scheme, as Warmer 
Homes is delivered directly to private homeowners by SEAI rather than through the local authority, and 
therefore falls outside the remit of the Monaghan County Council’s Housing Section. 
You can access and apply for the Warmer Homes Scheme directly through the Sustainable Energy Authority 
of Ireland (SEAI) at the following link: 
https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/fully-funded-upgrades-for-eligible-homes 
At present, Monaghan County Council’s Housing Section is undertaking an internal review of the NWRA’s 
€34m ERDF Social Housing Scheme and assessing potential Local Authority owned buildings that may be 
suitable for submission. Formal engagement with the NWRA will intensify once the competitive call for 
proposals opens in April 2026. 
Cllr A. Johnston asked: 
18. Are there any mechanisms where Monaghan County Council can develop and build affordable housing? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council are currently in the process of completing 10 Affordable Purchase units at 
Sean Ghairdíní.  Monaghan County Council are proactively engaging the contractors and developer in 
relation to future proposals.  
We have released a survey online to assess demand for all aspects of Affordable housing and Cost Rental in 
the county it will remain open until Friday the 17th of April. We will present result of this survey in the next 
Management Report.  
19. When is development of the Dublin Street South regeneration project expected to commence? 
Reply: The Council are continuing to progress the initial phase (Phase 1) of the South Dublin Street 
regeneration scheme which is focused on the new pedestrian civic plaza off Dublin Street. The executive is 
currently finalising acquisitions of back-land properties required for the implementation of the Phase 1 
scheme. Following completion of property acquisitions, it is expected that the Council will make a 
submission to the URDF Department under the next project stage approval (Pre-Tender Approval) as 
required under the Infrastructural Guidelines. Subject to URDF Department Approval, it is envisaged that 
Phase 1 may proceed to tender in Q3 2026. 
Cllr P. Gibbons asked: 
20. I understand the construction of the N2 Castleblayney bypass cut through a number of pre-existing roads and 
that these are still in the ownership of Monaghan County Council, and not eligible for repair under either the 
MD repair programmes or Local Improvement Scheme. The N2 bypass is approximately 20 years old and many 
of these roads are deteriorating badly. Can an overview by given on the number of such roads, a summary of 
their condition and any plans the Executive has to repair same. 
Reply: There are 28 access lanes created as part of the N2 scheme. These are private lanes that are in the 
ownership of MCC. They are not public roads and as such do not appear on a road schedule. As they are not 
on our schedule there is no specific funding to carry out repair works. The executive in the roads department 
will discuss this item at our next monthly TII meeting and we will update the members accordingly. 
21. Have the tenancies of Council tenants who are in Part V tenancies been examined from a legal perspective? I 
am referencing in particular to tenants who accepted tenancies in early Part V houses. I have been advised 
that they were not initially informed that these houses would not be able to be purchased but were after they 
had accepted tenancies and settled in their new homes. 
Reply: Monaghan County Council sought legal advice regarding the tenants’ request to purchase a property 
that had been allocated under a previous Tenant Purchase Scheme. Based on the legal guidance received, 
it has been confirmed that such a purchase is not permitted under the 1995, 2010, or 2016 Schemes, nor 
under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001. The tenants previously had the opportunity to 
purchase the dwelling under the schemes in place at the time of allocation; however, they did not avail of 
this option before the respective scheme expiry dates.  
22. Can an overview be given on the plans and actions undertaken for the provision of affordable and cost rental 
housing by Monaghan County Council in Castleblayney? 
Reply: As per response above (Q18), Monaghan County Council are proactively engaging the contractors 
and developer in relation to future proposals. We have released a survey online to assess demand for all 
aspects of Affordable housing and Cost Rental in the county it will remain open until Friday the 17th of April. 
We will present result of this survey in the next Management Report.  
23. Can the total staff number employed by Monaghan Council be provided along with the number of employees 
with a disability. In addition, can an overview of internal policy and legislative requirements be provided in 
relation to employing people with a disability. 
Reply: No. of staff employed at 31/12/25 – 535(Headcount) 
Number of staff with a Disability = 44 (Headcount) 
Monaghan 
County 
Council 
– 
Disability 
Employment 
Policy 
and 
Legislative 
Requirements: 
Monaghan 
County 
Council  
- Focus on accessibility, service/information, built environment, and external environment. 

 
- 
Promote 
a 
culture 
of 
inclusion 
through 
awareness 
and 
staff 
training. 
- 
Develop 
inclusive 
customer 
service 
and 
consultation 
policies. 
- Appointment of an Access Officer  
- Implementation of reasonable accommodation supported by national Work and Access programme. 
Monaghan County Council is committed to fostering a culture of equality, including actively supporting the 
employment of people with disabilities. The Council’s recruitment and selection processes fully comply with 
the Employment Equality Acts 1998–2015 and the Disability Act 2005, which prohibit discrimination on nine 
grounds, including disability. 
1. 
Disability 
Act 
2005 
– 
Part 
5 
- 
Promote 
and 
support 
employment 
of 
people 
with 
disabilities. 
- Public bodies must meet statutory disability employment targets (rising to 6% by 2025). 
- 
Annual 
compliance 
reporting. 
2. 
Employment 
Equality 
Acts 
1998–2015 
- 
Prohibit 
discrimination 
on 
grounds 
including 
disability. 
- 
Require 
provision 
of 
reasonable 
accommodation. 
- 
Support 
equal 
treatment 
in 
recruitment, 
promotion, 
and 
employment. 
3. 
UN 
CRPD 
- 
Support 
equal 
access 
to 
employment 
for 
people 
with 
disabilities. 
- 
Ensure 
inclusive 
and 
accessible 
work 
environments. 
4. 
Public 
Sector 
Equality 
& 
Human 
Rights 
Duty 
(2014) 
- Obligates public bodies to eliminate discrimination, promote equality, and protect human rights. 
- Monaghan County Council participated as a national pilot for this duty. 
24. Can the junction of L7870 and L4310 (Watters Crossroads, Annalitten) be assessed from a road safety 
perspective. Theses roads are quite narrow, and yield signs have been knocked consistently by lorries meaning 
it is not clear who must yield.  Can the junction be assessed and an appropriate means of displaying same 
implemented (e.g. new location for signs and/or yield signs painted on road etc). This road is a main diversion 
route when the N2 is closed for repair or an accident with huge amounts of traffic on this route at these 
times.Reply: The executive will assess the LP4310/LS7870/LS8310 junction (Watters Crossroads, 
Annalitten), with a view to optimising road signage and markings. 
Cllr N. Keelan asked: 
25. In relation to the disability act 2005 and local authority obligations to employ a minimum of 6% persons with 
a disability, is Monaghan County Council meeting our obligations in this regard?  
Reply: Yes (8.2% employed with a disability at 31/12/25) 
26. What is the up to-date position in relation to the proposed Inniskeen village and Community plan?  
Reply: Tenders for the preparation of the Inniskeen Community Vision and Spatial Land Use Plan have been 
received, and an assessment process will be completed shortly. It is anticipated that the successful 
consultant team will be appointed in April to commence the plan preparation.  
27. In relation to the huge increases in oil based products as a result of the conflict in the middle East, what, if 
any, is the impact on Monaghan County Council’s ability to deliver the agreed road reconstruction and 
resurfacing programme for this year 2026?  
Reply: Monaghan County Council have tendered these works for the completion of the 2026 roads program 
as agreed with the members. These works are tendered under the Public Works Contracts which contain a 
Price Variation Clause, i.e. the Contract Sum/Price may be adjusted for fluctuations in the price of materials 
and fuel. These tenders are due back in early April, and following the tender valuation process, Monaghan 
County Council will be in a better position to know the effect of the current market prices on the Road 
programme. 
28. What was the outcome of the Inniskeen Fane Bridge trial and Survey? And what efforts are been made by 
Monaghan County Council to progress this proposed pedestrian and cycle bridge project in the Village?  
Reply: Outcome of the Inniskeen Fane Bridge Trial and Survey: 
The temporary traffic trial and accompanying public survey at the Fane River Bridge were carried out to 
determine whether a signal-controlled shuttle system on the existing bridge could improve safety for people 
walking and cycling by reallocating road space. Monaghan County Council has reviewed the full technical 
report and all traffic survey data. 
The trial demonstrated that, while the shuttle system was operationally feasible from an engineering and 
traffic-flow perspective, it generated significant negative feedback from the local community. Due to the 
scale of public dissatisfaction, the trial had to be ended earlier than planned. The results indicate that any 
future planning application for a permanent shuttle system at this location would be likely to attract similar 
levels of objection. 
Efforts Being Made to Progress Pedestrian and Cycle Improvements in Inniskeen: 
Monaghan County Council remains committed to identifying a long-term solution that supports safe walking 
and cycling in Inniskeen. 
 
The following work is ongoing: 

 
Integration with the new Inniskeen Village Plan: 
The Planning Department is currently preparing a comprehensive Village Plan for Inniskeen, which will 
include objectives and policies to guide future transport and mobility improvements.  
Continued liaison with the NTA. The Active Travel team continues to engage with the NTA regarding 
future funding opportunities and to ensure that any proposals emerging from the Village Plan align with 
national guidance and investment priorities.Review of all feasible options. While the recent trial did not 
receive community support, MCC will continue to assess alternative design options for improving safety 
and connectivity for people walking and cycling, including the potential for a separate pedestrian and 
cycle bridge should it become viable and supported through the planning process. 
29. In relation to the local Lane Improvement Scheme (LIS):What is the up to-date position regarding eligible 
lanes, What funding is currently available, When is it hoped to commence resurfacing works, How many 
lanes do we hope to resurface this year 2026?  
Reply: There are 155 eligible lanes applications on the current list. There are other applications that 
further information was requested, and this information is still being received.  
Monaghan County Council has received an initial funding allocation of €385,880 for the Local 
Improvement Scheme in 2026. It is estimated that this allocation will complete 9 lanes, subject to tender 
rates. Tenders have been uploaded to SupplyGov with a closing date of the 13th of April.  
When the lane beneficiaries have their preparation works complete and their local contribution paid the 
Council can commence the works. The contractor will be available for resurfacing works from mid to late 
Q2, 2026. 
Cllr A. Campbell asked: 
30. What is the update on an Affordable Purchase Housing Scheme for Castleblayney? 
Reply: See reply to Q 22.  
31. When it is envisaged that the options strategy under the Masterplan of Muckno will be finalised and when 
will this go public consultation? 
Reply: The consultant team are progressing refinements to the ‘Emerging Options’ report following 
feedback from the Municipal District members. It is expected that the consultant team will revert to the 
Municipal District members in April, with public consultation to follow. 
32. What is the update on the Market House in Castleblayney? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council’s submission under Decision Gate 3 (DG3), Approval to Proceed, remains 
under consideration by the Department of Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht 
(DRCDG).  The Executive is continuing to engage with the Department on the matter, however the 
Department have not confirmed a timeline for a decision on the DG3 submission. The commencement of 
construction works is contingent on DRCDG approval to proceed to contract award.  
33. What is the latest update on the Data Cleansing for the Register of Electors? 
Reply: Following the June 2025 letter campaign to nearly 7,000 electors missing a date of birth or Eircode 
on the register, Monaghan County Council issued two more formal letters to these electors (in December 
2025 – 4100 letters and January – 3400 letters). 
Where electors have not engaged with us, despite receipt of three official letters, it is assumed that they no 
longer reside at the address in which they are registered and therefore no longer meet the eligibility criteria 
to remain on the Register. Consequently, Monaghan County Council, as the registration authority, in 
accordance with Part 3, Section 106 (10) of the Electoral Reform Act 2022, will remove these names from 
the Register of Electors. There are approximately 2,380 electors scheduled to be removed in accordance 
with the legislation. 
A list of electors scheduled for removal has been posted out to each Elected Member on 27th March 
2026.  Elected Members are encouraged to contact any eligible constituents whose names they recognise 
and assist them in completing a form or online application or advise these constituents to make contact 
with the Council as soon as possible to ensure their continued registration. 
Any elector who has not contacted us by 30 April 2026, or for whom we have not received at least an 
Eircode, will be removed from the Register and will no longer be able to vote. 
After this date, final correspondence will issue to all electors whose names are being removed.  
Our overall progress in improving data quality is demonstrated in the figures below: 
 
 
We now meet or exceed the national average on 3 out of 4 accuracy indicators used for evaluating the data 
quality on the register. 

 
22. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
- 
Michelle Mulligan, Staff Officer, Housing, on the death of her father, James (Jimmy) 
Cassidy, Drummons, Scotstown, Monaghan.  
- 
Padraic Cassidy, Driver, CMX-CBY MD, on the death of his father, Patrick Cassidy, Moys, 
Clontibret, Co. Monaghan.  
- 
Liam Bradley, Museum Curator, on the death of his aunt Breda O’Kane, Glenullin, Co. 
Derry.  
- 
Dette Hughes, Programme Manager, East Border Region, on the passing of her mother 
and Adrian Hughes, Senior Planner, on the passing of his mother-in-law, Maureen 
O’Toole, Ballymacnab, Co. Armagh.  
- 
The family of the later Eamon Prenter, Marley Grange, Dublin 
 
It was agreed that votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
- 
Shane Hand on winning the Irish Indoor Bowling Association All-Ireland Singles Title.  
 
23. Conferences 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed that the Council 
be represented at the following training events by the members listed below: 
 
Promoting Authority 
Subject/Theme 
Venue 
Dates 
Members Selected 
AILG 
Annual Training 
Conference 
2026 
Hotel Minella, Clonmel, 
Co. Tipperary 
22nd & 23rd March 
2026 
Cllr. P. Treanor 
Cllr. N. Keelan 
Urgent Business:  
1. Cllr B. McAree proposed, Cllr S. Flynn seconded, that this Council expresses serious concern at the 
approach taken by Government to the recent fuel protests, which arose from genuine and 
widespread concerns about the cost of living and the rising cost of doing business. 
 
This Council condemns the aggressive and inflammatory language used by members of Government, 
which served only to heighten tensions, and further condemns the failure and refusal of Government 
to engage in a constructive and meaningful manner with those involved. 
  
That this Council, in light of the above, has no confidence in the current Government’s willingness or 
ability to adequately support workers, families and businesses during the ongoing cost-of-living crisis. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, a recorded vote was taken which resulted as follows: 
For: Cllrs C. Carthy, S. Conlon, N. Keelan, P. Treanor, N. McCooey, S. Flynn, B. McAree and P. 
Gibbons  
Total: 8 
 
Against: Cllrs R. Aughey, A. Campbell, P. Clerkin, P. Conlon, S. Gilliland, A. Johnston, PJ 
O’Hanlon and R. Truell.  
Total: 8 
Abstention: Cllr S. Treanor  
 
As there was an equal division of votes, the Cathaoirleach stated that he was exercising his casting 
vote against the motion.  
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the motion defeated. 

 
 
2. Cllr S. Gilliland proposed, Cllr A. Campbell seconded that in light of the disruption to rate paying 
business in County Monaghan due to the recent road blockades which have had a severe and 
negative impact on local businesses in terms of deliveries, collections and employee disruption, this 
Council calls on the Government to introduce a Business Grant to the value of two weeks to 
compensate for the loss of business. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the members, and it 
was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
The meeting then concluded.  
 
 
 
 
Signed: ____________________ 
               Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________ 
Meetings 
Administrator 
 
Date: 
____________________ 
