 
Minutes of the Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, M-Tek 
Building, Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan, on Monday 02 March 2026 at 10.15 a.m.  
 
Chair: 
Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, Cathaoirleach  
 
Present: 
Cllrs Aughey, Carthy, Clerkin, P. Conlon, Flynn, Gibbons, Gilliland, Johnston, Keelan, 
McCooey, P. Treanor, S. Treanor and Truell. 
 
  
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. C O’Hare, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. O. 
McConnon, Directors of Services, Mr. N. O’Connor, A/Director of Services, Ms. M. 
McGarvey, Meetings Administrator, Ms. M. McMahon, Staff Officer. 
 
MS Teams:   Cllrs S. Conlon and McAree   
 
Apologies: Cllrs Campbell and Coyle  
 
2026 LAMA All-Ireland Community and Council Awards  
At the Outset, the Cathaoirleach, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, referred to the Local Authority Energy 
Decarbonisation Award that was won by Monaghan County Council at the 2026 LAMA All Ireland 
Community & Council Awards Ceremony which took place on 28 February 2026. He stated that the 
award recognises the Council’s Innovation in Road Maintenance and commended all of those 
involved in the Reclaimed Asphalt project, particularly, the Chief Executive, Directors of Service, Mr. 
K. West, Acting Senior Engineer, Roads and Mr. D. Toner, Acting Senior Executive Engineer, Roads. 
He concluded by conveying his gratitude to Cllr. S. Conlon, LAMA Representative, for the 
professional way in which he carried out his role as flag bearer representing Monaghan County 
Council during a flag parade which formed part of the 2026 LAMA Awards ceremony.  
 
Mr. N. O’Connor, A/Director of Services, congratulated all those involved in the project stating that it 
was a fantastic achievement. He commended the Roads Section for their innovativeness in bringing a 
new product to the market which can be used on roads, significantly reducing costs and carbon 
emissions.  
 
Mr. K. West, Acting Senior Engineer, Roads, thanked Mr. N. O’Connor. A/Director of Services, the 
Executive and the Elected Members’ for their support in bringing an idea to fruition and also for 
their support in the development of the Pilot Roads Maintenance Strategy 2025-2030. He paid 
tribute to his previous Directors of Service, Ms. P. Monahan and Mr. G. McMahon, for their support 
towards the project.  
 
The Chief Executive commended all involved in the project, particularly Mr. K. West who led the 
project with his team in Roads. He stated that it gives him a great source of comfort and satisfaction 
to know that staff are willing to explore the potential for new approaches that improve efficiencies 
and support Ireland’s National Climate Action Goals. He concluded by congratulating all of those 
involved in winning the Local Authority Energy Decarbonisation Award.  
 
Cllr. S. Conlon concurred with the comments made by members in respect of the achievement by 
the roads team in winning the Local Authority Energy Decarbonisation Award.  
 
A number of members joined in congratulating all involved in winning the 2026 LAMA Local 
Authority Energy Decarbonisation Award.  
 
 

 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 09 February 2026   
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr A. Johnston, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Council meeting held on the 09 February 2026 be confirmed. 
 
2. To  consider the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for the replacement of the 
Ballynacarry Bridge on N53 Concession Road, Ballynacarry, Co. Monaghan 
Mr. T. Gourley, Senior Executive Planner, referred to the Part VIII report which had been 
circulated in respect of the proposed replacement of the Ballynacarry Bridge on N53/A37, 
Concession Road, Ballynacarry, Co. Monaghan. The development comprises the 
replacement of the Ballynacarry Bridge which is on the N53 National Secondary route / 
A37 Main 'A' route (Concession Road) and the realignment of a 1.3km portion of the 
N53/A37 road which crosses the River Fane. The existing multi-arch bridge is to be 
retained in situ, and immediately adjoining road sections altered and repurposed. The 
scheme is to progress as a multi-authority project involving Transport Infrastructure 
Ireland (TII), Monaghan County Council (MCC) and the Department for Infrastructure 
(DFI), Northern Ireland. Mr. Gourley advised the members that no third-party 
submissions/observations were received during the public consultation period, and he 
recommended that members proceed with the proposal. 
 
On the proposal Cllr P. Gibbons, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, it was agreed to approve the 
replacement of the Ballynacarry Bridge on N53/A37, Concession Road, Ballynacarry, Co. 
Monaghan and realignment of the N53/A37 road which crosses the River Fane as detailed 
in the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
3. To consider the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for the pavement and 
embankment reconstruction and the diversion of existing water courses to 
accommodate pavement upgrades, through the means of the realignment of the stream 
north of the N54 at Altartate Glebe and Clonkeen (Cole), Co. Monaghan 
Mr. T. Gourley, Senior Executive Planner, referred to the Part VIII report which had been 
circulated in respect of pavement and embankment reconstruction and the diversion of 
existing water courses to accommodate pavement upgrades, through means of the 
realignment of the stream north of the N54 at Altartate Glebe and Clonkeen (Cole), Co. 
Monaghan.   Mr. Gourley advised that no third-party submissions/observations were 
received during the public consultation period, and he recommended that members 
proceed with the proposal. 
 
On the proposal Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, it was agreed to approve the  
pavement and embankment reconstruction and the diversion of existing water courses to 
accommodate pavement upgrades, through means of the realignment of the stream north 
of the N54 at Altartate Glebe and Clonkeen (Cole), Co. Monaghan, as detailed in the Chief 
Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
4. To consider the Chief Executive's recommendations on the NPF Implementation: 
Housing Growth Requirements 
Ms. M. McKearney, Senior Executive Planner, referred to the Chief Executive’s Report: 
National Planning Framework (NPF) Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements, 
which had been circulated. Ms. McKearney stated that Members would be familiar with 

 
the process relating to the document and the background work which had taken place to 
prepare it. The document relates to the zoning of additional lands for residential use and 
policy changes to align with revised Housing targets and the CE report commits to paper 
the intended approach of the Council. It is an additional step added to the normal 
variation process and includes providing a copy of this document to both the Minister 
for Housing and the OPR if agreed with Members. 
  
By way of providing a background, Ms. McKearney advised the members that the first 
revision of the NPF was approved in April 2025 and set high level policies for national, 
growth and development. It has updated population and housing targets across Ireland – 
critically seeking to plan for approximately 50,000 additional homes per annum to 
2040. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage wrote to all CE’s of LA in 
2025 seeking an urgent review of County development plans to reflect the revised 
Housing Growth Targets. 
  
In terms of zoning & policy this means:  
- 
 Additional land is required for Tier 1-3 settlements which is set out at Page 10, table 
6 of the Report.  
- 
The Inclusion of additional policy for Tier 4 villages pending the adoption of Tier 4 
village plans is required. 
  
Ms. McKearney highlighted the Chief Executive’s recommendations which are outlined 
on page 11 of the report. In terms of next steps, she stated that the planning authority 
were seeking members’ consent on the approach presented and the CE 
recommendations contained within it; to Issue the Chief Executive’s recommendations 
on the NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements to the Minister and OPR; 
and to undertake environmental assessments to the lands proposed to be zoning and 
any text or policy changes. 
 
Ms. McKearney concluded by stating that following the environmental assessments and 
environmental consultations the planning authority intends to seek members 
agreement to proceed to public consultation at the May County Council meeting. 
 
5. To consider Section 183 Rectification of Boundaries at No.37 Rockdaniel Road, 
Carrickmacross, Co. Monaghan 
Mr. C. Flynn, Director of Services, referred to the proposed disposal of lands at No. 37 
Rockdaniel Road Carrickmacross, Co. Monaghan– site area 0.0019 hectares. He advised 
the members that the disposal relates to rectification of boundaries to enable the sale of 
the property to proceed.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the disposal of lands at No. 37 Rockdaniel Road, Carrickmacross, Co. 
Monaghan, in accordance with the terms of the notice dated 16th December 2025 and 
attached site location map in accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
 
6. To approve 2026 Grant Funding Allocations 
Ms. O. McConnon, Director of Services, referred to the new policy in respect of Festivals 
and Events that was devised last year. She advised the members that one of the policy 
objectives is to ensure that as many community groups and individuals benefit from 
Monaghan County Council grants as possible. The grants amounts are set by the elected 

 
members as part of the annual budget adoption process. One purpose of the revised 
policy was to coordinate the application, evaluation, processing and approval of the 
following grants:  
 
- 
Tourism Fund  
- 
Community Development Fund 
- 
Environment and Biodiversity Fund 
- 
Seachtain na Gaeilge Fund  
- 
Arts Grants 
 
In accordance with the Ethics Framework, Cllr Johnston declared a possible conflict of 
interest in relation to this item and withdrew from the meeting room whilst the matter 
was being dealt with. 
 
Tourism Fund 
Members noted the Reports circulated which recommended the allocation of funding 
under the Tourism Focused Festival & Event Fund 2026 and the Failte Ireland Regional 
Festivals & Participative Events Funding Scheme 2026.  
 
Ms. D. Condra, Tourism and Marketing Executive, advised that the total budget to assist 
in the delivery of these projects is:  
 
Monaghan County Council Tourism Focused Festival & Event Fund 2026:  €15,000  
Failte Ireland Regional Festivals & Participative Events Funding Scheme 2026: €5,000 
 
16 applications were received under the Tourism Focused Festival & Event Fund 2026. 
Upon review of the applications, there was one duplicate submission, and 7 applications 
were deemed more suitable under the Community Development Fund. Similarly, 3 
applications received under the Community Development Fund were deemed more 
suitable for the Tourism Fund, therefore, a total of 11 applications were evaluated.  
 
 It is proposed to fund 9 applications to the value of €15,000, under the Monaghan County 
Council Tourism Focused Festival & Event Fund 2026.  
  
3 applications were received under the Failte Ireland Regional Festivals & Participative 
Events Funding Scheme 2026.  
 
It is proposed to fund 2 applications to the value of €5,000, under the Failte Ireland 
Regional Festivals & Participative Events Funding Scheme 2026.  
 
In accordance with the Ethics Framework, Cllr McCooey declared a possible conflict of 
interest in relation to this item and withdrew from the meeting room whilst the matter 
was being dealt with. 
 
Community Development Fund 
Members noted the Reports circulated which recommended the allocation of funding 
under the Community Development Fund 2026. 
 
Ms. N. Payne, Senior Executive Officer, Community, advised that the total budget to assist 
in the delivery of these projects is €100,000. 139 applications were received representing 
a 20% increase on 2025. 8 applications were transferred as they were deemed more 

 
suitable to alternative funding streams i.e. Tourism, Environment, Sports Capital Fund. 2 
applications were deemed ineligible as one was not a community group and the other was 
not an eligible project. 1 application was excluded as reporting requirements had not been 
fulfilled in 2025. 2 applications were duplications that had applied for funding under the 
Environment Fund. 
 
It is proposed to fund 126 applications to the value of €100,489 under the 2026 
Community Development Fund.   
 
Environment and Biodiversity Fund 
Members noted the Reports circulated which recommended the allocation of funding 
under the Environment and Biodiversity Fund 2026. 
 
Mr. N. Malone, Administrative Officer, Environment, advised that the total budget to 
assist in the delivery of these projects is €90,000. 89 applications were received.  
 
It is proposed to fund 89 applications to the value of €90,000 under the 2026 Environment 
and Biodiversity Fund.  
 
Seachtain na Gaeilge  
Members noted the Reports circulated which recommended the allocation of funding 
under the Seachtain na Gaeilge Fund.  
 
Mr. N. O’Connor, A/Director of Services, advised that with the approval of the Coiste 
Gaeilge Committee, as the Seachtain na Gaeilge runs from 1-17 March, 29 applications 
were funded to the value of €4,070 under the Seachtain na Gaeilge Fund.  
 
Arts Fund  
The members considered the report from the Arts Officer recommending the allocation 
of grants under the Arts Partnership Funding Scheme 2026 and Artist Support Scheme 
2026. 
 
Mr. Mac Conghail stated that it is proposed to fund, 6 applications under the Arts 
Partnership Funding Scheme 2026 to the value of €78,000 and 22 applications under the 
Artist Support Scheme 2026 to the value of €21,000.   
 
On the proposal Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the allocation of the 2026 grants under the Tourism Fund, Community and 
Development Fund, Environment and Biodiversity Fund, Seachtain na Gaeilge Grants, Arts 
Partnership Funding Scheme and Artist Support Scheme, as per the Reports circulated with 
the agenda.  
 
7. To approve Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 
Ms M. McGarvey, A/Senior Executive Officer, stated that, under Section 50 of the Local 
Government Reform Act 2014, Local Authorities are required to prepare an Annual 
Service Delivery Plan for each financial year. The Draft ASDP 2026, translates long-term 
strategic objectives of the Corporate Plan 2024-2029 into actionable, monitored, and 
evaluated tasks across all service departments including internal support services like 
Human Resources, Finance, Corporate and Information Systems. Ms. McGarvey 
highlighted that Pages 7 to 51 of the report circulated outlines the key targets for 2026 
across all departments.  

 
 
Ms. McGarvey concluded by conveying her thanks to the staff and Directors for their co-
operation in preparing this plan and Ms. Michelle McBride for all her work in producing 
the final draft.  
 
In response to Cllr P. Treanor’s query, it was agreed that further opportunities to use the 
Irish Language would be explored.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, it was agreed that the 
Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan for 2026 as circulated, be approved.  
 
8. To consider Audit Committee Reports  
The Members noted the following Audit Committee Reports, all of which had been 
circulated to the Members: 
 
- 
The Annual Financial Statement 2024 and The Local Government Auditors Report on 
the Accounts of Monaghan County Council for year ended 31 December 2024.  
- 
The Audit Committee Annual Report on Performance and Effectiveness 2025.  
- 
The Audit Committee Charter 2026.  
- 
The Audit Committee Work Programme 2026 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr P. Gibbons it was agreed that the Audit 
Committee Annual Report on Performance and Effectiveness 2025, Audit Committee 
Charter 2026 and the Audit Committee Work Programme 2026, as presented, be approved. 
 
9. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group – 18 February 
2026.  
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 18 
February 2026, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 18 February 2026 and the 
recommendations contained therein be approved.  
 
10. To receive Management Report – February 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for February 2026 which had 
been circulated with the agenda. He provided members with an update in relation to the 
recent funding allocations for roads from the Department of Transport and Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland (TII). Key points to note were:  
 
- 
The total amount of funding between the Department of Transport regional and local 
roads allocations and TII’s national roads allocations is €27,373,413. 
- 
In terms of the regional and local roads, €17,231,600 was allocated. At a high level, a 
4.5% decrease on last year.  
- 
There was a 5% increase in respect of the 4 key areas; Restoration Maintenance; 
Restoration Improvement; the Supplementary Element; and the Discretionary 
Element.  
- 
Funding under the Specific Improvement grant has decreased by €455,000.  
 

 
The Chief Executive stated that discussions were ongoing with officials/technical advisers 
in the Department of Transport and indications have been made that a number of 
additional pilot roads projects/initiatives will be funded.   
 
The members noted the Management Report for February which had been circulated with 
the agenda.  
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members. 
 
In response to Cllr Treanor’s query, regarding recent figures which demonstrate an 
increase in the no. of planning permissions having been granted for houses and how 
these were progressing, Mr. C. Flynn, Director of Services advised that he would look into 
the possibility of providing figures from the Building Control section in relation to 
commencement notices in future Management Reports.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, it was agreed that this Council, 
seeks a meeting with Mr. Darragh O’Brien, T.D., at the earliest opportunity in order to 
discuss the short, medium and long-term funding needs for the maintenance and upgrading 
of our local and regional road network. In anticipation of the meeting request being 
accepted, it is proposed that an all-party delegation including the Director of Service and 
Senior Roads Engineers led by the Cathaoirleach, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon attend the Minister’s 
office or agree a place and time convenient to all.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland, it was agreed that this Council, 
requests that the roads department, as part of the 2026 Road Works Programme, 
undertakes a review of current pothole repair practices and implement a more effective and 
durable long-term repair strategy for roads throughout the county. In light of recent 
abnormal weather conditions, road surfaces, particularly local roads, have deteriorated to 
a very poor state. The existing repair methods have not proven sufficiently resilient to 
adverse weather and a more robust approach is required. This should include the proper 
removal of loose material, infilling with suitable dense bitumen macadam and the effective 
sealing of pothole repairs.  
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr PJ O'Hanlon it was agreed that this 
Council, given that County Monaghan is the biggest producer of poultry in Ireland with the 
smallest farm size, calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Mr. Martin 
Heydon, T.D., to roll-out an Economic Compensation Scheme in Ireland, similar to the 
Scheme provided by the French Government, to protect poultry farmers income when they 
are impacted by Avian Influenza outbreaks.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O'Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, it was agreed that this 
Council call on the Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and Employment, Mr. Peter Burke, 
T.D., to re-introduce the Increased Cost of Business (ICOB) Grant for all SMEs for the 
calendar year 2026 and beyond. This grant is urgently needed as a contribution toward 
rising costs faced by businesses. 
 
11. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events  

 
The members noted the reports from Cllrs Coyle, Flynn, Keelan, McAree and McCooey in 
relation to their attendance at the following conference/training events:  
 
- 
LAMA Spring Seminar - The Connacht Hotel, Galway – 28 & 29 January 2026 
- 
Celtic Conferences – Misinformation, Disinformation and Fake News – O’Donovan’s 
Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork – 06 - 08 February 2026.   
 
12. Business Submitted by the Chief Executive   
There were no matters for consideration under this item.  
 
13. Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 9th February 2026  
There were no matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 9th 
February 2026.   
 
14. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
No further update on the N2 National Primary Road.  
 
15. To receive update on North South Interconnector project 
In response to Cllr Keelan’s query, the Chief Executive advised that an update following 
his recent meeting with representatives from Eirgrid would be provided to members at 
the next Council meeting.  
 
Correspondence  
The following correspondence relating to the North South Interconnector project was 
received: 
- 
Acknowledgement email from the Office of the Taoiseach regarding 
correspondence relating to Eirgrid.  
- 
Response from Senator Robbie Gallagher regarding correspondence relating to 
Eirgrid.  
 
16. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update on the Ulster Canal project.  
 
 
 
 
 
17. Correspondence 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting: 
 
- 
Response from Uisce Éireann, regarding connection and supply issues on the Lough Egish 
Regional Water Supply Scheme.  
- 
Response from IHA Manager - Cavan Monaghan, HSE, regarding funding for the Errigal 
Truagh Special Needs Extension. 
- 
Response from Consumer Services Officer, HSE, regarding the new children’s respite unit.  
- 
Response from the Road Safety Authority regarding legislation for e-bikes and e-scooters.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Rural and Community 
Development and the Gaeltacht, Mr. Dara Calleary, T.D., regarding a review of the funding 
model for Irish Language organisations.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Transport, Mr. Darragh 
O’Brien, T.D., regarding Bord Bia.  

 
- 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Transport, Mr. Darragh 
O’Brien, T.D., regarding the request for additional and exceptional roads funding support 
for urgent repair and remedial works as a result of Storm Chandra.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., regarding the request for additional and targeted 
funding for flood relief and flood prevention works.  
- 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister of State, Mr. Kevin Boxer Moran, 
T.D. regarding additional funding for flood relief and flood prevention works. 
- 
Resolution from Clare County Council regarding a recent appeal from the Irish 
Beekeepers’ Association. 
- 
Resolution from Wexford County Council regarding legislation outlawing the use of 
anonymous social media accounts.  
- 
Resolution from Wexford County Council regarding insurance for properties located in 
designated flood risk zones.  
- 
Resolution from Wicklow County Council regarding the Government’s decision to ratify 
CETA and in particular the Investor Court System (ICS).  
 
Additional Correspondence:  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda had 
issued was also circulated: 
 
• 
Resolution from Westmeath Council regarding income thresholds for social housing 
and HAP.  
  
Proposals arising out of correspondence:   
On the proposal of Cllr S. Flynn, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy it was agreed that this council, in 
support of the Westmeath County Council resolution, writes to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., calling on the Minister  to increase 
the income thresholds for social housing provision and Housing Assistance Payment (HAP).  
 
18. Notices of Motion  
1. Cllr S. Flynn proposed, Cllr S. Conlon seconded: 
 ‘That this Council, writes to the Department of the Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the 
Minister for Defence, to express its opposition to the Government’s proposal to abolish or 
amend the Triple Lock governing the overseas deployment of Irish Defence Forces 
personnel. The Triple Lock requires that overseas missions involving more than twelve 
Defence Forces personnel receive the approval of the Government, Dáil Éireann, and a 
United Nations mandate from either the UN Security Council or the UN General 
Assembly. This mechanism was introduced following the rejection of the Nice Treaty in 
2001 and reaffirmed after the initial rejection of the Lisbon Treaty, as part of solemn 
commitments given to the Irish people to protect Ireland’s policy of military neutrality.  
Furthermore, this Council rejects any attempt to dismantle the Triple Lock, viewing such 
proposals as a breach of trust with the Irish people and a serious undermining of Ireland’s 
neutrality’. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, a vote by show of hands resulted in 
 
For: 8 
Against: 8  
 
As there was an equal division of votes, the Cathaoirleach stated that he was exercising 

 
his casting vote against the motion.  
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the motion defeated. 
 
2. Cllr N. McCooey proposed, Cllr P. Treanor seconded: 
‘That this council calls upon Government to enact legislation to systematically, sustainably 
and steadily increase the provision of Irish-medium education so that future generations 
of Irish children will have the opportunity to be educated through their national language, 
if they so desire’. 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
3.    Cllr S. Conlon proposed, Cllr S. Gilliland seconded:  
‘For the purpose of expediting the Taken-in Charge process where applications have 
previously been submitted by residents or developers, I ask that this Council write to 
Uisce Eireann seeking to determine what are the causes of delay at the following 
locations, and has this Council a role in completing the process at, Mullach Glas, 
Monaghan (applied in 2020), The Meadows, Emyvale (applied in 2023) and Cluain Ard, 
Monaghan (applied in 2024).’ 
 
Following a short debate on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put the motion to the 
members, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
19. Questions and Replies 
Cllr. A. Campbell asked:  
1. 
What is the update on the progress of the Ballynacarry Bridge? 
Reply:Planning applications have been lodged in both NI and ROI (Part 8). In relation to the Part 8, 
Plans and Particulars were on display until the 10th of January 2026.  A presentation to facilitate 
securing Part 8 planning consent will be made at next Monday, 2nd March full council meeting. 
2. 
Regarding the N2 upgrade from Ardee to Castleblayney. What is the latest progress on these 
works? Reply: The N2 Ardee to Castleblayney Road Scheme received no funding in 2023/2024/2025, 
and the project has been suspended for 3 years. An allocation of €500,000 for 2026 was announced 
on the 17th February 2026. Although, we were well progressed through the Phase 3 Design & 
Environmental Evaluation process at the time of suspension in 2023, it is likely that changes to 
design standards, policies, and the passing of time, will require elements of the design to be 
reviewed and reworked, and additional surveys and studies will be required. Jacobs Engineering 
Ireland (Jacobs) are the consulting engineers designing this project. With funding available for 2026, 
Monaghan County Council can now re-engage with Jacobs and TII to develop and agree an updated 
project delivery plan, programme and costs. This process is likely to take a number of months.  
3. 
Regarding water quality in “Lough Muckno” and with all the work under “Muckno Road to 
Recovery Plan” what is the latest update on these works? 
Reply:  
• 
Monaghan County Council are an associate partner on the PEACE 5.3 plus “Protecting our Shared 
Waters”. The role of Monaghan County Council as Associate Partner will be to provide local 
expertise on the Fane catchment and to support the selection of a demonstration farm which 
can be used for knowledge exchange purposes. Staff from MCC attended an initial meeting with 
the project partners in February 2026 and will continue to provide local expertise and support 
to the project. 
• 
Environment staff are currently exploring funding opportunities to develop a cross-border 
collaborative work plan for the inputting river catchments which are contributing the most 
significant loads of P to Lough Muckno. Further meetings are proposed with the aim of 
potentially submitting a funding application if an appropriate funding avenue is available.  

 
• 
Lough Muckno has been included as a Priority Area for Action in Irelands Water Action Plan 
(2022-2027). Work is underway at a national and regional level to develop water action plans 
for all sectors and agencies involved in water framework directive implementation.   
• 
Catchment characterisation and inspections are ongoing in the County Water and the Gentle 
Owens River Catchment areas. The project has highlighted these areas as the catchment areas 
contributing the most significant loads to Lough Muckno. Farm inspections are due to 
commence in the Fane 10 catchment upstream of Lough Muckno in the coming weeks.  
• 
Due to the cross-border nature of the contributing tributaries to Lough Muckno, staff from water 
team met with the Northern Ireland Environment Agency twice in 2025 and further 
collaboration is planned for 2026. 
4. 
With Monaghan LEO and Teagasc coming together to run a programme for farm family members 
to help them diversify to new business opportunities. What is the details of these events? 
Reply: In 2025, the Local Enterprise Office (LEO) Monaghan partnered with Teagasc and other 
stakeholder agencies to deliver the Farm Business Options Training Programme.  This initiative 
supports farmers seeking to improve on-farm income or diversify into areas such as renewable 
energy, artisan food production, organics, and rural tourism. The multi-week programme provides 
participants with practical guidance in business planning, one-to-one mentoring, and direct links to 
the relevant support agencies.  It is delivered with contributions from LEO Monaghan, Monaghan 
Integrated Development, Teagasc, and  entrepreneurs who have successfully diversified their own 
farm enterprises. The 2026 programme is currently under review.  Full details, including programme 
content, start date, and venues will be published once finalised.  It is expected that information will 
be issued in advance of the programme’s commencement in Autumn 2026. In addition, LEO 
Monaghan continues to provide a range of training and mentoring supports for individuals wishing 
to establish a new enterprise, including the Start Your Own Business programme. 
5. 
With regard to the Market House in Castleblayney.  What is the latest update on from the 
Department on this project? 
Reply:  Monaghan County Council’s submission under Decision Gate 3 (DG3) - Approval to Proceed, 
remains under consideration by the Department of Rural and Community Development and the 
Gaeltacht (DRCDG).  The Executive is continuing to engage with the Department on the matter, 
however the Department have not confirmed a timeline for a decision on the DG3 submission. The 
commencement of construction works is contingent on DRCDG approval to proceed to contract 
award.  
Cllr. C. Carthy asked: 
6. 
When is it expected the Taking in Charge process for Alderwood, Carrickmacross, will be presented 
to members for ratification?  
Reply: The intention of the Local Authority to take this development in charge was advertised, with 
the public consultation period expiring on 23 Jan 2026. While a matter for attention relating to storm 
drainage has been identified, it is hoped that this can be resolved and that a recommendation to 
take in charge Alderwood can be presented to the April Council meeting. 
7. 
Are any plans in place to deliver serviced sites in Carrickmacross for housing?  
Reply: There are no immediate plans to provide serviced sites in Carrickmacross for housing. It 
appears that the provision of Affordable Purchase Housing and modestly-sized and reasonably-
priced private houses in housing developments and the grants for Vacant Homes are more popular 
options than provision of serviced sites at present. However, the possibility of providing serviced 
sites in Carrickmacross may be considered further following a review in Quarter 2 of 2026.  
8. 
Are plans being put in place to carry out significant road repairs this year following damage caused 
by recent flooding?  
Reply: Each Municipal District has prepared estimated costs for the necessary repair works, and 
these have been submitted to the Department of Transport (DOT) with a request for additional 
financial support. Whilst awaiting a response from the Department, the Council is committing 
€100,000 per MD to undertake works deemed most urgent, commencing immediately, as well as 
accelerating Annual Roads Programme. 
9. 
Has the LEO an update on the rollout of the new version of their online trading voucher scheme 
and will they outline how it is being used by businesses throughout the county?  
Reply:  In 2024, the Trading Online Voucher Scheme closed to new entrants and was replaced by 
the Grow Digital Voucher.  This scheme supports businesses with less than 50 employees to adopt 
digital tools that improve efficiency, expand customer reach, and strengthen competitiveness.  
It provides 50% funding for eligible software costs, from €500 to €5,000, including e-commerce 
platforms, CRM systems, accounting tools, booking and payment systems, and software 
configuration and training. 
The scheme operates through a two-stage process - completion of a Digital for Business assessment, 

 
followed by a Grow Digital Voucher application based on the consultant’s recommendations. 
Businesses throughout County Monaghan are using the scheme to upgrade online sales systems, 
introduce digital booking and payment tools, improve customer management, and streamline 
internal workflows.  Applicants come from a wide range of sectors, including accountancy, 
consultancy, retail, hospitality, and engineering/joinery. 
In 2025, 12 businesses in the county were approved for Digital for Business support, with 3 
progressing to a Grow Digital application.  In 2026, 8 businesses have been approved to date, with 
one applying for Grow Digital. 
10. 
Can the executive outline projects in 2025 (and expected projects for 2026) that will benefit from 
development contributions made at planning stage? Reply: Below is list of projects proposed to be 
partially funded in 2025 and 2026 subject to available funds: 
• 
Peace Campus, Monaghan  
• 
My Open Library Monaghan, Castleblayney & Clones 
• 
Ballybay Market House, Ballybay 
• 
Scotstown Car Park, Scotstown 
• 
Lough Muckno Gate Lodge 2 - final payment 
Cllr. N. McCooey asked:  
11. 
Can Monaghan County Council provide an update on the application for the installation of a VRS 
on the N12 at Skinnagin Bridge, Tyholland, and confirm whether we have received any 
correspondence? 
Reply: The Feasibility & Options Report is with Road Safety Section of TII for review and approval, 
once approval has been given and funding has been allocated, then the installation of the barrier 
can be undertaken at Skinnagin. 
12. 
Can Monaghan County Council confirm how many road defects were reported in January and 
February 2026, in comparison to the same months in 2025, both countywide and per Municipal 
District (MD)? 
Reply: The number of defects reported in Jan-Feb 25 were 203, BCMD 82, CCMD 70, MMD 51 
In the same period in 2026 there were 414, BCMD 227, CCMD 107, MMD 80. 
13. 
Can Monaghan County Council confirm the total number of road defects reported in 2025, both 
for the county overall and per MD? 
Reply: Overall, there were 902 defects reported. BCMD 430, CCMD 302 and MMD 170. 
14. 
Can Monaghan County Council confirm the number of applicants on the housing list who have 
selected Clontibret or Knockatallon as their first-choice location? 
Reply: Applicants may choose a maximum of 3 areas of choice, the listing of areas of choice is not a 
priority listing i.e. all areas of choice specified on the application form are deemed to be of equal 
priority. 
Total applicants seeking rehousing in Clontibret 21 
Total applicants seeking rehousing in Knockatallon 3 
Cllr. P. Gibbons asked:  
15. 
Can details of all supports provided by Monaghan County Council for retail businesses be 
provided? 
Reply: LEO Monaghan provides a range of supports for retail businesses in the county. These 
include: 
• 
Energy Efficiency Grant - Assists businesses in introducing sustainable and energy efficient 
measures. Funding of up to €10,000 or 75% of eligible expenditure (whichever is lower) is 
available to companies that have completed the Green for Business Programme.  Eligible 
expenditures include LED lighting, smart energy controls, energy-efficient refrigeration, heat 
pumps, motors, and meter monitoring efficient measures. Funding of up to €10,000 or 75% of 
eligible expenditure (whichever is lower) is available to companies that have completed the 
Green for Business Programme. 
• 
Grow Digital Voucher - Provides 50% funding, from €500 to €5,000, for new software, digital 
tools, and related training.  The voucher helps businesses improve efficiency, reach new 
customers, and enhance digital competitiveness. Companies may receive up to two vouchers 
to a combined maximum of €5,000. 

 
• 
Lean for Business - Supports businesses in adopting Lean principles to improve performance 
and competitiveness. Participants work with a consultant to identify inefficiencies and new 
ways of working. This support is valued at up to €5,000 per participant. 
• 
Training and Mentoring - LEO Monaghan also offers ongoing sector wide supports. See link to 
review and book  extensive training programmes and one to one mentoring support    which 
are all available to retail enterprises.-wide training programmes and one-to-one mentoring to 
support retail enterprises. In addition to above micro finance Ireland loans can be applied for 
the LEO Monaghan office. 
16. 
Does Monaghan County Council have a role in the provision of electric vehicle charging points? If 
so, can this role be clarified? Can details of electric vehicle charging points in Castleblayney be 
provided including location and age of charging unit, along with plans for additional new units and 
upgrades of existing unit? 
Reply: Yes, Monaghan County Council have a role in the provision of electric vehicle charging points. 
Monaghan County Council are responsible for delivering on the objectives of the Regional and Local 
Charging Network Plan 2025-2030. The Regional and Local Charging Network Plan 2025-2030 
outlines a pathway to delivering charging infrastructure where it is needed most – at 
neighbourhoods, destinations and key transport routes. Monaghan County Council are currently 
preparing a Strategy and Implementation Plan for the rollout of electric vehicle charging 
infrastructure. ZEVI (Zero Emission Vehicles Ireland) have compiled information on existing charging 
infrastructure in the county which will be shared with Monaghan County Council in the coming 
weeks via ZEVI’s online Network Planning Map. 
17. 
Recent changes to rent pressure zones have been announced. This may have an impact on the 
planning status of houses available for short term lets. What is the latest on this issue? Has 
Monaghan County Council considered the local implications of this situation and if so, can the 
result of these considerations be provided? 
Reply: From the 1 March 2026, Rent Pressure Zones are replaced by a national system of rent 
control. This system covers all private and student specific accommodation tenancies across Ireland. 
In relation to Short term letting, the Council received a circular in January 2026 which sets out that, 
The Department of Enterprise, Tourism and Employment (DETE) are drafting Short-Term Letting and 
Tourism (STLT) legislation to align with EU Short Term Rental Regulation, and it is expected that the 
provisions will be in place by 20 May 2026.  The introduction of the STLT legislation will provide a 
legal and administrative framework to regulate short-term lettings, by providing the statutory basis 
for the establishment of a register for short-term lets. The Council has not yet assessed the local 
implications of the forthcoming legislation, as it will not take effect until May 2026. Internal 
discussions will be undertaken in advance of its introduction to prepare for implementation. 
18. 
In relation to housing loans can the actual interest rates being paid by customers be provided. Can 
an overview be given on how these rates are determined and how different clients have different 
interest rates on their home loan? 
Reply: 
Table 1: Fixed Interest rates and number of customers at each rate 
Table 2: Variable rates since 2009 
 
 
Table 1 

 
 
Table 2 
 
If a loan customer originally paid a fixed interest rate for a period shorter than the duration of the 
loan and was offered a further fixed rate and didn’t accept, they were automatically transferred to 
a variable rate. It is not possible to avail of a fixed rate again. This is made clear to all customers. 
Variable interest rates were quite low from a period of 2009 to 2023. In recent years the interest 
rates have increased. The interest rate is relevant to the point in time that the customer draws down 
their loan or subsequently fixes the rate. The customer has signed a loan agreement with general 
terms and conditions and the contract states all the conditions in relation to loan an interest rate.  
As future rates are unpredictable, customers make an informed choice at a point in time. The local 
authority sector provides finance to help customers purchase their own homes when they cannot 
avail of finance from other lending institutions. MCC hedge each loan with the Housing Finance 
Agency and they determine the interest rates for our customers.  
 
19. 
Can details of the actuarial review of Monaghan County Councils pension liabilities be provided? 
Reply: An actuarial review of the liability in respect of the LGSS carried out as at 1 January 2024 by 
PWC indicate that cashflows payable by LA are expected to increase beyond 2025 until they peak in 
2048 before beginning to reduce. Cashflow analysis predicts an increase for Monaghan of circa €7m 
between 2024 and 2048. This represents a 150% growth in cashflow requirements for this cost alone 
for Monaghan County Council over a 23 year period before any other cost movements are even 
considered. 
 
Cllr. S. Conlon asked:  
 
20. 
Following the September 2024 Housing Section presentation to Council that provided details of 
the Monaghan Area Based Retrofit Initiative, 
a. 
what progress has occurred in retrofitting the proposed 53 Council dwellings and the 50 privately 
owned houses that were to be targeted? Reply: Please see the table below showing a breakdown 
of progress at both the privately owned homes and the Council owned properties.  
 
totals 

 
Privately owned Homes 
Private home total leads (genuine 
enquiries)  
78 
Visits completed to private homes 
by SSE rep.  
37 
Homes indicating interest in Home 
Energy Assessments  
14 
Home 
Energy 
Assessments 
completed  
14 
Quotes issued for upgrade works  
13 
Private home quotes accepted 
2 
Upgrades completed to LA owned 
Homes  
49 
 
In 2026 SEAI launched increased grant supports for private homeowners. These increased grant 
supports have the potential to incentivise uptake of energy efficiency improvements. SSE Airtricity 
will now re-engage with private homeowners to create awareness of the increased grant supports 
and will offer private homeowners the opportunity to consider the upgrades through MABRI.  
As part of the ongoing monitoring of the MABRI Pilot Project, SSE Airtricity has been tracking direct 
engagement with their partner Activ8. It has been found that there has been increased activity 
around the area of Solar PV in Monaghan since June 2025. Much of this increased activity has been 
on the back of referrals through MABRI with 155 b 
The works completed to the Council owned housing stock has seen energy savings in the region of 
69% and Carbon reductions of 77% per property. The average starting Building Energy rating was 
D1/C3 and an average size of 83 square metres. The final Building Energy Rating of the Council 
owned housing stock is B1.  
b. 
with the completion of this phase of works, are there additional houses to be considered for 
extensive retrofitting? Reply: Monaghan County Council continues to complete upgrade works to 
its own housing stock under the Energy Efficiency Retrofit programme (EERP) launched in 2021. The 
roll out of the EERP has been delivered under the MABRI pilot project while also being delivered 
using other contractors appointed through the Dynamic Purchasing System. The roll out of upgrade 
works will continue using contractors from the Dynamic Purchasing System while Monaghan County 
Council explores other mechanisms for delivering additional works in the future. An ambitious 
programme of works is being developed for 2026 and the years beyond this. Monaghan County 
Council continues to surpass its allocation for each year of the programme from the Department of 
Housing Local Government and Heritage, the ambitious programme being considered is subject to 
an increased allocation and funding.   
c. 
what number of Council tenants offered these energy efficiency measures declined to have 
their home included in this scheme? 
Reply: The MABRI pilot project set out a target to upgrade 53 Local Authority owned homes within 
the Killygoan area of Monaghan Town. To date 49 of the 53 Local Authority owned homes have been 
upgraded. Monaghan County Council will engage with the remaining properties and aims to have all 
53 properties completed as part of the MABRI project. The upgrade works on offer have significant 
benefits for tenants including lower energy usage, reduced carbon output, reduced exposure to 
pollutants, reduced risk of Carbon Monoxide poisoning, reduced risk of house / chimney fires and a 
warmer, more efficient home. Monaghan County Council and SSE Airtricity will engage with the 
remaining properties and address specific barriers to the upgrade works.  Monaghan County Council 
continually receives requests from homes wanting to be included in the Energy Efficiency Retrofit 
Programme and is currently reviewing options to add additional properties to this project. Any 
additional properties will be subject to agreed costs with the MABRI contractor and subject to 
increased allocation and funding from the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage.    
 
21. 
Following the allocation of €13,113,557 in March 2021 through the Urban Regeneration 
Development Fund for the Dublin Street Regeneration Project aimed at transforming the 
backlands of both north and south Dublin Street, 
a. 
what plans are advancing for the road network that will provide access through the 
approximate 10 acres of lands previously owned by the HSE at Rooskey? 

 
Reply: The road currently under construction at Rooskey Lands, providing access to the 10 acres 
of land formerly owned by the HSE, is a separate project and does not form part of the URDF 
Dublin Street Regeneration scheme. 
b. 
following An Coimisiún Pleanála’s decision last October to grant planning approval for the 
Dublin Street Regeneration North project, and Council's submission to the Department of 
Local Government seeking to move to the next stage of implementation, what are the next 
steps in moving this plan forward? 
Reply: The project Design Team are currently finalising the submission to the Department of 
Local Government to seek approval to move into the next stage Detailed Design for Dublin 
Street North Regeneration project.  
c. 
following extensive negotiations with landowners during several rounds of consultation over 
the past 5 years, involving properties required to fulfil the objectives of this plan, what is the 
status relating to consent to proceed, land acquisition and Compulsory Purchase Orders? 
Reply: In reference to the South Dublin Street Regeneration scheme, to date a total of 7 
properties has been acquired through negotiation with relevant property owners. Negotiations 
with the remaining property owners are still ongoing, any properties not acquired by 
agreement will be subject to a CPO process. Regarding the Dublin Street North Regeneration 
Project, the Design Team are also finalising the submission to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage seeking consent to advance land acquisition in parallel with the 
Detailed Design phase. 
d. 
aligned to the initial URDF grant from 2021, what is the financial status of the €13,113,557 
allocated, and has additional funding been secured since that period to advance the overall 
scheme? Reply: Having regard to the €13.1m URDF allocation, a total of €1,074,000 (Dublin St 
South: €493k & Dublin St North €581k) has been drawdown to date. The Executive is continuing 
to engage with the URDF funding department in relation to the progression of both phases of 
the overall regeneration scheme and associated funding requirements, no additional funding 
has been secured since the initial grant allocation. 
 Cllr. S. Flynn asked:  
22. 
Can an update be provided on the development of new playgrounds and the refurbishment of 
existing playgrounds across County Monaghan, with a breakdown by each Municipal District, 
including timelines for delivery and details of any funding applications submitted or approved 
under current schemes? In particular, can the Executive outline the current status and future plans 
for playground provision and improvement in Clones, Smithboro, Threemilehouse, and 
Rockcorry? 
Reply: There are currently no funding streams available for the development or refurbishment of 
playgrounds. The Municipal Districts have limited budgets to carry out Playground Maintenance and 
would not be sufficient for refurbishment projects of existing playgrounds. If funding streams 
become available, all playgrounds will be assessed and considered at application stage. 
23. 
Concerns regarding inadequate public lighting have been identified through the Women’s Safety 
Audit, the Local Community Safety Partnership survey, and representations from various 
community groups, particularly in relation to Fermanagh Street in Clones and the route from 
Smithboro to Magherarney, County Monaghan. 
In light of these concerns, can the Executive carry out a public lighting survey on the route from 
Smithboro to Magherarney and on Fermanagh Street in Clones? Furthermore, will the Executive 
undertake a full assessment of these locations and replace or upgrade any lighting found to be 
insufficient, including the installation of additional lighting columns where necessary? 
Reply: The Executive will arrange for the examination of both locations to ascertain if there are any 
lighting faults or vegetation issues obstructing illumination. Should there be no issues and Lighting 
Engineers confirm that lighting illumination in both locations are insufficient a full assessment will 
be carried out. 
24. 
Can the Executive please confirm whether Monaghan County Council has been contacted by the 
Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth, or any relevant State agency, 
in relation to the Government’s proposed plan to purchase buildings for use as childcare facilities 
to address childcare shortages, and to further confirm whether any properties in County 
Monaghan are currently being identified, assessed or considered for acquisition under this 
initiative. 
Reply: Monaghan County Council have not been directly contacted by the Department, nor by any 
other relevant state agency in relation to the Governments’ proposed initiative to purchase 
buildings for use as childcare facilities. However, Monaghan County Childcare Committee have 

 
received correspondence in this regard.  
  
25. 
In relation to the Age Friendly Homes Programme, what is the current waiting time from the 
submission of an application to the assessment of the applicant and the provision of a bespoke 
support package tailored to the specific needs of the older person? 
Reply: The Healthy Age Friendly Homes Programme aims to support older people (aged 65 and over) 
to live in their own home with dignity and independence, for as long as possible. The programme’s 
ambition is to enable everyone to live longer healthier lives by keeping care close to home and 
expanding the range of health and social care services in the community.  It is about providing a 
range of alternatives for older people who may otherwise transition into long term residential care 
prematurely. To do this, we have appointed a Local Healthy Age Friendly Homes Coordinator in 
Monaghan, Elizabeth (Liz) Doherty Mooney. Liz case manages a range of supports for each person 
referred, linking them with supports from the variety of public, voluntary, private and community 
agencies in the area. As a Local Coordinator, Liz will carry out a home-based assessment. During this 
assessment and in partnership with the older person, Liz will identify a range of supports to enable 
the older person to continue living independently.  Once the supports have been identified Liz will 
continue to work with the older supports to ensure they are delivered.  
This is a free service and will not affect any current home help, medical card, pension, or other 
services being received. 
Current wait times in Monaghan are presently estimated at four to six weeks.  
To send a referral please see contacts below: 
Email Referrals: referralshafh@meathcoco.ie 
Email Admin: healthyagefriendlyhomes@meathcoco.ie 
Address:  
Meath County Council 
Kells Civic Office 
Headfort Place 
Kells, Co. Meath          
A82 W2R3 
Phone: 046 9248899 
Cllr. N. Keelan asked:  
26. 
What plans have the council in the time ahead working with An Garda Siochana and other 
agencies to enhance road safety measures across the county in particular, along the N2 given the 
significant increase in road deaths and injuries as a result of road traffic accidents?  
Reply: The County Monaghan Road Safety Working Together Group, consisting of members of AGS, 
Monaghan Fire & Civil protection, National Ambulance Service, RSA and Monaghan County Council 
met recently to discuss Phase 2 of the local Road Safety Action Plan 2026-2027, will be brought 
before the Council for noting, once complete.  A series of road safety initiatives for 2026 has been 
drawn up to target the various causes of road collisions in the county. A meeting is due to be 
scheduled between the Chief Executive, Senior Gardaí, Chief Fire Officer and Road Safety Officer to 
discuss road safety issues in Co Monaghan including safety on the N2 and what collaborative 
approach can be taken to help reduce the number of serious injuries and fatalities. 
27. 
What is the up to-date position in relation to the preparation of a village plan for Inniskeen and 
the other tier 4 villages. Will the proposed Inniskeen Community plan run in tandem with the 
Village plan? What is the difference between a village plan and a community plan?  
Reply:Requests for tenders for consultancy services for the preparation of a Community Vision and 
Spatial Land Use Plan for the Tier 4 villages of Glaslough, Inniskeen and Smithborough have been 
issued, with the closing date for the submission of tenders of the 23rd February 2026.  
Subject to satisfactory tenders being received, it is anticipated that the successful consultant(s) shall 
be appointed in March 2026.  
The plans when completed shall contain two distinct, but interrelated elements: - 
(1) Community vision and action plan, and  
(2) Spatial land use and planning policy framework  
The spatial land use element of the document shall focus on the physical development of the village, 
and will provide a planning policy framework for its sustainable growth. It is anticipated that this 
element of the village plan shall be incorporated into the Monaghan County Development Plan 2025 
– 2031, by way of the variation process. 
The Community  element will involve engaging with the people living in the area to come to a shared 
understanding of the social, economic and cultural needs in the area, the opportunities which exist 
to address these needs, and agree a set of actions which the community can take to make their area 

 
a better place to live, taking all the information into account. The Community element will identify 
any gaps in structures which are needed in order for the community to succeed in their ambitions 
and will give them guidance on how to get started with projects which will make a difference in their 
community.   
Together, the two elements shall provide a shared vision for the future development of the village. 
28. 
What is the up to-date position in relation to the local lane improvement scheme ( LIS ) When is 
it hoped to have a list of eligible lanes put together and points allocated. Has funding been 
announced for the scheme?  
Reply: With regards to the Local Improvement Scheme council staff have visited all eligible 
applications for assessment. Significant work has been completed on the assessment and 
prioritisation. The list will be finalised when the funding and criteria for the Local Improvement 
Scheme has been announced. Monaghan County Council has received an initial funding allocation 
of €385,880 in 2026. 
29. 
Following on from the Ministerial / Government directive to reopen the county development plan, 
when is it hoped to have this work completed?  
Reply: A significant body of work has already been undertaken by the Planning Section in partnership 
with the Elected Members, in response to the Ministerial guidelines. As part of this, a Chief 
Executives Report has been prepared, which outlines the recommended response to the guidelines. 
It is intended that the Report shall be presented to the Elected Members at the March Council 
meeting, where agreement will be sought to proceed to vary the Monaghan County Development 
Plan 2025-2031. It is difficult to determine a precise date for conclusion of the variation process, but 
it is hoped that it can be concluded by late summer. 
30. 
Given the recent storm events and the negative impact that the weather has had on the county 
road network, will the council consider a county wide pothole blitz with good quality material as 
was done before as soon as weather allows?   
Reply: Each Municipal District has prepared estimated costs for the necessary repair works, and 
these have been submitted to the Department of Transport (DOT) with a request for additional 
financial support. Whilst awaiting a response from the Department, the Council is committing 
€100,000 per MD to undertake works deemed most urgent, commencing immediately, as well as 
accelerating Annual Roads Programme. 
Cllr R. Truell asked:  
31. 
That Monaghan County Council acknowledges its responsibility as owner of the crèche facility 
building in Rockcorry and agrees to allocate appropriate funding under the Capital Works 
Programme to carry out essential external refurbishment works, including but not limited to the 
replastering and repair of the external walls of the building and to seek departmental funding, if 
needed, and to make it more energy efficient. The Council further recognises that these works are 
necessary to: 
• 
Protect and preserve the structural integrity of the Council owned asset 
• 
Ensure the building remains safe, weatherproof, and fit for purpose 
• 
Maintain appropriate standards for childcare provision within the community 
• 
Safeguard the long-term sustainability of the facility 
Therefore, I ask that a full condition assessment be undertaken immediately and that the required 
works be prioritised within the current Capital Works budget or included in the forthcoming 
Capital Programme review. 
Reply: Monaghan County Council will arrange a condition survey of the building fabric to ascertain 
the current extent of refurbishment works required, including plaster repairs and potential 
energy-efficiency measures. A decision on costs and potential funding streams will be made 
following the completion of the condition report. Please note, works were completed in 2023 /2024 
by CMETB to facilitate the decant of students, during the reconstruction of Scoil Mhuire at the 
Creche / Community building. Given that the Scoil Mhuire students have now returned to the new 
school, Monaghan County Council will meet with the Creche Manager to agree new long-term 
licence / lease arrangements and a schedule of works / work plan for the building going forward. 
 
20. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
- 
The family of the late George (Pat Jack) McMeel, Knocknagrave, Tydavnet, Monaghan, 
former Monaghan County Council employee.  

 
- 
The family of the late Cormac Boylan, Dundalk Road, Annahale, Castleblayney, Co. 
Monaghan, former Monaghan County Council employee.  
 
It was agreed that votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
- 
Shane McLoughlin, Clones on being named the Farney Foundation County Monaghan 
Person of the Year 2025.  
 
21. Conferences 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr N. McCooey, it was agreed that the 
Council be represented at the following training events by the members listed below: 
 
Promoting 
Authority 
Subject/Theme 
Venue 
Dates 
Members Selected 
AILG 
Briefing on New Housing Plan 
Delivering Homes Building 
Communities 2025-2030 
Limerick 
(Southern Region) 
19 March 2026 
Cllr. R. Truell  
AILG  
Briefing on New Housing Plan 
Delivering Homes Building 
Communities 2025-2030 
Raddison Blu, Sligo 
21 March 2026 
Cllr N. McCooey  
Cllr P. Gibbons  
 
 
 
April County Council Meeting – 13 April 2026 
It was agreed that the April County Council meeting, would start at the later time of 2.00pm to 
accommodate the Monaghan County Council Annual Awards Ceremony.  
 
The meeting then concluded.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed:  
________ 
  
 
               Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________ 
Meetings 
Administrator 
 
Date: 
____________________ 
