1 
 
Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (Economic Development & Enterprise Support) meeting 
 
held 30th April 2025 @ 4pm in Council Chamber at MTek 1 
 
 
In attendance: 
 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland (Chair) 
 
Monaghan County Council  
Cllr. Niamh McCooey 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. P.J. O’Hanlon  
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
 
Mr. Peter McMahon  
 
 
Business/Commercial Reps 
Ms. Eileen Collery 
 
 
Business/Commercial Reps 
Mr. Ciaran McEntee 
 
 
PPN - Environment Electoral College 
 
Mr. Adrian Hughes  
 
 
Senior Planner, Planning Section 
Ms. Angela Gallagher 
 
 
Administrative Officer, Planning Section 
Ms. Denise O’Neill 
 
 
Assistant Staff Officer, Planning Section  
 
 
Ms. Michelle Boyle 
 
 
Senior Staff Officer, Finance Section 
Ms. Siobhan McKenna 
Revenue Collector, Finance Section 
Ms. Collette Murray 
 
 
Staff Officer, Finance Section 
Mr. Brian Annon 
 
 
Executive Engineer, Town Regeneration 
Mr. Drew Hurley 
 
 
Senior Executive Planner, Town Regeneration 
 
MS Teams:  
 
Cllr. Colm Carthy 
 
 
Monaghan County Council  
Ms. Grainne McNamee  
 
Assistant Staff Officer, Planning Section  
Mr. Kevin Dowds 
 
 
Assistant Staff Officer, Planning Section 
 
Apologies: 
 
Ms. Olga McConnon 
 
 
DoS, Finance, Housing & Cultural  
Mr. Cathal Flynn 
 
 
DoS, Planning, Econ Dev, Fire, Building, Capital, Corporate 
Cllr. Pat Treanor 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Peter Conlon  
 
 
Monaghan County Council  
Mr. Peadar Black 
 
 
PPN- Community and Vol or Social Inclusion Electoral College 
Mr. Tom Treanor 
 
 
Agri/Farming  
 
 
1. Adoption of Previous Minutes held on 26th February 2025 
 
The minutes of the meeting held on 26th February 2025 were proposed by Cllr. Niamh McCooey and 
seconded by Ms. Eileen Collery.  
 
 2.    Matters Arising 
 
None.  
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 3.    Rates Vacancy Abatement Scheme & Scheme for Waiver of Rates 
 
Ms. Michelle Boyle introduced a presentation on the Vacant Properties Rates Abatement Scheme and 
the Scheme for the Waiver of Rates. Ms. Boyle advised that Public Consultations regarding the two 
schemes had taken place since the last Strategic Policy Committee (S.P.C.) meeting in February.  
 
Ms. Siobhan McKenna outlined both schemes advising that a presentation to the Senior Management 
Team would provisionally take place in June this year. It is hoped that the schemes would then be 
approved by Monaghan County Council (M.C.C.) at a monthly meeting prior to the statutory budget 
meeting, provisionally in September.  
 
Cllr P.J. O’Hanlon asked if the proposed schemes were National Schemes? He also queried if all 
owners of the vacant properties had been contacted and asked what the procedure was in relation to 
derelict sites? 
 
Ms. Boyle confirmed that the scheme was a National Scheme and stated that revenue collectors had 
done a lot of work over the last number of years trying to make contact with all vacant property 
owners. 
 
Mr. Brian Annon, Executive Engineer, in response to Cllr O’Hanlon’s query stated that the Town 
Regeneration team issues a Notice of Intention letter and erects a Derelict Sites Notice on the same 
day.  
 
Cllr. Niamh McCooey asked who would be liable for payment of the 20% of the rates if a property was 
sold to a new owner? 
 
Ms. Boyle responded saying that solicitors would normally deal with historical bills as part of the sale 
adding that if a new owner was bringing it back into use, they would get 100% abatement.  
 
Ms. Eileen Collery requested that a reference be made in the policy that properties would be charged 
the vacancy rate or the derelict site levy but not both?  
 
Ms. Boyle agreed to amend the policy to include this.   
 
Cllr. P.J. O’Hanlon asked if commercial properties in the town centres could be bought and turned into 
residential accommodation? He also queried if members could be informed of any planning 
applications that request a change of use from commercial to residential? 
 
Cllr Sean Gilliland commended the teams in both the Rates Section and the Town Regeneration team 
for their work in trying to locate the owners of vacant properties and endorsed making every effort to 
contact landowners.  
 
In response, Mr. Adrian Hughes, Senior Planner stated that any applications that require planning will 
be assessed against the policies and the standards that apply. He advised that it was policy to 
facilitate mixed use in town centres. Mr Hughes added that it was a complex area but agreed to meet 
with Cllr. O’Hanlon and Cllr. Sean Gilliland before the next S.P.C. meeting to discuss the issue.  
 
Mr. Peter McMahon mentioned the vibrancy of the town centres and said derelict buildings needed 
to be cleaned up to regenerate the town centres.  
 

3 
 
Cllr. Gilliland stated that Monaghan County Council was very town-centre orientated in comparison to 
towns in other counties. He recommended that upper floors of properties in town centres be utilised 
as residential whilst maintaining retail units on the ground floors.  
 
Mr. Adrian Hughes stated that it was important to acknowledge that there had been a shift at 
national and local level in relation to policy and funding. He mentioned the establishment of the Town 
Regeneration team who were doing significant work and added that Monaghan was one of the few 
counties that had been successful in maintaining a strong town centre.  
 
Mr. Ciaran McEntee welcomed the scheme for the Waiver of Rates whilst Cllr. Sean Gilliland said the 
scheme would help new businesses.  
 
4.    Derelict Sites Policy Review & update of Croí Cónaithe grant 
 
Mr. Brian Annon, Executive Engineer with the Town Regeneration team gave a presentation on the 
Proposed Policy and Procedures to deal with Dereliction and Vacancy in County Monaghan and gave 
an update on the Croí Cónaithe Property Refurbishment Grant. He advised that there was a long 
series of interaction with the owners of properties before properties were deemed derelict. 
 
Mr. Ciaran McEntee welcomed the scheme stating that it was a positive thing if idle properties could 
be brought back into use for housing.  
 
Cllr. Colm Carthy stated that whilst it was important that the policy was being used to deal with 
dereliction and vacancy, he said he needed reassurance that the scheme was not being used to make 
money.  
 
Mr. Annon responded saying that if a property is on the Derelict Sites Register from 1st January in any 
given year, they would be subject to the 7% levy of the value of the property. The owners would have 
received notices prior to 1st January stating this would be the case.   
 
Mr. Peter McMahon commended the work of the team in relation to Muckno Street in Castleblayney 
but raised concerns about who was availing of the grant and the number of people living in certain 
properties?  
 
In response, Mr Annon stated that the grant was only available to individuals and added that 
applicants could only avail of two grant. One property would have to become their primary residence 
while another property could avail of the grant and be rented out.  
 
Mr Adrian Hughes commented that where there is overcrowding issues that the local authority should 
be notified in order to conduct inspections. He added that M.C.C. would work with local people in 
these areas to see what the problems were and to find solutions but could only do so if they were 
aware of the issues.  
 
Mr. Drew Hurley, Senior Executive Planner highlighted that property owners would have to register 
the tenancy with the Residential Tenancies Board (R.T.B.) if they intended to rent out their properties 
after receiving the grant.   
 
 

4 
 
 
Cllr Sean Gilliand concluded the discussion by stating that the Croí Cónaithe grant was a very 
successful grant that had transformed towns and given young people the opportunity to get on the 
property ladder. He said it was important to recognise the work and effort of the team overseeing it 
and urged those in attendance that where there were issues with properties that the local authority 
and other agencies should be notified. 
 
5.   AOB 
 
 Mr. Ciaran McEntee raised the issue of traffic congestion on the Clones Road in Monaghan town.  
 
Mr. Adrian Hughes responded saying there had been engagement with the Roads Section in M.C.C. in 
relation to the issue. He recommended that Kevin West, Acting Senior Engineer come to the next 
S.P.C. meeting to update members on the progress being made.   
 
Mr. Hughes also highlighted the availability of a Derelict Sites Register online for the public when Ms. 
Eileen Collery queried if the information conveyed at the meeting in relation to derelict properties 
was confidential.  
 
Ms. Angela Gallagher confirmed that both presentations would be circulated to the S.P.C. members.  
 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland agreed to invite Kevin West to the next meeting in September. He also conveyed 
get well messages to S.P.C. committee member Tom Treanor.  
 
6.   Date of Next Meeting 
 
The next meeting will be held on Wednesday 24th September 2025 at 4pm. 
 
  
  
