 
Minutes of the Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, M-Tek 
Building, Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan, on Monday 07 October at 2.00pm  
 
Chair: 
Cllr C. Bennett, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
  Cllrs Aughey, Campbell, Carthy, Clerkin, P. Conlon, S. Conlon, Flynn, Gibbons, Gilliland, 
Keelan, Maxwell, McAree, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, S. Treanor and Truell 
 
  
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. C O’Hare, Directors of 
Services, Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, Ms. M. 
McGarvey, Meetings Administrator, Ms. M. McMahon, Staff Officer. 
 
Urgent Business 
At the outset The Cathaoirleach informed the members that she had received the following 
notice of urgent business as follows:  
 
‘That Monaghan Council write to Eir and Towercom calling on them to stop work 
immediately on the mast at Eir Exchange, Railway Road (off New Street), Conabury, 
Castleblayney, Co Monaghan and send a copy of this correspondence to the Minister for 
Transport, Communications, Climate and Environment Mr Eamon Ryan. This mast is located 
directly adjacent to several schools and residences, public consultation did not take place, 
and it has been a cause of serious concern among both the school and the wider 
communities.’ 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, it was agreed to enter ‘into 
committee’ to discuss whether to accept the motion submitted as urgent business.  
 
Following a short discussion, it was agreed to take the motion of urgent business at the 
end of the meeting. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed that the Council 
revert to public session.  
 
1. 
Confirmation of Minutes held on 02 September 2024 and 16 September 2024 
 
 
(i) Minutes of Council Meeting held on 02 September 2024  
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Council meeting held on the 02 September 2024 be confirmed.  
 
(ii) Minutes of Council Meeting held on 16 September 2024 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Council meeting held on the 16 September 2024 be confirmed.  
 
2. 
Correspondence  
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting:  
• 
Email response from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Health, Mr. Stephen 
Donnelly, T.D., regarding dental services in County Monaghan.  
• 
Email response from Mr. E. Ryan, T.D., Minister for Transport regarding funding for 
roads.  
• 
Letter from Ms. Mandy Doyle, Head of Service, Primary Care, HSE, regarding the long 
delays that are occurring whereby children and medical card holders are having 

 
difficulty in accessing dental services.  
• 
Letter from Ms. Claire Gavin, Head of Secretariat, National Oversight and Audit 
Commission regarding the 10th annual Local Authority Performance Indicator Report. 
• 
Acknowledgement letter from the Office of Taoiseach, Mr. Simon Harris, T.D., 
regarding implementation of the Good Friday Agreement.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Justice, Ms. 
Helen McEntee regarding the public enquiry into the death of Shane O’Farrell.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Education, Ms. 
Norma Foley, T.D, regarding school transport services.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Health, Mr. 
Stephen Donnelly, T.D., regarding dental services.  
• 
Resolution from Roscommon County Council regarding illegal dumping. 
• 
Resolution from Sligo County Council regarding the employment of care-
taker/ambassador roles in villages in Ireland. 
 
 
Additional Correspondence  
2.1 
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda had 
issued was also circulated:  
 
• 
Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the 
Marine, Mr. Charlie McConalogue, T.D., regarding the reconvening of the National 
Fodder Committee.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Office of the Minister for Social Protection and 
Rural and Community Development, Ms. Heather Humphreys, T.D., regarding the 
the North-South Interconnector.  
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr. S. Flynn, it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Minister for Transport, Mr. E. Ryan, An Taoiseach, Mr. Simon Harris T.D., and 
Tánaiste, Mr.  Micheál Martin, T.D., requesting additional funding for the maintenance and 
upgrading of our County’s Regional and Local Road network, noting the NOAC report which 
indicated that an additional €5.9million would be required just to stand still.  
On the proposal of Cllr C. Bennett, seconded by Cllr. P. Treanor, it was agreed that this 
Council rewrites to Minister for Health, Mr. Stephen Donnelly, T.D., seeking clarity in relation 
to the need for additional orthodontists and dentists in County Monaghan and whether there 
is an ongoing recruitment drive to fill these positions.  
 
 
3. 
To consider draft Local Improvement Scheme (LIS) 
 
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services, gave the members a brief overview of the new draft 
Local Improvement Scheme 2024 and the eligibility criteria, which had been agreed by the 
new LIS Sub-Committee and circulated with the agenda. He stated that the most important 
element of the new scheme is that applications will be subject to a two-stage evaluation 
process as follows:  
 
Stage 1 – will include an assessment of eligibility i.e. land size and land use. Applicants must 
meet the requirements under stage one to progress to Stage 2.  

 
 
Stage 2 – applications will be ranked by road condition (PSCI rating) and Value for Money.  
 
Mr. McMahon advised that with members approval, the intention is to re-open the Scheme 
for one month in November. Eligible applications would be evaluated, scored and ranked in 
order of merit. Works will be carried out by reference to this order of merit.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, it was agreed that the condition of 
assessment under Stage 2 of the Local Improvement Scheme 2024 be amended to “Lane 
greater than or equal to 50 meters” as was the case in the previous Scheme.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett it was agreed that this Council 
request a meeting with Minister Heather Humphreys in relation to the number of applications 
on the Local Improvement Scheme (LIS). Based on the funding available it could take in excess 
of 3 years for some lanes to be completed and this issue needs to be addressed.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Campbell, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell it was agreed to re-open the 
Local Improvement Scheme (LIS) 2024 for new applications for one month in November.  
 
4. 
To note Update on Speed Limit Review 2024-2025 
 
Mr. K. West, A/Senior Executive Engineer, Roads, joined the meeting to provide an update to 
members on the Speed Limit Review 2024-2025. He outlined new legislation that had been 
enacted in April 2024 (Act Number 10 of 2024) – Variation to the Default Speed Limits 
permitted by way of local authority Byelaws. He informed the members that new guidelines 
were published in May 2024 on priority actions (default speed limits) relating to: -  
 
• 30km/h (Urban Areas)  
• 60km/h (Rural Local Roads)  
• 80km/h (National Secondary Roads)  
 
He provided members an overview of the Road Safety Strategy 2021-2030 highlighting that 
the aim of the Irish Government is to cut road deaths and serious injuries by 50% by 2030, by 
following the ‘Safe Systems’ approach (Vision Zero), supported by international research and 
best practices.  
 
Mr. West stated that the change to the speed limit from 80km/h to 60km/h for Rural Local 
Roads will be implemented in November 2024 and in the first half of 2025 the National and 
Urban speed limits would be implemented. In terms of next steps, he advised that the tender 
for installation of 1,282 new signs and 1,000 poles in the county had been completed and it is 
anticipated that these works would commence and conclude in November 2024. 
 
Mr. K. West responded to Members queries.  
 
The Members thanked Mr. K. West for the very informative presentation. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, it was agreed that this Council 
write to the Minister of State, Department of Transport, Mr. James Lawless, T.D., seeking 
additional funding for Low-Cost Safety Schemes.  
 

 
At this point, the Cathaoirleach asked the meeting to observe a minute's silence in memory of 
the 2nd anniversary of the Creeslough tragedy. 
 
5. 
To approve nomination of Elected Members to the Strategic Policy Committees 
 
SPC for Housing – Cllr Colm Carthy (Chair): 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Bennett, seconded by Cllr B. McAree Cllr Sinead Flynn was nominated 
to the SPC for Housing.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, Cllr Paul Gibbons was 
nominated to the SPC for Housing.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
to the SPC for Housing.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllrs Richard Truell and Aidan 
Campbell were nominated to the SPC for Housing.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Sinead Flynn, Paul Gibbons, PJ O’Hanlon, Richard 
Truell and Aidan Campbell were declared elected to the Strategic Policy Committees for 
Housing. 
 
SPC for Transport – Cllr Raymond Aughey (Chair): 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Flynn, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, Cllrs Bronagh McAree, Noel 
Keelan and Sean Conlon were nominated to the SPC for Transport.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was nominated 
to the SPC for Transport.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Clerkin, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was nominated 
to the SPC for Transport.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Bronagh McAree, Noel Keelan, Sean Conlon, 
Pauric Clerkin and David Maxwell were declared elected to the Strategic Policy Committees 
for Transport. 
 
SPC for Economic Development & Enterprise – Cllr Sean Gilliland (Chair): 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr B McAree and Cllrs Pat Treanor, Colm 
Carthy, and Cathy Bennett were nominated to the SPC for Economic Development & 
Enterprise.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr Aidan Campbell, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was 
nominated to the SPC for Economic Development & Enterprise.  
 
On the proposal of P. Clerkin, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr David Maxwell was nominated 
to the SPC for Economic Development & Enterprise.  
 

 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Pat Treanor, Colm Carthy, Cathy Bennett, PJ 
O’Hanlon, and David Maxwell were declared elected to the Strategic Policy Committee for 
Economic Development and Enterprise.  
 
SPC for Climate Action & Environment – Cllr Richard Truell (Chair): 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Sinead Flynn and Cllr 
Bronagh McAree were nominated to the SPC for Housing.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, Cllr Paul Gibbons was 
nominated to the SPC for Climate Action & Environment.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Noel Keelan was nominated 
to the SPC for SPC for Climate Action & Environment. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the SPC for Climate Action & Environment. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the SPC for Climate Action & Environment. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Sinead Flynn, Bronagh McAree, Noel Keelan, 
Pauric Clerkin and Raymond Aughey were declared elected to the Strategic Policy 
Committees for Climate Action & Environment. 
 
SPC for Tourism, Rural and Community Development: An Ghaeilge & Cultural Services – Cllr 
Sean Conlon (Chair): 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, Cllrs Pat Treanor, Cathy Bennett 
and Paul Gibbons were nominated to the SPC for Tourism, Rural and Community 
Development: An Ghaeilge & Cultural Services. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr Aidan Campbell was 
nominated to the SPC for Tourism, Rural and Community Development: An Ghaeilge & Cultural 
Services. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the SPC for Tourism, Rural and Community Development: An Ghaeilge & Cultural 
Services. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Pat Treanor, Cathy Bennett, Paul Gibbons, Aidan 
Campbell and Raymond Aughey were declared elected to the Strategic Policy Committees for 
Tourism, Rural and Community Development: An Ghaeilge & Cultural Services. 
 
6. 
To receive an update from Environment Section 
 
Ms. P. Monahan, Director of Services, welcomed Mr. Kieran Duffy, Senior Executive Engineer 
and Mr. Niall Malone, Administrative Officer, to the meeting to provide an update to the 
members from the Environment section.   
 

 
Mr. K. Duffy commenced his presentation by providing an overview of the National 
Environmental Enforcement Priorities which fall under the three areas, Water, Waste and Air. 
He outlined how the activities of the environment section align with the priorities. Key points 
to note were:  
 
• 
Monaghan County Council met the required standard of ‘strong’ or ‘excellent’ result of 
90% of the National Enforcement Priorities (NEPs) in 2023. The National average was 
70%. 
• 
The Lough Muckno Road to Recovery Project involved an 18- month assessment of the 
inputting loads from the catchment area and a detailed lake core analysis to determine 
the legacy issues within the lake sediment. The main aim of the project was to improve 
the understanding of the unique characteristics of Lough Muckno and to inform the 
development of catchment management plans.  
• 
Excellent feedback was received as a result of recent Anti-Dumping Initiative funded 
projects such as the Agricultural Hazardous Waste Collection Day and the 50% Reduction 
Price on Bulky Goods project. 
• 
The focus on air quality is gaining momentum with the enforcement of the solid fuel 
regulations and the Solvent and Paint Regulations.   
 
Mr. N. Malone provided members with an update in respect of litter management and 
environmental awareness programmes. Key points to note were:  
 
• 
The next three-year Litter Management Plan 2024-2026 will commence in Q4 of 
2024.  
• 
A range of Environmental awareness campaigns and programmes are ongoing. The 
main focus is on areas such as waste, litter and resource efficiency and these are 
delivered through community information sessions, schools programmes, 
promotional events, local events and via the Council’s social media channels. 
• 
The Waste Management (Collection Permit) (Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2023 
came into effect on 01 July 2023. This introduced incentivised charging for waste 
collection in the commercial sector. 
• 
Since 1 January 2024, under new EU legislation, authorised household waste 
collectors are required to provide households with a brown bin collection service.  
 
Mr. K. Duffy and Mr. N. Malone responded to members’ queries. The Members thanked Mr. 
K. Duffy and Mr. N. Malone for their detailed and informative presentation. 
 
7. 
To fix a date for Statutory Budget Meeting 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Bennett seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell it was agreed to hold the 
Statutory Budget meeting on Tuesday 19 November 2024 at 10.00am in the Council 
Chamber. 
 
8. 
To approve the opening of a supplementary bank account for the operation of the Peace 
Campus building 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed to approve the 
opening of a supplementary bank account for the operation of the Peace Campus building.  
 
9. 
To approve nomination to Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr B. McAree it was unanimously agreed 

 
that Ms. Bridgie Joyce be appointed to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative 
Committee to fill the existing vacancy.  
 
10. 
To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 17 
September 2024, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Gilliland, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 17 September 2024 and the recommendations 
contained therein be approved.  
 
11. 
To receive Management Report - September 2024 
The members noted the Management Report for the month of September which had been 
circulated with the agenda.  
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members. 
 
12. 
To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events 
There were no reports received.  
 
13. 
Business Submitted by the Chief Executive 
 
The Chief Executive referred to the upcoming prestigious IPB Pride of Place Gala Awards 
Ceremony, that will be proudly hosted by Monaghan County Council on 02 November 2024 in 
the Hillgrove Hotel. It is anticipated that the event will present the concept of a ‘Community 
Weekend’ with community workshops set to take place on Friday 01 November. Further 
information regarding the event and official invitations will be issued to Members in due 
course.  
 
The Chief Executive informed the members that he had attended a meeting on 27 September 
with Clones GAA and Monaghan GAA. Oireachtas members, Minister Heather Humphreys, 
Deputy Matt Carthy, Senator Robbie Gallagher and representatives from Ulster Council were 
also in attendance. The purpose of the meeting was to receive a presentation on a vision for 
the development of St. Tiernach’s Park, Clones, being referred to as ‘St. Tiernach’s Quarter’. 
He stated that the main aim of the plans is to keep St. Tiernach’s park at the heart of GAA in 
Ulster. They also looked at the potential for Clones to be a high-performance location, 
maximizing opportunities afforded by the nearby Peace Link and the Ulster Canal. It also 
includes the diversification of use of the stadium, potentially opening it up to other sports and 
social and community events. A Steering Work Group will be formed to oversee the 
development of the project and will include representation from local and regional 
stakeholders. 
 
14. 
Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meetings held on 02 and 16 September 
2024   
 
There were no matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 02 September 
2024. 
 
The Chief Executive responded to a query arising from the minutes of the Council meeting 
held on 16 September 2024 in relation to the delivery of the Clos na Droimainne estate. 

 
 
There were no further matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 16 
September 2024. 
 
15. 
To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
No further update on the N2 National Primary Road Schemes.  
 
16. 
To receive update on North/South Interconnector project 
 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the North/South Interconnector 
project:  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Infrastructure minister in 
Northern Ireland, Mr. John O’Dowd regarding meeting with Minister for Transport, 
Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., in respect of the North-South Interconnector. 
 
17. 
To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update on the Ulster Canal project. 
 
18. 
Questions and Replies 
 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  
1. What is the latest update in relation to the Clos na Droimmaine (unfinished) estate in 
Carrickmacross – are we on target to offer units to those on our housing waiting list 
soon?  
Reply:  The delivery of 6 houses at the end of September has been missed by the AHB 
and Contractor. Monaghan County Council continues to liaise with both parties to get 
a revised delivery date, which has yet to be agreed. 
 
2. Similar to the County Civic Office Accommodation committee, does the Executive intend 
to establish a committee to work towards bringing a Swimming Pool & Leisure Centre to 
Carrickmacross, including representation from elected members?  
Reply: S3 Solutions are continuing to progress works in relation to the Feasibility Study 
and Strategic Assessment for a proposed Swimming Pool and Leisure Complex in 
Carrickmacross. It is expected that the draft Feasibility Study Report will be completed 
in October 2024. The project is currently at inception stage and its progression to the 
next project stage (preliminary business case development) will be contingent on the 
feasibility report findings and recommendation. Subject to the project progressing, the 
establishment of a project steering committee can be considered at a future stage in 
the project lifecycle. 
 
3. When is it expected the updated ‘online trading’ voucher will be made available to 
businesses in County Monaghan and what plans are in place to encourage as many 
businesses as possible to apply for it?  
Reply: On September 4th, a circular was issued by the Centre of Excellence, Enterprise 
Ireland, indicating that the Trading Online Voucher Scheme would be discontinued 
from October 31st, 2024. However, a subsequent circular issued on September 11th 
confirming the scheme will remain open for applications beyond this date. We have 
updated our website accordingly and launched a targeted social media campaign to 
ensure that SMEs in County Monaghan are aware of the continued availability of 
Trading Online vouchers. 
 
In addition to this, a new support measure, which I believe Councillor Carthy is 
referring to, has been introduced and is called “Grow Digital.” This initiative is 

 
designed to assist small businesses in leveraging digital tools to enhance efficiency, 
expand their market reach, and strengthen their competitive position. Eligible 
businesses are those with 1 to 50 employees that are not currently clients of 
Enterprise Ireland or IDA. 
 
The Grow Digital Voucher offers a grant covering 50% of eligible costs, with a minimum 
grant of €500 and a maximum of €5,000. This grant is limited to new software 
subscriptions for a 12-month period, covering areas such as e-commerce, customer 
relationship management (CRM), and accounting software. Additionally, the grant can 
be used for training and configuration costs associated with the new software, up to 
50% of the software purchase cost. 
 
To maximise the uptake of both the Trading Online Voucher and the new Grow Digital 
Voucher, we are implementing an extensive awareness campaign. This includes 
outreach through local business networks and ongoing digital marketing efforts. Our 
goal is to ensure that as many eligible businesses as possible in County Monaghan are 
informed about these valuable supports and are encouraged to apply. 
 
4. Can the Housing section confirm: 
- 
The number of new applicants that have been added to the Council’s housing list up 
to the end of quarter 3 (Jan-Sept) 2024?  
Reply: 147 New Applications received - 101 Approved to date. 
 
- 
The number of applicants that have been allocated a house/apartment in the same 
time period (not including HAP/RAS Tenancies)?  
Reply: 124 New Tenancies. 
 
Cllr S Flynn asked:  
 
5. Can Monaghan County Council please outline their plans, if any, for Traffic Calming 
measures for our towns and villages in the county? 
Reply: Traffic Calming for the Town and Villages will be carried out in accordance with 
Monaghan County Council’s, Non-National Urban Public Roads, Traffic Calming Policy 
which was adopted in March this year.  
The Municipal Districts carry out traffic counts and speed surveys on foot of 
representations from elected members and the public. These counts and surveys are 
used to plan and implement traffic calming measure subject to funding. Proposed 
traffic calming measures/schemes are submitted for approval under the Low-Cost 
Safety Schemes funding strand. 
 
 
6. Can Monaghan County Council, please confirm if the TII will consider reducing or 
extending the speed limits on the outskirts of towns and villages, particularly in 
residential neighbourhoods? 
Reply: A national road speed limit review is to take place in 2025.  Speed limit 
modifications proposed by MCC, Elected Representatives and Members of the Public 
will be considered and assessed in line with the Guidelines for Setting and Managing 
Speed Limits in Ireland (DOT).  
 
7. Can Monaghan County Council please confirm what grants are available for people with 
disabilities and their families and for those persons of 66 years and over? 
Reply: The Housing Grants Schemes are available to assist in carrying out works that 
are reasonably necessary for the purposes of rendering a house more suitable for the 
accommodation of a person with a disability or for an older person living in poor 

 
housing conditions to have necessary repairs or improvements carried out to allow 
them to remain in their own homes. 
The 3 grant types are: 
Housing Adaptation Grant for People with Disabilities (HGD) – for all ages with a 
disability. Max Grant €30,000 
Mobility Aids Grant (MAG)– for older people with mobility Issues.  Max Grant €6,000 
Housing Aid for Older People (HOP) – for people aged 66 and over.  Max Grant €8,000 
 
8. Can Monaghan County Council please update on whether there are additional services 
to be offered by the local link throughout the county and whether the NTA have 
additional services planned for other areas? 
Reply: Local link has issued Monaghan County with a list of proposed new location 
where local link services are to be provided. Monaghan County Council have assessed 
the locations from a road safety prospective and returned comments to local link for 
their consideration.   
 
Cllr P Gibbons asked  
9. Can the number of Monaghan County Council tenancies in houses classified as Part V be 
provided? These tenants are not able to purchase their properties currently. It is a 
source of great frustration to many of these long-term tenants. Are these tenants 
eligible to apply for affordable housing if/when available in County Monaghan and if so, 
can any discount be provided as would apply to a traditional tenant purchase? 
Reply: Currently there are 182 properties classified as Part V 
All first-time buyers will be eligible to apply for any Affordable Housing Scheme that 
may be launched by Monaghan County Council. Existing tenants that surrender a 
Council owned house to purchase their own home may be eligible to avail of the 
Mortgage Allowance Scheme which gives an allowance of €11,540 payable directly to 
the Mortgage provider over a 5-year period.  
 
10. How many approved housing applicants have included Castleblayney as their area of 
choice? What is the breakdown as regards housing type required? 
Reply: 
285 Approved have Castleblayney as an Area of Choice. 
1Bed     =              155 
2Bed     =              82 
3Bed     =              31 
4Bed     =              16 
5Bed     =              1 
11. Can the income limits for social housing be provided and when were they last amended 
be clarified? The last few years have seen very welcome and necessary raises in the 
minimum wage and Social Welfare rates to try and combat the extra ordinary rises in 
inflation and cost of living we have seen, and this has brought some applicants just 
outside the Social Housing income limits. Has Monaghan County Council any options to 
show discretion on a case-by-case basis to applicants slightly over the income limit 
having consideration of medical, compassionate, social or other relevant issues? 
Reply: The income limits for Monaghan County Council were last adjusted on the 1st 
January 2023. Monaghan County Council does not have any discretion with these 
limits.  
 
12. Can an overview on actions to tackle dereliction in the Castleblayney and Oram areas 
since the last Council meeting be provided? 
Reply: To date there has been 25.no Section 8(2) notices (notice of intention to enter 

 
onto the derelict site register) issued within the Castleblayney and Oram areas. The 
Town Regeneration Section has had several interactions and engagements with 
property owners over the summer which will continue to be an ongoing process.  
10.no properties did not engage sufficiently and therefore have been entered onto the 
derelict site register. 1.no property has been listed for sale, 1.no property has applied 
for the Croí Cónaithe grant and 3.no properties are currently undergoing renovations. 
The remaining property owners have indicated they will make property non derelict 
and have been afforded a grace period in which to carry out these works. 
13. Can an update on the proposed Ballybay to Castleblayney Greenway be provided with 
timelines provided for next steps? 
Reply: The Route Options Selection for the Ballybay to Castleblayney Greenway has 
now been completed and the Preferred Route Option has been developed. Phase 2 of 
this project is now completed. Phase 3, a preliminary design of the Greenway scheme 
must now be prepared, and more precise land acquisition requirements determined. 
This will allow a clearer picture to emerge regarding the exact location of the 
Greenway route by identifying specific characteristics such as vertical and horizontal 
alignments, as well as the likely general impacts on individual landowners.  Currently, 
the TII are not able to provide a funding allocation to proceed to detailed design stage 
however an application for funding has been made for 2025.  
 
Cllr S Conlon asked:  
14. In ensuring the 'Protecting the Right to Vote' recommendations advocated by the Irish 
Human Rights and Equality Commission, aimed at assisting people with physical and 
intellectual disabilities at polling booths, has this Council, as a partnership agency tasked 
with oversight of elections, engaged with the relevant stakeholders to ensure people 
with physical or intellectual disabilities will have ease of access and information at 
polling booths? 
Reply: Following the local elections in June, Monaghan County Council has engaged 
with the European Returning Officer, who primarily has responsibility for polling 
stations, and will continue to do so to assist in facilitating any necessary improvements 
and ensure ease of access and information at polling booths for all. 
 
15. Following completion of the IDA advanced Technology Unit at Knockaconny almost three 
years ago and that continues to remain unoccupied, have Council Executive received any 
updates from the IDA of what marketing and promotion efforts are being made to 
attract business to this state-of-the-art facility? 
 
Reply: Monaghan County Council has continuous engagement with the IDA, Enterprise 
Ireland and the industry sector on securing new business for the IDA Advanced 
Technology Unit at Knockaconny. An update on progress, in this regard, will be 
available from the IDA over the coming weeks.  
 
Cllr P Treanor asked:  
16. What company is contracted by Monaghan County Council to repair and maintain the 
Public Lighting system throughout our Towns and Villages? What is the agreed waiting 
time to repair light out, when reported? Coming into the winter months, can they be 
asked to monitor all Public Lights in the interest of Community Safety?  
Reply: MCC have signed the contract for the Public Lighting maintenance with Killaree 
Lighting Services Ltd, who will commence maintenance works in October 2024. The 
time frame for repairs is on a case-by-case basis as the works may require third party 
(ESB) involvement. 
 
Cllr N Keelan asked:  

 
17. While we are awaiting funding to advance the N2 project from Ardee to Castleblayney, 
what plans have the council in conjunction with TII to improve road safety on this very 
dangerous stretch of road, including revisiting the previous plan to improve the 
Tullyvaragh junction? 
Reply: The right turn lane proposal was previously refused by TII on the basis that 
traffic volumes turning off the N2 were not high enough to warrant inclusion of a right 
turning lane. MCC are currently in discussion with TII and up to date traffic counts have 
been organised to gauge if traffic volumes may have increased since 2021 and thus 
reach the threshold required.  As per TII Design Standards, collision data and near side 
passing opportunity at this location is also considered when assessing road safety.   
18. What is the up-to-date position in advancing an affordable housing scheme across the 
county, what will be the approximate cost of an affordable home? What plans have the 
council to provide social and affordable housing units in some of our village areas such 
as Inniskeen, Donaghmoyne and Lisdoonan village?  
Reply: The Housing Section are finalising an application for an Affordable Housing 
Scheme for Monaghan Town. Once Departmental approval is given for the Affordable 
Housing Subsidy, Monaghan County Council will be able to announce the price range 
for the houses. There are currently no approved social or affordable housing projects 
in Inniskeen, Lisdoonan or Donaghmoyne.    
 
19.  What funding is currently available for active travel schemes? What active travel 
schemes will we see commenced in the coming 12/18 months across the county and can 
we get a breakdown per electoral area? 
Reply:  
• 
Monaghan MD, UCG- Monaghan to Border (N12).  Anticipated that construction 
will commence in Q3 2025, subject to approvals and provision of funding.  
• 
Monaghan MD, N2 Cyclepaths, Emyvale Village and Corlat to Collegiate, 
construction to commence in Q4 2024 and continue through 2025, subject to 
approvals and provision of funding.  
 
The Active Travel unit are continuing to work on over 20 Active Travel across the 
county with a budget of €3 million for 2024 from the NTA. The schemes are 
progressing through the 7 phases of the NTA Cost Management Guidelines and the 
necessary approvals at each phase.  
The list below shows schemes that are expected to have construction work 
commenced and/or completed by end 2025. This funding allocation is for 2024, and 
continued funding is dependent on the NTA.  
 
Project Code: 
Project Name 
2024 Allocation 
MD 
MN/21/0001 
Upgrade of Monaghan Town Greenway 
€200,000 
Monaghan 
MN/21/0010 
Carrickmacross- Castleblayney Rd Active Travel  
€75,000 
CMX/CBY 
MN/21/0013 
Monaghan Town  Horseshoe Bridge Active Travel 
€500,000 
Monaghan 
MN/21/0014 
Monaghan Town Ballyalbany Bridge Active Tavel 
€70,000 
Monaghan 
MN/21/0020 
Low Cost Junction Tightening/Pedestrian Crossing Scheme 
€100,000 
All 3 
MN/21/0021 
Light Segregation Cycle Scheme- Castleblayney 
€35,000 
CMX/CBY 
MN/22/0001 
Clones Peace Link Active Travel Scheme 
€479,000 
Clones/Ballybay 
MN/22/0002 
Monaghan Town Local Transport Plan 
€60,000 
Monaghan 

 
MN/22/0004 
Lough Egish Village Active Travel Scheme 
€332,000 
Clones/Ballybay 
MN/23/0005 
Clones – Tirnahinch Road Footpath 
€30,000 
Clones/Ballybay 
MN/23/0007 
Carrickmacross R178/Oriel Road Active Travel Scheme 
€60,000 
Carrickmacross/ 
Castleblayney 
MN/23/0016 
SRTS  St Louis GNS & St Louis Infant School - Monaghan R1 
€50,000 
 
Monaghan 
MN/23/0017 
SRTS St Marys Boys NS R2 
€50,000 
Monaghan 
MN/23/0018 
SRTS St Tiarnach’s Primary School, Clones R2 
€50,000 
Clones/Ballybay 
MN/23/0019 
Ulster Canal Greenway Link (Mall Road) 
€190,000 
Monaghan 
MN/23/0020 
Urban Mobility Plans- Castleblayney, Ballybay, Clones & 
Carrickmacross 
€60,000 
CMX/CBY 
Clones/Ballybay 
 
MN/23/0102 
Woodview to Glen Road connectivity - Monaghan Town 
€200,000 
Monaghan 
20. As discussed at a previous meeting of the last council, is there any indication from the 
department or the line minister that the Croi Conaithe grant aid will be reinstated for 
agricultural type buildings?  
Reply: It is understood that the terms of the grant are being reviewed and that 
consideration is being given to the inclusion of agricultural type buildings within the 
scheme. Once the terms of this review have been announced details will be provided 
to the members. 
21. In relation to the council policy on the 20% rates levy, which will help deal with vacant 
commercial property in terms of encouraging owners to rent and sell property on, is the 
20% been levied on all vacant commercial property, particularly in our town centres? Is 
there an appeal process in place to allow for the 20% levy to be waived in cases where a 
genuine, verifiable effort is being made to rent or sell a commercial property?   
Reply: For budget 2023 and 2024, it was agreed that the level of refund of Rates on 
vacant commercial premises that are available for rent or lease or undergoing 
refurbishment would be reduced from 100% to 80%. This acts as a deterrent to 
commercial properties being left vacant and provides an improved economic stimulus 
to our local towns and villages. Vacant properties that are available for sale are 
benefiting from the 80% abatement on rates due. Our Revenue Collectors work closely 
with all customers in relation to vacant properties and Rates collections. No appeals 
have been issued to Monaghan County Council since the inception of this scheme. 
 
19. 
Notices of Motion 
 
Cllr B. McAree proposed, Cllrs C. Bennett and S. Flynn jointly seconded –  
 
1. “That Monaghan County council write to the Minister for Health, Mr. Stephen Donnelly, T.D., 
calling on him to extend government policy of providing free contraception to include all 
women of childbearing age or anyone prescribed contraception by their GP. 
 
It is important that we support all women in providing equitable and easy access to services 
that allow them to control their reproductive health.” 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously. 
Cllr B. McAree proposed, Cllr S. Flynn, seconded-  

 
2. “That Monaghan County council writes to the Taoiseach, Mr. Simon Harris, T.D., and Minister 
for Education, Ms. Norma Foley, T.D., calling on them to meet with Special Needs Active 
Parents-SNAP Monaghan to discuss the failure of government to provide adequate services 
for families and children with special needs in Co Monaghan. 
The Taoiseach stated in the Dail on June 18th of this year that he and Oireachtas colleagues 
would meet with families of children with special needs and hear from them directly. This has 
yet to come to fruition.”  
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously. 
 
20. 
Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
• Darren Flanagan, Assistant Engineer, Monaghan Municipal District on the death of his 
mother, Margaret Flanagan, Cremartin House, Castleblayney.  
• Fergal and Aengus O’Rourke on the death of their mother Mary O’Rourke, former Fianna 
Fáil Minister. 
• The family of the late John Naughten, Ardkeenan, Drum, Athlone, Co. Roscommon, Chair 
of the North West Regional Assembly and Roscommon County Council Councillor.  
 
It was agreed that votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Carrickmacross Emmets Ladies LGFA on winning the Intermediate Championship.  
• 
Emyvale Ladies GFC on winning the Senior Football League Semi-Final. 
• 
Aughnamullen Sarsfields Ladies on winning the Junior Championship Final.  
 
28. Conferences 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan it was agreed that the Council 
be represented at the following training events by the members listed below:  
 
Promoting 
Authority 
Subject/Theme 
Venue 
Dates 
Members Selected  
LAMA 
Autumn Seminar 
 
Newgrange Hotel, 
Navan, Co. Meath 
17 & 18 
October 
David Maxwell 
Richard Truell 
Bronagh McAree 
Sean Conlon 
Colm Carthy 
Seamus Treanor 
Celtic 
Conferences 
Corporate Governance 
O’Donovan’s 
Hotel, Clonakilty, 
Co. Cork 
22-24 
November 
Richard Truell 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Urgent Business:  
 
1. Cllr P. Gibbons proposed, Cllr N. Keelan seconded that Monaghan County Council write to Eir 
and Towercom calling on them to stop work immediately on the mast at Eir Exchange, 
Railway Road (off New Street), Conabury, Castleblayney, Co Monaghan and send a copy of 
this correspondence to the Minister for Transport, Communications, Climate and 
Environment Mr Eamon Ryan. This mast is located directly adjacent to several schools and 
residences, public consultation did not take place and it has been a cause of serious concern 
among both the school and the wider communities. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously. 
 
 
The meeting then concluded.  
 
 
 
 
Signed:  
________ 
  
 
               Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________ 
Meetings 
Administrator 
 
 
Date: 
_______________________ 
