 
 
Minutes of Adjourned Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, M-Tek 
Building, Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan, on Monday 16 September 2024 at 10.00am 
 
Chair: 
Cllr C. Bennett, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
  Cllrs Aughey, Campbell, S. Conlon, Flynn, Gilliland, Keelan, Maxwell, McAree, O’Hanlon, 
P. Treanor, S. Treanor and Truell 
 
MS Teams:  Cllrs Carthy, Clerkin, P. Conlon and Gibbons 
 
  
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. C O’Hare, Directors of 
Services, Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, Ms. M. 
McGarvey, Meetings Administrator, Ms. M. McMahon, Staff Officer. 
 
 
21. 
Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 08 July 2024  
There were no matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 08 July 2024. 
 
22. 
To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the N2 National Primary Road 
Schemes project:  
 
• 
Email from Ms. Rachel Begley, Transport Infrastructure Ireland, regarding the N2 
Ardee to South of Castleblayney Bypass and the N2 Clontibret to the N.I. Border 
Projects.    
 
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services gave the following update in relation to the N2 
National Primary Road Schemes: 
 
• 
The Ground investigation contract for the Clontibret to the Border Road Scheme has 
been awarded and works have commenced. The roads department have contacted 
the 115 landowners affected by the works which will take approximately 4 months.   
• 
The Ardee to Castleblayney Road Scheme remains suspended, however, works to 
improve road safety are ongoing and discussions are underway with Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland in relation to the existing arrangements at the Tullyvar junction 
to see if it can be improved. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ. O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, it was agreed that this Council 
write to Transport Infrastructure Ireland seeking assurance that the €5m allocation is in place for 
the N2 Clontibret to the Border Road Scheme.  
 
23. 
To receive update on North/South Interconnector project 
 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the North/South Interconnector 
project:  
• 
Letter from Mr. Martin Corrigan, EirGrid, regarding undergrounding the North-South 
Interconnector.  
• 
Email from Mr. Brendan Smith, TD, regarding the response he received to a 
parliamentary question in respect of the North-South Interconnector.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Department of Infrastructure, regarding the 

 
 
North-South Interconnector.  
• 
Email from the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications regarding 
funding of the North-South Interconnector.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett it was agreed that this Council, 
in light of the legal opinion requested and circulated to council members some weeks ago 
which indicated that the North South Interconnector was granted under section 182A of 
the Planning and Development Act, and consequently the 5 years does not apply to the 
NSI planning approval, and subsequently it would appear there is no limitation in respect 
of this approval, writes to all Oireachtas members for this constituency requesting they 
raise the ongoing public concerns and strong opposition to the overgrounding of the North 
South Interconnector in the Dail at the earliest opportunity, including the apparent no 
limitations on the planning approval.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Minister for Infrastructure, NI Executive, Mr. John O’Dowd and Minister for 
Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan TD, requesting that they arrange a meeting to discuss the 
undergrounding of the North-South Interconnector.  
 
 
24. 
To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update on the Ulster Canal project. 
 
25. 
Questions and Replies 
 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  
1. 
What is the latest update in relation to the Feasibility Study and Assessment Report for the 
proposed Swimming Pool and Leisure Centre for Carrickmacross? And, has Swim Ireland given 
a definitive date for the operation of their Pop-Up Pool for the town?  
Reply: 
Monaghan County Council appointed S3 Solutions to prepare a Feasibility Study and 
Strategic Assessment for a proposed Swimming Pool and Leisure Centre in Carrickmacross. 
Public & Community / Voluntary / Sports Club consultation surveys were completed by the 
9th of August 2024. The feedback received is currently under consideration by S3 Solutions. 
Monaghan County Council expect a Draft Feasibility Study and Strategic Assessment to be 
made available to the Municipal District Members in October 2024. The Pop-Up Pool will 
be operational in mid-September. 
 
2. 
What is the latest update in relation to the Clos na Droimainne unfinished estate in 
Carrickmacross? What are the current expected completion dates?  
Reply:  
The developer has recommenced work on site. On last inspection works were ongoing on 
access to car park as well as works to the houses. Monaghan County Council continues to 
liaise with the developer and AHB to get project completed. Latest update from Tuath on 
delivery is as follows: 
 
Phase 1- 6 units – 30th September 2024 
Phase 2 – 6 units – 31st October 2024 
Phase 3 – 14 Units – 31st October 2025 
 
 

 
 
3. 
Will the Council Executive, in conjunction with our Library Services, consider introducing a 
Sensory Room/Space in each of our Libraries throughout the county to facilitate children with 
sensory issues? If space is limited or not available in all our libraries, can we look at 
alternative public buildings/locations?  
Reply:  
Monaghan County Libraries offers a range of sensory spaces, services and supports for 
library members. This includes sensory spaces, sensory resources and other sensory 
services and supports. 
 
Sensory spaces in library branches 
 
Castleblayney: a dedicated sensory room, which can be booked in advance. 
Clones: a multi-purpose activity room, which can be configured as a sensory space, and 
booked in advance.   
Carrickmacross: a sensory area in the Children’s Zone.  
Monaghan: the use of the multi-purpose activity room as a bookable sensory space is 
being considered. Access to the room as a sensory space would be limited because it is 
heavily used as an activity space. 
 
Ballybay: the latest architectural drawings for the new library in Ballybay include a 
dedicated sensory room. 
 
Sensory resources available at Monaghan County Libraries 
 
Assistive toys 
Each branch library has a collection of assistive toys that is available to all library 
members. These are designed to support children and adults with learning difficulties, 
disabilities, or more significant needs. They have been developed by staff of Monaghan 
County Libraries in partnership with therapists and local parent groups.  All items can 
be used in our sensory spaces in the library and a selection of items are available to 
borrow. 
 
Tovertafel tables 
Tovertafel tables are available in Carrickmacross, Castleblayney, Clones and Monaghan 
town library branches. These tables encourage interactive play using a projector and 
sensors. They are suitable for everyone but especially those with autism and dementia. 
 
Other sensory services and supports 
Since 2021, Monaghan County Libraries has delivered a Sensory Stories Programme that 
is designed to make our libraries more accessible and to improve our services to those 
with additional needs. See: Sensory Stories - Library (monaghan.ie) 
Monaghan County Libraries works with AsIAm, Ireland's National Autism Charity to 
make our libraries more accessible for people on the autism spectrum. Staff have 
received autism awareness training. We are also a JAM Card© Friendly Organisation. 
The JAM Card© allows people with learning difficulties, autism and communication 
barriers to ask for Just A Minute of patience in customer service situations. 
 
The museum is looking at installing a sensory space in the one of the galleries. We will 
hopefully have it installed before the end of the year.  
 
4. 
When is it expected work will begin on initiating a master plan for the Convent Avenue (and 
surrounding areas) in Carrickmacross and will the council consider introducing a 
greenspace/playing field for multiple sporting activities between the existing Running Track 
and Carrick Rovers soccer pitches? 

 
 
Reply: 
Monaghan County Council has appointed The Paul Hogarth Company to prepare a concept 
landscape masterplan for the Convent Lands / Bath Avenue area to the south of 
Carrickmacross Town Centre. The terms of reference of the proposed Masterplan are 
centred on the provision of improved foot and cycle linkages to the town centre, the 
accommodation of the potential expansion of the St. Louis Secondary School and the 
consolidation of recent investments in sports facilities.  
Subsequent to meetings with key stakeholders, a number of options to improve the 
pedestrian/cycle linkages to the town centre have been developed for consideration. The 
Executive is currently engaging with key stakeholders in order to identify an optimum 
solution. These discussions ae ongoing and it is hoped that a preferred solution may be 
identified by Q3 2024.  
 
 
5. 
How many housing units are expected to be delivered for social housing before the end of 
2024 and will the executive give a breakdown of size and location?   
Reply:  
In 2024, Monaghan County Council projections are to deliver 111 new social homes in 
County Monaghan as part of the Housing for All program. Please see Table below for 
number of units, location and delivery breakdown. The sizes of units to be completed are 
as follows; 1 or 2-bedrooms 42%, 3 bedrooms 33% and 4 bedrooms 25%.  There are a small 
number of projects that face some minor delays and some of the units may be carried over 
into 2025 delivery. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr S Conlon asked:  
 
6. 
Following the meeting held in July between the Council’s Road Section and the National 
Transport Authority, what infrastructure improvements are being planned arising out of the 
€500,000 allocation provided through the Bus Stop Enhancement Programme. Also, what 
locations are currently being considered for improvement works aimed at enhancing the public 
transport experience. 
Reply: 
Monaghan County Council held a meeting with the NTA public transport section on the 
meeting on 18th July it was outlined the next steps required by the LA as following: 
 
• 
Review the GIS Database and Excel Spreadsheet with a view to providing NTA with a 
prioritise programme of work.  
• 
Consider how this programme of work could be delivered over the next number of 
years.  
• 
Provide an estimate of the funding requirements for 2024, 2025, 2026 and 2027 

 
 
 
MCC are progressing with the works listed above and has also submitted a business case 
to the NTA requesting approval to appoint dedicated staff to manage the bus stop 
enhancement programme on a permanent basis.  
 
7. 
According to the Glen Road Culvert Works Programme published in February, excavation and 
road restoration works for the purpose of culvert installation across both lanes of the Glen 
Road were due to be completed in August, ensuring traffic disruption would be completed 
for the return to school. 
 
I ask for an explanation as to: 
a) what has been the cause of delay, evident by the protracted periods of no 
construction activity on site? 
Reply: The precast culverts proposed by the contractor could not be installed at the 
required design level due to a contractor error. An insitu design was then proposed by 
the contractor to salvage the installed piles and ground beams. This design has now 
been approved and works are progressing. 
 
b) are the original design specifications, including installation of box culverts aimed at 
reducing flood risk in the area, been altered, and if so, are Council Executive satisfied 
that maximum flood water alleviation measures will be installed, 
Reply: The culvert construction technique has been altered from a precast box culvert 
option to insitu construction. However, this change in technique does not compromise 
the original design specification of the flood alleviation works. 
 
c) due to the extended delays, have additional costs being incurred by the Council, i.e., 
tax-payers money, that will result in higher project expenditure, 
Reply: The delay is a contractor issue and the costs associated with this delay will be 
incurred by the contractor. 
d) has a revised Works Programme been established that will provide a timescale for 
completion? 
Reply: The contractor has submitted a revised programme. This programme is currently 
being reviewed by Monaghan County Council. The estimated date for completion is 
November 2024. 
 
8. 
What results have followed the water quality testing from the Bathing Waters Sampling 
Programme undertaken across the nine previously listed sites in the County over the summer 
months? 
Reply:  
County Monaghan does not have any designated bathing waters, but we do monitor the 
areas listed below on a monthly basis from June to September each year.   
 
• Lough Muckno 
• Lough Muckno Water Sports Area  
• Lough Muckno Black Island Point  
• Greaghlone Lake  
• Creevy Lake   
• Emy Lough 
• Hollywood Lake 
• Halton’s River (Dromore Lake System)  
• Gortnawinny Lough 
• Beach area at Lough Major 

 
 
 
Samples taken are assessed against the water quality standards specified in the 2008 
Bathing Water Regulations, using the two microbiological parameters, Intestinal 
enterococci, and Escherichia coli (E Coli). To date in 2024, out of 31 samples taken we 
have detected 2 exceedances of these standards. These microbiological exceedances 
were on samples taken at Emy Lough and Gortnawinny Lough on the 9th of July 2024.  
 
Following the detection of the poor-quality results at Emy Lough and Gortnawinny Lough 
on the 9th of July 2024, advice not to swim notices were erected at both locations and 
circulated on Monaghan County Council’s social media. Repeat samples then taken at 
both locations on the 17th of July 2024, the results of these repeat samples were within 
permissible limits.  
 
The results of Monaghan County Council’s bathing/amenity water monitoring are 
available 
to 
view 
on 
the 
Monaghan 
County 
Council 
website: 
https://monaghan.ie/environment/bathing-waters/ 
 
 
9. 
What progress is occurring regarding installation of pedestrian safety measures which I have 
previously sought at locations:  
Reply: 
 
a) Peace Campus / North Road 
A Feasibility & Options Report for the North Road has been submitted to TII Road Safety 
Section for review.  This proposal includes for two number crossings i.e. one to the west 
side of the Lidl entrance and the other is to upgrade the uncontrolled crossing at Flacks 
Garage. MCC have sent a reminder to TII for a response on this to allow us to progress 
implementation.  We will continue to follow up with TII.   
 
b) R 937 Dublin Road between Bogues Garage and Latlorcan 
A road safety Audit Stage 1 & 2 was carried on the proposed crossing at this location. 
The contents of which are currently be reviewed by Monaghan MD Staff.  
 
c) Road servicing Latlorcan Close, Latlorcan Court, Latlorcan Way 
The MD are currently finalising a design for traffic calming measures at these 
locations.  Following completion of the design, a cost to install these measures will be 
obtained and assessed against available budget. 
 
 
Cllr S Flynn asked:  
 
10. With regards traffic congestion on the Clones/Monaghan road, can you please confirm if 
there are plans in place to reduce the impact of traffic congestion at peak times or whether 
there are plans for the potential of a ring road? 
Reply:  
A Local Transport Plan (LTP) is currently being prepared for Monaghan Town, which may 
provide robust evidence of how the introduction of planned Active Travel facilities, public 
transport hubs/links would benefit from rerouting vehicular traffic (particularly HGVs) 
away from the urban core, and therefore strengthen the case for a bypass/ring road.  
Before TII would consider funding a bypass, it must be demonstrated that a high level of 
Active Travel infrastructure (existing or planned) along the N54 is included in our transport 
strategy for Monaghan Town, whereby a bypass would relieve the town centre from HGVs 
and create a less hostile environment for Vulnerable Road Users, not only in terms of road 
safety but also to reduce air pollution. The LTP is due to be completed later this year.   
 

 
 
11. Can you please confirm how many prospective first-time buyers & other eligible buyers 
submitted an interest in the Affordable Housing Scheme plan?  Which towns showed the 
greater demand? And you please provide an update in relation to the “Ready to Build Grant 
Scheme”. 
Reply: 
Monaghan County Council had a great response to the second affordable housing survey. 
181 responses were received, indicating a strong interest from the public in an affordable 
scheme in Monaghan Town. These results will now be used to strengthen the case for an 
affordable housing application for Monaghan Town to the Department in Q4 2024.  
 
In relation to “Ready to Build” Housing Section is working on a proposal to bring several 
sites to the market in Monaghan Town and Scotshouse.  
 
12. The Increased Cost of Business Grant (ICOB) has been a very welcomed measure by qualifying 
small and medium sized businesses in the county, will a similar grant be available in 2025?   
Reply:  
As of yet, the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment have not given any 
indication as to whether the Increased cost of Business grant will be available in 2025. 
 
13. What financial or grant supports are available to those SME’s not involved in manufacturing or 
international trade? 
Reply: 
The Local Enterprise Office can provide financial supports to assist small-scale businesses 
not involved in manufacturing or international trade in the following areas: - 
 
• 
Energy Efficiency Grant: - This is available to any business commercially rateable.  
Grants of 75% eligible costs available up to a maximum spend of €10,000 are 
available.  
For further information visit.  
What is the Energy Efficiency Grant? - Local Enterprise Office  
 
• 
Trading online Voucher: - The Trading Online Voucher Scheme is designed to 
assist small businesses with up to 10 employees to trade more online, boost 
sales and reach new markets.  Financial assistance of up to €2,500 with co-
funding of 50% from the business.  The program also offers training and advice to 
help a business trade online. 
 
Trading Online Voucher Scheme - Local Enterprise Office - Monaghan  
* Monaghan LEO has been informed this scheme will shortly be discontinued. 
 
• 
Microfinance Ireland (MFI) Loans: - Business loans available from €2,000 up to 
€25,000.  Any application made through the LEO office will provide applicants 
with a discount on the loan interest rate to MFI  5.5%  About Micro Finance 
Ireland - Local Enterprise Office 
 
Enterprise Ireland recently launched  National Enterprise Hub (neh.gov.ie) which is a single 
source of information for all government supports for business. Monaghan LEO continues 
to provide a range of training and mentoring services to all business located in County 
Monaghan. 
 
 
14. Please provide an update in relation to the Ulster Canal Greenway, Smithboro - Clones, 
Smithboro - Monaghan. 

 
 
Reply:  
Both these Greenway schemes are at the same stage and currently undergoing the same 
flood risk assessment works so the same update is applicable to both schemes.  
Update below; 
The Stage 3 Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) for the schemes is ongoing and due to be 
completed in September. Information obtained from the FRA will inform the detailed 
design of the Greenway. 
 
 
 
Cllr C Bennett asked:  
 
15. Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with the names of playparks under their 
remit within the county. Can I please have an update on all recent works at playparks as we 
need to create a plan to improve all playparks and make them more accessible for everyone. 
Can I also have updates on any new playpark plans? 
 
Reply:  
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney Municipal District is responsible for the maintenance and 
upkeep of 12 No. publicly accessible playparks as listed below:  
 
 
For the period January 2023 to August 2024, Carrickmacross-Castleblayney Municipal 
District has invested circa €100K in the maintenance and upgrade of playparks under its 

 
 
remit. These works have included the repair/replacement of existing play equipment, 
the provision of new equipment, and the general upkeep of the grounds. There are 
currently no plans to create any new playparks however, this Municipal District was 
successful in the receipt of funding for the development of a sensory space adjacent to 
existing playground in Lough Muckno Park. It is envisaged that these works shall 
commence in mid Q3 2024.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ballybay -Clones Municipal District 
1 
Barry McGuigan Park Clones  
Outdoor Gym Equipment 
2 
Cara Street Clones  
Outdoor Gym Equipment 
3 
Cara Street Clones  
Play Area 
4 
Carn Heights Clones  
Play Area 
5 
Cherry Park Clones  
Play Area 
6 
O’Neill Park Clones  
Play Area 
7 
Mulladuff Smithborough  
Play Area 
8 
Scotshouse  
Play Park 
9 
Scotshouse  
Outdoor Gym Equipment 
10 
An Cluain Bawn  
Play Area 
11 
Ballybay Town Park  
Play Area Additional play equipment added in 2024 
12 
Ballybay Town Park  
Outdoor Gym Equipment 
13 
Corrybrennan Park Ballybay  
Play Area Recently upgraded in 2024 
14 
Cois Hill Doohamlet  
Play Area 
15 
Cois Locha Doohamlet  
Play Area 
16 
Doohamlet 
MUGA 
17 
Crann Mor Rockcorry  
Play Area 
18 
Lisdarragh Newbliss  
Play Area 
19 
Threemilehouse  
Outdoor Gym Equipment 
  
  
  
 
Monaghan Municipal District 
1 
Beechgrove, Monaghan Town 
  
2 
Orielway, Monaghan Town  
Refurbished in the last 5 yrs 
3 
Killygoan, Monaghan Town  
Refurbished in the last 10 yrs 
4 
Ard Glas, Monaghan Town  
MUGA 
5 
Cluain Lorcan, Monaghan Town 
  
6 
Belgium Park, Monaghan Town 
Football field & MUGA 
7 
Drumbearwoods, Monaghan Town 
New Playground 
8 
Ballinode, Monaghan Town 
  
9 
Oriel Park, Emyvale 
Refurbished in the last 10 yrs   
10 
Ardbannagher, Glaslough 
Refurbished in the last 10 yrs 
11 
Oaklands, Glaslough  
Refurbished in the last 10 yrs 
12 
Corlat, Knockatallon 
Funding obtained 2024 to carry our minor 
refurbishments/repairs 

 
 
13 
Carrickroe 
New Playground 
 
16. Can Monaghan County Council please update me on the Sliabh Beagh partnership and 
funding opportunities. Has the Sliabh Beagh been included in the Managers report under 
Tourism for future updates. 
Reply:  
The next meeting of the Sliabh Beagh Partnership Committee is scheduled for 4 September 
in Clogher, Co Tyrone. The Shared Island funded feasibility study was submitted in 
December 2024 for consideration for capital funding and there has been on-going liaison 
with the Shared Island Unit and Failte Ireland in this regard in the intervening months. 
When there is an update on the project, this is then included in the Manager’s Report. 
 
 
17. Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with an update on the number of people 
on the Housing Waiting List in County Monaghan. Can this please be broken down to show 
the numbers waiting to be housed, the numbers receiving the Housing Assistant Payment 
(HAP) and the numbers on the Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS).  
Reply: 
As of 20.08.2024 there are 1,050 Approved applicants on the Social Housing Waiting List.                                     
• 
497 in HAP supported Private Rented Accommodation.  
• 
66 in RAS supported Private Rented Accommodation. 
 
18. Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with an update on the number of 
applicants waiting on the Local Improvement Scheme (LIS) and a breakdown of when these 
should be completed. 
Reply:  
There are currently 29 applicants remaining on the 2017/18 LIS. It will take approximately 
5-6 years to complete these lanes based on the current funding allocation. There are 255 
applications waiting to be assessed as part of the reopened LIS application process in 2024. 
An approximate completion date cannot be provided for these 255 applications until they 
are initially assessed. 
 
19. Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with a list of Festivals and Shows that 
received funding from Monaghan County Council in the last year and the amount that was 
given to each. 
Reply: FESTIVALS & EVENTS FUNDING 2024 
 
  
Arts (Up to August 2024 - further funding may 
be allocated thereafter) 
  
  
Various artists 
Traditional Music Book Launch 
€1,150.00 
Ceol Connected 
Festival Support 
€1,500.00 
Garage Theatre 
Programming support 
€19,000.00 
Iontas Theatre 
Programming support 
€22,000.00 
Blayney Drama Festival 
Festival Support 
€3,000.00 
Feile Oriel 
Festival Support 
€2,500.00 
Clones Film Festival 
Festival Support 
€11,000.00 
Muckno Mania 
Festival Support 
€3,000.00 
Music Generation 
Partner Contribution 
€30,000.00 
  
  
€93,150.00 
  
  
  
Community Development Funding  
  
  
Ballinode Community Projects Ltd 
Family Fun Day - On the Road to Ballinode 
Festival  
€1,000.00 

 
 
Carrickmacross Toy Library 
Micro festival in Carrickmacross at Lough Fea 
€1,000.00 
Carrickroe Community Centre Company Limited 
By Guarantee 
2 day event “Party in the Park” at Carrickroe 
Community Centre 
€1,000.00 
Castleblayney Agricultural Show CLG 
Printing and providing our annual show 
schedule and show catalogue  
€3,000.00 
Castleblayney Annual Fair Day Committee 
Contribution to cost of Annual Fair Day 
€1,000.00 
Countryfest.ie 
Funding that would support the event  
€1,000.00 
Monaghan Town Music Festival CLG 
Support Irish Country Music Festival  
€1,500.00 
Taste of Monaghan 
Christmas Street Food Festival.  
€1,500.00 
Carrickmacross Camera Club 
Run a public photography exhibition in 
Autumn-theme "A slice of life" in CMX 
€500.00 
Clones Chamber Of Commerce CLG 
Annual Christmas lights switch on in Clones 
Town. 
€350.00 
Clones Famine Graveyard Committee 
Event support  
€500.00 
Different Keys Choir 
Support  event at Garage Theatre. 
€500.00 
Doohat Accordion Band 
Annual picnic event on 19th July 2024.  
€500.00 
Drum Accordion Band 
Transport from and to our annual 12th of July 
parade. 
€500.00 
Druminan Flute Band 
Support Annual “picnic”  
€500.00 
Greenan's Cross Development Committee 
Reunion of the last pupils who attended 
Greenan’s Cross N.S.  
€500.00 
Inniskeen Whist Club 
Major Whist Drive in Community Centre. 
€500.00 
Kilmore Swanns Cross Community Alert 
Social dinner evening in the Hillgrove Hotel to 
bring elderly neighbours together. 
€500.00 
Monaghan County Board Comhaltas Ceoltoiri 
Eireann 
Funding for Monaghan Fleadh 
€500.00 
Monaghan County Ploughing Association 
Hold a county ploughing match at the Plough 
Association event. 
€500.00 
Mullan Village Tidy Towns & Community 
Development  
Village open day, factory tours and art events 
to be run as part of heritage week. 
€500.00 
Mulladuff Residents Association 
End of summer family fun day on Mulladuff 
Green for the whole community.  
€500.00 
Mullyash Community Daycare centre 
To Provide refreshments and music for the 
Blaeberry Sunday walk.  
€500.00 
O'Neill Park Residents' Association 
Annual community barbecue which will be held 
in the communal green space. 
€500.00 
Real Housewives Donaghmoyne 
1 night a month to run evenings on Nutrition 
values, mindfulness, cookery demonstrations  
€500.00 
Rockcorry Dartry Community Alert 
Senior Citizens Annual Christmas Party 
€500.00 
Scotshouse Festivals Committee 
Purchase of the Christmas lights for 2024 and 
beyond. 
€500.00 
Smithborough Tidy Towns 
Family friendly Santa Christmas Disco party 
event in early December.  
€500.00 
Spudfest Alternative Music Festival 
To assist with the cost of an alternative music 
festival. 
€500.00 
St. Dymphna's Church Hall Ballinode Co / 
Tydavnet Parish Church 
Assist with costs of holding their annual 
barbeque in June 2024. 
€500.00 
  
  
€21,850.00 
Tourism  
  
  
MCC Festival Fund 
  
  
Dracula Festival 
Festival Support 
€2,000.00 
Winter Feile Oriel 
Festival Support 
€2,000.00 
Monaghan Town Country Music Festival 
Festival Support 
€2,000.00 

 
 
Back to Castleblayney Festival 
Festival Support 
€1,000.00 
Macra Na Feirme 80yr celebration 
Festival Support 
€1,000.00 
Muckno Santa Experience 
Festival Support 
€1,000.00 
Big Tom Memorial Weekend 
Festival Support 
€1,000.00 
Failte Ireland Festival Funding  
  
  
Muckno Mania 
Festival Support 
€2,500.00 
Harvest Time Blues 
Festival Support 
€2,500.00 
 
 
 
Agri-Tourism Scheme Funding (Dept) 
 
 
Monaghan Street Food Festival 
 
€4,000.00 
Christmas Market Monaghan 
 
€4,000.00 
Mushroom Festival 
 
€2,000.00 
 
 
€25,000.00 
 
 
 
Ballybay Clones MD 
  
  
St Patrick's Day Parade Clones 
Festival Support 
€2,000.00 
St Patrick's Day Parade Ballybay 
Festival Support 
€1,925.00 
St Patrick's Day Parade Newbliss 
Festival Support 
€855.00 
Billy Fox Memorial 
Festival Support 
€25,389.00 
Ulster Final Festival Day 
Festival Support 
€12,000.00 
Angling Festival Ballybay 
Festival Support 
€320.00 
Music Festival 
Festival Support 
€5,000.00 
Contribution to Clones Golf Classic 
Festival Support 
                TBD 
Halloween Festival Clones 
Festival Support 
€1,250.00 
Christmas Lights Ballybay 
Festival Support 
€15,834.00 
Christmas Lights Clones 
Festival Support 
€9,926.00 
Christmas Lights Newbliss 
Festival Support 
€1,986.00 
  
  
€76,485.00 
Creative Monaghan 
 
(other events organised by Creative 
Monaghan directly) 
  
Tradoodle Festival 
Programme  Support 
€8,000.00 
Mushroom Festival 
Support for Workshops etc 
€6,000.00 
  
  
€14,000.00 
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney MD 
  
  
CMX Christmas Lighting 
  
€10,000.00 
Carrickmacross Festival 
Festival Support 
€16,000.00 
Muckno Mania 
Festival Support 
€7,400.00 
Castleblayney Regeneration Team 
Small events funded via annual contribution to 
Regen Team 
€10,000.00 
  
  
€43,400.00 
Monaghan MD 
  
  
Monaghan Town Team Funding 
Town Team contribution  
€15,000.00 
St Patricks’s Day Parade Monaghan 
Organised & funded directly by MMD 
  
Feile Oriel 
Festival Support 
€6,000.00 
Summer Street Food Festival 
Festival Support 
€7,000.00 
Harvest Times Blues 
Festival Support - MCC 
€40,000.00 
Christmas Lights Switch-on 
Festival Support – TBD for 2024 
€7,500.00 
Christmas Street Food  
Festival Support – TBD for 2024 
€2,500.00 

 
 
  
  
€78,000.00 
Note: MMD also assists with Road closures 
and provides MMD staff for certain festivals 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr P Gibbons asked:  
 
20. How much did Monaghan County Council pay in compensation for public liability claims over 
the past 3 years. What percentage of these claims were settled? 
Reply: 
Public Liability claims include potholes, damage to vehicles, personal injuries including 
slips, trips and falls.  The percentage of claims settled is not a figure that IPB report on as 
registered and settled claims in any given year are not comparable. 
 
 
 
21. How many applicants are approved for social housing in the Oram area and what is the 
breakdown as regards housing type required? Are there plans to develop additional social 
and/or affordable housing in Oram? 
Reply:  
As of 20.08.2024 there are 6 (5 x 1bed 1 x 3bed) approved social housing applicants who 
have Oram as one of their “Areas of Choice”.  Housing Section does not currently have any 
approved social housing projects in Oram.  
 
22. The junction at Brennans Cross at Ardkirk on N53 is extremely busy. Can Monaghan County 
Council provide an update on plans for lighting at this crossroads? 
Reply: 
MCC have submitted an application to the TII for funding for installation of public lighting 
at this junction.  We have followed this up with a reminder for a response.  Installation of 
public lighting along the rural national road network is not within TII Design Standards and 
as such a Departure from Standards had to accompany our application.  We will continue 
to follow up with TII.   
23. Can Monaghan County Council provide an overview on activity on tackling dereliction in 
Castleblayney since the last Council meeting? 
Reply: 
Monaghan County Council is currently undertaking a survey of vacant/derelict properties 
within the County.  This survey has identified more than 100 vacant/derelict properties in 
Castleblayney. 
 
To date, the Regeneration Section has issued 24.no Section 8(2) notices which allow 
property owners 35 days to respond in writing with proposals to make the property non 
derelict. 5.no properties have been entered onto the Derelict Site Register in Castleblayney 
after failing to submit adequate proposals to make the property non derelict. Further 
properties will be entered onto the Derelict Site Register in the coming weeks. 
 

 
 
The Regeneration Section is currently engaging with the Housing section to identify 
properties that are suitable for acquisition and inclusion into the Councils social housing 
programme.  
24. I note the plans to appoint a Design Consultant to review road safety issues on the N2. Can 
you provide an update on the appointment of the consultant, timelines on their contract and 
when it is envisaged actionable outcomes will be available? 
Reply: 
Road Plan completed road safety inspections in 2018 and several low-cost improvement 
works were identified, some of which have been implemented. A review of the remaining 
measures and potential new schemes is to be progressed in Q4 
A F&O Report for the N2 northern approach to Emyvale Village was approved by TII with 
provision of a roundabout and associated works the preferred option.  A preliminary design 
has been completed to date. A letter of Intent has issued to most competitive consultant to 
take scheme through detailed design and construction.  It is envisaged that construction 
will commence in Q2/Q3 2025. 
Cllr N Keelan asked:  
25. How many families/individuals are currently on the council housing waiting list, including 
those receiving a HAP payment? What is the break down per electoral area? 
Reply: As of 20.08.2024 there are 1,050 Approved applicants on the Social Housing 
Waiting List. 
Carrickmacross/Castleblayney MD          364 
Monaghan MD                                                  540 
Clones/Ballybay MD                                       146 
497 in HAP supported Private Rented Accommodation.  
66 in RAS supported Private Rented Accommodation. 
26. How many housing units does the council hope to provide in conjunction with 
approved housing bodies in the next one/two years? What is the proposed breakdown per 
electoral area?Reply: Monaghan County Council proposes to deliver 451 new social 
homes in County Monaghan as part of the Housing for All program from 2024 to 2026. 
The Housing For All target is 183 homes, which equates to 246% of the target. Please see 
Table below for number of units, location and delivery breakdown. Please note that other 
potential projects will be added to this list subject to development availability and 
funding approval. 

 
 
 
27. 
In relation to the council policy on vacant and derelict property, will the local authority 
give some flexibility where a genuine verifiable effort is been made by a property owner 
to rent or sell the property in question before enforcement action is taken and a levy is 
imposed?`Reply: Prior to entering a property onto the Derelict Sites Register, the 
Council is obliged to engage with the owners of such properties to determine the 
owner’s plans/proposals to address the dereliction issue and bring the property back 
into use.   
If the Council receives correspondence from the landowner outlining a reasonable 
and verifiable pathway to addressing the dereliction issue whether though renovation 
or sale the Council would grant short term flexibility to allow these proposals to be 
completed.  
28. 
How many roadways are currently on the community involvement scheme list (CIS), 
what is the criteria for having a roadway included on the list? How is it determined 
which road is resurfaced first, is it chronological order? 
Reply: Currently 18 applications for CIS funding.  
In 2018, the Department introduced ring-fenced funding for Community Involvement 
Schemes. Applications for this programme are generally sought on a bi-annual basis. 
The Department must approve the CIS scheme before works can proceed. 
Roads are prioritised based on the PSCI Rating. A scheme can only proceed if the 
community are willing to contribute the necessary percentage (10% monetary only or 
20% minimum when the contribution comprises works).  
29. 
What is the current position in relation to the local lane improvement scheme (LIS) 
number of lanes on the old list, number of lanes on the new list, funding available etc? 
Reply: There are currently 29 applicants remaining on the 2017/18 LIS. It will take 
approximately 5-6 years to complete these lanes based on the current funding 
allocation. There are 255 applications waiting to be assessed as part of the reopened 
LIS application process in 2024. An approximate completion date cannot be provided 

 
 
for these 255 applications until they are initially assessed. In 2024 Monaghan received 
€546,698.33. An allocation of €391,745.67 has been allocated for 2025.  
 
26.Notices of Motion 
 
Cllr C. Carthy proposed, Cllr N. Keelan seconded -  
1. “That Monaghan County Council welcomes the recent vote passed by the Dail calling for a 
Public Inquiry into the death of Carrickmacross man, Shane O’Farrell, and we call on the 
Minister for Justice to immediately put in place that Inquiry. 
Monaghan County Council notes that a similar motion was passed previously and was never 
delivered upon; we also note, with concern, that Government have decided to refer the 
report of the previous scoping exercise to the Oireachtas Justice Committee, instead of 
immediately initiating a Public Inquiry”. 
A recorded vote was taken which resulted as follows:  
For: Cllrs Aughey, Bennett, Carthy, S. Conlon, Flynn, Keelan, McAree, O’Hanlon, S. Treanor and 
P. Treanor 
Total: 10 
Abstentions:  Cllrs Clerkin, Gilliland, Maxwell and Truell 
Total: 4 
The Cathaoirleach declared the motion carried.  
Cllrs C. Bennett, proposed, Cllr S. Flynn seconded -  
2. “That Monaghan County Council write to the Department of Health and demand that free 
HRT and free mid-life health checks are made available to all women between the ages of 
45 and 64. This scheme should be included in the Government Budgetary proposals for 
2025”. 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously. 
Cllr S. Conlon proposed, Cllr P. Treanor seconded -  
3. “That Monaghan County Council supports the work of the Joint Oireachtas Committee on the 
Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement and the production by that Committee in July 
2024 of the report, 'Perspectives on Constitutional Change: Finance and Economics and calls 
for the full implementation of these recommendations which include: 
• 
The publication by the government of a Green Paper setting out a vision for a 
united Ireland 
• 
An Oireachtas Committee dedicated to the preparation for a united Ireland 
• 
The government beginning civic engagement in the form of citizens’ 
assemblies and or other deliberative fora 

 
 
• 
Examination of the all-island economy by government departments and 
research on the economy of the north and border region” 
A vote by show of hands resulted in 11 for, 4 against and 1 abstention.  
The Cathaoirleach declared the motion carried.  
27. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
• Drew Hurley, Senior Executive Planner, on the death of his mother, Eileen Hurley.  
• Cllr Seán Conlon, on the death of his father-in-law, Paddy Owens.  
• The family of the late Archbishop Noël Treanor, Apostolic Nuncio to the European Union.  
• Deputy Caoimhghín O'Caolain, on the death of his Aunt Sally McGlynn (née O’Hanlon).   
• Cllr Peter Conlon, on the death of his mother, former Councillor Mary Kerr-Conlon.  
• Róisín Moore (Nic Án Iarla), Senior Executive Engineer, Roads on the death of her father 
John (Seán) Early. 
 
It was agreed that votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Anne-Marie McArdle on representing Monaghan so well at the Rose of Tralee Event.  
• 
Muireann Atkinson on recently making her debut with Collingwood Australian Rules 
football team.    
• 
Eve McCrystal on winning her 6th paralympic medal, winning silver in the B, 3,000m 
individual pursuit final in the Paralympic Games in Paris on Sunday 01 September, 
alongside her partner, Katie-George Dunlevy.  
• 
Carrick Corduff U10 Boys on winning the All-Ireland Community Games final.  
• 
Shane McLoughlin, Clones, on recently entering the Guinness Book of Records as the 
first amputee to pull a 20-tonne lorry.  
• 
The 2024 Community Games National Finalists from County Monaghan on their many 
successes.  
 
28. Conferences 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan it was agreed that the Council 
be represented at the following training events by the members listed below:  
 
Promoting 
Authority 
Subject/Theme 
Venue 
Dates 
Members 
Selected  
AILG 
AILG Autumn Training Seminar 2024  
 
 
Hillgrove 
Hotel, 
Monaghan 
Wednesday 
11th Sept 
and 
Thursday 
12th Sept  
Richard Truell 
AILG  
September Training Module: An overview of the 
Planning System. Delivered by the OPR  
Bridge House 
Hotel, 
Tullamore 
Saturday 
28th 
September  
David Maxwell 
Richard Truell 
Sean Gilliland  
  
 
 

 
 
Urgent Business:  
 
1. Cllr C. Bennett proposed, Cllr B. McAree seconded that Monaghan County Council writes to 
Minister Charlie McConalogue,  Department of Agriculture, Food, and the Marine, Minister 
Jack  Chambers, Department of Finance, and Minister Paschal Donohoe, Department of 
Public Expenditure, National Development Plan Delivery and Reform, calling for the 
reconvening of the National Fodder Committee and engagement with all the farming 
organisations and stakeholders.  
 
Agriculture is the primary industry in County Monaghan and due to the inclement weather 
and forecasts of unsettled weather for the foreseeable future many farmers are concerned 
and worried about their current supply of fodder and the prospects for next winter's 
harvest. It is prudent to prepare for a 'worst case scenario' rather than complacency which 
could cause further problems and panic. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously. 
 
2. Cllr N. Keelan proposed, Cllr S. Flynn seconded that Monaghan County Council writes to Ms. 
Norma Foley, T.D., Minister for Education and Ms. Siobhan Griffin, Regional Manager, School 
Transport Scheme, requesting that immediate action be taken to resolve the ongoing 
problems in relation to qualifying students and other students with no transport not being 
able to access the school transport service.  
 
That Monaghan County Council writes to Ms. Norma Foley, T.D., Minister for Education and 
Mr. Eamon Ryan, Minister for Environment, Climate, Communications and Transport 
requesting that Government as a matter of policy provides a school transport scheme that 
will ensure that all students as far as practicable be provided with school transport and the 
recommendations of the review of the school transport scheme be implemented as soon as 
possible in terms of choice and flexibility by eliminating the requirement to attend the 
nearest school, reducing the distances that is required for students to qualify for school 
transport etc.  
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously. 
 
 
 
Signed:  
________ 
  
 
               Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________ 
Meetings 
Administrator 
 
 
Date: 
_______________________ 
