 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, Mtek Building, 
Armagh Road, Monaghan, County Monaghan, on Monday 04 March 2024 at 11.30 a.m. 
 
Chair: 
Cllr D. Maxwell, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
  Cllrs Aughey, Bennett, Campbell, Carthy, Connolly, S Conlon, P. Conlon, Gilliland, 
O’Hanlon, Keelan, McCooey, McElvaney, McKenna, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, Truell 
 
Apologies:  
Cllr Seamus Coyle, Ms C O’Hare, DOS 
 
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Directors of Services, 
Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, Meetings 
Administrator, Ms. M McGarvey 
 
 
Urgent Business 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S Conlon, seconded by Cllr P Conlon it was agreed to suspend Standing 
Orders to receive a delegation from the Irish Farmers Association. 
 
Speakers from the IFA asked that Monaghan Co Co would do its utmost to highlight the issues raised 
and seek a fundamental reset of how farm policy is devised and implemented both at the EU and in 
Ireland.  
 
The Speakers asked that Monaghan Co Council support the following motion: 
 
‘Monaghan County Council resolves to write to the President of the EU Commission, the Taoiseach 
and the Minister for Agriculture advising them that the Council has passed the following resolution. 
 
Monaghan County Council supports the IFA ‘enough is enough’ campaign.   
The Council recognises the significant contribution that farming, and the Agri-sector makes to the 
Irish and local economy.  
The Council acknowledges the income challenge on Irish farmers arising from the significant increases 
in the cost of doing business, regulatory costs and cuts in Basic Income support for farmers.   
The Council calls on the Government to introduce no further regulations on farmers or any measures 
that may increase costs on farms without full negotiation and agreement with the Irish Farmers 
Association (IFA). The Council calls on the European Union and the Irish Government to provide 
additional stand-alone funding, separate to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), to support 
farmers to undertake climate and biodiversity measures’. 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the members that he had received a second notice of urgent business 
as follows:  
 
‘That focused on the key principles of social, economic, and environmental sustainability, Monaghan 
County Council agree to proceed with the development of Lough Muckno and its environs. In so doing, 
Monaghan County Council agree to the engagement of consultants to progress the proposed 10-year 
Masterplan and Development Framework for Lough Muckno and its environs.’  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Campbell, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, it was agreed to enter ‘into 
Committee’ to discuss whether to accept the motions submitted as urgent business. 
 
Following a short discussion, it was agreed to take the motions of urgent business at the end of the 
meeting. 

 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Bennett, seconded by Cllr B McKenna, it was agreed that the Council 
revert to public session. 
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Meetings held on 12 February 2024. 
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr N Keelan seconded by Cllr R Aughey it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Council meeting held on the 12 February 2024 be confirmed. 
 
2.     Correspondence 
 
 
 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting: 
 
• 
Acknowledgement Letter from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, Leo 
Varadkar T.D., regarding supporting Clare County Council Motion to take immediate 
action in introducing Primary medical certs to all individuals with physical disabilities.  
• 
Email from Private Secretary to Minister of State for Transport Jack Chambers, T.D., 
regarding additional funding need to expedite driver testing services and NCT car testing 
services. 
• 
Acknowledgement Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance, Mr. 
Michael McGrath T.D., regarding Climate enhancement measures. 
• 
Acknowledgement Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance, Mr. 
Michael McGrath T.D., regarding the increase of funding allocation to the active travel 
projects. 
• 
Email from Uisce Eireann regarding a request for confirmation that effluent discharge into 
watercourses from wastewater treatment plants. 
• 
Email from Ms. Niamh Smyth, T.D., regarding special fund be set up in relation to the 
salting of roads. 
• 
Email from Ms. Niamh Smyth, T.D., regarding additional funding need to expedite driver 
testing services and NCT car testing services. 
• 
Email from Ms. Pauline Tully, T.D., regarding additional funding need to expedite driver 
testing services and NCT car testing services. 
 
 
• 
Resolution from Cork County Council regarding VAT rate for pubs should be reduced down 
from 23% to 17%. 
• 
Resolution from Cork County Council regarding hospitality VAT rate be reverted to 9%. 
 
 
 
2.1  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda 
had issued was also circulated:  
• 
2024 Grant Allocation to Local Authorities for National Roads, Active Travel and 
Greenways from Transport Infrastructure Ireland. 
• 
2024 Regional and Local Road grant allocations from Department of Transport. 
 
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr C Carthy, seconded by Cllr R Aughey it was agreed that this Council 
support the Cork Co Co motion calling on the Minister for Finance, An Taoiseach and An 

 
 
Tánaiste to ask that the VAT rate for pubs should be reduced down from 23% to 17%. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr B McKenna, seconded by Cllr C Bennett it was agreed that this Council 
support the Cork Co Co motion calling on the Minister for Finance, An Taoiseach, An Tánaiste 
to ask that the hospitality VAT rate be reverted to 9% and that the collection programme be 
fair and sensible. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Bennett, seconded by Cllr N Keelan it was agreed that this Council 
call on the Government of Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and Green Party to provide the additional 
funding of 5.9 million needed to achieve proper road maintenance in Co Monaghan as 
referred to in the NOAC Report. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr A McCooey it was agreed that this 
Council call on the Minister for Finance, Michael McGrath to liaise with Minister Eamonn 
Ryan and Minister Jack Chambers in relation to additional funding for the ‘hot tarring’ to fill 
the potholes in Co Monaghan. 
 
3. To consider Part VIII approval for PT8MN63 Ballyalbany Bridge - Construction of a new 
pedestrian and cycle bridge on the east side of the existing Ballyalbany Bridge 
 
 
Mr A Hughes, Senior Planner outlined the Part VIII proposal circulated with the agenda.  He 
advised that the proposed development is the construction of a new pedestrian and cycle 
bridge on the East side of the existing Ballyalbany bridge, which is a protected structure.  The 
new bridge will directly abut the existing bridge.  The new bridge will be adjoined to the 
existing bridge but will be supported independently via new piled abutments and new 
wingwalls.  
 
Mr Hughes recommended that the members proceed with the proposal.  Mr Hughes and Mr 
K West responded to members questions. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R Aughey seconded by Cllr C Bennett, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the construction of a new pedestrian and cycle bridge on the east side of the existing 
Ballyalbany Bridge as detailed in the Chief Executive’s Report of 12 February 2024 prepared 
in accordance with Part VIII of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as 
amended).  
 
Cllr S Conlon abstained on this proposal. 
 
4. To consider Part VIII approval for PT8MN 64 Horseshoe Bridge - Construction of a new 
pedestrian and cycle bridge on the west side of the existing Horseshoe Bridge 
 
Mr A Hughes, Senior Planner outlined the Part VIII proposal circulated with the agenda.  He 
advised that the proposed development is for the construction of a new pedestrian and cycle 
bridge on the west side of the existing Horseshoe Bridge. The new bridge will directly abut 
the existing bridge. The new bridge will be joined to the existing bridge but will be supported 
independently via new piled abutments and new wingwalls. 
 
Mr Hughes recommended that the members proceed with the proposal.  Mr Hughes and Mr 
K West responded to members questions. 
 
 

 
 
On the proposal of Cllr B McKenna seconded by Cllr R Aughe, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the construction of a new pedestrian and cycle bridge on the west side of the existing 
Horseshoe Bridge as detailed in the Chief Executive’s Report of 12 February 2024 prepared in 
accordance with Part VIII of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended).  
 
Cllr S Conlon abstained on this proposal. 
 
 
5. To consider Part VIII approval for PT8MN67 Glenmore Quarry - Refurbishment works are 
proposed at Glenmore Quarry, Carrickroe, Co. Monaghan. 
 
Mr A Hughes, Senior Planner outlined the Part VIII proposal circulated with the agenda.  He 
advised that the proposed development is to upgrade facilities at the existing council facility 
at Glenmore, Carrickroe to afford for the reception, storage and transfer of inert bituminous 
material. The proposed development includes the provision of a hard standing area, 
weighbridge and welfare facility. 
 
Mr Hughes recommended that the members proceed with the proposal.  Mr Hughes and Mr 
K West responded to members questions. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr B McKenna seconded by Cllr R Aughey, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the proposed refurbishment works at Glenmore Quarry, Carrickroe, Co. Monaghan 
as detailed in the Chief Executive’s Report of 12 February 2024 prepared in accordance with 
Part VIII of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended).  
 
6. To receive Chief Executive's Report on submissions received on Pre-Draft Public 
consultation process of Monaghan Co Development Plan 2025-2031 at March Co Co 
Meeting 
 
Mr T Gourley, Senior Executive Planner advised members that the review of the current 
County Development plan and the preparation of a new County Development plan for the 
period 2025-2031 formally commenced last year.  He stated that an eight-week Pre-Draft 
Consultation process was held to gather opinions on the content of the Draft Development 
Plan.  A Strategic Options and Issues Paper was on public display which set out the key 
discussion topics of Climate Change, Environment & Heritage, Infrastructure & Services, 
Settlement Strategy, Housing Strategy, Community Services / Facilities, Economic Activity, 
and Environmental Assessment & Monitoring.  
 
The consultation process attracted sixty-six submissions from a wide range of public bodies, 
other organisations and individuals.  In accordance with Section 11(4)(b) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000, this report provides for the elected members a summary of the 
issues raised in the sixty-six written submissions received, the Chief Executive’s opinion on 
the issues raised and his recommendations on the policies to be included in the draft 
development plan. 
 
Mr Gourley stated that workshops will be arranged with each grouping over the next few 
weeks to assist members in reviewing the report and to discuss the matters arising within 
it. 
 
 Mr Gourley responded to members’ queries.  The Cathaoirleach thanked Mr Gourley for his 
presentation. 
 
 

 
 
 
7. To consider the Draft Policy and Procedure for Derelict Sites. 
 
Mr K McNally, Town Regeneration Officer provide members with a presentation on the 
Draft Policy and Procedure for Derelict Sites.  He stated that the policy set out the methods 
which the Council would use going forward to reduce the level of derelict properties in the 
county in conjunction with relevant Government policies such as the Town Centre First 
policy and the Housing for all Strategy.  During the course of his presentation, Mr McNally 
referred to issues leading to property dereliction and vacancy; schemes/initiatives to deal 
with vacancy and dereliction; progress to date in dealing with dereliction and next steps. 
 
On the proposal Cllr S Gilliland seconded by Cllr S Conlon it was agreed that the Draft Policy 
and Procedure for Derelict Sites as circulated, be approved. 
 
8. To consider the Arts Partners Grant Scheme 
 
In accordance with the Ethics Framework, Cllr Bennett declared a possible conflict of interest 
in relation to this item and withdrew from the meeting room whilst the matter was being 
dealt with. 
 
The members considered the report from the Arts Officer recommending the allocation of 
grants under the Arts Partnership Grant 2024.  The Arts Officer responded to members’ 
queries. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A McCooey, seconded by Cllr N Keelan, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the allocation of the following grants under the Arts Partnership Grant 2024: 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. To consider the Artist Support Scheme  
 
The members considered the report from the Arts Officer recommending the allocation of 
grants under the Artist Support Scheme 2024.  The Arts Officer responded to members 
queries. 
 
On the proposal Cllr A McCooey seconded by Cllr S Conlon it was agreed that the Council 
approve the allocation of the following grants under the Artist Support Scheme 2024: 
 
 
Arts Partners Grant 
Recommended Applicants 
Amount 
Awarded 
1 
The Garage Theatre 
€ 19,000 
2 
Castleblayney Drama Festival 
€   3,000 
3 
N/East Musical & Dramatic Society 
€   3,000 
4 
Íontas Theatre 
€ 22,000 
5 
Féile Patrick Byrne 
€   6,500 
6 
Féile Oriel 
€   2,500 
7 
Clones Film Festival 
€ 11,000 
8 
Muckno Mania 
€   3,000 
 
TOTAL 
€ 70,000  

 
 
Emerging Talent - €600 each                               * 1st time recipient 
 
 
Applicants 
Art Form 
1  Zara Doody * 
Visual Artist/Multimedia 
2 Matthew McMahon * 
Theatre Practitioner/ Actor 
3  Simon Hennessey * 
Comedy 
4  Dervla McElvaney * 
Visual Artist/Textiles/Mixed Media 
5  Courtney Mulligan *  
Film/Special Effects/Makeup     
 
 
Total € 3,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Established Artists  
 
 
 
 
 
* 1st time recipient 
 
 
Applicants 
Art Form 
1 
Seán McElwain  
Traditional Arts/Music 
2  
Kate Beagan * 
Visual Artist/Painter 
3 
JJ Duffy * 
Visual Artist/Mixed Media 
4 
Michelle Kettle 
Visual Artist/Painter 
5 
Joanne Behan 
Visual Artist/Sculpture 
6 
Denise McCabe 
Visual Art/Contemporary Drawing 
7 
Siobhan McDonald 
Visual Artist 
8 
Fiona Longmuir 
Author/Childrens Novels 
9 
Rory Pierce * 
Music/Performer & Composer 
10 Eileen Ferguson 
Visual Artist/Painting/Sculpture 
11 Neal Greig 
Visual Artist/Drawing & Painting 
12 Gráinne Hunt 
Music/Singer/Songwriter 
 
 
Total € 12,000 
 
 
 
10. To consider the Traffic Calming Policy 2024 
 
Mr K West, A/Senior Engineer outlined the Draft Traffic Calming Policy 2024 circulated to 
members.  He stated that the objectives of the policy are to:  
 
• 
Provide guidance and a standardised procedure for implementing traffic calming 
measures within County Monaghan  
• 
Improve Road Safety 
• 
Reduce and control vehicular speed 
• 
Improve driver awareness of vulnerable road users  
• 
Enhance the environment 
• 
Reduce noise, disturbances and anxiety in our towns and villages 
 
The aims of the policy are to: 

 
 
• 
Incorporate traffic-calming measures at the planning and design stage of all new 
schemes. 
• 
Introduction of an appraisal system for traffic calming on existing public roads.  
• 
Introduction of a prioritising scheme selection system. 
• 
Set up a shared centralised database between the Three MDs and the Roads Section to:  
I. hold all requests for traffic calming measures from the public and elected 
members,  
  
II. act as a knowledge share database.  
  
Mr West outlined the phases of the Traffic Calming Implementation process from initiation 
through to formal consultation, funding approval and implementation.  Mr West responded 
to members’ queries. 
 
 
Cllr R. Aughey proposed, Cllr C Bennett seconded that the Traffic Calming Policy 2024 as 
circulated, be approved.   A vote by show of hands resulted in 14 for, 1 abstention.   The 
Cathaoirleach declared the proposal carried. 
 
 
11. Diospoireacht as Gaeilge  / Tuarascail Bhliantuil - Coiste na Gaeilge 
 
Cllr P Treanor introduced the presentation by highlighting that the Coiste spent almost 
€12,000 in 2023.  He advised that the All-Ireland Ceili Band would visit the Garage Theatre 
on Sunday next to start Seachtain na Gaeilge.  Cllr Treanor thanked Nial Ó Conchúir for his 
work and thanked the other members of the Coiste Gaeilge for their work during the year 
and outlined details of the activities listed in the report.   
 
An tUasal Nial Ó Conchúir, Oifigeach Gaeilge outlined the work of the Coiste Gaeilge during 
2023 and thanked them for their help and support.  He stated that the Coiste aims to 
promote the use of the Irish language in Co Monaghan as well as insuring that the Council 
fulfils its obligations under the Official Languages Act.   
 
He highlighted the Coiste’s activities during 2024: 
 
1. The Coiste held 4 meetings.  
2. The Coiste organised a concert for Nollaig na mBan. 
3. Two community groups availed of Seachtain na Gaeilge funding.  
4. 37 scholarships were awarded to students to attend the Gaeltacht. 
5. The Coiste funded Ulster Comhaltas to host Omós na nUltach, composed by Scotstown 
native, Michael Rooney, in the Garage Theatre. 
6. Funding was given to Monaghan County Comhaltas to promote the use of Irish language 
at the Co. Monaghan Fleadh. 
7. The Coiste supported Muineachán le Gaeilge to run Campaí Sproai, which is an Irish 
language summer camp. 
8. The Council worked towards compliance with Section 10(a) of the act. 
 
He concluded by stating that in 2024 the Coiste hope to continue their good work and ensure 
the Council complies fully with the Official Languages Act.  
 
 
12. To consider the Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan for 2024     
 
Ms. M. McGarvey, A/Senior Executive Officer, outlined the main elements of the Annual 
Service Delivery Plan (ASDP) for 2024, which had been circulated with the agenda for the 

 
 
meeting. She stated that the plan, which had been prepared in accordance with the Local 
Government Reform Act, 2014 and in conjunction with the Draft Corporate Plan 2020-2024, 
identifies the services that the Council intends to provide to the public in the year ahead. 
She further stated that the Plan, which reflected the provisions of Budget 2024, sets out the 
objectives and priorities for each department; the strategies for achieving those objectives 
and the priorities and performance standards intended to be met. She acknowledged the 
contribution of all staff and Directors in the preparation of the plan.  
 
On the proposal Cllr H McElvaney seconded by Cllr S Conlon it was agreed that the Draft 
Annual Service Delivery Plan for 2024 as circulated, be approved. 
 
 
13. To note Annual Report of the Joint Policing Committee for 2023 
 
 The Annual Report of Co Monaghan JPC which details the work of the Committee over the 
past 12 months and is also an important means of communicating and highlighting the role 
and work of the Committee was noted and agreed by members. 
 
 
14. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 20 February 
2024, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P Treanor seconded by Cllr R Aughey it was agreed that the minutes of 
the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 20 February 2024 and the recommendations 
contained therein be approved.  
 
 
15. To receive Management Report - February 2024 
 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for February 2024 which had been 
circulated with the agenda.   
 
The members noted the Management Report.   
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr S Conlon, seconded by Cllr D Maxwell it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Departments of Agriculture and also Department of Rural Affairs in follow up to 
the publication of Working Group of Dog Control seeking the immediate allocation of funding 
to support the recruitment of an additional dog warden for Co Monaghan. 
 
 
16. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events. 
The members noted the reports from Cllrs D. Maxwell, relation to attendance at the 
following Conference/Training events:  
 
• 
AILG, Road Safety, 16 November, Clayton Hotel, Galway, Co. Galway. 
• 
Celtic Conference, 01-03 December, Social Welfare in Ireland, O'Donovan's Hotel, 
Clonakilty, Co. Cork. 
 

 
 
17. Business submitted by Chief Executive 
 
The Chief Executive informed the members there were no matters for consideration under 
this item.   
 
 
18. Matters arising out of the minutes of Council meeting held 12 February 2024 
 
There were no matters arising out of the Council meeting held on 12 February 2024. 
 
 
19. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the N2 National Primary Road 
Scheme.  
 
• 
Email from Mr. Brendan Smyth, T.D., regarding funding for the N2 Ardee to 
Castleblayney road scheme. 
 
 
20. To receive update on North/South Interconnector project 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the North south Interconnector 
project:  
 
• 
Acknowledgement email from Mr. Brendan Smyth, T.D., regarding the North South 
Interconnector issue.  
• 
Email from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Minister for the Environment, 
Climate and Communications Eamon Ryan TD. regarding the North South 
Interconnector issue.  
• 
Email from Ms. Niamh Smyth, T.D., regarding the North South Interconnector issue.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from Private Office Infrastructure Northern Ireland 
regarding the North South Interconnector issue.  
 
Mr C Flynn, Director of Services informed members that ESB has requested a meeting with 
Planning Officials from Monaghan, Cavan and Meath Co Councils to discuss planning 
compliance in relation to the North South Interconnector.  This meeting will take place on 14 
March 2024.  Mr Flynn assured members that what was discussed would be brought back to 
the full Council. 
 
21. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update. 
 
22. Questions 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  
1. Has the executive completed their assessment of tenders received for the Feasibility Study 
and Strategic Assessment Report for a Swimming Pool/Leisure Centre for Carrickmacross? 
If so, is the council prepared to formulise an engagement with selected consultants in 
March? 
 
Reply: Monaghan County Council completed the formal tender assessment process on the 
19th of February 2024. Having regard to compliance with relevant procurement procedures 

 
 
and timelines, it is expected that the contract for engagement of professional consultants 
will be executed before the end of March 2024. 
 
2. Has the council received confirmation from the Department of Housing yet that would 
allow us to proceed with our ‘Affordable Purchase Scheme’ and can the council pursue an 
‘Affordable Rental’ model with the Department also?  
 
Reply: Circular: Housing 06/2023 sets out information and documentation suggested to 
accompany applications for funding support from the Affordable Housing Fund for those local 
authorities who were not set affordable housing targets last year for the period 2022 to 2026 
by the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage. Monaghan County Council are 
proposing an affordable housing scheme in Latlorcan. Initial designs are completed and its 
expected that an application for funding will be made during 2024.   
 
3. In response to numerous issues with streetlights being out for significant periods of time, 
has the council been engaging with ESB to avoid similar issues arising in future? Is there a 
need for certain lines to be upgraded and, if so, what plans are in place to make those 
improvements?  
Reply: After storm Isha some locations were without lights for a prolonged period as priority 
was given to reestablish power to homes and businesses.  Also, the public would need to log 
outages/lighting issues for us to know there is a problem. 
Monaghan County Council maintains and improves the existing public lighting network on 
an ongoing basis. There are a group of streets out in Patrician High School, Carrickmacross 
due to a cable fault, Enerveo, MCCs public lighting contractor, is liaising with ESB on this.  
 
Cllr S. Conlon asked: 
 
4. Regarding the urgent need for Council houses and apartments across our county, with 
supply continuously falling behind the demand by eligible applicants, has the 
Department of Housing set a forecast target for social housing completions and 
acquisitions for 2024? What was the total number provided in 2023?  
 
Reply: The Department has given Monaghan County Council a target of 58 properties to be 
delivered in 2024 under the Housing for All programme. No target has been detailed for 
single property acquisitions. 
See table and graphic below detailing projected number of 109 Acquisitions and Build 
properties to be delivered in 2024 by Monaghan County council and Approved Housing 
Bodies. 
 
 
Housing Delivery 2023 

 
 
A total of 98 additional social housing units were provided in 2023. These homes were 
delivered through a mix of new build and acquisitions. The Department of Housing target 
set for Monaghan County Council for 2023 was 56 social housing units, this was exceeded 
by 75% in 2023.  
In 2023 Monaghan County Council completed the purchase of 19 houses. These properties 
were purchased for Tenants in situ (13), Disability (1), Exit from homelessness / prevention 
of homelessness (3) and properties for people in exceptional need (2). Monaghan County 
Council exceeded the acquisition target by 9 properties.   
Through the Mortgage to Rent scheme a further three houses are now being managed by 
“Home for Life”. These properties are officially recorded under the “Leasing” heading as they 
might eventually return to the ownership of the occupiers, however they are currently in the 
ownership of “Home for Life” to allow occupiers to remain in their homes in spite of 
mortgage issues. 
See table and graphic below for 2023 figures. 
 
 
 
  
5. In line with the core objectives of implementing carbon footprint mitigation measures as 
outlined throughout the recently adopted Climate Action Plan, what number of the 
Council’s social housing stock remains to be retrofitted with energy saving measures that 
will result in an optimum BER rating of B2 or better, along with a reduction in fuel 
poverty that many Council tenants experience? Aligned to this, what is the total number 
of Council owned housing stock?  
 
Reply: The energy efficiency retrofitting programme in its current format was launched by 
the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage in 2021 as a ten-year 
programme of works to improve the energy efficiency of Council owned housing stock to a 
minimum B2 Building Energy Rating or cost optimal equivalent. This programme for 
government superseded the original Phase 1 Energy Efficiency programme which was 
launched in 2013.  Under the Phase 1 programme all council owned housing stock received 
energy upgrades in the form of attic insulation, cavity wall insulation (where possible) and 
heating control upgrades along with insulated water cylinders. 
In 2023 Monaghan County Council’s Housing Section upgraded 92 houses under the Energy 
Efficiency Retrofit Programme (EERP) at a cost of €2.93million (average cost €31,868 per 
dwelling).  The Housing Section are currently developing another ambitious programme of 
works for 2024. The programme being developed by Monaghan County Council will continue 
to select properties in order of priority dictated by their Building Energy Rating with an 
emphasis on properties with the poorest Building Energy Ratings. The works included new 
windows and doors, internal or external wall insulation (if required) and heat pump 
installation. Works also include removing old, inefficient heating systems, upgrading flat roof 

 
 
insulation, closing existing chimneys and all other works necessary to achieve a minimum B2 
Building Energy Rating (BER).  See graphic below detailing 199 properties (Photos of 
completed properties) that received deep Energy Efficiency Retrofitting works since 2021. 
 
 
 
  
In 2024 Monaghan County Council plan to undertake Energy Efficiency Retrofit works to over 
100 properties subject to funding. 
To date 652 properties have a B2 Energy Ratings of higher, 1,136 properties remain to 
receive works to bring them up to B2 Building Energy Rating and the average BER for 
properties to receive works is D1 Building Energy Rating.  
Monaghan County Council’s Social Housing stock was 1,788 properties on the 01/01/2024 
based on the National Oversight Audit Commission (NOAC) criteria. 
 
Also, I ask the Housing Section, what are the total number of social houses provided by our 
partner Associated Housing Bodies, and of that number, what is the percentage that are of 
a B2 or better energy rating?  
 
As of end of Feb the number of AHB properties are:-  
 
Total  
CALF  
244 
CAS  
186 
CLSS 
76 
MTR 
34 
 
540 
We do not have the BER’s for these properties are they are not in MCC ownership. However, 
the older AHB owned houses have BERs averaging between C and D (Ard na Lorgan 
Castleblayney and Convent Lands Carrickmacross etc).  The more recently constructed AHB 
houses have A or B rated BERs (Emy, Drumbear Wood, Coill an Ri etc).   
 
6. For the purpose of this Council aligning to Environmentally Sustainable Development 
Goals, and objectives outlined in the recently adopted Climate Action Plan, will the 
Councils Rural Water Services Section engage with the Department of Local Government 
for the purpose of establishing a Group Sewerage Scheme funded by the Departments 

 
 
Multi-Annual Programme for the dwellings in the Milltown area of Monaghan, that will 
provide long overdue provision of this necessary civic infrastructure.  
 
Reply: The relevant funding measure, Measure A8 of the Multi Annual Rural Water 
Programme-Waste water collection and treatment needs for villages and settlements 
without access to public wastewater services, was announced by the Minister in early 
2022.  Water services looked at proposals for this measure at the time and engaged with the 
Department in relation to Milltown.  However, the settlement did not meet the minimum 
criteria required for application. The projects approved by the Minister under this measure 
were announced in December 2022.  Monaghan County Council will continue to monitor 
developments and will re-engage with the Department if there is any indication of a change 
in the eligibility criteria.   
 
7. In reference to the lengthy delays in processing applications for the Taking in Charge of 
housing developments by this Council, I ask for an update on what progress is occurring 
relating to the following developments being Taken in Charge, what date the application 
was originally submitted, and are Uisce Eireann solely responsible for any delays?  
Name                    Address  
Millbrook               Milltown, Monaghan 
An Crannog          Glen Rd, Monaghan 
Mullach Glas         Mullaghmonaghan, Monaghan  
Cois Cnoic             Pound Hill, Monaghan  
 
Reply: The Planning Authority received a taking in charge application for Millbrook in 2017.  
The Planning Authority are still awaiting the agreement from Uisce Eireann to progess the 
taking in charge.   
The Planning Authority received a taking in charge application for An Crannog in 2018.  The 
intent to take in charge this estate has been formally advertised and it is expected that it will 
go to the April Council meeting. 
The Planning Authority received a taking in charge application for An Crannog in 2020.  Uisce 
Eireann will not agree to take in charge this estate until a wayleave is required to a pumping 
station.  Water Services are engaging with a third-party landowner with regards acquiring 
such a wayleave.   
The Planning Authority received a taking in charge application for Cois Cnoic in 2018.   Due 
to third party land issues and following discussion with Uisce Eireann it has not been possible 
to progress the taking in charge of the development.  Water Services are exploring and 
discussing possible solutions to the routing of the Cois Cnoc gravity foul line with various 
relevant third parties.   This pipeline is being monitored for any signs of deterioration to 
enable early action to be taken to prevent any possible discharge to the surrounding 
environment. 
 
Cllr N. Keelan asked: 
 
8. Given the ongoing scourge of littering across our county including along the N2.  
What success have we had over the course of last year 2023 in detecting some of these 
litter louts, how many fines have been issued over the course of last year 2023 for 
littering excluding those issued for bring banks violations?  
Reply: 47 Fines issued. 
 

 
 
9. How many properties across the county come under the housing assistance payment 
scheme (HAP). How much was paid out to landlords under the (HAP) scheme in 2023 
How many inspections of private rented accommodation have been carried out in 2023, 
what was the outcome of these inspections?  
 
Reply: There are currently 506 active HAP tenancies with Monaghan County Council.   
€ 3,367,620.46 was the cumulative 2023 figure paid to HAP landlords for Monaghan County 
Council. 
There were 404 private rented inspections carried out in 2023. 
305 were non-compliant after the 1st Inspection.  
86 were compliant after the 1st Inspection. 
181 became compliant in 2023. 
In the first quarter of 2024 the inspection team is following up on non-compliant properties.  
 
10. How many local authority housing tenants, if any, find themselves in rent arrears at 
present of over three months, six months, twelve months or more? 
 
Reply: 
Timeframe 
No of customers 
Rents between 7 and 12 weeks old 
88 
Rents greater than 12 weeks old 
260 
 
Only 71 of the >12 weeks old are still active tenants. The remainder are those that have 
surrendered their tenancy with arrears on their accounts. These customers remain on our 
listings as a point of reference. 
Revenue collectors are actively engaged with all customers who are in arrears and support 
them in setting up payment plans and arranging payments through the Household Budget. 
 
11. What is the up-to-date position in relation to the taken in charge by Monaghan County 
council of the Sliabh Dubh estate at Corduff Carrickmacross, have the issues with Uisce 
Éireann being resolved given that this seems to be the problem in terms of moving the 
process forward?   
Reply: Sliabh Dubh is served by a standalone wastewater treatment plant which is not 
maintained by the original developer. Monaghan County Council has previously intervened 
and carried out remedial works relating to this plant when a public health matter has arisen. 
In the 2015 Memorandum of Understanding agreed between local authorities and Uisce 
Eireann, it was confirmed that Uisce Eireann would not take in charge developer provided 
infrastructure (DPI), such as that installed in Sliabh Dubh.  
When taking in charge an estate, the Local Authority is obliged to take in charge all 
infrastructure and cannot decide to omit certain elements (such as standalone wastewater 
treatment systems).  In the case of the taking in charge of Sliabh Dubh, if the Local Authority 
proceeds to take in charge the development, it will be liable for the future maintenance and 
repair of the wastewater treatment system, which is defective.  
The Local Authority must consider the implications of taking in charge of DPI, particularly 
considering Uisce Eireann’s position, and future potential liabilities to the Council.  It is 
understood that Uisce Eireann may be reviewing its position with regards DPI. 
 
12. How many tradesmen / tradeswomen, plumbers, carpenters etc, are currently employed 
by Monaghan County council, what plans have the council to roll out an apprenticeship 
scheme for the various trades in the time ahead?  

 
 
Reply: 
 
  Trade person - 
Craftworker 
No. Employed by Monaghan County Council 
 Craftworker 
  9 
 Horticulturist 
  1 
 Mechanic 
  3 
  Plumbers 
  9 
  Total 
  22 
 
Preparation work has commenced to recruit Apprentices for intake in September 2024 for 
the following Apprenticeship programmes: 
1. Apprentice Mechanic 
2. Apprentice Horticulturist 
Correspondence from the Human Resources Section was circulated on 19th February 2024 
to Career Guidance Teachers of all Secondary Schools in County Monaghan providing details 
to Leaving Certificate Students that a recruitment campaign for the above apprenticeships 
will go live mid/late June 2024.  This is to align with the completion of the Leaving Certificate 
examinations.   Recruitment adverts for the apprenticeships will be placed in the local 
newspaper, the Northern Standard and the Council’s Social media platforms and website 
www.monaghan.ie.  Students are also encouraged to submit an expression of interest email 
to recruitment@monaghancoco.ie 
Nominated mentors for both apprenticeship programmes have been identified and 
approved and both mentors are available to visit any school in the County or Monaghan 
Institute to speak with students that may be interested in these programmes.  
 
In addition to the above CMETB have invited Monaghan County Council to take a stand at a 
career fare scheduled to take place in Monaghan Institute May 2024.  Monaghan County 
Council welcome this opportunity and appropriate staff will be available on the day to 
promote the apprenticeship programmes coming on stream for September 2024. 
 
Cllr P. Connolly asked: 
 
13. In view of the fact Louth Co Co recently purchased a JCB Pothole Pro (pothole filler) 
which was partially funded by the department of Environment and is halving the cost of 
filling potholes and improving the quality of work what plans have Monaghan Co Co to 
purchase a similar machine?  
Reply: Monaghan County Council have currently no plans to purchase a similar machine. The 
major cost incurred for repairing potholes is the traffic management and labor involved. 
Monaghan County Council have previously purchased a velocity patcher, which has provided 
significant savings, and have also an additional velocity patcher on hire to repair potholes 
across the County. 
 
 
Cllr P. Treanor asked: 
 
14. How many new homes were completed in County Monaghan in 2022 and 2023, across all 
sectors -Social, Affordable and Private, per M.D.?  
 
Reply: The most reliable statistics available for this is through CSO New Dwelling Completions 

 
 
data New Dwelling Completions - CSO - Central Statistics Office 
 
 
 
 
138 new build social houses were completed in 2022. 
76 New build social houses were completed in 2023. 
 
15. What stage of development are the new houses on the old school site, Roslea road, 
Clones, at?  
Reply: Ownership of this site has not been transferred to Monaghan County Council yet 
because the transaction is subject to Charities Regulator consent. Regular contact is being 
made with the Vendor’s Solicitors to see if there is anything they can do to progress matters. 
 
 
23. Notice of Motion 
 
Cllr Paudge Connolly proposed, Cllr A McCooey seconded that Monaghan County Council calls 
on the Minister for Further & Higher Education to remove the barriers that prevent students 
who wish to enter the States Graduate Entry Medicine Programme (GEM) from accessing the 
SUSI grant support scheme.  
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting and it 
was agreed unanimously. 
 
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q1
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
29
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q1
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney, Monaghan
Number
25
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q1
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan
Number
2
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q2
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
25
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q2
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney, Monaghan
Number
46
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q2
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan
Number
28
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q3
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
25
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q3
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney, Monaghan
Number
23
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q3
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan
Number
14
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q4
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
40
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q4
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney, Monaghan
Number
66
New Dwelling Completions
2022Q4
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan
Number
12
Total
335
Statistic Label
Quarter
Local Electoral Area
UNIT
VALUE
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q1
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
44
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q1
Carrickmacross-Castleblayn Number
10
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q1
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan Number
12
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q2
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
19
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q2
Carrickmacross-Castleblayn Number
19
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q2
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan Number
14
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q3
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
32
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q3
Carrickmacross-Castleblayn Number
22
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q3
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan Number
9
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q4
Monaghan, Monaghan
Number
13
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q4
Carrickmacross-Castleblayn Number
18
New Dwelling Completions
2023Q4
Ballybay-Clones, Monaghan Number
24
Total
236

 
 
 
 
24. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Denise Hamill, Clerical Officer, Motor Tax on the death Father Maurice Cathcart, 4 
Cherryhill, Gortacharn, Lisnaskea, Fermanagh, BT92 0LE 
• 
Pascal Rooney, Water Services Section on the death of his mother Molly Rooney, 
Tullyhatina, Oram, Castleblayney, Co. Monaghan 
• 
The family of the late John Bruton, former Fine Gael politician and former Taoiseach 
 
It was agreed votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Rory Beggan, Scotstown on his selection for NFL trails 
• 
Kayleigh Trappe on her recent success in the Goss.ie Awards 
 
25. Conferences 
On the proposal of Cllr P Connolly seconded by Cllr D Maxwell it was agreed that the Council 
be represented at the following training events by the members listed below: 
    
Promoting 
Authority 
Subject/Theme 
Venue 
Dates 
Members Selected 
AILG 
AILG Annual 
Training 
Conference 2024 
AILG Annual 
Training Conference 
2024 Tickets, Wed 
14 Feb 2024 at 
17:00 | Eventbrite 
 
Arklow Bay 
Hotel, Co. 
Wicklow. 
14th and 
15th 
February 
2024 
Cllr Brian McKenna 
Cllr Paudge Connolly 
Cllr David Maxwell 
Cllr Noel Keelan 
Cllr Colm Carthy 
Cllr Sean Conlon 
Cllr Richard Truell 
Cllr Sean Gilliland 
Celtic 
Conferences 
 
“A Practical Guide 
to Personal Taxation 
in Ireland” 
O'Donovan's 
Hotel, 
Clonakilty, Co. 
Cork. 
1st - 3rd 
March 
2024 
 
Roscommon 
Conference 
- Suck Valley 
Way 
 
The Rise of 
Loneliness on The 
Emerald Isle 
Hannon’s Hotel, 
Athlone Road, 
Roscommon, 
Co. Roscommon 
13th & 
14th 
March 
2024 
Cllr Richard Truell 
Cllr Paudge Connolly 
Cllr Sean Gilliland 
Cllr Seamus Treanor 
AILG 
 
How to Use Canva 
to Create Marketing 
Images – Beginner 
Level 
 
 
Online 
Friday 
15th 
 

 
 
AILG 
Module 2
 
 
Southern 
Region 
Local Election 2024 
Preparation A 
Briefing from the 
Electoral 
Commission 
Hotel Kilkenny 
Thursday 
21st 
March  
 
Cllr Richard Truell 
Cllr Colm Carthy 
AILG 
Module 2 
 
Eastern & 
Midland/ 
Northern & 
Western 
Local Election 2024 
Preparation – A 
Briefing from the 
Electoral 
Commission 
 
Athlone Hodson 
Bay Hotel, 
Athlone 
Saturday 
23rd 
March 
Cllr David Maxwell 
AILG 
 
AILG-CMG Security 
Training – 
Protecting yourself 
when canvassing for 
Local Elections 
Online 
Friday 5th 
April 
 
AILG 
Defensive Social 
Media Training – 
Protecting yourself 
online 
Online 
Friday 
12th April 
 
 
 
Urgent Business 
 
Cllr P Treanor proposed, Cllr A Campbell seconded that Monaghan County Council writes to the 
President of the EU Commission, the Taoiseach and the Minister for Agriculture advising them 
that the Council has passed the following resolution. 
 
Monaghan County Council supports the IFA ‘enough is enough’ campaign.   
The Council recognises the significant contribution that farming, and the Agri-sector makes to 
the Irish and local economy.  
The Council acknowledges the income challenge on Irish farmers arising from the significant 
increases in the cost of doing business, regulatory costs and cuts in Basic Income support for 
farmers.   
The Council calls on the Government to introduce no further regulations on farmers or any 
measures that may increase costs on farms without full negotiation and agreement with the 
Irish Farmers Association (IFA). The Council calls on the European Union and the Irish 
Government to provide additional stand-alone funding, separate to the Common Agricultural 
Policy (CAP), to support farmers to undertake climate and biodiversity measures’. 
 
Following discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting and the motion 
was agreed unanimously.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr P Connolly, seconded by Cllr R Aughey it was agreed that In view of the 
fact that Ash Dieback has been identified as a roadside safety issue by an IFA delegation and 
the fact that they sought help from Monaghan Co Council at this morning's Co Council meeting 
that this Council request funding from the Department of the Environment to initiate a pilot 

 
 
scheme to cooperate with farmers by providing funding and logistics to help with the removal 
of trees affected by Ash Dieback  
 
 
Cllr B McKenna and Cllr A Campbell proposed, Cllr A McCooey seconded that focused on the 
key principles of social, economic, and environmental sustainability, Monaghan County 
Council agree to proceed with the development of Lough Muckno and its environs. In so 
doing, Monaghan County Council agree to the engagement of consultants to progress the 
proposed 10-year Masterplan and Development Framework for Lough Muckno and its 
environs.’  
 
Following discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting and the motion 
was agreed unanimously.   
 
 
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach concluded the meeting. 
 
 
Signed: 
 
 
 
 
                              Cathaoirleach 
 
 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
Date:  ________________________ 
