 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, Mtek Building, 
Armagh Road, Monaghan, County Monaghan, on Monday 12 February 2024 at 10 a.m. 
 
Chair: 
Cllr D. Maxwell, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
 Cllrs Aughey, Bennett, Campbell, Carthy, Connolly, S Conlon, P. Conlon, Gilliland, 
O’Hanlon, Keelan, McCooey, McElvaney, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, Truell 
 
Via TEAMS: 
Cllr Brian McKenna  
 
Apologies:  
Cllr Seamus Coyle 
 
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms Carmel O’Hare 
Directors of Services, Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, 
Meetings Administrator, Ms. M McGarvey 
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Meetings held on 08 January 2024. 
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr N Keelan seconded by Cllr C Bennett it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Council meeting held on the 08 January 2024 be confirmed. 
 
2.     Correspondence 
 
 
 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting: 
 
• 
Acknowledgement Letter from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, Leo 
Varadkar T.D., regarding request for urgent debate on NSI. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from Ms. Pauline Tully, T.D., regarding additional funding 
announced in Budget 2014. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from Ms. Pauline Tully, T.D., regarding Croì Cònaithe vacant 
property grant. 
• 
Letter from Fermanagh and Omagh District Council regarding A5-N2 Cross Border 
Committee proposed name change. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Minister for the 
Environment, Climate and Communications Eamon Ryan TD. regarding motion RE: Parallel 
running of N2 and NSI projects. 
 
 
2.1  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda 
had issued was also circulated:  
• 
Acknowledgement Letter from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, Leo 
Varadkar T.D., regarding N51 and N2 motion parallel running of projects. 
• 
Acknowledgement Letter from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, Leo 
Varadkar T.D., regarding expectation of driving test services. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Minister for the 
Environment, Climate and Communications Eamon Ryan TD. regarding special fund be set 
up in relation to the salting of roads. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from Mr. Brendan Smyth, T.D., regarding N51 and N2 motion 
parallel running of projects, special fund be set up in relation to the salting of roads and 
Dail Debate on NSI. 
 

 
 
 
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr P Treanor, seconded by Cllr P. Connolly it was agreed that this Council 
forward correspondence received from Fermanagh & Omagh District Council in relation to 
the proposed name change of A5-N2 Cross Border Committee to the ‘N2 AF Ten-T Northwest 
Transport Corridor Committee’ to the A5-N2 Cross Border Committee. 
 
 
3. To consider the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for Blackwater Valley Rural 
Enterprise & Digital Hub 
 
Mr A Hughes, Senior Planner outlined the Part VIII proposal circulated with the agenda.  He 
advised that the proposed development is a rural enterprise and community building which 
would provide a commercial kitchen, café/craft shop/farm shop, exhibition space, training 
rooms, IT suite, offices, floor space for rent/hot desking/remote working and a meeting room.   
Mr Hughes advised that there were no objections received during the public consultation 
period.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D Maxwell seconded by Cllr P Connolly, it was agreed that the Council 
approve for Blackwater Valley Rural Enterprise & Digital Hub in accordance as detailed in the 
Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended).  
 
 
4. To approve the Monaghan Co Co Climate Action Plan 2024-2029 
 
Ms P Monahan, Director of Services introduced the Draft Climate Action Plan as the ‘most 
critical, long-term challenge of our generation, not just for Monaghan but for Ireland, for 
Europe and globally, and not just for us, but for he lives of our children, grandchildren and all 
the generations that will follow us’. 
 
Chief Executive, Robert Burns stated that a huge amount of work had already been done 
across the county in the areas of climate change and biodiversity and a lot of engagement 
had taken place with communities. 
 
Mr M Coyle, Climate Action Co-Ordinator provided members with an overview and 
outcomes from the public consultation on the proposed Monaghan Co Co Climate Action 
Plan 2024-2029.  He provided a recap of statutory context and process to date.   M. Coyle 
stated that the plan is a five-year plan and is required to be adopted by the elected 
members by 23 February 2024.  The plan is divided into five sections and contains 93 
separate actions. 
• 
Section 1. Climate Policy Context 
• 
Section 2. Baseline Emissions Inventory & Climate Change Risk Assessment 
• 
Section 3. Framework of Climate Actions (93) 
• 
Section 4. Monaghan Town Decarbonising Zone (60 actions) 
• 
Section 5. Implementation & Reporting 
 
M. Coyle outlined the consultation and engagement process and provided an overview of 
consultation highlights.  He provided a summary of key themes from submissions received 

 
 
and advised that the response and recommendations to these issues are incorporated in 
the Chief Executive’s report which has been circulated to members.   
 
Mr Coyle responded to members questions. 
   
On the proposal of Cllr S Conlon, seconded by Cllr C Carthy the following amendments were 
proposed and agreed subject to a further public consultation period not being required to 
accommodate said proposals: 
 
‘Section 5.3.4. that members are included along with the DECC with the quarterly monitoring 
reports charting the Plans progress.’  
 
‘That reference to the Safe Routes to the School scheme includes the encouragement of staff, 
along with students, to engage in active travel.’ 
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr S Conlon, seconded by Cllr N Keelan it was agreed that for the purpose 
of enabling our Local Authority Climate Action Plan to commence the process of implementing 
long overdue climate enhancement measures, that this Council write to the Minister for 
Finance Michael McGrath and Sustainable Energy Authority Ireland seeking the requisite 
substantial finances required to fulfil the Climate Action Plan objectives.  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr S Conlon, seconded by Cllr N Keelan it was agreed that following their 
submission to this Council’s Climate Action Plan, that this Council write to Uisce Eireann 
seeking confirmation that effluent discharge into watercourses from Wastewater Treatment 
Plants from both urban and rural settlements meet optimum standards and aligns to their 
commitment of 'having due regard for environmental protection considerations'  
 
 
 Cllr C. Carthy proposed, Cllr A Campbell seconded that pursuant to the provisions of the 
Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 2021 as it amends the 
principle Act of 2015, Monaghan County Council resolves to adopt the Monaghan County 
Council Climate Action Plan 2024-2029, having considered the draft plan, the contents of the 
Chief Executives report on submissions received during the period of consultation and the SEA 
and AA Reports and determinations, carried out in accordance with the requirements and 
regulatory provisions of the SEA Directive (DIR 2001/42/EC) and Article 6(3) of the EU Habitats 
Directive (Directive 92/43/EEC). 
 
A vote by show of hands resulted in 17 for, 0 against.   The Cathaoirleach declared the 
resolution adopted.  
 
 
5. To approve new members to the LCDC/LAG Committee 
 
On the proposal of Cllr, seconded by Cllr R Aughey, seconded by Cllr C Carthy, it was agreed 
that Alan Clark would replace Mr Denis Sheridan as the Trade Union representative.  
On the proposal Cllr C Bennett seconded by Cllr A McCooey it was agreed that Ms Bronagh 
McAree will represent the PPN (the Women’s Assembly)  
 
On the proposal Cllr C Carthy seconded by Cllr P Conlon it was agreed that Paula Loughran 
would replace Mr Cathal Hand as the HSE representative.   
 
 
 

 
 
6. To Consider DRAFT Terms of Reference for establishment of Co Monaghan Tourism & 
Recreation Forum 
 
Ms D. Condra, Tourism Officer, joined the meeting to provide an update to members on 
the establishment of a Tourism and Recreation Forum.  She stated that the establishment 
of the forum was a key objective of the Tourism Strategy recently adopted by the elected 
members and the aim of the forum is to deliver on that strategy. 
 
Ms Condra outlined the proposed Terms of Reference and stated that it was intended that 
the Forum would have an independent Chairperson.  She advised that it is proposed to 
have the inaugural meeting of the Forum in March 2024. 
 
 
On the proposal Cllr S Conlon seconded by Cllr A Campbell it was agreed that Terms of 
Reference as circulated, be approved. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr P Treanor, it was agreed that, up to June 
2024, that 4 elected members sit on the Tourism & Recreational Forum as follows: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Campbell, seconded by Cllr R Truell, it was agreed that Cllr P Conlon 
represent the Fine Gael party on the Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R Aughey it was agreed that Cllr A 
McCooey represent the Fine Fail party on the Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Carthy, seconded by Cllr C Bennett, it was agreed that Cllr S Conlon 
represent the Sinn Fein party on the Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr H McElvaney, seconded by Cllr D Maxwell it was agreed that Cllr S 
Treanor represent the Independents on the Forum. 
 
 
7. To receive an update on the Muckno Masterplan 
 
Chief Executive, Mr R Burns commenced the presentation stating everything that the 
Council was trying to achieve in relation to Lough Muckno was meant to support the 
community in line with their wishes as far as that could be achieved.   Monaghan wants to 
protect and enhance the biodiversity of the facility and support the local economy.  He 
stated that it is an amazing asset for the county and the Co Council had to be considerate 
and deliberate in everything it did. 
 
Mr Burns stated that a review of the Muckno Master plan was the starting point.  He stated 
that a lot of work has gone on in Castleblayney over a number of years – the refurbishment 
of the two Gatehouses and an application for RRDF Funding for the Market House project.  
 
Mr Burns stated that Hope Castle and the Annex need to be progressed as urgently as 
possible.  The condition of these buildings is not good enough for the amenity and not 
acceptable to the community. 
 
Mr A Hughes, Senior Planner outlined the framework and advised that it will identify 
priority actions and specific targets and timeframes for their delivery.  Mr Hughes advised 
that the Lough Muckno Development Committee would be reinvigorated and consulted 
with at all stages.  A stakeholder engagement plan would be put in place and whatever the 
framework turned out to be, it would come bac to the elected members for their approval. 

 
 
Mr C. Flynn, Director of Services stated that the short-term goal is a clean-up and face lift 
operation to Hope Castle and Annex buildings to facilitate access to potential project 
partners.  Monaghan Co Co would seek funding to restore Hope Castle and the Annex to 
their former glory and had confidence in doing that based on previous track record.  Mr 
Flynn referred to the Gate Lodges and other works involved in the Market Square 
regeneration plan in the town.  He referred also to other projects in Castleblayey concluding 
by stating that there is ‘every reason for Monaghan Co Co to be confident in our ability to 
turn Lough Muckno around’. 
 
It was agreed that the sub-committee would convene in the next two weeks to discuss the 
proposed framework and a recommendation would be brough back to the full Council. 
    
On the proposal of Cllr D Maxwell seconded by Cllr A Campbell it was agreed that following 
the local elections, the reformed Muckno Sub-Committee will have representation from each 
Municipal District. 
 
 
8. Audited Annual Financial Statement for the Year Ended 31st December 2022 
 
Members noted the Audit Committee Report on the Annual Financial Statement 2022 and 
the Local Government Auditors Report 2022 on the Accounts of Monaghan County Council 
for year ended 31 December 2022, all of which had been circulated to the members. 
 
9. Audit Committee 
 
(i) To receive the Audit Committee Annual Report for 2023 which includes Performance & 
Effectiveness.       
The members noted the Audit Committee Annual Report for 2023, which includes 
Performance and Effectiveness, which had been circulated with the agenda. 
(ii) To approve the Draft Audit Committee Charter for 2024  
The members noted the Draft Audit Committee Charter for 2024 which had been 
circulated with the agenda. 
On the proposal of Cllr H McElvaney, seconded by Cllr P Connolly, it was agreed that the 
Draft Audit Committee Charter for 2024, as presented, be adopted. 
(iii) To approve the Draft Audit Committee Work Programme for 2024 
 
The members noted the Draft Audit Committee Work Programme for 2024 which had 
been circulated with the agenda.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr H McElvaney, seconded by Cllr P Connolly, it was agreed that the 
Draft Audit Committee Work Programme for 2024 as presented, be adopted. 
 
 
10. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group Meeting on 23 
January 2024. 
 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 23 January 
2024, which had been circulated.   It was agreed that the Annual Awards Ceremony would 

 
 
take place on Monday, 08 April 2024 following the April Council meeting which will 
commence at 2.00 pm. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P Treanor seconded by Cllr S Gilliland it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 23 January 2024 and the recommendations 
contained therein be approved.  
 
11. To receive Management Report – January 2024 
 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for January 2024 which had been 
circulated with the agenda.   
 
The members noted the Management Report.   
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr S Conlon, seconded by Cllr N Keelan it was agreed that this Council 
write to the Department of Finance and Department of Transport seeking an increase of 
funding allocation to the Active Travel projects that continue to be underfunded year after 
year. 
 
 
12. Business submitted by Chief Executive 
 
The Chief Executive advised members that the Corporate Plan process is commencing.  He 
stated that it is important to get the process underway to have a Plan in place at the end of 
2024.   
 
The Chief Executive updated members on the upcoming St Patrick’s Day trip.  He advised that 
the aim is to showcase Monaghan at a high level and a number of events have been scheduled 
over the course of the trip to do this.  He stated that a number of prominent business people 
are also travelling as part of a wider Monaghan delegation.  The American launch of ‘Project 
Children’ will also take place during the visit.   
  
13. Matters arising out of the minutes of Council meeting held 08 January 2024 
 
 There were no matters arising out of the Council meeting held on 08 January 2024. 
 
    
14. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Scheme 
 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the N2 National Primary Road 
Scheme.  
 
• 
Email from Ms. Pauline Tully, T.D., regarding funding for the N2 Ardee to 
Castleblayney road scheme. 
 
 
15. To receive update on North South Interconnector project 
 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the North south Interconnector 
project:  

 
 
 
• 
Email from Ms. Pauline Tully, T.D., regarding the North South Interconnector issue.  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S Gilliland, seconded by Cllr R Truell it was agreed that this Council call 
on First Minister Michelle O’Neill and John O’Dowd, MLA to reverse the decision of former 
Minister Nicola Mallon to allow the over-grounding of the North South Interconnector so that 
the project will be undergrounded on the Northern Ireland side.  Furthermore, an invitation 
to meet with the members of Monaghan Co Council on this matter should issue to John 
O’Dowd, MLA and Minister Eamon Ryan   
 
 
16. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project. 
Project progressing well – no further update. 
17. Questions & Replies: 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  
• 
What is the latest up-to-date situation with the taking in charge of Conabury Hill estate 
(Castleblayney) and Alderwood (Carrickmacross)? Has Uisce Eireann responded to 
items raised with them?  
 
Reply: Conabury Hill: The Planning Authority are still awaiting the agreement from Uisce 
Eireann to progress the taking in charge.   
Alderwood: The Council Water Services section are finalising their assessment and 
following this consultation will take place with Uisce Eireann to get agreement on taking 
in charge of water assets.   
 
 
• 
Can the executive confirm if the Council has received tenders for the Feasibility Study 
and Strategic Assessment Report for a Swimming Pool/Leisure Centre for 
Carrickmacross? If so, what are the next steps?  
Reply: A total of 5 tender submissions were received for the engagement of professional 
services to prepare a ‘Feasibility Study’ & ‘Strategic Assessment Report’ for a proposed 
Swimming Pool and Leisure Centre in Carrickmacross. The Council proposes to conduct 
the formal tender assessment process in mid-February. Having regard to compliance 
with relevant procurement procedures and timelines, it is expected that the contract for 
engagement of professional consultants will be executed in March 2024. 
 
 
• 
What is the latest update in relation to Clos na Droimann, Carrickmacross, where 
Tuath is due to provide 12no. 4-bed houses and 14no. 2-bed apartments for social 
housing? If this project is going to see a significant delay, what measures are being 
taken to deal with the derelict apartment unit on site which is an eyesore in the town?  
 
Reply: Monaghan County Council contacted all parties involved to see if issues delaying 
this project could be addressed.  All parties now appear to be working towards 
resolution.  The possibility of a revised funding application to address inflation will be 
considered by the Department. It is hoped that the development will recommence 

 
 
during 2024.  
 
Cllr S. Conlon asked: 
• 
Considering the extensive number of bridges that have been strengthened and rebuilt 
in recent years across the County, will the Roads Section prepare a case for 
Department funding to realign the Fauklands bridge on the main Glaslough Rd. which 
presents a considerable danger especially for drivers travelling from beyond the region 
visiting the Glaslough area?  
Reply: Roads will inspect this bridge to assess its condition and whether there is a safety 
issue. However please note that work was carried out on this bridge in July 2019. Bridges 
with an EI rating of 4 and 5 are given priority. Currently over 57% of the bridges in the 
county have an EI rating of 4 and 5. As such further investment in this bridge is unlikely 
at this time. 
 
• 
In relation to the current construction of social houses at Knockcarrick, Annyalla, 
what is the breakdown of 2-3-4 bed dwellings etc. planned upon completion? Also, 
what is the target date agreed by the Approved Housing Body, Council and 
contractor for completion, and availability for occupation of these dwellings?  
 
Reply: All 30 houses at Knockcarrick in Annyalla are being constructed by GEDA 
Construction for Monaghan County Council. There is no AHB involved in this project.  
 
The breakdown and planned handover dates for the 30no new houses in Knockcarrick is 
as follows: 
 
Phase 1 - Numbers 73-81:  4no 2-Bed Bungalows, 2no 3-Bed Semi Detached, 3no 2-bed 
terraced:  completion March 2024 
 
Phase 2 – Numbers 82-92:  3no 2-bed terraced (these may come with phase 1, or shortly 
after), 4no 3-Bed Semi Detached, 4no 4-Bed Semi Detached:  completion June 2024 
 
Phase 
3 
– 
Numbers 
93-102:  
8no 
3-Bed 
Semi 
Detached, 
2no 
2-bed 
Bungalows:  completion Aug 2024 
 
                       Total 12no. 2 beds, 14 no. 3 beds, 4no. 4 beds            
 
Availability for occupation is usually within approximately 4 weeks of completion. 
  
• 
In follow up to the data provided last month relating to the Glaslough Village New 
Line / Emyvale Road (R-185-1) traffic count and speeding survey that indicated speed 
limit violation, what traffic calming measures are being considered in this residential 
area?  
 
Reply: In line with the Monaghan County Council traffic calming policy the MD will 
assess the survey data. 
 
 
Cllr N. Keelan asked: 
• 
What is the up-to-date position in relation to the roll out of a the much-needed 
affordable housing scheme for the people of County Monaghan?  
 

 
 
Reply: Housing Section has met with several developers in the County to progress 
turnkey opportunities for Affordable Housing. Furthermore, designs for a Council led 
Affordable Housing Scheme in Latlorcan are progressing with expected approval being 
sought under Section 179 (a) of the Planning and Development Act in Q3 of 2024. 
  
• 
How many housing allocations have been made and accepted by Monaghan County 
council and other approved housing bodies in the last twelve months, how many 
new housing applications have we received and approved in the last twelve months?  
 
Reply:  
Offers Accepted Jan – Dec 2023 
MCC Housing     137 
AHB Housing        47 
 
New Applications Approved Jan – Dec 2023 
240 
 
• 
How many active travel schemes can we expect to see commencing and completed in 
the next twelve to eighteen months, where are these schemes located?  
Reply: 
• 
Off road cycle path along east side of N2 on southern approach to Emyvale 
Village. 
• 
Off road cycle path along north side of N2 between Corlat Roundabout and 
Collegiate College.  
The Active Travel unit are continuing to work on over 20 Active Travel across the county. 
The list below shows schemes that are expected to have construction work commenced 
and/or completed by mid-2025.  
 
Project Code: Project Name 
MN/21/0001 
Upgrade of Monaghan Town Greenway 
MN/21/0013 
Monaghan Town Horseshoe Bridge Active Travel 
MN/21/0020 
Low Cost Junction Tightening/Pedestrian Crossing Scheme 
MN/21/0021 
Light Segregation Cycle Scheme- Castleblayney 
MN/22/0001 
Clones Peace Link Active Travel Scheme 
MN/22/0002 
Monaghan Town Local Transport Plan 
MN/22/0004 
Lough Egish Village Active Travel Scheme 
MN/23/0005 
Clones - Tirnahinch Road Footpath 
MN/23/0007 
Carrickmacross R178/Oriel Road Active Travel Scheme 
MN/23/0016 
SRTS St Louis GNS & St Louis Infant School - Monaghan R1 
MN/23/0017 
SRTS St Marys Boys NS R2 
MN/23/0018 
SRTS St Tiarnach’s Primary School, Clones R2 
MN/23/0102 
Woodview to Glen Road connectivity - Monaghan Town 

 
 
 
 
• 
Approximately how many roads were closed across the county as a result of the 
recent storm Isha, In commending our council staff and all other agencies for dealing 
with this very dangerous situation, what would be the appropriate cost to the council 
of dealing with this storm event. Will this cost come from our own resources?  
Reply: 75 locations were reported on the road network that involved closures 
following storm Isha. Monaghan County Council are still waiting on the final cost to the 
council. It is not envisaged that emergency funding will be made available from central 
government to cover these costs therefore the cost will come from the MD 
Discretionary budget (DoT funded). 
 
• 
Given the ongoing housing crisis we are experiencing in terms of affordable available 
properties to rent and available affordable properties to buy, what is the current 
planning policy of Monaghan County council in terms of those wishing to site a 
residential mobile home unit / modular home unit / log type home etc, in a back 
garden for example or a stand-alone site?  
Reply: Section 15.13.4 and Policy RDP19 of the Monaghan County Development Plan 
2019-2025 acknowledge that it may be necessary to temporarily erect a mobile home / 
temporary accommodation to facilitate site specific, exceptional and/or personal 
circumstances. In these instances, the Planning Authority will consider granting 
temporary permission (for a period of up to 5 years) where a permanent dwelling is 
being constructed on site, or to facilitate site specific and compelling domestic or 
personal circumstances where genuine hardship would result if planning permission for 
the temporary accommodation were refused. Proposals for mobile homes / temporary 
accommodation must comply with normal development management considerations 
such as visual impact, design considerations, the treatment of wastewater and the 
provision of a safe access onto the public road. Planning permission will not be granted 
for the permanent retention of a mobile home / temporary accommodation. 
 
 
 
Cllr B. McKenna asked: 
• 
Will this Council, as a matter of urgency, reconvene the Lough Muckno Development 
sub-committee to oversee, assess and, if necessary, bring forward recommendations 
in relation to any proposals for the future of Lough Muckno Castle and the lands 
therein." 
Reply: Subsequent to the recommendations set out in the Strategic Planning and 
Environmental Appraisal Report, prepared by Fehily Timoney on behalf of Monaghan 
County Council, the Executive has initiated the process of developing a 10-year 
Masterplan and Development Framework for Lough Muckno and its environs. In this 
regard, it is intended to appoint a multi-disciplinary team of consultants with expertise 
in planning, economic development, recreation, and tourism. It is the Executive’s 
intention to engage collaboratively with the Lough Muckno Development Committee at 
all stages during the development and delivery of the proposed Masterplan. It 
anticipated that a meeting of the Lough Muckno Development Committee shall be 
convened within the coming weeks. 
 
 

 
 
Cllr P. Connolly asked: 
• 
In relation to the Domestic Wastewater Treatment Systems & Septic Tanks   
How many inspections have been conducted since the grant schemes were 
introduced in June 2020 – Since June 2020 Monaghan County Council have carried 
out 123 No. of inspection as per the National Inspection Plan (NIP) 
1) How many systems failed inspection? Since June 2020 - Since June 2020 
Monaghan County Council has issued 60 No. Advisory Notices on Domestic 
Wastewater Treatment Systems (DWWTS) that have failed inspections.  
2) How many households throughout the county have availed of the grant 
scheme to repair their faulty systems? Since June 2020 11 No. of Households have 
availed of the grant. Please note that a large portion of Advisory Notices issued to 
homeowners where in relation of desludging the Domestic Wastewater Treatment 
System, Costs incurred for the routine maintenance, servicing or de-sludging of a 
DWWTS do not qualify for a grant. 
(B) In relation to the recently announced increased grant of €12,000 to repair & 
upgrade septic tanks what areas of Co Monaghan (% area of county) qualifies to 
apply for this grant? Response - Grants are available under three separate 
schemes: 
• 
DWWTS grant under the National Inspection Plan - To be eligible for this 
grant, works to the DWWTS must arise directly from an inspection carried 
out under the National Inspection Plan, and the subsequent issue of an 
Advisory Notice to the householder by the local authority. 
• 
DWWTS grant in Prioritised Areas for Action - To be eligible for this grant, 
the DWWTS serving a house must be situated in a Prioritised Area for 
Action in accordance with the River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 
2018-2021, and the applicant must have received a letter from the Local 
Authority Waters Programme Office (LAWPO) on behalf of the local 
authority, confirming eligibility to apply for a grant. 
• 
DWWTS grant in High Status Objective Catchment Areas - To be eligible for 
this grant, the DWWTS serving a house must be situated in a High-Status 
Objective Catchment Area in accordance with the River Basin Management 
Plan for Ireland 2018-2021, and the applicant must have received a letter 
from the local authority confirming eligibility to apply for a grant. 
• 
To ask Monaghan Co Co for an update in relation to the Aldi site in Monaghan town? 
Reply:  Monaghan County Council granted planning permission for an Aldi discount 
food store on the 5th April 2018. This decision was appealed to An Bord Pleanála. 
Planning permission for the development was subsequently granted by An Bord 
Pleanála on the 7th March 2019 subject to 14 conditions. A number of compliance 
submissions relating to the imposed planning conditions have been received and are 
currently being assessed by the Planning Authority. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
18. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations   
 
It was agreed votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Caroline Sherry Gallagher, Arts Office on the death of her father-in-law Hugh Gallagher, 
Killyboley, Glaslough. 
• 
The family of Noel McKenna, Scotstown RIP, brother of the later Cllr Sheila McKenna, 
Uncle to Brenda McAnespie and Grainne McNamee. 
• 
Bronagh Treanor, Planning Department on the death of her Aunt Mona Finch, Boston, 
USA 
• 
Patrick McKenna, General Operative on the death of his sister, Kathleen Stack 
• 
Cllr David Maxwell on the death of his uncle Denis Walsh, Limerick 
• 
Eamonn O’Sullivan on the death of his mother Sarah O’Sullivan, Wicklow 
 
It was agreed votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Our Lady’s Secondary School, Castleblayney Senior Girls Team and Management on 
winning the Ulster Schools A Senior Ladies GAA Competition. 
• 
Ethan Graham on making his debut for the Ireland U20s in France 
• 
Molly Coffee O’Connor on qualifying to represent Ireland at the world and European 
Junior Olympic Weightlifting Championships. 
 
 
19. Conferences 
On the proposal of Cllr N Keelan seconded by Cllr P Conlon it was agreed that the Council be 
represented at the following training events by the members listed below: 
 
Promoting 
Authority 
Subject/Theme 
Venue 
Dates 
Members Selected 
AILG 
"Elected Members 
Briefing: Annual 
Declarations, 
Donations, Code of 
Conduct, and Local 
Representation 
Allowance Update" 
Out of Region 
Option 
Greenhills 
Conference & 
Leisure Centre, 
Limerick 
 
9.30am – 
1.00pm 
Saturday 
27th 
January 
2024 
 
Cllr Paudge Connolly 
Cllr Seán Conlon 
 
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach concluded the meeting. 
 
 
Signed: 
 
 
 
 
                              Cathaoirleach 
 
 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
Date:  ________________________ 
