 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, Mtek Building, 
Armagh Road, Monaghan, County Monaghan, on Monday 08 April 2024 at 2.00pm 
 
Chair: 
Cllr D. Maxwell, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
  Cllrs Aughey, Bennett, Campbell, Carthy, Connolly, S. Conlon, P. Conlon, Gilliland, 
Keelan, McCooey, McElvaney, McKenna, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, S. Treanor, Truell 
 
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. C O’Hare, Directors 
of Services, Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, Mr. T. 
Gourley, Senior Executive Planner, Mr. A. Hughes, Senior Planner, Mr. P. Connolly, 
Senior Executive Engineer, Meetings Administrator, Ms. M McGarvey 
 
 
Urgent Business 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the members that he had received three notices of urgent business as 
follows: 
 
1. 
On behalf of Cllr C Bennett:  
Following the Information provided to the LCDC committee at their March meeting – 
that the new Leader programme is to be awarded to Monaghan Integrated 
Development. 
We ask that Monaghan Council write to the Department to obtain clarification on the 
future direction and purpose of the LCDC in the county as they will be no longer 
required be the local action group for leader funding. 
There is serious concern felt by all members of the LCDC, many of whom have given up 
their time voluntarily. We seek direction from the Department.   
In awarding the Leader programme to a local development company, this change will 
have a detrimental impact on the LCDC which has had representatives from statutory 
bodies, Elected Members and Community groups in place for the last 10 years.  
The LCDC will be meaningless and have no input in decision making going forward for 
all Leader applications in the County. 
2. 
On behalf of Cllr S Gilliland:  
 
That this Council write to Minister Eamon Ryan, Minister for Transport, Climate Action 
and Communications with the responsibility for Roads Funding and all Oireachtas 
Members to seek an urgent Meeting in relation to providing emergency Funding from 
the 200 million under spend in his Dept to the Roads network in county Monaghan.  
  
This money is urgently required to Re Surface, Repair, and Maintain our Local Roads 
Network which have been totally destructed by the un precedented amount of Rain Fall 
and Storms we have suffered since June 2023. The Funding we received in the Roads 
Program 2024 while welcome stops a long way short of Re Surfacing and basic Repairs 
and Maintenance for our Network.  
 

 
 
We are a Rural Non-Maritime County with no Rail Network which supply's 90 % of Ireland 
Poultry and Mushrooms substantial Beef and Dairy Foods that are much needed in 
Ireland and across the world, we heavily rely on our Local roads network to get food to 
market. 
 
3. 
On behalf of the Sinn Féin Party:  
 
That this Council writes to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and Marine, Mr. Charlie 
McConalogue, T.D., Minister for Finance, Mr. Michael McGrath, T.D. and Minister for 
Public Expenditure, National Development Plan Delivery and Reform, Mr. Pascal 
O’Donohue, T.D. calling for the reconvening of the National Fodder Committee and 
engagement with all the farming organisations and stakeholders. It is prudent to 
prepare for a ‘worst case scenario’ rather than complacency which could cause further 
problems and panic. Agriculture is the primary industry in County Monaghan. Due to 
the inclement weather and forecasts of unsettled weather for the foreseeable future 
many farmers are concerned and worried about their current supply of fodder and the 
prospects for next winter’s harvest.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, it was agreed to enter ‘into 
committee’ to discuss whether to accept the motions submitted as urgent business.  
 
Following a short discussion, it was agreed to take the motions of urgent business at the end 
of the meeting.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, it was agreed that the Council 
revert to public session.  
 
May Council Meeting 
 
The Members agreed that the May meeting be held on Tuesday 07 May 2024 at 2.00pm.  
 
Civic Reception 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney, it was agreed that a 
Civic Reception would be afforded to, Patrick Corrigan – World Irish Dance Champion, 
following the May Council meeting. 
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Meetings held on 04 March 2024  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan seconded by Cllr P. Treanor it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Council meeting held on the 04 March 2024 be confirmed. 
 
2.     Correspondence 
 
 
 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting: 
 
• 
Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance, Mr. Michael McGrath T.D., 
regarding the VAT rate for the Tourism and Hospitality Sector.  
• 
Acknowledgement letter from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, Mr. Leo 
Varadkar, T.D., regarding the VAT rate for the Tourism and Hospitality Sector.  
• 
Letter from the Private Secretary to the Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr 
Micheál Martin, T.D., regarding additional funding of €5.9m to achieve proper road 

 
 
maintenance. 
• 
Acknowledgement letter from the Assistant to Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, Mr. Leo 
Varadkar, T.D., regarding additional funding of €5.9m to achieve proper road 
maintenance. 
• 
Acknowledgement Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance, Mr. 
Michael McGrath T.D., regarding the additional funding for the hot tarring to fill the 
potholes. 
 
• 
Resolution from Clare County Council regarding policy change that allows participants in 
Community Employment Schemes (CES), Rural Social Scheme (RSS), and Tús programme 
to continue their contributions until the age of 70. 
 
Additional Correspondence  
 
2.1  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda 
had issued was also circulated:  
• 
Letter from Mandy Doyle, HSE, Head of Service, Primary Care Community Healthcare 
Cavan Donegal Leitrim Monaghan Sligo regarding increase the staff of primary care 
nursing. 
• 
Email from Uisce Eireann, regarding effluent discharge into watercourses from 
wastewater treatment plants. 
• 
Acknowledgement Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Transport, Eamon 
Ryan T.D., regarding the Ash Dieback roadside safety issue. 
• 
Acknowledgement Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Transport, Eamon 
Ryan T.D., regarding the additional funding of 5.9 million to achieve proper road 
maintenance.  
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that this Council 
would seek an urgent meeting with Minister Heather Humphrey’s, T.D., and all Oireachtas 
members to discuss the following:  
 
• 
Funding to progress the N2 Ardee – Castleblayney road scheme.  
• 
Funding to maintain our County and Regional Road Network, given the requirement 
for an additional €5.9 million to achieve proper maintenance of our county road 
network.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett it was agreed, that this Council, 
rewrites to the Minister for Finance, An Taoiseach and An Tánaiste, regarding reducing the 
VAT rate for pubs from 23% to 17%, while factoring in, the number of businesses within the 
Tourism and Hospitality sector that have closed over recent years.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, it was agreed that this 
Council writes to the Minister for Rural and Community Development, Ms. Heather 
Humprey’s, T.D., in follow up to the publication of the Working Group on Dog Control 
seeking the immediate allocation of funding to support the recruitment of an additional 
dog warden for County Monaghan. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Connolly, seconded by Cllr B. McKenna, it was agreed that this 
Council supports the Clare CoCo motion calling on the Minister for Social Protection to 
consider and implement a policy change that allows participants in Community Employment 

 
 
Schemes (CES), Rural Social Schemes (RSS) and Tús programs to continue their valuable 
contributions until the age of 70. This extension would not only acknowledge the dedication 
and skills of these individuals but also contribute to the over-all wellbeing of our community 
and enhance sustainability of these programs. These programs play a crucial role in fostering 
community development, providing essential services and supporting those who may face 
challenges in securing traditional employment. Currently participants in these valuable 
community-based employment programs are required to retire at the age of 66 and 
considering the changing demographics and the desire of individuals to remain actively 
engaged in work programs, I am asking you to make this important change to allow 
participants the opportunity to continue to contribute to their local communities.  
 
 
 
 
3. To consider the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for the construction of new 
Civic Office Building at Roosky and Tirkeenan, Monaghan Town. 
 
Mr. C. Flynn, Director of Services gave the following overview of the key milestones to date, 
in relation to the proposed development of the new Civic Office Building at Roosky and 
Tirkeenan, Monaghan Town: 
• 
April 2021 
The preliminary business case to develop the new civic offices was agreed by 
members.  
• 
November 2022 
The preliminary design for the new civic offices was approved by members.  
• 
November 2023 
Members agreed to submit the Part VIII Planning submission and tender 
process for the development of the new civic offices.  
• 
April 2024 
Members to consider Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with 
Part VIII of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) 
for the construction of new Civic Office Building at Roosky and Tirkeenan, 
Monaghan Town. 
 
Mr. C. Flynn, referred to the Chief Executive’s Report, prepared in accordance with Part VIII 
of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for the construction of the 
new Civic Office Building at Roosky and Tirkeenan, Monaghan Town. He highlighted that 
members considerations at this stage relate to planning matters only and that a tender 
report would be the next key decision point being brought to the members for their 
consideration by the end of 2024.  
 
Mr. A Hughes, Senior Planner advised that following the public consultation period, no 
objections or external consultations were received. He stated that with regard to the zoning 
objective applicable to the site, the design, layout and scale of the proposed development, 
would be consistent with the County Development Plan 2019 – 2025, Ministerial Guidelines 
and the proper planning and sustainable development of the area. 
 
Key points to note from the Report included: 
 

 
 
• 
A Noise Report had been completed and the findings were minimal.  
• 
The development will provide for new access routes and active travel 
provision.  
• 
The impact on the road network is considered satisfactory.  
• 
The site will include 112 parking spaces.  
 
Mr. R Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C Flynn, Director of Services, Mr. A Hughes, Senior Planner 
and Mr. P Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer, responded to members queries on the 
Report.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McKenna, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, it was agreed to approve the 
construction of the new Civic Offices Building at Roosky and Tirkeenan, Monaghan as 
detailed in the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the Planning 
and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
A recorded vote was taken which resulted as follows:  
 
For: Cllrs R. Aughey, C. Bennett, A. Campbell, C. Carthy, P. Conlon, S. Gilliland, N. Keelan, D. 
Maxwell, H. McElvaney, B. McKenna, P. Treanor and Truell 
Total: 12 
 
Against: Cllrs P. Connolly, A. McCooey, PJ O’Hanlon, S. Treanor 
Total: 4 
 
Abstentions:  
Total: 0 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal carried.  
 
 
4. Strategic Directions regarding the preparation of the Draft Monaghan County 
Development Plan 2025-2031 
Mr. T. Gourley, Senior Executive Planner, referred to the Chief Executive’s report on 
submissions received on the pre-draft consultation process in accordance with Section 11 
(4) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) that had been circulated with 
the agenda.  
 
Mr. T. Gourley provided an overview of the Development Plan Process. He noted that 66 
submissions were received as part of the pre-draft public consultation and highlighted that 
a summary of the responses had been set out in the Chief Executive’s Report. He advised 
members that the development plan process was now at the stage of issuing the strategic 
direction papers and that the next step would be to convene sub-committee workshops, 
over the next 6 weeks, which will include discussions regarding the content of each chapter 
or topic within the Development plan.  
On the proposal of Cllr P. Connolly seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the issuing of the strategic direction papers in accordance with section 11 (4) 
of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended).  
 
 

 
 
5. To consider Taking in Charge application for An Crannog, Glen Road, Monaghan. 
 
Members considered the Taking in Charge Application circulated for An Crannog, Glen Road, 
Monaghan.   
 
On the proposal Cllr P. Connolly, seconded by Cllr S. Treanor it was agreed that the Council 
approve the application for An Crannog, Glen Road, Monaghan, in accordance with the Taking 
in Charge of Estates and Declaration of Public Road Notice, under Section 180 of the Planning 
and Development Act 2000 (as amended), & Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993.  
 
6. To consider Taking in Charge application for Glaslough: Main Street, Village Square; Village 
Green; and Lough Lane, Co. Monaghan. 
 
Members considered the Taking in Charge Application circulated for Glaslough: Main Street, 
Village Green; and Lough Lane, Co. Monaghan.   
 
On the proposal Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett it was agreed that the Council 
approve the application for Glaslough: Main Street, Village Green; and Lough Lane, Co. 
Monaghan, in accordance with the Taking in Charge of Estates and Declaration of Public Road 
Notice, under Section 180 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), & Section 
11 of the Roads Act 1993.  
 
7. To consider Taking in Charge application for Knocknamaddy, Ballybay 
 
Members considered the Taking in Charge Application circulated for Knocknamaddy, 
Ballybay, Co. Monaghan.   
 
On the proposal Cllr S. Gilliland, seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney it was agreed that the Council 
approve the application for Knocknamaddy, Ballybay, Co. Monaghan, in accordance with the 
Taking in Charge of Estates and Declaration of Public Road Notice, under Section 180 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), & Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993.  
 
8. To consider Taking in charge - Telayden Heights, Telayden, Milltown, Co. Monaghan. 
 
Members considered the Taking in Charge Application circulated for Telayden Heights, 
Telayden, Milltown, Co. Monaghan.   
 
On the proposal Cllr B. McKenna, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the application for Telayden Heights, Telayden, Milltown, Co. Monaghan, in 
accordance with the Taking in Charge of Estates and Declaration of Public Road Notice, under 
Section 180 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), & Section 11 of the 
Roads Act 1993.  
 
 
 
9. To consider S183 Lease of 1st Floor in Motor Tax Building to CMETB 
 
In accordance with the Ethics Framework, Cllrs D. Maxwell, S. Conlon, PJ O’Hanlon, A. 
Campbell and C. Carthy declared a possible conflict of interest in relation to this item and 
withdrew from the meeting room whilst the matter was being dealt with. 
 
On the proposal Cllr N. Keelan seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland it was agreed that the Council 
approve the Lease of the 1st floor in the Motor Tax building to Cavan and Monaghan 

 
 
Education and Training Board (formerly known as Monaghan VEC), located at Park Street, 
Monaghan, in accordance with the terms of notice dated 29 January 2024 and attached site 
location map under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001.   
 
10. To consider S183 Disposal of lands at Drumcrew, Castleblayney 
 
 In accordance with the Ethics Framework, Cllr S. Gilliland declared a possible conflict of 
interest in relation to this item and withdrew from the meeting room whilst the matter was 
being dealt with. 
 
On the proposal Cllr A. Campbell, seconded by Cllr N.Keelan  it was agreed that the Council 
approve the disposal of lands at Drumcrew, Castleblayney, Co. Monaghan, in accordance 
with the terms of notice dated 16 January 2024 and attached site location map under Section 
183 of the Local Government Act 2001.   
 
 
11. To Consider the Section 86 Agreement between Monaghan, Louth and Cavan Co Council 
 
On the proposal Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the Section 86 Agreement for Monaghan County Council to continue act as the 
national leader in cold-mix RAP technologies with the three other local authorities involved 
(Louth CoCo, Cavan CoCo, Cork CoCo).  
 
12. To receive a presentation from Crowe Consultants on Corporate Plan 2024 – 2029 
 
Ms. Carmel O’Hare, Director of Corporate Services, informed the members that in 
accordance with Section 134(2) of the Local Government Act 2001 there is a requirement 
on the Council to adopt a Corporate Plan within 6 months of the date of the Annual 
meeting, in an election year.  She stated that Crowe Consultants had been appointed to 
assist in the preparation of the Draft Corporate Plan 2024-2029 which will set out the 
Council’s priorities for the next 5 years.  
 
Shane McQuillan, Crowe Consultants, gave a presentation to the members, outlining the 
terms of reference, project plan, timeframe, key issues, progress made to date, and 
opportunities for the current Council, new Council, members of the public and staff to 
provide their feedback and input.   
 
He highlighted the following next steps:  
 
• 
Reviewing the existing Corporate Plan and background documents.  
• 
Conducting fact-finding exercises to better understand the broad range of Council 
services.  
• 
Surveying staff and members of the public to obtain their views.  
• 
Engagement with Strategic Policy Committees 
• 
Development of an Outline Strategic document  
• 
Corporate Plan development workshops 
 
Mr. Robert Burns, Chief Executive, responded to members queries and highlighted that 
members input would form part of the engagement process. He noted that there is a 
degree of overlap between the Corporate Plan and the County Development Plan. The 
Corporate Plan focuses on, skills development, staffing, environmental planning across the 
range of services that the Council provides across the County, whereas the County 

 
 
Development Plan ensures proper planning and sustainable development within the 
County.  The Cathaoirleach thanked Mr McQuillan and his associates for their presentation. 
 
 
13. To consider the Draft Monaghan County Council Annual Report 2023 
 
The members considered the Draft Monaghan County Council Annual Report for 2023 which 
had been circulated with the agenda for the meeting.    
 
Ms M. McGarvey, A/Senior Executive Officer, outlined the main elements of the Draft Annual 
Report for 2023.  The comprehensive report, which had been prepared in accordance with 
the Local Government Act, 2001, provides an overview of the activities and progress made 
by each of the Directorates within Monaghan County Council during 2023.    
 
Members commended staff on the volume of work undertaken during the year and the 
significant progress being made in the delivery of services across all sections of the 
organisation. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, it was agreed to adopt the Draft 
Monaghan County Council Annual Report for 2023 as presented. 
 
 
14. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group 22 March 2024 
 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 22 March 
2024, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney, it was agreed that Ms Breda 
McKenna (Community and Voluntary sector), would replace Ms. Bronagh McAree on the Local 
Community Development Committee (LCDC).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland, it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 22 March 2024 and the recommendations 
contained therein be approved.  
 
 
15. To receive Management Report – March 2024 
 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for March 2024 which had been 
circulated with the agenda. He referred to the Community Recognition Fund 2024, whereby 
Monaghan County Council received a sizeable allocation of €914,972. The Fund aims to 
support the development of facilities that will be used by all members of the community in 
the future. He encouraged members to bring the Fund to the attention of constituents, local 
clubs/community groups so that they can submit proposals for consideration before the 
closing date of 01 May 2024.  
 
The Chief Executive also welcomed the announcement that Monaghan County Council would 
be hosting the prestigious All Ireland IPB Pride of Place Awards night which will take place in 
the Hillgrove Hotel, Monaghan town on Saturday 02 November 2024. He noted that the event 
will attract approximately 500 people from communities across the island of Ireland and that 
it will be an excellent opportunity to showcase the best the county has to offer.  
    
The members noted the Management Report.   

 
 
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members.   
 
16. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events. 
The members noted the reports from Cllrs D. Maxwell, P. Conlon, C. Carthy, B. McKenna, N. 
Keelan in relation to their attendance at the following Conference/Training events:  
 
• 
AILG, Annual Conference 2024, 14th-15th February, Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow  
• 
LAMA, Spring Seminar, 19th-20th January Abbey Hotel, Donegal Town, Co. Donegal  
 
17. Business submitted by Chief Executive 
 
As part of the official delegation from Monaghan County Council to New York during the St. 
Patrick’s Day celebrations, the Chief Executive informed the members that the trip had been 
hugely successful. He invited the Cathaoirleach, Cllr D. Maxwell, who led the delegation to 
provide an update to members, in summary he advised: 
 
• 
It was the first time in five years an official delegation from Monaghan County 
Council visited New York as part of the St. Patrick’s Day celebrations. 
• 
They attended a series of meetings with key strategic partners and participated in 
events to showcase all that County Monaghan has to offer, economically and 
culturally as well as promoting the county as a place to visit, invest and do business.  
• 
The official delegation also included Liam Bradley, Curator of the Monaghan County 
Museum and they were joined on the visit by members of Monaghan GAA along 
with representatives of Enterprising Monaghan.  
• 
Several prominent businesspeople from County Monaghan were also present on the 
trip.  
• 
The centerpiece event of the visit was the inaugural meeting of the Monaghan – 
New York Business Network, in which business and civic leaders from New York, the 
wider USA, Monaghan and other parts of Ireland came together to explore 
opportunities for business investment, job creation and tourism in Monaghan. The 
cultural partnership between Project Children and Monaghan County Council was 
also promoted at the event.  
 
The members congratulated the Cathaoirleach, the Chief Executive and all members of the 
delegation on their achievements during their trip to New York.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Gilliand, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, that the executive of this Council 
and it’s Cathaoirleach, explore opportunities to attend other events, in the United Kingdom or 
Europe, where we can showcase Monaghan as place to do business. This is based on the 
success of the recent New York trip, during the St. Patrick’s Day celebrations and the amount 
of positive feedback that was received in relation to successfully showcasing Monaghan.  
 
The Chief Executive informed the members that Monaghan County Council had finalised the 
strategic acquisition of buildings and land within St. Louis Convent in Monaghan Town. He 
invited, Mr C. Flynn, Director of Services, to read the joint statement between Monaghan 
County Council and St. Louis Sisters.  
 
Key points to note were:  
• 
The property being acquired is almost 11.5 hectares/28 acres.  
• 
The site contains a cluster of recently vacated buildings that includes, a former 

 
 
school, chapel, living quarters and three terraced houses.  
• 
The remainder of the site includes a formal greenspace, gravel tennis courts, a lake 
with native surrounds and a conifer plantation. 
• 
No definite purpose for the site has yet been determined.   
 
18. Matters arising out of the minutes of Council meeting held 04 March 2024 
 
Cllr S. Conlon referred to the question he had submitted to the March meeting in relation to 
the Taking in Charge (TIC) of several housing developments in the Milltown area, 
highlighting that the initial application had been submitted 7 years ago, in 2017. He 
confirmed that he had submitted a request to Ms. Mary McGarvey, A/Senior Executive 
Officer, for the planning department to liaise with Uisce Eireann, seeking clarity on the 
impediments that exist in relation to this TIC. 
 
19. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
No further update. 
 
20. To receive update on North/South Interconnector project 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the North south Interconnector 
project:  
 
• 
Email from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Tánaiste Mr Michael Martin T.D., 
regarding the North South Interconnector issue.  
• 
Letter from Minister for Infrastructure John O’Dowd MLA regarding the North South 
Interconnector issue.  
• 
Minutes of Planning Compliance Meeting (ABP Reference 02.VA0017 – North South 
400 kV Interconnector Project) 14th March 2024 @ 11am in the Planning Office, 
Monaghan 
 
On the proposal of Cllr H. McElvaney, seconded by, Cllr N. Keelan, that this Council writes to 
Minister Heather Humphrey’s, T.D., on behalf of the landowners in Cavan and Monaghan, to 
ask her to intervene to have the North South Interconnector undergrounded.  
 
A recorded vote was taken which resulted as follows:  
 
For: Cllrs R. Aughey, C. Bennett, C. Carthy, P. Connolly, S. Conlon, N. Keelan, McCooey, H. 
McElvaney, B. McKenna, PJ O’Hanlon and P. Treanor. 
Total: 11 
 
Against:  
Total: 0 
 
Abstentions: Cllr A. Campbell, P. Conlon, S. Gilliland, D. Maxwell, R. Truell 
Total: 5 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal carried.  
 
21. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
Mr G. McMahon, A/Director of Services, informed the members that Waterways Ireland 
intend on providing members with an update in relation to progress of the Ulster Canal 
project at the May Council meeting. 
 
 

 
 
22. Questions and Replies 
 
Cllr B. McKenna asked:  
1. Can this Council please provide an update in relation to the progress made on 
acquiring the unfinished housing development at Chapel Court, Carrickroe, Co. 
Monaghan.  
Reply: In order to resolve the dereliction issue on this site, Monaghan County Council has 
undertaken extensive engagement with the owners of the unfinished housing 
development at Chapel Court, Carrickroe, County Monaghan.  
Unfortunately, this engagement process has been unsuccessful resulting in the recording 
of the site on the County’s Derelict Sites register.  
On 5th March 2024, notices in accordance with Section 22 of the Derelict Sites Act 1990 
(as amended) were served on the owners and persons with interest in the site. These 
notices confirmed the Councils valuation of the property.   
Notices in accordance with Section 15 of the Derelict Sites Act 1990 (as amended) were 
served on the owners and persons with interest in the site on 28th March 2024.  
These notices confirm that Monaghan County Council, in exercise of the powers 
conferred on them by Section 14 of the Derelict Sites Act 1990 (as amended), intends to 
acquire compulsorily, the derelict site located at Chapel Court, Carrickroe, County 
Monaghan.  
A map of the said derelict site has been deposited at the Planning Offices of Monaghan 
County Council, No. 1 Dublin Street, Monaghan, H18 X982 and may be inspected there 
during its public opening hours Monday to Friday, excluding bank holidays.   
Any owner, lessee or occupier (except a tenant for a month) may, on or before 02 May 
2024, submit to the Council an objection to the proposed compulsorily acquisition of the 
derelict site.  Any such objection must be in writing stating the grounds of the objection 
and addressed to the Council at Town Regeneration Office, Monaghan County Council, 
No. 1 Dublin St, Monaghan H18 X982.  
The Derelict Sites Act, 1990 (as amended) provides that if an objection is made to the 
proposed compulsory acquisition of a derelict site and the objection is not withdrawn, 
the derelict site shall not be acquired compulsorily by the Local Authority without the 
consent of An Bord Pleanála.  
In the event that objections to the proposed compulsory acquisition of the site are not 
received within the specified timeframe, the Council will proceed to compulsorily acquire 
the site.  
 
 
2. When will drawings be available concerning the provision of a roundabout at Steele's 
Corner, Emyvale to address the dangerous situation that has existed there, 
particularly over the last 8 or 10 years? 
 
Reply: A tender competition is currently ongoing to procure a consultant to take the 
project through detailed design, planning and construction.  A preliminary design has 
been completed to date.  MCC are talking to affected landowners as the construction of 
a roundabout will require third party lands. It is envisaged that detailed design drawings 
will be available in June 2024.  These will be presented at the MD meeting prior to Part 8 
application. 
 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  

 
 
3. Has the executive completed the contract for engagement of professional consultants 
for the Feasibility Study and Strategic Assessment Report for a Swimming 
Pool/Leisure Centre for Carrickmacross? If so, is the council in a position to give 
details on it?  
Reply: Following completion of the tender assessment process, the executive held a pre-
appointment meeting with the preferred tenderer on the 20th of March 2024. The 
executive is currently awaiting the preferred tenderer to submit supporting information 
that was requested at the pre-appointment meeting. Subject to the satisfactory 
submission of relevant documents, it is expected that the contract for engagement of the 
professional consultants will be executed in April 2024. Following completion of the 
contract, the executive can provide relevant details to the Elected Members. 
 
4. What additional measures are being taken by MCC to deal with the huge volume of 
roads in need of repair throughout the county and, most especially, in south 
Monaghan? Is the executive engaging with officials in the Department of Transport to 
try and secure additional funding?  
Reply: Monaghan County Council are currently leading a reclaimed asphalt pilot scheme 
that has received funding to strengthen existing roads on a regional basis. In 2024 the 
local roads in south Monaghan will be assessed and works completed as part the 
Reclaimed Asphalt Pilot scheme. Monaghan County Council lobby the Department of 
Transport on an ongoing basis for additional funding each year to try and secure 
additional funding. For example, in 2023 MCC were allocated €7,681,500 for the road 
strengthening programme, an additional €951,612 was allocated following continuous 
lobbying for additional funding. Under the Specific Improvement 2023 grant allocation 
the R181 upgrade was allocated €150,000 following numerous meeting and discussions 
with the Department of Transport an additional €727,333 was allocated.  
 
5. What is the latest update on the unfinished Clos na Droimainne estate, 
Carrickmacross? Has a timeline been received yet for the delivery of the 12no. 4-bed 
units and have we been given any details on whether the 14no. 2-bed apartment 
block will be completed or demolished in a reasonable timeframe?  
Reply: Over the last few months Monaghan County Council’s Housing Section has been 
endeavouring to find a way forward for this project.  Housing Section has managed, 
through meetings and communication with Tuath, the Developer and the Department, 
to get all parties on board to work towards a solution for this site.  The Developer 
prepared a submission setting out the effect of inflation on the costs involved.  Tuath 
reviewed the submission and prepared a revised funding application that was reviewed 
by Monaghan County Council and recommended for approval and submission to the 
Department of Housing seeking funding approval.  The revised funding application has 
been submitted to the Department of Housing and seeks funding approval for the 
completion of all 33 dwellings (7 completed to date).  In a meeting prior to submission 
of the revised funding application the Department of Housing indicated that the revised 
funding application would potentially be supported subject to the usual checks and 
balances etc.  
It is hoped that revised funding approval will be received in April 2024 and that the 
Developer will be back on site shortly after that.  

 
 
 
6. Will the council consider providing members with a breakdown of all lands in its 
ownership (greenfield and brownfield) and what each site may be suitable for 
housing, public amenity, commercial etc?  
 
Reply: 
The 
Council’s 
asset 
Register 
identifies 
the 
following 
Assets 
as 
Landbank
 
 
Cllr S. Conlon asked: 
7. In line with the creation of 44 Local Healthy Age Friendly Homes Co-ordinator posts 
across the State, what progress have Monaghan County Council made in introducing 
this role? And also, what will be the priority objectives be of this new position?  
Reply: Meath County Council are coordinating the recruitment of Local Healthy Age 
Friendly Homes Coordinator posts across the Country.  Meath County Council have 
confirmed that they are currently awaiting the candidate nominated from the Public 
Appointment Service (PAS) for the role of Local Healthy Age Friendly Homes 
Coordinator for Monaghan.   
The programme involves: -  
• 
participants can be referred into the programme by family members, friends, 
healthcare providers, social prescribers, members of the community (for 
example, Gardaí), or self-refer themselves. 
• 
once referred into the programme, participants will receive a home visit from a 
Local Coordinator who is based in their local authority and has good links into 
statutory and non-statutory services in the community. 
• 
the Local Coordinator – based in the local authority – will carry out an 
assessment of their needs across health, housing, community, and technology. 
• 
Local Coordinators then work with each older person to design a personalised 
action plan under each of these areas to support them to live healthily and 
independently in their own home for as long as possible. Examples of 
interventions include access to primary care, public health nurse, 
physiotherapist, occupational therapist, meals on wheels, befriending services, 
Asset Ref.
Location
Asset Type
Size
Town
Zoning
LDB106
ANNAHAGH (ED 
Monaghan Rural)
LAND BANK
2.36 ha
Monaghan
Industrial
LDB1338
ANNAHAGH (ED 
Monaghan Rural)
LAND BANK
2.34 ha
Monaghan
Industrial
LDB133
TULLYHIRM
LAND BANK
1.65 ha
Monaghan
Industrial
LDB984
Industrial Zone, 
Convent Lands
LAND BANK
4093 sqm
Carrickmacross
Industrial
LDB2008
Town Centre Zone, 
Convent Lands
LAND BANK
2.18 ha
Carrickmacross
Town Centre
LDB2018
Corrybrannan - Road 
and Land
LAND BANK
1.80 ha
Ballybay
Town Centre
LDB2020
Roosky
LAND BANK
4.09 ha
Monaghan
Town Centre

 
 
housing adaptation grants, home energy retrofits, and assistive technologies 
such as wearable devices, pendants and fall detectors. 
 
 
8. Please provide an update on queries I have previously submitted regarding - 
A) provision of lighting in Glaslough Village between Barrack Hill and the Caledon 
Road. 
 
Reply: The council have completed an initial assessment of the public lighting along 
this road. There is currently no funding to complete these works at present. A 
detailed assessment will be brought to the Municipal District of Monaghan meeting 
in May for consideration. 
B) introduction of road safety measures relating to monitored speeding occurrences 
observed last November on the New Line / Emyvale Road.  
 
Reply: The existing gateway, reduced speed limit, signage has been replaced on the 
Emyvale and Caledon roads on the approach to the village. Further speed monitoring 
will be carried out as per the Traffic Calming policy.   
Cllr N. Keelan asked: 
9. What is the up-to-date position in relation to the proposed speed limits review of our 
county and regional road network, which was announced by government last year 
2023, including a review of the speed limits on our national primary and secondary 
routes which I understand is currently under way?  
  
Reply: The Speed limit review for our local and regional roads was completed in 2023. The 
National Roads review was due to commence in 2024, however, following the 
government announcement regarding the reduction of the speed limits on our National, 
Regional and Local roads, it was decided by our Speed Limit Committee to postpone the 
National roads review until further guidance and direction is received from the DOT. This 
guidance is expected in Q3 2024. 
 
 
10. What plans have the council in conjunction with some of the approved housing bodies 
to build social and affordable homes in some of the south Monaghan village areas 
including Inniskeen, Donaghmoyne, Lisdoonan where a need has been clearly 
established?  
 
Reply: Housing applications with an area of choice listed for either Lisdoonan or 
Donaghmoyne.  There are 38 social housing applicants who have listed Inniskeen as one 
of their areas of choice. Housing Section are continuing to seek opportunities in Inniskeen 
to develop Social Housing, however no projects are currently in Council pipeline of 
delivery. 
 
11. Given the crisis we are facing in our county in terms of inadequate funding for the 
upgrading , maintaining and drainage of the county regional and local road network 
and in reference to the NOAC report which outlines the fact that we need an 
additional 5.9 million euro in order to achieve no further deterioration in our road 
infrastructure, what additional funding did we receive this year 2024 to address this 

 
 
serious situation, will the council be in a position to upgrade and resurface extra 
roads that are not currently on a programme for resurfacing this year 2024 ?  
Reply: In 2024 Monaghan County council were allocated €600,000 under the formal 
national road grant compared to €245,000 in 2023. The RI allocation in 2024 is 
€7,810,500 which is an increase on the €7,681,500 allocated in 2023. Again in 2024 
Monaghan County council received funding to improve roads under the Reclaimed 
Asphalt Scheme which was originally piloted by Monaghan County Council. Senior 
management in the roads section are continually looking at ways to streamline and 
improve our processes and delivery of road improvement and resurfacing schemes.  
The roads programme is the list of roads adopted by the elected members. Any 
additional funding will be used to complete the roads on the 2024 programme and/or 
off the 2025 programme. 
12. Given the ongoing problem of serious littering across the county including along 
the N2, how many litter fines were handed out last year 2023, what is the current 
position in relation to GDPR and our CCTV detection systems?  
Reply: We issued 47 Fines last year.  
The use of CCTV had been stalled for some time, on foot of a successful prosecution 
of a local authority for non-compliant use of CCTV. Following significant work at 
national level, Local Authorities have now been advised of 3 Code of Practices and 
the legal basis that will allow local authorities to use CCTV and Mobile Recording 
Devices (MRDs) for the prevention, detection and prosecution of waste 
management and litter offences. 
 
The 3 Codes are listed below, 
• 
Code of Practice for the Operation of CCTV for the Purposes of Prevention, Detection 
& Prosecution of Waste Offences 
• 
Code of Practice for the use of Mobile Recording Devices (MRDs) for the Purposes of 
Prevention, Detection and Prosecution of Waste Offences 
• 
Code of Practice for the Operation of CCTV for the Purposes of Prevention, Detection 
& Prosecution of Litter Offences 
 
A detailed and onerous multi-step process must be followed by local authorities 
intending to use CCTV and MRDs in targeting offences. In addition to the above Codes 
of Practice, a total of 15 Statements of Practice (SOPs) must be developed before 
MCC can proceed compliantly in this area. We are currently waiting on the WERLAs 
and the Climate Action, Transport, Circular Economy, and Networks Committee 
(CATCEN), to issue national guidance documents that will support the development 
of SOPs and guidance documents locally for Local Authorities. The steps below 
outline the process that needs to be followed by each Local Authority when 
proposing to use CCTV for Litter Offences for example. Similar steps apply for CCTV 
and MRD for Waste offences.  
 
1. Establishing the need for CCTV before deciding to install a CCTV Scheme – Allowing 
the deployment of the right resources to the right location enabling Local Authority 
resources to 
be used more effectively. 

 
 
2. Conducting a Local Data Protection Impact Assessment (Local DPIA) to establish the 
necessity and proportionality for a CCTV Proposal 
3. Necessity for the Use of CCTV – Proving necessity based on the number of 
complaints received regarding breaches of the Act of 1997 and enforcement actions 
taken and 
prosecutions 
4. Local consultation on intended CCTV implementation 
a. Feedback obtained from elected representatives, on behalf of their 
constituents, where CCTV is to be deployed. 
b. On-line public consultation. 
c. In person public information events; and  
d. Direct engagement with local community groups and bodies potentially 
impacted by the deployment of CCTV. 
5. Approval process by Oversight Board prior to CCTV Scheme being installed. 
6. Standard operating procedures for the use of CCTV 
7. Identification of sites where CCTV may be introduced.  
8. Preparation of a business case for submission to an Oversight Board  
9. Appropriate signage when using CCTV for Law Enforcement Purposes under section 
23A of the Act of 1997  
10. Installation of CCTV on-site i.e. sighting and field of vision for CCTV installed on-site. 
11. Security & Controlling Access to CCTV  
12. Records to be maintained by Local Authorities 
13. Chain of custody 
14. Disclosure of CCTV images and recordings  
15. Data Subject Rights 
16. Monitoring compliance with this Code of Practice 
 
Once we have the SOPs completed and the above steps implemented, Monaghan CoCo 
will be is a stronger position to tackle the ongoing problem of littering within the 
county. 
 
 
Cllr S. Coyle asked: 
13. Can Monaghan County Council give a detailed update on the Taking in Charge of the 
following Housing Estates, as applications from the Residents are lodged for a 
lengthy period of time, when is it expected the recommendation to Take in Charge 
will come before the Elected Members- 
                                            (A). Sruthan Claddagh, Meeting House Lane, Ballybay? 
This estate is at an advanced stage in the taking in charge process. 
Council inspections have been completed.  Uisce Eireann have requested 
clarification and actions on some matters which remain outstanding. It is 
hoped that these can be completed in the near future and that the taking 
in charge process can be expedited. 
                                         (B). Knocknamaddy Housing Estate, Ballybay? 
This estate is before the April 2024 Council meeting with the 
recommendation that it be taken in charge. 
                                            (C). Dartry Park, Rockcorry? 
This estate is at an advanced stage in the taking in charge process. 
Council inspections have been completed.  Uisce Eireann have requested 
clarification and actions on some matters which remain outstanding. It is 
hoped that these can be completed in the near future and that the taking 
in charge process can be expedited. 

 
 
                                            (D). Carrabarra Island, Smithboro?  
The Council remain in ongoing legal pursuit of the bond, and until such 
negotiations are resolved or exhausted, the taking in charge cannot be 
progressed further.  The Planning Authority are seeking alternative legal 
assistance on the matter. 
 
14. What is the target date for Monaghan County Council/HAB to make offers of Tenancy 
to families/persons on Waiting Lists of homes and the target date for occupancy- 
                                           (A). An Clos, Ballybay?  
Handover Date is 1/4/24 
                                           (B). Hall Street, Clones Road, Ballybay? 
 Due to some issues around contracts, it will be beginning of Q3 before 
Houses are occupied. 
(C). Birch Court, Ballybay?  
Nominations have been sent to AHB, occupancy within next 6 to 8 
weeks.  
 
How many Houses/Apartments are to be offered at the above locations and how many are 
for families/single persons, with 2/3/4 bedrooms?  
 
15. As Threemilehouse Village is the location of numerous Community Facilities i.e. St. 
Mary’s National School, Sean McDermotts GAA Club Facilities, Playing Fields, Walking 
Track, Community Centre etc, Day Care Centre, After School/Pre-School Facilities, 
Autistic Unit, Cabra Housing Estate, Bar/Restaurant, Shop/Post Office, Barbers etc and 
is located on a heavily vehicleized  Regional Road(R189-4),can Monaghan County 
Council outline in detail and the approximate time frame, there plans for the 
installation of a Pedestrian/Zebra Crossing on the R189-4,as with the huge pedestrian 
numbers crossing the Regional Road, it is currently hazardous and very dangerous?  
Reply: As Threemilehouse Village is the location of numerous Community Facilities i.e. 
St. Mary’s National School, Sean McDermotts GAA Club Facilities, Playing Fields, Walking 
Track, Community Centre etc, Day Care Centre, After School/Pre-School Facilities, Autistic 
Unit, Cabra Housing Estate, Bar/Restaurant, Shop/Post Office, Barbers etc and is located 
on a heavily vehicleized  Regional Road(R189-4),can Monaghan County Council outline in 
detail and the approximate time frame, there plans for the installation of a 
Pedestrian/Zebra Crossing on the R189-4,as with the huge pedestrian numbers crossing 
the Regional Road, it is currently hazardous and very dangerous? 
The provision of a pedestrian crossing at the location identified will form part of the Low-
Cost Safety Improvement Scheme application for 2025. An announcement on this funding 
application is expected in mid Q1 of 2025. 
 
 
Housing For All 
2 Bedroom 
3 Bedroom 
4 Bedroom 
Ballybay – Clones 
An Clós, Ballybay (Formerly Ballybay 
Courtyard) 
MCC 
7 
7 
  
  
Ballybay – Clones 
4 apartments at Birch Court Ballybay 
AHB 
4 
4 
  
  
Ballybay – Clones 
Hall Street, Ballybay 
AHB 
7 
  
  
7 

 
 
16. Can Monaghan County Council immediately have Holy Trinity Chaple, Rockcorry listed 
for Public Lighting (LP02320), as it is very dangerous for those attending evening 
masses/ceremonies on dark winter evenings?  
 
Reply: MCC will review this location to assess the current lighting arrangement and will report 
back on the outcome.    
 
23. Notice of Motion 
 
In the absence of Cllr Coyle’s Motion 23 (1) was deferred to the May Council meeting.  
 
 
24. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Ciaran Murray, Plumber/Caretaker, Water Services on the death of his wife  
Carmel Murray (Nee Boyle), late of Killycarnan, Scotstown, Co. Monaghan  
• 
Samantha Boyle, Administrative Officer, Housing on the death of her Sister-In-Law 
Carmel Murray (Nee Boyle), late of Killycarnan, Scotstown, Co. Monaghan  
• 
Sean Kelly, Driver B – of Ballybay-Clones MD, on the death of his mother Bridget Kelly 
(Nee McKenna), late of, Dooskey, Smithborough, Co. Monaghan. 
• 
Martin Gallagher, Driver B – Ballybay-Clones MD, on the death of his Mother-in-Law 
Bridget Kelly (Nee McKenna), late of, Dooskey, Smithborough, Co. Monaghan. 
 
 
It was agreed votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Kaiden McKenna and Masie Flanagan of Castleblayney Boxing Club who had both 
won All-Ireland Boxing titles. 
 
25. Conferences 
No conferences for consideration under this item.  
 
 
Urgent Business 
 
1. C. Bennett proposed, Cllr D. Maxwell seconded, that following receipt of the 
Information provided to the LCDC committee at their March meeting – that the 
new Leader programme is to be awarded to Monaghan Integrated Development 
that this Council writes to the Department to obtain clarification on the future 
direction and purpose of the LCDC in the county as they will be no longer required 
to be the local action group for leader funding. There is serious concern felt by all 
members of the LCDC, many of whom have given up their time voluntarily. We seek 
direction from the Department.  In awarding the Leader programme to a local 
development company, this change will have a detrimental impact on the LCDC 
which has had representatives from statutory bodies, Elected Members and 
Community groups in place for the last 10 years.  
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the 
meeting, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 

 
 
2. 
Cllr S. Gilliland proposed, Cllr A. Campbell seconded, that this Council writes 
to Minister Eamon Ryan, Minister for Transport, Climate Action and 
Communications with the responsibility for Roads Funding and all Oireachtas 
Members to seek an urgent Meeting in relation to providing emergency Funding 
from the 200 million under spend in his Dept to the Roads network in county 
Monaghan.  This money is urgently required to Re Surface, Repair, and Maintain 
our Local Roads Network which have been totally destructed by the un precedented 
amount of Rain Fall and Storms we have suffered since June 2023. The Funding we 
received in the Roads Program 2024 while welcome stops a long way short of Re 
Surfacing and basic Repairs and Maintenance for our Network. We are a Rural 
Non-Maritime County with no Rail Network which supply's 90 % of Ireland Poultry 
and Mushrooms substantial Beef and Dairy Foods that are much needed in Ireland 
and across the world, we heavily rely on our Local roads network to get food to 
market. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the 
meeting, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
3. Cllr P. Treanor proposed, Cllr N. Keelan seconded, that this Council writes to the 
Minister for Agriculture, Food and Marine, Mr. Charlie McConalogue, T.D., Minister 
for Finance, Mr. Michael McGrath, T.D. and Minister for Public Expenditure, 
National Development Plan Delivery and Reform, Mr. Pascal O’Donohue, T.D. 
calling for the reconvening of the National Fodder Committee and engagement 
with all the farming organisations and stakeholders. It is prudent to prepare for a 
‘worst case scenario’ rather than complacency which could cause further problems 
and panic. Agriculture is the primary industry in County Monaghan. Due to the 
inclement weather and forecasts of unsettled weather for the foreseeable future 
many farmers are concerned and worried about their current supply of fodder and 
the prospects for next winter’s harvest.  
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the 
meeting, and it was agreed unanimously. 
 
  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach concluded the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
Signed: 
 
 
 
 
                              Cathaoirleach 
 
 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
Date:  ________________________ 
 
