Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee for Economic Development & Enterprise Support meeting 
on Tuesday 24th February 2026 at 4pm in the Council Chamber, MTek 1, Monaghan 
 
In attendance:  
Cllr. Sean Gilliland (Chairperson)  
Monaghan County Council  
Cllr. Pat Treanor  
 
 
Monaghan County Council  
Cllr. Peter Conlon  
 
 
Monaghan County Council  
Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon 
 
 
Monaghan County Council  
Mr. Pete McMahon  
 
 
Business/Commercial  
Mrs. Eileen Collery  
 
 
Business/Commercial  
Mr. Tom Treanor  
 
 
Agri/Farming  
Mr. Cathal Flynn  
DoS Planning, Economic Dev., Capital Projects, & 
Regeneration 
Ms. Pamela Kerr  
 
 
Head of Enterprise, LEO  
Mr. Kevin McNally  
 
 
Town Regeneration Oﬃcer, Town Regeneration 
Mr. Darragh Drury  
 
 
A/Vacant Homes Oﬃcer, Town Regeneration 
Mr. Brian Annon  
 
 
Executive Engineer, Town Regeneration  
Mr. Adrian Hughes  
 
 
Senior Planner, Planning 
Ms. Fiona McEntee  
 
 
Administration Oﬃcer, Planning  
Ms. Sharon Finnegan  
 
 
Senior Staﬀ Oﬃcer, Planning  
Ms. Bernice Creighan   
 
Clerical Oﬃcer, Planning  
 
Mr. Cian Murphy  
 
 
Communications Executive, GAA 
Dr. Peter Horgan  
 
 
Strategy, Insights, and Innovation Manager, GAA 
Mr. Shane Cassells 
 
 
Public Aﬀairs, GAA 
 
Apologies:  
Cllr. Niamh McCooey Monaghan County Council   
Mr. Ciaran McEntee PPN - Environment Electoral College  
Cllr. Colm Carthy Monaghan County Council  
 
 
 
 

1. Previous Minutes  
The minutes of the meeting held on 26th November 2025 were proposed by Cllr. Pat Treanor and 
seconded by Pete McMahon. 
 
2. Matters Arising  
Cllr. Cllr. Sean Gilliland welcomed everyone. 
 
Eileen Collery asked if the Terms of Reference for the Industry Advisory Group information would be 
included in today’s meeting as indicated in the November SPC. Cllr. Sean Gilliland conﬁrmed that it was 
not on the agenda, but it can be discussed at the April SPC meeting.  
 
Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon – in relation to the discussion which took place at the September SPC meeting 
regarding the Annahagh Site, will there be any further discussion & updates on the matter and when 
can this be expected? Cllr. Sean Gilliland advised that due to a full agenda, it will be added to the April 
SPC meeting. 
 
Eileen Collery stated that she had hoped that there would updates on the Anaerobic Digestor by DoS 
Nial O’Connor. Adrian Hughes stated he will engage with Nial O Connor in this regard and give a brief 
report at the April SPC meeting.  
 
A further query was raised regarding the N54 traﬃc concerns on Clones Road - Kevin West to be asked 
to attend & give an update at the April SPC meeting. 
 
3. Town Regeneration Update - Kevin McNally 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland praised the Regeneration Team, along with Planning for their great work that is 
visibly evident throughout the county and welcomed Kevin McNally, Brian Annon & Darragh Drury to 
present to the committee.  
 
Kevin McNally commenced his presentation with a review of the Town Regeneration section 
progress in dealing with dereliction, stating that the success of the section was dependant on the 
cooperation of all the MCC sections & the Elected Members. He then gave an overview of projects in 
each of the Municipal Districts. 
 
Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon added that the Digi-hub initiative mentioned was greatly supported by the East 
Border Region (EBR) to which he is the Chairperson for 2026. He expressed his gratitude to MCC in 
supporting this initiative and asked for their support in the upcoming “East Border Region 50th 
Anniversary” event which will be hosted in Co Monaghan in October 2026. Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon expressed 
the opinion that a MCC presence would be vitally important at the event. Cllr. Sean Gilliland suggested 
that a further discussion around the Conference take place at the April SPC meeting.  
 
Brian Annon discussed the issues that lead to dereliction in the county giving a brief overview of the 
process (derelict Sites Act) and timelines involved. Working examples were presented.  
 
Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon complimented the great work that has been carried in the CBY/CMX MD and sought 
clariﬁcation regarding the “Prescribed Urban Areas” highlighted on the map in the presentation. Kevin 
McNally responded to say that the focus is on the 5 towns to begin with. Brian Annon added that the 
Team hopes to be able to assess other Hamlets /Rural Areas with a view to get the Department to add 
them to the map in 2026. (Time and resources are required to carry out this additional work). Brian 

Annon suggested that if the Elected Members know of local “Hot Spots” of dereliction to let the team 
know and they will endeavour to add them.  
 
Pete Mc Mahon queried if MCC could provide an incentive for younger people from the area to get on 
the property ladder through some of these derelict properties. He also highlighted that the  
timelines for the Scheme could prove diﬃcult when you consider the time taken to consult with 
Architects and source a Contractor.  In response Brian Annon said that MCC are open for discussion 
once meaningful engagement is made with the team. Kevin McNally added that the process had to be 
carried out in line with the National Regulations.  
 
Darragh Drury updated the committee on the success of the Croi Conaithe Grants to date and gave an 
overview of the funding available to applicant’s (€50k with possible €20k top-up). He presented 
approved and drawdown ﬁgures and gave examples of how MCC are leading the way in promoting the 
work that they have completed to date. 
 
Eileen Collery asked if there was a speciﬁed period in which the works should be completed for 
drawdown to which the team advised the schedule was 13 months from approval to drawdown, but 
that MCC could use their discretion to extend. It was also advised that there is a 10-year legal charge 
placed on the properties, which means if a property is sold within the 10 years a % of the grant must 
be paid back.  
 
Tom Treanor queried why only a small portion of the €20m approved has been drawn down. 
Brain Annon responded, noting that the scheme was operational from 2023, over €9million had been 
drawdown and that other projects are still under construction. 
 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland said it was great to see so many citizens take on these projects to the beneﬁt of 
143 families, now housed in these derelict properties. Cllr. Pat Treanor reaﬃrmed that the work 
carried out was great however there are many who cannot fund the developments in the ﬁrst place. 
He asked if perhaps MCC could do anything to help them? 
 
Kevin McNally said people may apply for Council Loan to cover the cost of works pending payment of 
the grant. 
 
Cllr Pat Treanor queried if MCC could approach ﬁnancial institutions or give a letter to support loan 
applications. Could the VHO network raise it at Department National level? Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon 
 
asked if having a reputable contractor count as a commitment to complete the work be used to help 
get funding? He recognised the great work done by the team to date.  
 
Kevin McNally stated that as this is a National Scheme, MCC must ensure the process is carried out in 
line with the National Regulations but would ensure that the issue regarding ﬁnance is raised at 
network meetings for discussion. 
 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland suggested Kevin McNally set a meeting up with Olga McConnon, Head of Finance 
with MCC to discuss a proposal for presentation to the Department. Cllr Gilliland would be happy to 
attend this meeting. 
 
 
 

 
4. GAA – Economic Impact of the Ulster Final in Clones 
 
The GAA was represented at the meeting by Peter Horgan, Strategy, Insights, and Innovation Manager, 
Cian Murphy, Communications Executive, & Shane Cassells, Public Aﬀairs. 
 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland welcomed them to the February SPC and stated that Monaghan is facing a battle 
not to lose the Ulster Final in Clones, and he was delighted that they agreed to give the SPC an insight 
into the economic impact that the event has for the area. 
 
Peter Horgan led the committee through the presentation prepared by Sheﬃeld Hallam University on 
the Economic & Social Value of the Gaelic games with speciﬁc research on the Ulster Final Event in 
Clones. The presentation showed the objectives, how the data was collected & from whom, the 3-
strand method used and the ﬁndings. The Social Return On Investment (SROI) was highlighted as 
2.30:1.   
 
He outlined the direct and indirect eﬀects to the economy of the 2024 Ulster Final in Clones stated the 
total economic impact for 1 day was €1.5 million for Clones. Businesses, spectators, workers and 
accommodation providers were surveyed not just in Clones but also on the routes taken by spectators 
on the day of the 2024 Ulster ﬁnal. 10% of attendees on the day were part of spectator surveys. 
 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland was impressed by the ﬁgures produced, methods used and appreciated the fact that 
Sheﬃeld Hallam do not inﬂate the ﬁnancial ﬁndings. (i.e. Measured against minimum wage etc) 
He was delighted that the GAA used Ulster Final, Clones, 2024 as their working example for their GAA 
Assessment. 
 
Cllr. Pat Treanor expressed the importance of keeping big games in Clones and was happy to see the 
ﬁgures to back this up. He commended the work involved in quantifying the social impact of the games 
also and said that this will help when seeking funding and investment in Clones. Cian Murphy 
responded outlining the ﬁgures shown on return on investment in GAA are “at least” ﬁgures. 
 
Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon commented that it was an excellent piece of work and very well timed. The GAA in 
Monaghan was in a diﬃcult position, and he expressed the “Need for help” from GAA HQ and that 
continued investment was required in St Tiernach’s Park.  
He proceeded to ask the following of the GAA reps; 
1. What as an organisation have the GAA got planned for Clones?  
2. Is their focus on West Belfast only?  
3. Has this presentation been given to Monaghan County Board? 
 
In response, Cian Murphy answered that the report booklet containing the data has been circulated to 
the county boards, a presentation has not been given to Monaghan County Board.  
 
Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon gave assurances that the elected members of MCC will do everything in their power 
to support Clones (and explore alternative uses e.g. Concerts etc) He requested the GAA contact 
Monaghan County Board and make a presentation to them. He commended them on the presentation 
given this evening and noted the importance of having our local TD’s and Senators on board with this 
also. 
 

Cllr. Sean Gilliland proposed a motion that the presentation be given at both Clones-Ballybay Municipal 
District Meeting & Full Council Meeting, Cllr. Peter Conlon 2nd the motion. Pete Mc Mahon said that 
the GAA do things well and complimented them on issuing a fantastic document.  Cathal Flynn agreed 
presentation will be given to MD & Full Plenary Meeting, and this would include media presence to 
promote.  
 
On behalf of the GAA, Shane Cassells thanked Cathal Flynn DoS for organising and thanked the 
committee for their time dedicated to the topic.  
 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland conﬁrmed that dates for the MD & Full Council meeting will be agreed with GAA in 
the coming weeks, Cathal Flynn will liaise with GAA on the matter.  
 
Kian Murphy noted the importance of the media presence, especially with the recent closure of the 
northern standard. Cathal Flynn conﬁrmed that local media i.e. Northen Sound Radio & Anglo Celt 
Newspaper attend all council meetings. We can invite our own comms team to also be present.  
Eileen Collery queried whether Declan McBennett was still the RTE Sports correspondent and 
suggested that an invitation be extended to him also.  
 
 
5. Local Economic Plan 2026 – Pamela Kerr 
 
Pamela Kerr informed the committee she was here to brief the members on the draft Local Enterprise 
Development Plan (LEDP) for 2026-2027. This is a two-year plan required under the Enterprise Ireland 
Service Level Agreement, and it sets out the strategic direction and priorities for the Local Enterprise 
Oﬃce (LEO) in Monaghan. 
 
Pamela Kerr proceeded to give an overview of what the LEDP is and outlined the key priorities and 
deliverables over the next two years. Her ask of the committee was to review and note the draft plan 
before it is due to go back to Enterprise Ireland in early March for approval. 
 
Cathal Flynn thanked Pamela and the LEO team on their work. Lots of local businesses are beneﬁtting 
from LEO supports. This plan helps set out how the LEO are achieving and exceeding their targets. It 
was unanimously agreed that LEO provided signiﬁcant supports to businesses, however more 
promotional work was required. 
 
Cllr. Pat Treanor referenced the importance of having balanced development in the County within the 
plan with smaller villages needing extra encouragement and support for potential startups. Pamela 
Kerr responded by saying that last year business clinics were held in the 5 towns and local Councillors 
were encouraged to ask local businesses to come and meet the team. 
 
Cllr. PJ O Hanlon acknowledged the very positive work being done and the launch of the Anglo Celt 
Business and Tourism awards for County Monaghan in partnership with MCC recently in the Nuremore 
was a positive step in the right direction. He agreed with Cllr. Treanor in regards the need to support 
the smaller towns and villages. 
 
Pamela Kerr thanked the members for their feedback and will take on board the hosting of speciﬁc 
events in Ballybay/Clones over the year that could continue to raise the proﬁle of the LEO. 
 

Cllr. Sean Gililand suggested the production of short businesses videos that could be shared and 
highlighted via the MD and SPC meetings throughout the County would also increase the proﬁle of 
the LEO? 
 
Pamela Kerr advised that this can be facilitated. A LEO-supported business will be identiﬁed for each 
MD, and if the businesses are agreeable, a short promotional video of the beneﬁts of LEO supports 
will be produced. These videos can then be shared by each Cathaoirleach for their relevant MD’S 
across social media etc. 
 
 
6. AOB 
 
Tom Treanor wished to acknowledge the support of the committee in regards the recent IFA sit-in 
protest at Bord Bia. The issue is still not resolved but they are hopeful that some agreement can be 
reached soon. 
 
Cllr. Sean Gililand agreed stating that hopefully round table talks will aid in making some progress for 
the farming community. He also wanted it noted that the committee lend their full support to former 
SPC member who is one of the ﬁve members of the IFA involved in the sit-in protest. 
 
 
7. Date of Next Meeting 
 
The next meeting will be held on Wednesday 29th April at 4pm. 
 
 
