 
1 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, M-Tek Building, 
Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan, on Monday 02 September 2024 at 10.00am 
 
Chair: 
Cllr C. Bennett, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
  Cllrs Aughey, Campbell, Carthy, Clerkin, S. Conlon, P. Conlon, Flynn, Gibbons, Gilliland, 
Keelan, Maxwell, McAree, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, S. Treanor and Truell 
 
  
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. C O’Hare, Directors 
of Services, Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, Ms. M. 
McGarvey, Meetings Administrator, Ms. M. McMahon, Staff Officer. 
 
 
Sympathy – Mary-Kerr Conlon, RIP: 
At the outset the Cathaoirleach extended the sympathy of the Council to Cllr Peter Conlon and 
family on the late Mary-Kerr Conlon, Former County and Town Councillor who had passed away on 
the 15 August 2024.  
 
All elected members associated themselves with the vote of sympathy. The members spoke highly 
of Mary, stating that she had been a dedicated and hardworking community activist in 
Carrickmacross and the surrounding areas. They recognised her dedication and commitment to her 
local community through her work with the GAA, Tidy Towns Committees and the Carrickmacross 
Festival Committee. The members highlighted how she had broken barriers by becoming a leader 
for women in politics during her during her 25 years as an elected representative.  The Chief 
Executive, on behalf of the executive and staff, associated himself with the vote of sympathy.    
 
The Cathaoirleach adjourned the meeting for a short period as a mark of respect.  
 
Urgent Business:  
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the members that she had notices of urgent business as follows: 
 
1. 
On behalf of Cllr. C. Bennett 
That Monaghan County council writes to the Department of Agriculture, Food, and the 
Marine, Minister Charlie McConalogue, Department of Finance, Minister Jack  Chambers 
Department of Public Expenditure, National Development Plan Delivery and Reform, 
Minister Paschal Donohoe calling for the reconvening of the National Fodder Committee 
and engagement with all the farming organisations and stakeholders.  
 
Agriculture is the primary industry in County Monaghan and due to the inclement weather 
and forecasts of unsettled weather for the foreseeable future many farmers are concerned 
and worried about their current supply of fodder and the prospects for next winter's 
harvest. It is prudent to prepare for a 'worst case scenario' rather than complacency which 
could cause further problems and panic. 
 
2. 
On behalf of Cllr. N. Keelan 
That Monaghan County Council writes to Ms. Norma Foley, T.D., Minister for Education and 
Ms. Siobhan Griffin, Regional Manager, School Transport Scheme, requesting that 
immediate action be taken to resolve the ongoing problems in relation to qualifying 
students and other students with no transport not being able to access the school transport 
service.  

 
2 
 
That Monaghan County Council writes to Ms. Norma Foley, T.D., Minister for Education and 
Mr. Eamon Ryan, Minister for Environment, Climate, Communications and Transport 
requesting that Government as a matter of policy provides a school transport scheme that 
will ensure that all students as far as practicable be provided with school transport. That 
the recommendations of the review of the school transport scheme be implemented as 
soon as possible in terms of choice and flexibility by eliminating the requirement to attend 
the nearest school, reducing the distances that is required for students to qualify for school 
transport etc.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N Keelan, seconded by Cllr C Carthy, it was agreed to enter ‘into 
Committee’ to discuss whether to accept the motions submitted as urgent business. 
 
Following a short discussion, it was agreed to take the motions of urgent business at the 
end of the meeting.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N Keelan, seconded by Cllr S Conlon, it was agreed that the Council 
revert to public session. 
 
1. 
Confirmation of Minutes:  
Cllr N Keelan noted a correction under Item 12 of the minutes of the Council meeting held 
on 08 July 2024 in relation to the undergrounding of the North-South Interconnector.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R Aughey seconded by Cllr P Treanor, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Council meeting held on the 08 July 2024, as amended, be confirmed. 
 
2. Correspondence 
 
 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting:  
• 
Letter from Ms. Emma Ball, Acting Head of Service, Primary Care, HSE, regarding the long 
delays that are occurring whereby medical card holders are having difficulty in accessing 
dental services.  
• 
Letter from Dr. Fiona McGrath, Chief Executive, CMETB, regarding the election of 
Monaghan County Council members to CMETB.  
• 
Letter from Mr. Brian Mac Fhíobhuí, Comhairle Uladh (Ulster GAA), regarding the Ulster 
Senior Football Championship Final.  
• 
Acknowledgement email received from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance, 
Mr. Jack Chambers, T.D., regarding the the VAT rate for pubs and restaurants. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Further and Higher 
Education, Research, Innovation and Science, Mr. Patrick O’Donovan, T.D., regarding 
Graduate Entry Medicine (GEM).  
• 
Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., 
regarding additional funding of €5.9m needed to achieve proper road maintenance in Co. 
Monaghan.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Minister for Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., regarding 
ash dieback. 
 
Additional Correspondence  
2.1  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda 
had issued was also circulated:  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, Mr. Darragh O’Brien, T.D., regarding the resolution of 
Developer Provided Infrastructure (DPI) at Oisin Vale and Oisin Brian estates. 

 
3 
 
• 
Acknowledgement email from Ms. Nancy Smyth, Canadian Ambassador to Ireland, 
thanking the Cathaoirleach and all the members and staff of Monaghan County Council for 
the well wishes on the conclusion of her tenure. 
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Bennett, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that this 
Council rewrites to the HSE reiterating the urgent need for dentists and orthodontists in 
County Monaghan. Children and medical card holders are not receiving the urgent dental 
treatment needed.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, it was agreed that this Council 
writes to Minister Eamon Ryan, TD, Minister for Transport seeking a reversal of the decision 
not to grant-aid the cutting or removal of trees infected with ash dieback.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Department of Health, attaching the item of correspondence from the HSE in 
relation to the provision of dental services which highlights the frustration being experienced 
by dentist representative organisations in negotiating a new contract, and that we appeal to 
Minister Stephen Donnelly to expedite an outcome that will secure dental services for 
children.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Noel Keelan, it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Minister for Finance, Mr. Jack Chambers, T.D., to request that funding to 
accelerate the resolution of Developer Provided Infrastructure by Uisce Eireann be included 
in the Government Budgetary proposals for 2025. 
 
 
3. 
To consider Draft Monaghan County Development Plan 2025-2031 
 
Mr. A. Hughes, Senior Planner, gave a presentation to the members on the Draft County 
Monaghan Development Plan 2025-2031. He referred to documentation pertaining to the 
Plan which had been circulated to members on 30 July 2024. He drew members attention to 
the Lobbying Act 2015 and their roles as Designated Public Officials. He referred to the Code 
of Conduct for Councillors and the Code of Conduct for Employees prepared in accordance 
with the Local Government Act, 2001, which must be observed by both the elected 
members and officials in the making of a County Development Plan.  
 
Mr. Hughes stated that two workshops in each of the five towns would be held in 
September and October to encourage members of the public from all areas of the County to 
participate in the public consultation. In addition, there will be engagement with the PPN, 
the LCDC and online workshops with planning agents and architects.  
 
Mr. Hughes noted that hard copies of documents pertaining to the Draft Monaghan County 
Development Plan 2025-2031 will be available in libraries, MD offices and published on the 
Council website.  
 
Mr. Hughes stated that following members consideration of the Draft County Development 
Plan 2025-2031 at the Council meeting today, it would undergo public consultation for a 
period of 10 weeks until 14 November 2024. Notification that the consultation period had 
commenced would be advertised on local radio, published in local newspapers and on the 
Council’s social media platforms and website. He noted that during those 10 weeks the 
elected members and members of the public could make submissions either in writing or 

 
4 
 
via the new online portal. He stated that he expects the Chief Executive’s report with 
recommendations based on submissions received to be completed in January for members 
consideration at the February Council meeting.  
 
The members commended members of staff for the extensive engagement and work 
involved in the preparation of the Draft Monaghan County Development Plan 2025-2031 to 
date.  
 
Mr. A. Hughes responded to members queries.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the Draft Monaghan County Development Plan 2025-2031 and commence the public 
consultation process.  
 
4. 
To consider the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for Black Island, Lough Muckno 
 
Mr. A. Hughes referred to the Part VIII report which had been circulated in respect of 
proposed works to upgrade paths, signage, picnic and viewing areas at Black Island, Lough 
Muckno. He advised that two submissions were submitted during the public consultation 
period whereby matters of concern in relation to biodiversity were highlighted and these had 
been addressed in the Chief Executive’s Report.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Campbell, seconded by Cllr P. Gibbons, it was agreed to approve the 
works to upgrade paths, signage, picnic and viewing areas at Black Island, Lough Muckno, Co. 
Monaghan as detailed in the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of 
the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended).   
 
5. 
To consider the Chief Executive’s Report prepared in accordance with Part VIII of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for The Peace Link, Clones 
 
Mr. A. Hughes referred to the Part VIII report which had been circulated in respect of, an 
extension to the spectator stand and a small-scale storage building at the Peace Link, Clones, 
Co. Monaghan.  He advised that no submissions had been received during the public 
consultation period.   
 
On the proposal Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, it was agreed to approve the 
extension to the spectator stand and the small-scale storage building at the Peace Link, 
Clones, Co. Monaghan as detailed in the Chief Executive’s Reports prepared in accordance 
with Part VIII of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended).   
 
6. 
To consider Taking in Charge application - Oakland Grove, Scotshouse 
The members considered the Taking in Charge application circulated for Oakland Grove, 
Scotshouse.  
  
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the application for Oakland Grove, Scothouse, Co. Monaghan, in accordance with 
the Taking in Charge of Estates and Declaration of Public Road Notice, under Section 180 of 
the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), & Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993. 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
7. To consider Variation VI of County Development Plan 2019 – 2025 – Change of Land Use Zoning 
– Shirley House Lane, Carrickmacross 
 
 
             The members considered the report which had been circulated.  
 
Mr. D. Hurley, Senior Executive Planner, attended the meeting and outlined that the 
proposed variation at Shirley House Lane, Carrickmacross that relates to a change of land 
use zoning from Existing Residential to Town Centre Use to facilitate the sustainable 
development and expansion of the town centre. He noted that all necessary screenings had 
been carried out in accordance with statutory obligations and with full Council approval the 
Proposed Variation VI would undergo public consultation until 18 October 2024.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon it was agreed that the report 
on the proposed Variation VI of the County Development Plan 2019-2025 proceed to public 
consultation. 
 
8. To approve Overdraft Accommodation in the sum of €10m 
 
Ms. O. McConnon, A/Director of Services, informed the members that it was necessary to 
have the approval of the Council for Overdraft Accommodation in the amount of €10m for 
the year 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, it was agreed that the 
Council approve Overdraft Accommodation in the sum of €10 million for the period 1 January 
2025 to 31 December 2025. 
 
9. To consider report on Local Property Tax Adjustment Factor and Budget 2025 
 
The members considered the report which had been circulated. 
 
Ms O McConnon, A/Director of Services, explained that a local authority may, as a reserved 
function, resolve to vary the basic rate of the Local Property Tax within its functional area 
by a maximum of + / - 15% and each year the rate reverts to zero %. Ms. McConnon 
referred to the Report on Property Tax Adjustment Factor and Budget 2025 which had 
circulated with the agenda and had been prepared based on a 15% variation of LPT. Ms. 
McConnon highlighted how the variance in LPT liability could impact on the Council’s 
budget and the Municipal Districts Allocations.  
 
Cllr PJ O’Hanlon proposed, Cllr D. Maxwell seconded that the Council retain the current rate 
of 15% LPT on the base rate for 2025.  
 
Cllr P. Treanor proposed, Cllr C. Carthy seconded that the Council remove the 15% increase 
and leave the rate of increase in the LPT at zero % for 2025.  
 
The Cathaoirleach put Cllr O’Hanlon’s proposal to the meeting. A vote by show of hands 
resulted in 9 For and 8 Against. As Cllr Treanor’s proposal was a direct negative the 
Cathaoirleach declared Cllr O’Hanlon’s proposal carried. 
 
10. To fix dates for October CPG Budget Meetings 
 
The following dates for CPG Budget meetings were noted: 
 

 
6 
 
• 
08 October 2024 at 2.30pm (In-person CPG Budget meeting)  
• 
22 October 2024 at 2.30pm (Ordinary October CPG meeting followed by CPG Budget 
meeting via MS Teams)  
• 
29 October 2024 at 2.30pm (In-person CPG Budget meeting) 
 
11. To approve nominations for appointment of external members to Audit Committee 
 
Ms. C. O’Hare, Director of Services, referred to the report that had been circulated in 
relation to the appointment of the following external members to the Audit Committee 
following the Local Government election in June:  
 
• 
Marie Mohan, Financial Director, Greenfield Foods.  
• 
Siobhan McArdle, Director, McArdle Transport Ltd.  
• 
Alan Johnston, Director, Johnston & Co. Accountants Ltd.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey it was agreed that the three 
external members – Marie Mohan, Siobhan McArdle and Alan Johnston be appointed to the 
Monaghan County Council Audit Committee. 
 
12. To consider Protocol for attendance of the Cathaoirleach of Monaghan County Council at 
functions and events 
 
Ms. M. McGarvey, A/Senior Executive Officer referred to the Draft Protocol for the 
attendance of the Cathaoirleach of Monaghan County Council at functions and events that 
had been circulated with the agenda. Ms. M. McGarvey gave a brief overview of the 
protocol in relation to how Monaghan County Council events and functions should be 
organised in respect of the Cathaoirleach and all County Council Members.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan it was agreed to approve the 
Draft Protocol for attendance of the Cathaoirleach of Monaghan County Council at functions 
and events.  
 
 
13. To consider submissions on the Draft Scheme for the establishments of SPC’s 2024 – 2029 
 
The members considered the Report circulated with the agenda on the 12 submissions 
received following the public consultation process on the Draft Scheme for the 
establishment of Strategic Policy Committees for the period 2024-2029 which closed on 16 
August 2024. 
 
Ms. M. McGarvey, A/Senior Executive Officer advised that subject to members approval it is 
proposed to make the following amendments to the Draft SPC Scheme for the 
establishment of SPCs 2024-2029 to reflect the submissions received following the public 
consultation exercise:   
 
• 
The title of the ‘SPC for Tourism, Rural & Community Development and Cultural Services’ to 
be amended to ‘SPC for Tourism, Rural & Community Development, An Ghaeilge & Cultural 
Services’ 
• 
Representation from the PPN Community and Voluntary Electoral college to be reduced from 
two representatives to one representative on the SPC for Transport.  
• 
The PPN Social Inclusion Electoral college to be allocated a seat on the SPC for Transport.  
• 
One of the two representatives on the SPC for Tourism, Rural & Community Development, 

 
7 
 
An Ghaeilge & Cultural Services’, from the PPN Community and Voluntary Electoral College, 
is to be actively involved in the Irish Language.  
• 
The following wording to be included in the Scheme - ‘The Irish Language will be a cross-
cutting theme across all 5 SPCs. The Council will promote the use of the Irish language in the 
work of all SPCs.’. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett it was agreed that the Draft 
Scheme for the establishment of the Strategic Policy Committees 2024-2029, as amended 
above, be adopted and that the Council proceed to fill the vacant positions on each SPC. 
 
 
Appointment of SPC Chairs to each of the 5 SPC Committees for 2024-2029  
 
1.    SPC for Housing  
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, that Cllr Colm Carthy be 
appointed to the position of Chair of the SPC for Housing.   
 
2. SPC for Transport  
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell, that Cllr Raymond Aughey 
be appointed to the position of Chair of the SPC for Transport.  
 
3. SPC for Economic Development and Enterprise  
On the proposal of Cllr A. Campbell, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell, that Cllr Sean Gilliland be 
appointed to the position of Chair of the SPC for Economic Development and Enterprise.  
 
4. SPC for Environment and Climate Change 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, that Cllr Richard Truell be 
appointed to the position of Chair of the SPC for Environment and Climate Change. 
 
5. SPC for Tourism, Rural & Community Development, An Ghaeilge & Cultural Services 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Flynn, seconded by Cllr P. Gibbons, that Cllr Sean Conlon be 
appointed to the position of Chair of the SPC for Tourism, Rural & Community Development, 
An Ghaeilge & Cultural Services. 
 
 
14. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 20 August 
2024, which had been circulated.  
 
Civic Reception - Fleadh Cheoil nah Éireann 2024 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland, it was agreed that a civic 
reception would be afforded to gold medal winners at Fleadh Cheoil nah Éireann 2024 
following the October Council meeting on Monday 07 October commencing at the later time 
of 2.00pm in the Council Chamber, Mtek Building.  
 
Uisce Eireann Workshop  
Following a short discussion, the members agreed to facilitate the Uisce Eireann workshop 
at the November Council meeting.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliand, it was agreed the minutes of the 
Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 20 August 2024 and the recommendations contained 

 
8 
 
therein be approved.  
 
15. To seek agreement to advertise for Expression of Interest – Annahagh Industrial Lands 
Development 
 
The members noted the update from Mr. C. Flynn, Director of Services, in relation to the 
proposed development of 36 acres of land at Annahagh, Monaghan. Mr. C. Flynn informed 
the members that the proposed development will house a projected eight industrial units, 
however, the number of units and their and size would be adjusted based on market 
demand. He stated that project is very much about supporting job creation, enterprise and 
employment growth in the County. Mr. Flynn advised that, with members agreement, the 
next step would be to advertise for Expressions of Interest to ascertain the market interest 
and if there is a demand for a particular size of industrial units.  
 
Mr. C. Flynn responded to members queries. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Bennett, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed to proceed with 
advertising to seek Expressions of Interest in respect of the proposed Annahagh Industrial 
Lands Development. 
  
16. To receive Management Report – July and August 2024 
 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for July and August 2024 which had 
been circulated with the agenda. He welcomed the funding awarded to undertake Town 
Centre Health Checks and Town Team Capacity Building for Clones, Castleblayney and 
Monaghan. The Chief Executive also referred to the significant level of recruitment that had 
taken place over the past number of months, stating that Monaghan County Council are a 
project driven organization and are ahead of the curve in that regard.  He concluded by 
wishing Ms. Pamela Kerr well in her new role as the Head of the Local Enterprise Office.  
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members.   
 
The members noted the Management Report for July and August 2024 which had been 
circulated with the agenda.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy it was agreed that projects not 
shortlisted for the 2024 Chambers Ireland Excellence in Local Government Awards be 
submitted to the LAMA All-Ireland Community and Council Awards 2025.  
 
17. To receive an update on the Peace Campus  
 
Ms. Christina Captieux, Peace Development Officer, attended the meeting to provide an 
update to members on the Peace Campus. She commenced by sharing a video that 
captured the celebrations of the launch of the Peace Campus on Friday 10 May 2024. Ms. 
Captieux gave a presentation to the members. Key points to note were:  
 
• 
The Peace Campus’ Strategic Plan aims to ensure the future development and 
sustainability of the Peace Campus for the long-term. 
• 
In terms of operational activity, contracts have been signed with anchor tenants; 
Foróige, Co-Operation Ireland and the HSE, who are now in place and ready to roll-
out their programmes and activities.   

 
9 
 
• 
It is anticipated that the Peace Campus website will be available by Q4, 2024. In the 
interim, information is available on the Council's website (www.monaghan.ie).  
• 
Over recent weeks, a facilities management company have been appointed and their 
services, which include a barista style café, will be available from mid-September.  
• 
To ensure good governance, the Peace Campus follows a Social Charter, set out by 
SEUPB. 
• 
Approximately 30% of the Peace Campus’ activities/programmes are aimed at youth 
services.  
• 
On 21 September 2024, which coincides with UN International Day of Peace and the 
50th Anniversary of the Museum, there will be a community open day at the Peace 
Campus. All infrastructure will be in place, bookings will be taken and there are a 
variety of activities planned throughout the day.   
 
Ms. Captieux responded to queries from the elected members.  
 
18. To receive presentation from Housing Section  
 
Mr. Nial O’Connor, Senior Executive Officer and Mr. Lorcán MacCinna, Senior Executive 
Engineer, attended the meeting to provide members with an update from the Housing 
section. Key points to note were:  
 
• 
As part of the Capital Programme for 2024-2026, 10 additional houses are to be completed 
at Knockcarrick, Annyalla and 30 houses are to be completed at Coill an Rí, Carrickmacross 
by Q4, 2024. 
• 
Two ‘Design and Build Social Housing Projects’ at Slí Lorcáin, Latlorcan, Monaghan and Slí 
NaCoille, Mullaghmatt, Monaghan, have been granted full planning approval and are 
currently at tender stage. 
• 
In terms of Energy Efficiency, in 2023, the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage provided an allocation for the upgrade of 68 properties and Monaghan County 
Council overachieved this target by upgrading 92 properties. The target set by the 
Department for 2024 was also 68 properties, however, the Housing section aim to upgrade 
133 properties.  
• 
Monaghan County Council ranked within the top 3 Local Authorities in Ireland in terms of 
performance since 2016 in the National Oversight and Audit Committee (NOAC) Reletting 
Results from 2014 to 2023.  
• 
The Housing department are at an advanced stage in the preparation of an application to 
the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage for an Affordable Housing 
Scheme to be made available for Monaghan Town next year. 
• 
A feasibility study is currently underway for a Cost Rental Scheme which proposes to provide 
rent 30% below the market rate. 
• 
As part of the National Housing Strategy for Disabled People 2022-2027, a full review of the 
housing list was completed which identified 122 applicants as having a recognised disability. 
Working groups have been established with the disability and mental health services with 
the HSE and a target has been set for 20% of allocations to persons with a disability.  
  
Mr. MacCinna and Mr. O’ Connor responded to queries from the elected members.  
 
19. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events 
There were no reports received.  
  
20. Business submitted by Chief Executive 
 

 
10 
 
The Chief Executive referred to correspondence received from Fermanagh & Omagh District 
Council requesting that an invitation be extended to the members of Fermanagh and 
Omagh District Council to visit to the opening of Monaghan County Museum, Monaghan 
Peace Campus and the Clones Marina.  In addition, he stated that, the Chair of Fermanagh 
and Omagh District Council’s Visitor Experience Development Partnership (VEDP), 
Councillor Thomas O'Reilly, had requested that the feasibility of him hosting a joint meeting 
with tourism officers from Monaghan and Cavan County Councils be explored.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett it was agreed to respond to 
Fermanagh and Omagh District Council with suitable dates to facilitate the visits and joint 
meeting as outlined in their correspondence.   
 
The Chief Executive also referred to the invitation received to the Project Children event in 
New York on 20th October 2024.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that Leas-
Cathaoirleach and a member of the Executive would represent Monaghan County Council at 
the Project Children Picnic + 5K event in New York on 20th October 2024.  
 
  
Adjournment of meeting:  
As the time had reached 3.50 pm, it was agreed that the balance of the agenda would be adjourned 
until Monday 16 September at 10.00am in the Council Chamber, Mtek Building.  
  
The meeting then concluded. 
 
 
 
Signed:  
________ 
  
 
               Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________ 
Meetings 
Administrator 
 
 
Date: 
________________________ 
