Draft Minutes of the First Meeting of Monaghan County Council following the Local Elections, held 
in the Council Chamber, Mtek Building, Monaghan on Friday 21st June 2024 at 10.00 a.m. 
 
Present:  
Cllrs. Aughey, Bennett, Campbell, Carthy, Clerkin, P. Conlon, S. Conlon, Gibbons, Flynn, 
Keelan, Maxwell, McAree, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, S. Treanor, R. Truell. 
 
Via  
MS Teams:  Cllr S. Gilliland 
 
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Ms. C. O’Hare, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Directors of 
Service, Ms. O. McConnon, Mr. G. McMahon, A/Directors of Service, Ms. M. McGarvey, 
Meetings Administrator and Ms. M. Little, Staff Officer. 
 
Apology: Cllr. S. Coyle 
 
Ms. Mary McGarvey, Meetings Administrator, formally announced, by electoral area, the names of 
the members elected following the Local Elections held on June 07th, 2024, in the order in which they 
had been elected – 
 
 
Ballybay-Clones Local Electoral Area: 
Cllr Seamus Coyle   
Cllr Richard Truell  
Cllr Seán Gilliland 
Cllr Sinéad Flynn 
Cllr Pat Treanor 
 
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney Local Electoral Area 
Cllr P.J. O’Hanlon 
Cllr Aidan Campbell 
Cllr Colm Carthy 
 
 
Cllr Noel Keelan 
 
Cllr Paul Gibbons 
Cllr Peter Conlon 
 
Monaghan Local Electoral Area: 
Cllr Cathy Bennett 
Cllr Seamus Treanor  
 
Cllr Raymond Aughey 
Cllr Seán Conlon 
Cllr Pauric Clerkin 
Cllr Bronagh McAree 
Cllr David Maxwell 
 
 
 
1. 
Election of Cathaoirleach of the County of Monaghan: 
 
The Meetings Administrator presided over the election of Cathaoirleach and invited 
nominations for the position of Cathaoirleach of County Monaghan. 
 
Cllr P. Treanor proposed that Cllr Cathy Bennett be nominated for the position of 
Cathaoirleach of County Monaghan.   Cllr S. Flynn seconded the proposal. 

 
As Cllr Bennett had received the support of the majority of the members present, she was 
declared elected as Cathaoirleach of County Monaghan. 
 
Following her election, Cllr C. Bennett assumed the position of Cathaoirleach and thanked 
her proposer and seconder and the members that had supported her election.  She pledged 
to work with his Councillor colleagues and the officials of the Council for the benefit of the 
people of the county.   She also paid tribute to the outgoing Cathaoirleach, Cllr D. Maxwell 
and the Leas-Chathaoirleach, Cllr P. Treanor for the professional way in which they had 
undertaken these roles over the past year. She outlined her key priorities for the 
forthcoming year:  
 
• 
Pursuing further investment in the Sliagh Beagh area to make it an attractive place 
to live, work and visit.  
• 
As Chairperson of Monaghan Women’s Assembly, continuing efforts to ensure that 
female voices are heard in politics in equal measure both locally and nationally.  
• 
The roll-out of traffic calming schemes in all towns and villages.   
• 
Supporting families to ensure adequate provision of, housing, accessible playparks, 
accessible community venues and additional outdoor recreational amenities for all.  
 
Vote of Sympathy: 
 
On the Proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon it was agreed that the sympathy of 
the Council be extended to Cllr. Sinéad Flynn on the passing of her father, Michael Flynn, 
Magherarney, Smithboro, County Monaghan.  
 
2. 
Election of Leas-Chathaoirleach of the County of Monaghan: 
The Cathaoirleach sought nominations for the position of Leas-Chathaoirleach. 
 
Cllr A. Campbell proposed, Cllr D. Maxwell seconded that Cllr Peter Conlon be nominated for 
the position of Leas-Chathaoirleach. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr Peter Conlon was declared elected as Leas-
Chathaoirleach of the County of Monaghan. 
 
3. 
Adoption of Draft Standing Orders 2024-2029 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell it was agreed that the Draft 
Standing Orders 2024-2029, as circulated, be adopted. 
 
4. 
Election of Chairs-designate for the five Strategic Policy Committees  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor it was agreed that 
nominations would be sought for the election of Chairs-designate for the five Strategic Policy 
Committees, however, the committee each Chair would represent would be agreed at a 
future plenary meeting.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Sean Gilliland and Cllr 
Richard Truell were nominated for the position of Chairs of Strategic Policy Committees.  
 

On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, jointly seconded by Cllr B. McAree and Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr 
Colm Carthy and Cllr Seán Conlon were nominated for the position of Chairs of Strategic 
Policy Committees.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Colm Carthy, Cllr Seán Conlon, Seán Gilliand 
and Richard Truell were declared elected as Chairs of Strategic Policy Committees. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated for the position of Chair of a Strategic Policy Committee for the period June 2024-
June 2027.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr Raymond Aughey was declared elected as the 
Chair of a Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
5. 
Nomination of five representatives to Cavan and Monaghan Education and Training Board.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Sinéad Flynn and Cllr Colm 
Carthy were nominated to the Cavan and Monaghan Education and Training Board. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr Aidan Campbell was 
nominated to the Cavan and Monaghan Education and Training Board. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Cavan and Monaghan Education and Training Board. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the Cavan and Monaghan Education and Training Board. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Sinéad Flynn, Colm Carthy, Aidan Campbell, 
David Maxwell and Seamus Coyle were declared elected to the Cavan and Monaghan 
Education and Training Board.    
 
6. 
HSE - Nomination of three representatives to Regional Health Forum – Dublin and North 
East 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Regional Health Forum – Dublin and North East.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Bronagh McAree was 
nominated to the Regional Health Forum – Dublin and North East.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the Regional Health Forum – Dublin and North East.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs David Maxwell, Bronagh McAree and Seamus 
Coyle were declared elected to the Regional Health Forum, Dublin North East.    
 
 
7. 
Nomination of two representatives to the Northern and Western Regional Assembly   
 

On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Northern and Western Regional Assembly.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, Cllr Seán Conlon nominated 
to the Northern and Western Regional Assembly.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr David Maxwell and Cllr Seán Conlon were 
declared elected as the Council’s nominees to the Northern and Western Regional Assembly. 
 
 
8. 
Nomination of six representatives to the East Border Region Members Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Paul Gibbons and Cllr Noel 
Keelan were nominated to the East Border Region Members Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr Aidan Campbell and Cllr 
Peter Conlon were nominated to the East Border Region Members Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the East Border Region Members Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R, Aughey, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
to the East Border Region Members Forum. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Paul Gibbons, Noel Keelan, Aidan Campbell, 
Peter Conlon, Raymond Aughey and PJ O’Hanlon were declared elected to the East Border 
Region Members Forum. 
 
 
 
(ii)  Nomination of three representatives (from among the six representatives) as Directors 
to the Board of East Border Region Ltd. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Noel Keelan was nominated 
as a Director to the Board of East Border Region Ltd. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr Aidan Campbell was 
nominated as a Director to the Board of East Border Region Ltd. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
as a Director to the Board of East Border Region Ltd. 
 
 
 
As there were no other nominations, Cllrs Noel Keelan, Aidan Campbell and PJ O’Hanlon 
were declared elected as a Directors to the Board of East Border Region Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
9. 
Nomination of three representatives to the Management Board of ICBAN Ltd., (Irish 
Central Border Areas Network) 
 

 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Management Board of ICBAN.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Pat Treanor was nominated 
to the Management Board of ICBAN.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the Management Board of ICBAN.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs David Maxwell, Pat Treanor and Seamus Coyle 
were declared elected as the Council’s nominees to the Management Board of ICBAN. 
 
10. 
Nomination of six members to the Clones Erne East Partnership 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, it was agreed that the five 
members of the Ballybay-Clones Municipal District be elected to the Clones Erne East 
Partnership. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Seamus Coyle, Seán Gilliland, Sinéad Flynn, Pat 
Treanor and Richard Truell were declared elected to the Clones Erne East Partnership. 
 
The members agreed that the filling of the remaining place on the Clones Erne East 
Partnership be agreed at the Monaghan Municipal District meeting. 
 
 
 
11. 
Nomination of three delegates to the Association of Irish Local Government (AILG) 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated as a delegate to the Association of Irish Local Government. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, Cllr Pat Treanor and Cllr Noel 
Keelan were nominated as delegates to the Association of Irish Local Government. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs David Maxwell, Pat Treanor and Noel Keelan 
were declared elected as delegates to the Association of Irish Local Government. 
 
12. 
Nomination of one representative to the Local Authority Members Association. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Seán Conlon was nominated to 
the Local Authority Members Association for the period June 2024 to June 2027.  
 
As there was no further nomination, Cllr Seán Conlon was declared elected as the Council’s 
representative to the Local Authority Members Association.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr David Maxwell was nominated 
to the Local Authority Members Association for the period June 2027 – June 2029 
 
Subject to ratification at the June 2027 AGM, Cllr David Maxwell, to be elected as the Council’s 
representative to the Local Authority Members Association from June 2027 – June 2029.  
 
13. 
IPB Insurance - Nomination of one representative 

 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Richard Truell was 
nominated as the Council’s representative to IPB Insurance. 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr Richard Truell was declared elected as the 
Council’s nominee to IPB Insurance. 
 
14. 
Nomination of two representatives to the Connecting for Life Suicide Prevention Working 
Group 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the Connecting for Life Suicide Prevention Working Group.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Bronagh McAree was 
nominated to the Connecting for Life Suicide Prevention Working Group. 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Pauric Clerkin and Bronagh McAree were 
declared elected to the Connecting for Life Suicide Prevention Working Group. 
 
15. 
Nomination of two members to the Board of the Garage Theatre 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the Board of the Garage Theatre. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, Cllr Bronagh McAree was 
nominated to the Board of the Garage Theatre. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Pauric Clerkin and Bronagh McAree were 
declared elected to the Board of the Garage Theatre. 
 
16. 
Nomination of three members to the Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Paul Gibbons was 
nominated to the Local Community Development Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the Local Community Development Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the Local Community Development Committee. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Paul Gibbons, Pauric Clerkin and Seamus Coyle, 
were declared elected as the Council’s representative to the Local Community Development 
Committee. 
 
 
 
17. 
Nomination of four members to the Peace Partnership Board 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr Richard Truell and Seamus 
Treanor were nominated to the Peace Partnership Board. 

 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, Cllr Cathy Bennett was 
nominated to the Peace Partnership Board. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr Aidan Campbell, Cllr Raymond Aughey 
was nominated to the Peace Partnership Board. 
As there were no further nominations Cllrs Richard Truell, Seamus Treanor, Cathy Bennett 
and Raymond Aughey were declared elected to the Peace Partnership Board. 
 
 
18. 
Nomination of one representative to the Monaghan Local Sports Partnership Board. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Colm Carthy was nominated 
as the Council’s representative to the Monaghan Local Sports Partnership Board. 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr Colm Carthy was declared elected to the 
Monaghan Local Sports Partnership Board. 
 
19. 
Nomination of four representatives to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative 
Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Pauric Clerkin and Cllr 
Seamus Treanor were nominated to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative 
Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Cathy Bennett was 
nominated to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Pauric Clerkin, Seamus Treanor, Cathy Bennett, 
and Seamus Coyle were declared elected to the Local Traveller Accommodation 
Consultative Committee.  
 
20. 
Nomination of two representatives to the Audit Committee. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Paul Gibbons was 
nominated to the Audit Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the Audit Committee. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Paul Gibbons and Raymond Aughey were 
declared elected to the Audit Committee.  
 
21. 
Nomination of five representatives to Local Steering Group for the Use of Irish in 
Monaghan County Council (Coiste Gaeilge)  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr Richard Truell was 
nominated to the Coiste Gaeilge. 

 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the Coiste Gaeilge. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr Pauric Clerkin, Cllr Aidan Campbell was 
nominated to the Coiste Gaeilge. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllrs Pat Treanor and Cathy 
Bennett were nominated to the Coiste Gaeilge. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Richard Truell, Seamus Coyle, Aidan Campbell, 
Pat Treanor and Cathy Bennett were declared elected to the Coiste Gaeilge. 
 
22. 
Nomination of four representatives to An Coiste Logainmneacha  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr D. Maxwell, Cllr Peter Conlon was 
nominated to the Coiste Logainmneacha. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Pat Treanor was nominated 
to the Coiste Logainmneacha. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the Coiste Logainmneacha. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Bronagh McAree was 
nominated to the Coiste Logainmneacha. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Peter Conlon, Pat Treanor, Seamus Coyle and 
Bronagh McAree were declared elected to the Coiste Logainmneacha. 
 
23. 
Nomination of four representatives to Museum Advisory Committee: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Paul Gibbons was nominated 
to the Museum Advisory Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Museum Advisory Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the Museum Advisory Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the Museum Advisory Committee. 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Paul Gibbons, David Maxwell, Raymond Aughey 
and Pauric Clerkin were declared elected to the Museum Advisory Committee 
 
24. 
Nomination of four representatives to Local Monitoring Committee (Rural Water 
Programme)  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr. Aidan Campbell was 
nominated to the Local Water Monitoring Committee (Rural Water Programme). 
 

On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Noel Keelan was nominated 
to the Local Water Monitoring Committee (Rural Water Programme). 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
to the Local Water Monitoring Committee (Rural Water Programme). 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, Cllr Paul Gibbons was 
nominated to the Local Water Monitoring Committee (Rural Water Programme). 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Aidan Campbell, Noel Keelan, PJ O’Hanlon and 
Paul Gibbons were declared elected to the Local Water Monitoring Committee (Rural Water 
Programme). 
 
25. 
Nomination of six representatives to the Speed Limits Committee: 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Flynn, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Colm Carthy was nominated 
to the Speed Limits Committee. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr Peter Conlon was 
nominated to the Speed Limits Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Speed Limits Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the Speed Limits Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
to the Speed Limits Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Sinéad Flynn was 
nominated to the Speed Limits Committee. 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Colm Carthy, Peter Conlon, David Maxwell, 
Raymond Aughey, PJ O’Hanlon, and Sinéad Flynn were declared elected to the Speed Limits 
Committee. 
26. 
Nomination of four representatives to the Twinning Committee  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr Aidan Campbell was 
nominated to the Twinning Committee. 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Twinning Committee. 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Gibbons, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, Cllr Sinéad Flynn was 
nominated to the Twinning Committee. 
On the proposal of Cllr Raymond Aughey, seconded by Cllr Peter Conlon, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon 
was nominated to the Twinning Committee. 
 

 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Aidan Campbell, David Maxwell, Sinéad Flynn 
and PJ O’Hanlon were declared elected to the Twinning Committee. 
 
27. 
Nomination of four members to the County Monaghan Heritage Forum  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr Peter Conlon was 
nominated to the County Monaghan Heritage Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Bronagh McAree and Cllr 
Seán Conlon were nominated to the County Monaghan Heritage Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr Raymond Aughey, Cllr Seamus Coyle 
was nominated to the County Monaghan Heritage Forum. 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Peter Conlon, Bronagh McAree, Seán Conlon 
and Seamus Coyle were declared elected to the County Monaghan Heritage Forum. 
 
28. 
Nomination of six members to the Muckno Development Committee: 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, it was agreed to increase the 
membership on the Muckno Development Committee from six to eight members.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, the six members of the 
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney Municipal District were nominated to the Muckno 
Development Committee.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, Cllr Pat Treanor was 
nominated to the Muckno Development Committee.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the Muckno Development Committee.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Aidan Campbell, Noel Keelan, Paul Gibbons, PJ 
O’Hanlon, Colm Carthy, Peter Conlon, Pat Treanor and Pauric Clerkin were declared elected 
to the Muckno Development Committee. 
 
29. 
Nomination of six members to the Standing Orders and Procedures Committee  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr Peter Conlon was 
nominated to the Standing Orders and Procedures Committee. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Standing Orders and Procedures Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr P. Gibbons, Cllr Seán Conlon and Cllr 
Sinéad Flynn were nominated to the Standing Orders and Procedures Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the Standing Orders and Procedures Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Sinéad Flynn, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Cathy Bennett was 
nominated to the Standing Orders and Procedures Committee. 
 

 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Peter Conlon, David Maxwell, Seán Conlon, 
Sinéad Flynn, Raymond Aughey and Cathy Bennett were declared elected to the Standing 
Orders and Procedures Committee. 
 
30. 
Nomination of one representative to the Road Safety Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Seán Conlon was nominated 
to the Road Safety Committee. 
 
 
As there was no other nomination, Cllr Seán Conlon was declared elected to the Road Safety 
Committee.  
 
31. 
Nomination of five representatives to the Local Improvements Scheme Committee  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr Sean Gilliland and Cllr 
Aidan Campbell were nominated to the Local Improvements Scheme Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Flynn, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, Cllr Bronagh McAree and Cllr 
Noel Keelan were nominated to the Local Improvements Scheme Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
to the Local Improvements Scheme Committee. 
 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Sean Gilliland, Aidan Campbell, Bronagh 
McAree, Noel Keelan and PJ O’Hanlon were declared elected to the Local Improvements 
Scheme Committee. 
 
32. 
Nomination of three members to the Monaghan Leisure Complex Management 
Committee.  
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the Monaghan Leisure Complex Management Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, Cllr Seán Conlon was 
nominated to the Monaghan Leisure Complex Management Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the Monaghan Leisure Complex Management Committee. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Pauric Clerkin, Seán Conlon and Raymond 
Aughey were declared elected to the Monaghan Leisure Complex Management Committee. 
 
 
33. 
Nomination of one representative to the North East Regional Drugs and Alcohol Task 
Force. 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to the North East Regional Drugs and Alcohol Task Force.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr Seamus Coyle was declared elected to the North 
East Regional Drugs and Alcohol Task Force.  
 
 
34. 
Nomination of eight representative to the Civic Offices Steering Group 
 

On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr. C. Bennett, it was agreed that 
membership of the Civic Offices Steering Group be reduced from eight to seven members.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Seán Gilliland was 
nominated to the Civic Offices Steering Group. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, Cllr Seamus Treanor was 
nominated to the Civic Offices Steering Group. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Truell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the Civic Offices Steering Group. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Cathy Bennett and Cllr 
Bronagh McAree were nominated to the Civic Offices Steering Group. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr Raymond Aughey and 
Cllr Seamus Coyle were nominated to the Civic Offices Steering Group. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Seán Gilliland, Seamus Treanor, David Maxwell, 
Cathy Bennett, Bronagh McAree, Raymond Aughey and Seamus Coyle were declared 
elected to the Civic Offices Steering Group.   
 
35.  
Nomination of three representatives to the Cavan and Monaghan Drugs and Alcohol 
Forum 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr Richard Truell was 
nominated to the Cavan and Monaghan Drugs and Alcohol Forum.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, Cllr Cathy Bennett was 
nominated to the Cavan and Monaghan Drugs and Alcohol Forum.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr P. Conlon, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
to the Cavan and Monaghan Drugs and Alcohol Forum.  
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Richard Truell, Cathy Bennett and PJ O’Hanlon 
were declared elected to the Cavan/Monaghan Drugs and Alcohol Forum. 
 
36. 
Nomination of four representatives to the Monaghan Tourism and Recreation Forum  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr. C. Bennett, it was agreed that 
membership of the Monaghan Tourism and Recreation Forum be reduced from four to three 
members.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr Peter Conlon was 
nominated to the Monaghan Tourism and Recreation Forum.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Flynn, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Seán Conlon was nominated 
to the Monaghan Tourism and Recreation Forum.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr Raymond Aughey was 
nominated to the Monaghan Tourism and Recreation Forum.  

 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Peter Conlon, Seán Conlon and Raymond 
Aughey were declared elected to the Monaghan Tourism and Recreation Forum. 
 
37. 
Nomination of one representative to the Comhairle na nOg Steering Committee 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was 
nominated to the Comhairle na nOg Steering Committee until the Annual General Meeting 
in June 2027. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr Pauric Clerkin was declared elected to the 
Comhairle na nOg Steering Committee for the period June 2024 to June 2027. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, Cllr Colm Carthy was nominated 
Comhairle na nOg Steering Committee for the period June 2027 – June 2029. 
 
Subject to ratification at the June 2027 AGM, Cllr Colm Carthy, to be elected to the Comhairle 
na nOg Steering Committee from June 2027 – June 2029.  
 
 
38. 
Nomination of three representatives to Monaghan Walking and Cycling Forum 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, Cllr Paul Gibbons was nominated 
to Monaghan Walking and Cycling Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to Monaghan Walking and Cycling Forum. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, Cllr Seamus Coyle was 
nominated to Monaghan Walking and Cycling Forum. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs Paul Gibbons, David Maxwell and Seamus Coyle 
were declared elected to Monaghan Walking and Cycling Forum. 
 
 
39. 
Nomination of two representatives (SPC Chairs) to the Monaghan Digital Strategy Steering 
Committee 
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, Cllr Colm Carthy was 
nominated to the Monaghan Digital Strategy Steering Committee. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllr Colm Carthy was declared elected to the 
Monaghan Digital Strategy Steering Committee. 
 
The members agreed that the filling of the remaining place on the Monaghan Digital Strategy 
Steering Committee be deferred to a future meeting. 
 
40. 
Nomination of four representatives to the A5/N2 Cross-Border Committee 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr R.Truell, Cllr David Maxwell was 
nominated to the A5/N2 Cross-Border Committee. 

 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr P. Clerkin, Cllr Seamus Treanor was 
nominated to the A5/N2 Cross-Border Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, Cllr Noel Keelan was 
nominated to the A5/N2 Cross-Border Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr R. Aughey, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon was nominated 
to the A5/N2 Cross-Border Committee. 
 
As there were no further nominations, Cllrs David Maxwell, Seamus Treanor, Noel Keelan 
and PJ O’Hanlon were declared elected to the A5/N2 Cross-Border Committee. 
 
41. 
Appointment of members to witness the affixing of the Official Seal. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett all members of the Council 
were appointed to witness the affixing of the Official Seal. 
 
 
42. 
To agree a schedule for ordinary meetings of Monaghan County Council. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D. Maxwell, seconded by Cllr C. Bennett, it was agreed that Ordinary 
meetings of Monaghan County Council be held on the first Monday of each month except in 
the month of August.   Where the day for the Ordinary meeting falls on a bank holiday, the 
meeting shall be held on the following Monday. 
 
43. 
To fix date for July Council meeting 
 
It was agreed that the July Council meeting would be held on Monday 8thth July 2024 at 
10.00am in the Council Chamber. 
 
44. 
To fix date for Corporate Policy Group Meeting: 
It was agreed that a meeting of the Corporate Policy Group would be held on Tuesday 2nd 
July at 2.00pm. 
 
45. 
To agree dates for holding the first meeting of each Municipal District: 
 
The following dates were agreed for the first meetings of the Municipal Districts: 
 
(i) 
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney Municipal District  
Monday 24th June 2024  
(ii) 
Ballybay-Clones Municipal District  
Thursday 27th June 2024   
(iii) 
Monaghan Municipal District 
Friday 21st June 2024 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________           ________________________            
               Cathaoirleach  
                  
Meetings Administrator  
 
Date:    ________________________            ________________________   
