 
1 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Peace Campus, 6 Plantation Road, 
Monaghan, County Monaghan, on Tuesday 04 June 2024 at 10.00am 
 
Chair: 
Cllr D. Maxwell, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
  Cllrs Aughey, Bennett, Campbell, Carthy, Connolly, Coyle, S. Conlon, P. Conlon, 
Gilliland, Keelan, McCooey, McElvaney, McKenna, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, S. Treanor, R 
Truell.  
 
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. C O’Hare, Directors 
of Services, Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, Ms. M 
McGarvey, Meetings Administrator, Ms. M Little, Staff Officer.  
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Meetings held on 07 May 2024  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr D Maxwell, seconded by Cllr S Coyle, it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Council meeting held on the 07 May 2024 be confirmed. 
 
 
2.     Correspondence 
 
 
 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting:  
 
• 
Email received from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Public Expenditure, NPD 
Delivery and Reform, regarding the (Teagasc-led) National Fodder and Feed Security 
Committee.  
• 
Email received from Ms. Mandy Doyle, Head of Service, Primary Care, HSE, regarding the 
new Primary Health Service in Monaghan. 
• 
Email received from Senator Robbie Gallagher, regarding the response he received from 
Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Mr. Darragh O’Brien, T.D., on 
Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability scheme, in respect 
of private houses.  
• 
Email received from Chair of the Oireachtas Committee on Tourism, Culture, Arts, 
Gaeltacht, Sports and Media, Ms. Niamh Smyth, T.D., regarding the response she received 
from Mr. Michael Kennedy, Head of Regulatory and Administration Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland, in relation to her parliamentary question on winter maintenance 
operations on national roads.  
• 
Acknowledgement email received from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Transport, 
Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., regarding low-cost safety schemes.  
• 
Acknowledgement letter received from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, 
Mr. Simon Harris, T.D., regarding a review of rates of Housing Adaptation Grants and 
increase in allocation.  
• 
Acknowledgement letter received from the Private Secretary to the Tánaiste and Minister 
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Micheál Martin, T.D., regarding the VAT rate for the hospitality 
sector.  
• 
Acknowledgement email received from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, Mr. Darragh O’Brien, T.D., regarding a review of rates of 
Housing Adaptation Grants and increase allocation.  
• 
Email received from Mr. Brendan Smith, T.D., regarding response received from the 
Minister for Education, Ms. Norma Foley, T.D., in relation to the procurement of materials 
for schools.  

 
2 
 
• 
Resolution from Clare County Council regarding failures in the reconfigured health services.  
• 
Resolution from Tipperary County Council regarding ash dieback.  
 
 
Additional Correspondence  
 
2.1  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda 
had issued was also circulated:  
• 
Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and Marine, 
Mr. Charlie McConalogue, T.D., regarding the re-convening of the National Fodder 
and Food Security Committee.  
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr C Bennett, seconded by Cllr S Conlon, it was agreed that this Council, 
rewrites to the HSE to ask them to explain why there are idle dentist chairs in the Primary 
Care Health Unit in Monaghan and in particular, to explain why there is no orthodontist in 
the North-East Health Board. Children are not receiving adequate dental treatments in 
Monaghan due to the neglect of services and embargo on HSE employment. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr P Treanor, seconded by Cllr H McElvaney, it was agreed that this 
Council, support the Tipperary CoCo motion calling on the Minister of State at the 
Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine with special responsibility for Land Use and 
Biodiversity, Senator Pippa Hackett, to implement, in full and without further delay the 
recommendations of the Report titled ‘Review of Support for Farmers Impacted by Ash 
Dieback’ which had been compiled by Dr. Matthew Crowe, Jerry Grant and  Jo O’Hara.  
 
 
3. To consider Taking in Charge for Crann Nua, Carrickmacross 
 
Members considered the Taking in Charge application circulated for Crann Nua, 
Carrickmacross.  
 
On the proposal Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P Conlon, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the application for Crann Nua, Carrickmacross, in accordance with the Taking In 
Charge of Estates and Declaration of Public Roads Notice, under Section 180 of the Planning 
and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993.  
 
4. To consider S183 Sale of Lands at Onomy, Castleblayney to St. McCartan’s Diocesan Trust 
(amendment to previously approved S183) 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Campbell, seconded by Cllr A McCooey, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the amendment to the previously approved S183 for the sale of lands at 
Onomy, Castleblayney to St. McCartan’s Diocesan Trust in accordance with the terms of the 
notice dated 22nd April 2024 and attached site location map in accordance with S183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001.  
 
 
5. To consider S183 Sale/Exchange of Lands at Annahagh, Monaghan to Combilift Ltd 
On the proposal of Cllr D Maxwell, seconded by Cllr B McKenna, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the sale/exchange of lands at Annahagh, Monaghan to Combilift Ltd., in accordance 

 
3 
 
with the terms of the notice dated 13th May 2024 and attached site location maps in 
accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 2001.  
 
6. To consider S183 Transfer of Lands to ESB Networks at Drummond Otra, Carrickmacross 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr P Conlon, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the transfer of lands to ESB Networks at Drummond Otra, Carrickmacross, in 
accordance with the terms of the notice dated 22nd April 2024 and attached site location maps 
in accordance with S183 of the Local Government Act 2001.  
 
7. To approve nomination to the LCDC Committee 
 
On the proposal of Cllr S Coyle, seconded by Cllr C Bennett, it was agreed that Carol Kelly, 
CMETB, would replace Deirdre Byrne, CMETB, as a statutory member of the LCDC/LAG 
Committee from June onwards.  
 
8. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group 21 May 2024 
 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 21 May 
2024, which had been circulated.  
 
In response to a query, Mr. Robert Burns, Chief Executive confirmed that he had reviewed 
the request for a refund of course fees and that he was satisfied that it was in compliance 
with the Circular LG 05/2022 - Allowances and Expenses of Elected Members.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N Keelan, seconded by Cllr R Aughey, it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 21 May 2024 and the recommendations 
contained therein be approved.  
 
9. To receive Management Report – May 2024 
 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for May 2024 which had been 
circulated with the agenda. He referred to the work that had been recently completed by the 
Roads Team and staff from the three Municipal Districts to enhance the condition of roads in 
Monaghan over recent weeks and invited Mr. G McMahon, Director of Services to give a 
presentation to the meeting in relation to the nature of the work that had been carried out.  
 
Mr. G McMahon commenced by thanking the Municipal Districts technical and outdoor staff 
and contractors involved in the recent road repair blitz and gave a presentation to the 
meeting. Key points to note were:   
 
• 
As the road grant allocation for 2024 was in line with that of 2023 and considering 
the impact of the excessive rainfall experienced over recent months, which had 
resulted in deterioration of the condition of the roads network, a decision was made 
to concentrate roads resources into an intensive period of patch repairs which 
commenced on 29th April 2024. 
• 
Works consisted of; additional drainage crews and additional hot mix and road 
maintenance crews being deployed in each MD; an increase in the number of 
velocity patchers and road patch sealing.  
• 
Reclaimed asphalt was used for the first time as a pothole repair material, promoting 
the circular economy and sustainability of working practices.   
• 
840 tonnes of hot mix patching was carried out, 149 roads were repaired, 1 road 

 
4 
 
was patched using RAP materials and in total approximately 550km of patching 
works were completed.  
• 
In terms of next steps, the different types of patching repairs for the various road 
types will be closely monitored for durability, the trial of the RAP product and the 
use of the combi unit sealer will continue.  
• 
The roads department are currently developing a 5-year roads maintenance strategy 
to maximise efficiencies, resources and bring the road network to a steady state. 
 
The members noted the Management Report for May 2024 which had been circulated with 
the agenda.  
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr S Conlon, seconded by Cllr D Maxwell it was agreed to extend an 
invitation to the Canadian Ambassador, Ms. Nancy Smyth, to visit Monaghan to mark Canada 
Day, on Monday 01 July 2024.  
 
10. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events. 
The members noted the reports from Cllr R Truell, in relation to his attendance at the 
following Conference/Training events:  
 
• 
AILG, Local Elections 2024, 21st March 2024, Hotel Kilkenny, Co. Kilkenny  
• 
LAMA, Spring Seminar, 19th-20th January Abbey Hotel, Donegal Town, Co. Donegal 
• 
Association of Irish Regions, Regions in Focus Seminar, 7-8th February 2024, Woodlands 
Hotel, Co. Limerick 
• 
AILG, Annual Conference 2024, 14th-15th February, Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow  
 
11. Business submitted by Chief Executive 
 
The Chief Executive advised the members that he had considered the motion from the last 
meeting regarding the North South Interconnector and following legal advice received, he would 
not be in a position to act on the motion. He noted that the motion related to a function that was 
not a reserved function and was ultra vires and not in compliance with the relevant legislation. 
He invited Mr. A Hughes, Senior Planner, to provide an update to the members in relation to the 
item on behalf of the Planning Authority.   
 
Mr. A. Hughes, provided an update from the Planning Authority on the North-South 
Interconnector project. 
The key points to note were:  
 
• 
Planning permission had been granted by An Bord Pleanála in 2016, subject to 
compliance with conditions.  
• 
ESB contacted the planning authorities of Monaghan, Meath and Cavan earlier this 
year and a meeting was arranged on 12th March 2024 at their request. At the outset 
the following two queries were raised:  
 
 
1. The expiry period, if any, in respect of the granted planning permission.  
 2. The legal position of ESB to engage with planning authorities in respect of 
compliance matters. 
• 
ESB were contacted on 03 April and 08 May 2024 in relation to the outstanding 
queries.  

 
5 
 
• 
Due to the absence of a response from the ESB, the planning authority met with 
Senior Counsel on 22 May 2024 and correspondence was subsequently issued to ESB 
regarding the outstanding queries on 24 May 2024.  
• 
On 28 May 2024, correspondence was received from the ESB and this had been 
circulated with the agenda. In addition, the ESB correspondence has been forwarded 
to Senior Counsel for legal opinion.  
• 
Any further updates will be provided to members once received.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N Keelan, seconded by Cllr P Treanor it was agreed that this Council invite 
the ESB Networks Project Team to attend future meeting of this Council.  
 
 
12. Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held 07 May 2024 
 
There were no matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 07 May 
2024. 
 
 
13. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services gave the following update in relation to the N2 
National Primary Road Schemes:  
 
• 
On Monday 13 May 2024 a delegation from the A5-N2 Cross-Border Committee met with 
Minister of Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., in Dublin.  
• 
Minister Ryan reiterated the Government’s support for the A5 Scheme; however, he advised 
that funding for the A5 Scheme comes from the Department of An Taoiseach.  
• 
In relation to the Clontibret to the Border Road Scheme, the Minister’s Department 
continues to support this Scheme through funding via the current project management 
process.  
• 
The Ardee to Castleblayney Roads Scheme remains an objective of the National 
Development Plan, however, delivery is constrained by the availability of funding. TII and 
Monaghan County Council have been instructed to explore, short/medium term safety 
measures along this section of road.  
 
14. To receive update on North/South Interconnector project 
No further update. 
 
15. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update. 
 
16. Questions and Replies 
 
Cllr P. Connolly asked:  
1. What plans are there for the Taking In Charge of Millbrook housing development in Milltown, 
Monaghan? 
Reply: The Planning Authority are awaiting the agreement from Uisce Eireann to progress 
the taking in charge process.  The Planning Authority most recently contacted Uisce Eireann 
in April 2024 and again in May 2024, and are currently awaiting a response. 
Cllr R. Aughey asked: 

 
6 
 
2. Can you let me know how many businesses have applied for the Increased Cost of Business 
grant and how many have been paid out?  
Reply: MCC received 1,164 submissions for the grant. 
Not all these applications were eligible to receive grant as they are not in performing 
payment plans. 
 
An amount of €1,041,481.76 has been paid out to date. 
 
Cllr S. Coyle asked:  
3. Can Monaghan County Council seek funding to have a very dangerous corner, known locally 
as Myles Corner on the LS07001 removed? This is a very heavily vehicularised road, leading 
from Latton to Cootehill, carrying a huge number of HGVs, School Buses etc. Also in the 
proximity of this dangerous corner is road subsidence. In the interests of safety of all 
motorist’s, cyclists and pedestrians, this location needs to be prioritised for Safety 
improvement works.  
Reply: Works have previously been carried out here by Monaghan County Council to 
improve safety for road users.  Engineering staff will carry out traffic and speed surveys to 
ascertain the extend of the speeding issues. On foot of the results of this survey measures 
if any in compliance with Monaghan County Councils traffic calming policy will be put in 
place subject to funding availability. 
 
4. Can Monaghan County Council outline the amounts of funding received for each of the 
Home Adaptation Grant Schemes for the year 2024? 
Reply: As of the 22/05/2024 Monaghan County Council has not yet received the annual 
allocation from Department of Housing. 
  
5. Can Monaghan County Council give details of the numbers of Septic Tank Inspections carried 
out in the County in each of the years of the current Council term,2019,'20,'21,'22 &'23,the 
inspection failure rate, the number of grants applied for in each of these years for Septic 
Tank Upgrades and how can a householder who wishes to on their own initiative, that is 
without an inspection failure, access grant aid ? 
Reply:  
 
 
 
There are 3 different types of septic tanks grant schemes in Ireland, this is not a universal 
Grant and is subject to the household meeting the criteria for each septic tank grant are 
different as outlined below. 
• 
Domestic Waste Water Treatment System (DWWTS) grant 
under the National Inspection Plan - In order to be eligible for 
this grant, works to the DWWTS must arise directly from an 
inspection carried out under the National Inspection Plan, and 
the subsequent issue of an Advisory Notice to the householder 
by the local authority. Monaghan County Council are required to 
carry out a minimum of 41 inspection this year as per the EPA 
National Inspection Plan, Monaghan County Council will exceed 

 
7 
 
this number. This year’s inspections are targeted in an area 
where there is the greatest risk to human health and water 
quality from DWWTS. Monaghan County Council will carry out 
additional inspections where there is evidence that individual 
DWWTS or clusters of DWWTS are causing particular water 
quality problems in an area. 
• 
DWWTS grant in Prioritised Areas for Action - In order to be 
eligible for this grant, the DWWTS serving a house must be 
situated in a Prioritised Area for Action in accordance with the 
River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018-2021, and the 
applicant must have received a letter from the Local Authority 
Waters Programme Office (LAWPRO) on behalf of the local 
authority, confirming eligibility to apply for a grant. 
• 
DWWTS grant in High Status Objective Catchment Areas - In 
order to be eligible for this grant, the DWWTS serving a house 
must be situated in a High Status Objective Catchment Area in 
accordance with the River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 
2018-2021, and the applicant must have received a letter from 
the local authority confirming eligibility to apply for a grant. 
 
 
6. The Knocknamaddy Estate, Knocknamaddy, Ballybay was Taken in Charge at the April 
Meeting of Monaghan County Council. A number of difficulties exist in the 3 house estate, 
including flooding to the front and in the gardens of the homes, with residents having to use 
wellingtons to exit and access their homes. Also, there are a number of overgrown trees 
adjacent to the homes, which are a great danger in windy, stormy conditions. Can 
Monaghan County Council have these issues immediately investigated and resolved? 
Reply: The matters identified had not been raised in the taking in charge process. They 
have now been passed to the Municipal District for review and action as required. 
  
  
7. Residences of Wylies Hill, Castleblayney Road, Ballybay are very concerned for the Safety of 
children at play, with the speeding of vehicles in the estate, can Monaghan County Council 
examine immediately, what safety measures can be put in place? 
Reply: Engineering staff will carry out traffic and speed survey to ascertain the extend of 
the speeding issues. On foot of the results of this survey measures if any in compliance 
with Monaghan County Councils traffic calming policy will be put in place subject to 
funding availability. 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  
 
8. When is it expected that works will take place in south Monaghan using the Reclaimed 
Asphalt scheme and what roads are earmarked for this pilot?  
Reply: It is anticipated that works will take place in July 2024 in South Monaghan. 
The following Roads have been short listed for the RAP trail; further testing is ongoing to 
determine the final roads, this testing is expected to be completed in the coming weeks. 
1.           L-40311 
2.           L- 4815/4816 (Enagh Road) 
3.           R181-1  Creanghanroe 
4.           L-4910 (Trial patching being done) 
5.           L-40021 
6.           L-8801 
7.           L-40401/40021+ 

 
8 
 
 
 
9. Has there been any further updates in relation to the Clos na Droimainne unfinished estate 
in Carrickmacross; has the Housing Finance Agency responded to the latest request for 
funding to bring this project to a conclusion and has the council been given any further 
clarity on a timescale for the delivery of the 12no. 4-bed units and the 14no. 2-bed units?  
Reply: As of 22/05/2024 the final deed of variation has not yet been signed off with the 
Developer and AHB. 
 
10. How many 2-bed units are expected to be delivered for social housing in Carrickmacross to 
the end of 2025 and is the council pursuing any additional turn-key housing developments 
for the town during that timeframe? 
Reply: In 2024 & 2025, Monaghan County Council has the potential to deliver 138 new 
social homes in Carrickmacross – Castleblayney Municipal District as part of the Housing 
for All program. Please see Table below for number of units, location and delivery 
breakdown. The proposed sizes of units to be completed are as follows; 1 or 2-bedrooms 
50%, 3 bedrooms 30% and 4 bedrooms 20%. 
 
 
 
 
In 2024, Monaghan County Council are delivering 78 properties in Carrickmacross – 
Castleblayney Municipal District, of which 42 properties (54%) are 2 bedroom. The overall 
social housing delivery proposed for 2024 county wide is 101 properties. 
There are currently 2no potential turnkey developments in the Carrickmacross MD, but 
these are at the initial stages. Monaghan County Council will continue to proactively pursue 
opportunities for additional social housing provision in areas of Housing Need throughout 
County Monaghan at every opportunity that arises subject to funding. 
 
11. What plans have the executive to deal with the high volume of single people on our housing 
waiting, and transfer (HAP), lists? Are there plans to procure, develop, and build units 
specifically to deal with this group of applicants? 
Reply: Monaghan County Council’s Housing Delivery Plan has the stated intention of 
aligning delivery with demand by providing accommodation suited to the housing list. 
 
12. What additional supports have been given to the Carrickmacross Town Team, and the 
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney Municipal District, to reinvigorate the commercial activity to 
Carrickmacross Town and do they include measures to: 
• 
help bring vacant commercial units back into commercial use; 
• 
deal with poor quality and over-crowded residential units in the town; and 
• 
ensure the return of the Nuremore Hotel to its former commercial activity?  
Reply: Housing Section has submitted its Private Rented Inspection Plan to the 
Department. The plan will see housing staff inspect 350 privately rented properties during 
2024. Included in this plan is several properties in Carrickmacross Town.  
 
The Departments Town Centre First office has confirmed that funding will shortly be made 
available to the Town Teams of the pilot Town Centre First towns such as Carrickmacross. 
This funding will be used to develop the capacity of the Carrickmacross Town Team to 
deliver future projects and initiatives. 
  

 
9 
 
Following the approval by the elected members of the Councils new policies and procedures 
to deal with dereliction, the Council is currently engaging with the owners of a number of 
properties in the Carrickmacross Castleblayney Municipal District with the view to bringing 
these properties back into use.  In the event that this engagement process is unsuccessful, 
the Council will utilise its powers under the Derelict Sites Act 1990 (as amended).  
  
Planning, Fire and Housing Sections meet on a monthly basis to consider, inter alia, matters 
relating to poor and overcrowded residential units in the town, and to agree actions where 
appropriate. 
 The Council has engaged with the liquidator of the former Nuremore Hotel and is hopeful 
that following the resolution of the various legal and financial issues that the hotel will be 
reopened. 
 
Cllr N. Keelan asked:  
 
13. What is the up-to-date position in relation to the preparation and completion of the 
community plans for our village areas across the county including Donaghmoyne and 
Lisdoonan?  
Reply:  
Plans finished, published and launched: 
·       Aughnamullen 
·       Ballinode 
·       Newbliss/ Killeevan 
·       Oram 
·       Scotshouse 
Plans in draft form, not signed off by community: 
·       Emyvale 
Plans in development: 
·       Smithboro 
Communities being assisted to prepare their own: 
·       Latton 
·       Glaslough 
·       Tydavnet 
·       Ballybay 
Consultant-led Plans paid for by LA and complete: 
·       Drum 
·       Rockcorry 
  
Latest update:   
Smithboro is progressing, and a community event is planned for end of summer to review 
all the data and get feedback on the proposed projects going forward. 
  
Community Development Officer Carol Lambe is due to meet with the Emyvale committee 
on Tues 28th May to review their draft plan.  This will require updating with 2022 census 
data, looking at any implications from new stats, then agreeing a new updated set of 
actions which will include the Red Boys building. 
  
A request has been made to develop a plan for Inniskeen, and this will be carried out 
subject to available resources. 
  
Again, subject to available resources work will commence on a plan for Donaghmoyne 
which will include Donaghmoyne, Lisdoonan and Broomfield.   
 
14. What progress if any has been made in relation to the proposed upgrading and 
improvement of the Dundalk to Cavan town regional road (R178) including the section from 

 
10 
 
Carrickmacross to Shercock town given this is a very important transport and economic link 
which is not fit for purpose?  
Reply: There have been no further developments at National level regarding proposed 
upgrading and improvement of the Dundalk to Cavan town regional road (R178). 
 
15. What is the up-to-date position in relation to taken in charge by Monaghan County Council 
of the Sliabh Dubh estate at Corduff, Carrickmacross, have the outstanding issues with Uisce 
Eireann being resolved given that this seems to be the problem in terms of moving the 
process forward?  
Reply: Sliabh Dubh is served by a standalone wastewater treatment plant which is not 
maintained by the original developer. Monaghan County Council has previously intervened 
and carried out remedial works relating to this plant when a public health matter has arisen. 
In the 2015 Memorandum of Understanding agreed between local authorities and Uisce 
Eireann, it was confirmed that Uisce Eireann would not take in charge developer provided 
infrastructure (DPI), such as that installed in Sliabh Dubh.  
Notwithstanding this, correspondence issued by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage in April 2024, indicated that with effect from 1 January 2024, 
Uisce Eireann have been assigned responsibility for the remediation of DPI. 
The Departmental correspondence indicated that it would ‘take time to resolve’ matters 
but that a multi stakeholder group would be established during 2024 to oversee progress. 
In addition, it stated that the Department would work with Uisce Eireann on funding 
arrangements to underpin the process. 
It is anticipated that the conclusion of the taking in charge process on this development will 
be delayed pending the completion of the Uisce Eireann review. 
 
16. When can the people of County Monaghan expect to see an affordable housing scheme 
rolled out across the county, given the numbers of young people and couples locked out of 
owning their own home and are over the income threshold to avail of local Authority 
housing support?  
Reply:  In anticipation of an application to the Department for Affordable Housing Funding, 
a second survey will go live in June. This survey will be focused on the demand for affordable 
housing in Monaghan Town. The survey will be published on all social media channels. 
17. In relation to the active travel scheme, how many schemes are shovel ready, what funding is 
available to progress these schemes, what is the breakdown per MD?  
Reply: The Active Travel unit are continuing to work on over 20 Active Travel across the 
county with a budget of €3 million for 2024. The schemes are progressing through the 7 
phases of the NTA Cost Management Guidelines and the necessary approvals at each phase.  
 The list below shows schemes that are expected to have construction work commenced 
and/or completed by mid-2025. The funding allocation is for 2024 and continued funding is 
dependent on the NTA.  
 
Project Code: 
Project Name 
2024 
Allocation 
MD 
MN/21/0001 
Upgrade of Monaghan Town Greenway 
€200,000 
Monaghan 
MN/21/0010 
Carrickmacross- Castleblayney Rd Active Travel  
€75,000 
Carrickmacross/ 
Castleblayney 
MN/21/0013 
Monaghan Town  Horseshoe Bridge Active 
Travel 
€500,000 
Monaghan 
MN/21/0014 
Monaghan Town Ballyalbany Bridge Active 
Tavel 
€70,000 
Monaghan 
MN/21/0020 
Low Cost Junction Tightening/Pedestrian 
Crossing Scheme 
€100,00 
All 3 

 
11 
 
MN/21/0021 
Light Segregation Cycle Scheme- Castleblayney 
€35,000 
Carrickmacross/ 
Castleblayney 
MN/22/0001 
Clones Peace Link Active Travel Scheme 
€479,000 
Clones/Ballybay 
MN/22/0002 
Monaghan Town Local Transport Plan 
€60,000 
Monaghan 
MN/22/0004 
Lough Egish Village Active Travel Scheme 
€332,000 
Clones/Ballybay 
 
 
 
 
MN/23/0007 
Carrickmacross R178/Oriel Road Active Travel 
Scheme 
€60,000 
Carrickmacross/ 
Castleblayney 
MN/23/0016 
SRTS  St Louis GNS & St Louis Infant School - 
Monaghan R1 
€50,000 
 
Monaghan 
MN/23/0017 
SRTS St Marys Boys NS R2 
€50,000 
Monaghan 
MN/23/0018 
SRTS St Tiarnach’s Primary School, Clones R2 
€50,000 
Clones/Ballybay 
MN/23/0102 
Woodview to Glen Road connectivity - 
Monaghan Town 
€200,000 
Monaghan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. Notice of Motion 
 
Cllr S Coyle proposed, Cllr P Treanor seconded –  
1. “That Monaghan County Council commend the Ulster Council GAA, Monaghan County 
Board GAA & St. Tiarnach’s GAA Club, Clones on the great success of the recent 136th 
Ulster Senior Football Championship Final at St. Tiarnach’s Park, Clones.  Also, the business 
community, the people of Clones, Ballybay-Clones Municipal District staff and staff of 
Monaghan County Council on their invaluable work and contribution to a great day for 
Clones and all of County Monaghan.  
 
The historic occasions and the town of Clones make it the home of Ulster GAA Finals, so 
Monaghan County Council complement all involved at St. Tiarnach’s Park on the recent 
investments and works to improve player and spectator facilities.  
 
Furthermore, Monaghan County Council request the Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, 
Gaeltacht, Sport & Media, Ms. Catherine Martin T.D. and the Minister with special 
responsibilities for Sports & Physical Education, and the Gaeltacht, Mr. Thomas Byrne, T.D.,   
to make substantial funding available for the complete upgrading of St. Tiarnach’s Park, 
Clones and its surroundings, to ensure the Ulster Senior Football Championship Finals 
remain in Clones. (If adopted, this motion be forwarded to all of the above name bodies and 
individuals.)” 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it 
was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
Cllr P Connolly proposed, Cllr C Carthy seconded –  
2. “That in view of the fact that an individual who is registered as blind is not regarded as 
disabled by the Department of Finance & therefore not entitled to avail of the 
remission/repayment of VAT and VRT that Monaghan County Council calls on the Minister 
for Finance to address this anomaly and ensure the scheme is made available to a 

 
12 
 
nominated family member so that the person can be driven to clinics and also get about 
her daily life without having to resort to taxis.” 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it 
was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
 
18. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Lorcán MacCinna, Senior Executive Engineer, Housing on the death of his mother, Nóra 
MacCinna (née Holland), late of Leacht Lorcáin, Muineachán, County Mhuineacháin.  
• 
Mary Carolan, on the death of her husband and former Craftworker, Monaghan County 
Council, Gerard Carolan, late of Tyleadon, Milltown, Monaghan, County Monaghan.  
 
It was agreed votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
• 
Sinead Courtney, Castleblayney on her recent performance on Britain’s Got Talent.  
• 
Neil Dunwoody as Co-founder of company, ‘Spryt’ on the recent success of the 
Automated Intelligence Healthcare System.   
• 
Tara Cowan, on her appointment as the first female Principal of Monaghan Collegiate 
School.  
• 
St. Louis Monaghan U14 Team and Management on recently winning an Ulster Title. 
• 
Anne-Marie McCardle on her recent coronation as the 2024 Monaghan Rose.  
 
Address by the Cathaoirleach: 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr D Maxwell, thanked his party colleagues in Fine Gael for giving him the 
opportunity to serve as Cathaoirleach for the 2023/24 term. He thanked Cllrs Carthy, Campbell 
Coyle and Conlon who had previously held the position of Cathaoirleach during the term of the 
current Council (2019-2024).  He reflected on his time as Cathaoirleach stating that it had been a 
great honour and a thoroughly enjoyable time. He concluded by thanking his fellow members and 
the executive for their support during his time as Cathaoirleach. 
 
 
Address by Retiring Councillors: 
 
Cllr B McKenna, in his final address as a member of Monaghan County Council reflected on his 
service as a member of Monaghan County Council for the past 33 years. He began by thanking his 
family, particularly his wife Dympna and their three children for their support during his time as a 
public representative. He stated that he had been first elected in 1991 and paid tribute to his 
mentor, Caoimhghín Ó Caoláin adding that he had been someone he looked up to then and ever 
since. He recalled being selected by his fellow colleagues to serve as Cathaoirleach for the first time 
in 2000-2001, stating that it had been a huge honor as it had been the first time the Sinn Féin party 
had held the position since the foundation of the State. He acknowledged colleagues, the executive 
and staff from within the organisation both past and present for their support and contributions 
over the years.  He thanked the people of North Monaghan for their support which saw him 
elected on 6 occasions. He also thanked his party colleagues for their support over the years and in 
conclusion, wished members well in the forthcoming local elections. 
 

 
13 
 
In addressing the Council for the final time, Cllr H McElvaney began by complimenting Cllr D 
Maxwell for the way he had undertaken the role of Cathaoirleach, for the courtesy and respect 
shown to his fellow members and the efficient, fair and impartial way he had conducted Council 
meetings. He congratulated fellow Cllr Brian McKenna on his retirement and wished him well. He 
recalled being first elected in 1974 and thanked his family for their support over the past 50 years.  
He acknowledged colleagues, the executive and staff from within the organisation both past and 
present for their support and contributions over the years.  He pinpointed highlights of his career 
which included his election to the National Presidency of LAMA which he thoroughly enjoyed for 
over 5 years and paid tribute to the generosity of former Fianna Fáil colleague, the late Rosaleen 
O’Hanlon,  as Chairperson of the Vocational Education Committee for requesting that he hand over 
the keys the official opening Largy College in Clones, as Vice-Chair of the Committee.  
 
The Cathaoirleach paid tribute to retiring Cllr Hugh McElvaney on his 50 years’ service to 
Monaghan County Council and Cllr Brian McKenna on his 33 years’ service to Monaghan County 
Council. He thanked them both for their leadership, friendship and work as public representatives 
and wished them both good health and happiness in their retirement.   
 
The members joined in the tributes to Cllr H McElvaney and Cllr B McKenna, as did the Chief 
Executive on behalf of the management and staff.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr D Maxwell, seconded by Cllr A Campbell it was agreed that a presentation 
would be made to Cllr H McElvaney and Cllr B McKenna at the December Council meeting as a 
token of appreciation for their service to Monaghan County Council. 
 
The Cathaoirleach concluded by thanking the Northern Standard (particularly Peter Hughes) and 
Northern Sound for their coverage of Council meetings. He also wished his Council colleagues 
every success in the forthcoming elections. 
 
The Chief Executive, Mr R. Burns, thanked the members for their service over the past five years 
and extended good wishes to all those contesting the local elections on 7th June 2024.  
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach concluded the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
Signed: 
 
 
 
 
                              Cathaoirleach 
 
 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
Date:  ________________________ 
 
