Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee for Economic Development & Enterprise Support meeting 
on Wednesday 26th November 2025 at 4pm in the 
Council Chamber, MTeK 1, Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan. 
 
In attendance:  
Cllr. Sean Gilliland (Chairperson)  
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Pat Treanor  
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Peter Conlon 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Niamh McCooey 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Colm Carthy 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Mr. Peter McMahon  
 
 
Business/Commercial 
Mrs. Eileen Collery 
 
 
Business/Commercial  
Mr. Ciaran McEntee 
 
 
PPN - Environment Electoral College 
Mr. Tom Treanor 
 
 
Agri/Farming  
Mr. Cathal Flynn 
 
 
DoS Planning, Economic Dev., Capital Projects, & Regen. 
Mr. Nial O’Connor 
 
 
A/DOS, Transportation, Environment & Climate Action 
Mr. Adrian Hughes 
 
 
Senior Planner, Planning Section 
Ms. Pamela Kerr 
 
 
Head of Enterprise, LEO  
Mr. Paul Connolly 
 
 
Senior Executive Engineer, Capital Projects 
Ms. Sharon Finnegan 
 
 
Senior Staff Officer, Planning Section 
Ms. Denise O’Neill 
 
 
Assistant Staff Officer, Planning Section 
 
Apologies:  
Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Fergal Duﬀy 
 
 
 
CIF 
Peadar Black 
 
 
 
PPN-Community & Vol. or Social Inclusion Electoral College 
 
1. Previous Minutes 
 
The minutes of the meeting held on 24th September 2025 were proposed by Cllr. Niamh McCooey 
and seconded by Cllr. Pat Treanor.  
 
 
2. Matters Arising 
 
Mr. Cathal Flynn advised that Kevin West, Acting Senior Engineer (Roads) would attend the next 
meeting to give an update on plans to address traﬃc congestion in Monaghan town on the Clones 
Road (N54).  
 
3. Anaerobic Digestor 
 
Acting Director of Service Nial O’Connor provided detailed information on Anaerobic Digestors 
saying the investment required to set up digestors ranged from approximately €50 million to €150 
million. He updated members on the local authority’s journey so far in relation to digestors including 
the work of former Director of Services Nuala Woods who had commissioned a report on the 
facilities. Mr. O’Connor said Ms Woods had contacted industry and gas networks to explore the 
possibility of bringing a gas network to Monagan town however the conclusion was that it was not 
feasible.  
 

Members were also informed that a company is currently interested in establishing an anaerobic 
digestor plant in County Monaghan. The company, who had been consulting with the poultry 
industry, recently made a presentation to Ballybay-Clones Municipal District (M.D.) and hopes to 
lodge a planning application in the New Year.  
 
Cllr. Pat Treanor queried if the company had consulted with the local farming community as they 
had given a commitment to do so. Mr. O’Connor said he believed the company had made contact 
with people in the Drum region. Chairperson Sean Gilliland said that consultation, emphasised at the 
M.D. meeting, was key as it would rule out misinformation. Senior Planner Adrian Hughes echoed 
these sentiments saying that although the local authority could not make the company engage with 
the community, the applicant had been encouraged to do so.   
 
Chairperson Gilliland recommended the committee conduct a survey in relation to a gas pipeline to 
investigate the interest in bringing a gas network to Monaghan town. He suggested the 
infrastructure would attract business. Responding, Director of Service Cathal Flynn advised that cost 
estimates of extending the gas network to Monaghan had been explored previously and therefore, it 
would be a case of updating the cost benefit analysis, considering a potential new source in 
Cootehill. Mr. O’Connor agreed that an economic appraisal would be required. Chairperson Sean 
Gilliland requested that Mr. O’Connor attend the February meeting of the SPC with an update. 
 
Mr. O’Connor said that whilst present he could also address the issue of traffic congestion on the 
N54 road in Monaghan town. He advised that a number of link roads have been proposed for 
Monaghan town in the County Development Plan adding that an application had been made this 
year to the Department of Transport for funding.  
 
He advised that there will be a focus over the next 12 to 15 months to advance plans and receive 
funding, and to activate lands for development as well. In response to a question from Ms. Eileen 
Collery regarding the time frame for completion of a link road, Mr. O’Connor said it could be 2030 
depending on elements such as the design, Part 8, funding, procurement and Compulsory Purchase 
Order (C.P.O.) processes. He suggested that small measures in the Monaghan Transport Plan would 
help the flow of traffic in the interim.  
 
4. Local Economic Plan 2026 
 
Ms. Pamela Kerr, Head of Enterprise Local Enterprise Oﬃce (LEO) advised that the Local Economic 
Plan would be shared with the committee next year when completed at the end of the ﬁrst quarter. 
Chairperson Sean Gilliland proposed that an action plan be formulated to implement the delivery of 
the Plan. Mr. Cathal Flynn, DOS stated that it was important the committee contributed to the Plan 
to see actions delivered. He added that the responsibilities of the Local Economic Community Plan, 
Enterprise Oﬃcers and the Local Economic Plan should be aligned with clearly deﬁned actions.   
 
4. Economic Forum update 
 
Ms. Kerr also gave an update on the Economic Forum. She advised that the Strategic Policy 
Committee (S.P.C.) is to act as the new Economic Forum, and a separate industry advisory group will 
be established to provide feedback to the S.P.C. She proposed that the industry advisory group meet 
twice a year relaying information back to the S.P.C. members for consideration. Ms. Kerr also 
recommended that group members should be identiﬁed from renewable, manufacturing and agri-
tech sectors.  

 
Concerns were expressed by some members of the committee in relation to the governance aspect 
of the new advisory group and the potential for blocking development by creating siloes. 
Chairperson Sean Gilliland proposed that minutes of the group meetings are taken and brought 
before the S.P.C. for consideration. He said it was important to encourage feedback but suggested 
that the Terms of Reference and governance of the Forum be retained with the S.P.C. He requested 
that Ms Kerr work to source one representative from each sector for inclusion in the group.  
 
Mr Cathal Flynn, DOS reassured members that the government structure of the group would reﬂect 
the fact that the S.P.C. would remain in charge ensuring that the integrity of decisions taken at S.P.C. 
level are not undermined by a separate body.  
 
Cllr. Colm Carthy proposed that a public advertisement be placed to gain as much interest from 
interested industries as possible. Mr. Cathal Flynn, DOS agreed that an open call, particularly through 
the Local Enterprise Oﬃce (LEO), would be beneﬁcial as there were a signiﬁcant cohort of businesses 
that have no engagement and were not in receipt of government supports. Chairperson Gilliland 
concurred with Mr. Flynn and requested the item on the agenda again for the February meeting.  
  
5. Annahagh Industrial Lands update  
 
Mr. Paul Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer (Capital Projects) gave an up-to-date brieﬁng on costs 
regarding the Annahagh Industrial Lands project. He advised that there was a total estimate of €3.2 
million euro for the works including €2.8 million euro for roads and infrastructure and €0.4 million 
for earthworks. He added that the total ﬁgure would not be known until it went to market with 
tender; if costs came back above the estimates, those costs would have to be passed onto 
customers. Mr Connolly also outlined potential rates for the local authority as approximately 
€120,000 per year. As regards the stage of the project, he said a preliminary design report had been 
uploaded to the Transport Infrastructure Ireland (T.I.I.) portal and a Part 8 planning application is to 
be advertised next week.  
 
Mr. Cathal Flynn, DOS highlighted to the members that the cost of the local authority owned land 
used for the project was not factored into the sale of the sites. He said he had addressed the issue 
with the Department many times pointing out a need for a scheme to assist local authorities with 
economic growth. Responding to a query from Ms. Eileen Collery, Mr. Flynn noted that the price of 
the land may be out of reach for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) if the value of the land was 
included in the sale costs.   
 
During a discussion that followed, committee members commended the project referring to the 
potential employment it could create however, they expressed concern that the costs per acre would 
outstrip any potential customers.  
 
Chairperson Sean Gilliland raised the issue of a link road being developed at Roosky in Monaghan 
town. Responding, Mr. Cathal Flynn stated that the access road was currently being developed to 
activate approximately 12 acres of lands to facilitate development. He added that there was the 
potential, in the longer term, to create a relief road between Roosky and Annahagh. Members 

queried if the access road was to connect to the Mid Town link voicing concerns about possible 
objections.  
 
Mr. Cathal Flynn, DOS reassured the committee that the Annahagh project would go before the full 
Plenary Council before a contract was awarded.  
 
6. Suggested Dates for 2026 SPC Meetings 
 
The following meeting dates for 2026 were approved:  
 
• 
Wednesday 25th February 2026. 
• 
Wednesday 29th April 2026. 
• 
Wednesday 30th September 2026. 
• 
Wednesday 25th November 2026.  
 
Chairperson Sean Gilliland advised that there may also be an extra meeting next year in addition to 
the four dates proposed. Senior Staﬀ Oﬃcer Sharon Finnegan said the dates would be added to the 
calendars of committee members the following day and representatives would be notiﬁed.  
 
7. AOB 
 
It was agreed that Mr. Kevin McNally and the Regeneration Team be invited to the next meeting of 
the committee following a recommendation by Mr. Cathal Flynn, DOS. In a discussion that followed, 
committee members congratulated local authority staﬀ on the rollout of the Vacant Property 
Refurbishment Grant and requested that the Planning team address any barriers that might exist 
regarding Section 5 Exempted Development applications.  
 
Responding, Mr. Adrian Hughes said the Planning Authority were supporting the grant and tended to 
take a relaxed approach in relation to exempted development. However, he noted that in recent 
times, the Authority had seen applications where it was diﬃcult to deﬁne some developments as 
houses.  
 
