MINUTES OF HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE (SPC) 
Meeting held on Tuesday 4th March 2025 in Council Chamber MTek1 Monaghan @ 12 noon 
 
Attendance:  
Cllr Colm Carthy (Chair), Cllr Sinéad Flynn, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, April Anna Barker, Daniel 
Sean McKenna, Tom Freeman, Teresa Carolan, Packie Kelly, Olga McConnon, Nial 
O’Connor, Lorcán MacCinna, Andrew Field, Edel Dwan, Hannah McKenna, Mary Walker, 
Emma McMahon, Samantha Boyle and Teresa McGuirk 
Apologies: 
Cllr Aidan Campbell, Cllr Paul Gibbons, Cllr Alan Johnston, 
 
Meeting Minutes held on Tuesday 4th March 2025 
Chairperson Cllr Colm Carthy opened the inaugural meeting of the new Housing SPC, welcomed 
everyone and invited everyone to introduce themselves. 
 
Capital Programme 
Lorcán MacCinna gave a detailed update on Housing Capital Works for the period 2022-2026 including 
details of New Builds delivered, Targets, Projections, examples of works completed along with details of 
proposed works/estates and regeneration planned. 
During a discussion which followed members  
• 
complimented the works to date 
• 
raised several issues including long term derelict premises / properties in Carrickmacross town 
and Monaghan Town and 
• 
what could be done to expedite these problems  
 
 
Affordable Purchase / Cost Rental 
Hannah McKenna gave a detailed presentation of the new Affordable Purchase Scheme for County 
Monaghan including eligibility criteria, the journey so far and details of 10 properties identified with the 
developer and approved for the scheme.  A subsidy of €75,000 per property was recently approved by 
the Department, the scheme is due to launch shortly.   Information sessions will be organised.  
Members complimented works done to date and welcomed the scheme which will be a great asset for 
County Monaghan.  
 
Homeless Procedure 
A Homeless Action Team (HAT)has been established in the local authority; members of the team were 
introduced to the meeting by SEO Nial O’Connor who also gave details of new proposed draft 
procedures for the Section.  The document was aimed at providing guidance for staff and users 
presenting as homeless to the local authority.  Following a discussion in which members raised several 
issues including the lack of accommodation for workers relocating to Monaghan, antisocial behaviour 
and the requirement to keep members updated of homeless issues and impacts. 
 
Cllr PJ O’Hanlon then proposed the adoption of the document.  This was seconded by Cllr Colm Carthy.  
Members complimented the work and empathy of the team and in particular the work of previous 
social worker, Mary Walker. 
 
Traveller Accommodation Plan 
Mary Walker briefly outlined details of the proposed Traveller Accommodation Programme for 2025-
2029 which aims to support at least 20 families in this timeframe.  Members were informed of the 
development works which have been undertaken over recent years to the site at Gortakeegan. 
Following a discussion, Tom Freeman proposed the adoption of the plan.  This was seconded by Cllr 
Sinéad Flynn.  The plan will now be brought to the full council for final approval. 
 

Following a query regarding recent media reports that Monaghan was not drawing down Traveller 
Specific Accommodation funding, it was explained that Monaghan does not see the need for this 
funding and prefer to integrate Traveller families into new social estates as they come available. 
 
Future Items for Discussion 
Several items were suggested including 
• 
Cost Rental Scheme 
• 
Report from Regeneration Team regarding derelict properties in the county being 
identified/provided for housing purposes 
• 
Downsizing policy / Information Evening for any tenant wishing to transfer to a smaller 
property 
• 
Differential Rent Scheme – Policy 
• 
Scheme of Letting Priorities 
• 
Discussion of how to deal with high numbers of single applicants on the Housing List – lack of 
suitable accommodation 
• 
Presentation from Tenant Liaison Officer 
 
Dates and Times for meetings 2025 
Proposed dates and times for SPC meetings in 2025 were agreed as follows: 
10th June 2025 – 11am-1pm 
9th September 2025 – 11am-1pm 
2nd December 2025 - 11am-1pm 
 
