 
 
Draft Minutes of Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, Mtek 
Building, Armagh Road, Monaghan, County Monaghan, on Tuesday 07 May 2024 at 2.00pm 
 
Chair: 
Cllr D. Maxwell, Cathaoirleach 
 
Present: 
  Cllrs Aughey, Bennett, Campbell, Carthy, Connolly, Coyle, S. Conlon, P. Conlon, 
Gilliland, Keelan, McCooey, McElvaney, McKenna, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, S. Treanor 
 
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. P. Monahan, Ms. C O’Hare, Directors 
of Services, Mr. G. McMahon, Ms. O. McConnon, A/Directors of Services, Ms. M Little, 
Staff Officer, Ms. M McGarvey, Meetings Administrator.  
 
Apologies:    Cllr R. Truell  
 
 
June Council Meeting: 
On the Proposal of Cllr C. Bennett, seconded by Cllr S. Coyle, it was agreed that the June Council 
meeting would take place in the Council Chamber on Tuesday 04 June at 10.00am and conclude at 
1.00pm. 
 
At the outset the Cathaoirleach referred to the following motion that had been submitted by the 
Carrickmacross-Castleblayney Municipal District Members: 
 
‘That Monaghan County Council hold a civic reception in honour of Mr. Stephen Smyth and Mr. 
Johnny Nelson to acknowledge their bravery in saving the lives of Ms. Mary McAllister and Ms. 
Shirley McMahon, following a kayaking incident on the river Fane on the 18th of November 2023 
and subsequently nominate them both the National Bravery Award.’ 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously that a Civic Reception would be afforded to Mr. Stephen Smyth and Mr. 
Johnny Nelson on the 04 June 2024 at 1.00pm in the Council Chamber and subsequently nominate 
them both for the National Bravery Award. 
 
Urgent Business 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the members that he had received the following Notice of Urgent 
Business as follows: 
 
1. On behalf of the Sinn Féin Party Members:  
 
‘That Monaghan County Council calls on Eir to remove the mast recently erected in Scotstown 
village and to rescind plans to erect a mass in Scotshouse village. Both the mast in Scotstown and 
the proposed mast in Scotshouse are located close to people's homes and public consultation did 
not take place.’  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Bennett, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed to enter ‘into committee’ 
to discuss whether to accept the motions submitted as urgent business.  
 
Following a short discussion, it was agreed to take the motion of urgent business at the end of the 
meeting.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Treanor, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that the Council revert 
to public session.  
 

 
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes of Meetings held on 08 April 2024  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney, it was agreed that the 
minutes of the Council meeting held on the 08 April 2024 be confirmed. 
 
 
2.     Correspondence 
 
 
 
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting: 
 
• 
Letter from the Executive Officer to the Minister for Social Protection, Ms. Heather 
Humphreys, T.D., regarding the age limit for participants Community Employment 
Schemes, Rural Social Schemes and Tús Programmes.  
• 
Email from Brendan Smith, T.D., outlining a response that he had received from the Private 
Secretary to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan T.D., regarding Regional and 
Local Roads funding.  
• 
Email from the Minister for Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan T.D., regarding an increase in the 
funding allocation for Active Travel.  
• 
Letter from the office of Minister for Social Protection, Ms. Heather Humphreys, T.D., 
regarding dog control policy.   
• 
Letter from Ms. Christina Borchmann on behalf of Ms. Ursula von der Leyen, President of 
the European Commission, regarding the Irish Farmers Association’s “Enough is Enough” 
campaign.  
• 
Letter from the Principal Officer of the Rural Water Unit, Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, Mr. Douglas Kelly regarding Developer Provided Water 
Services Infrastructure.  
• 
Letter from ICBAN with an update on their current work programme.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister of Further and Higher 
Education, Research, Innovation and Science, Mr. Patrick O’Donovan, regarding GEM 
students access to the SUSI Grant.  
• 
Acknowledgement letter from the Assistant Private Secretary to the Taoiseach, Mr. Simon 
Harris, regarding reducing the VAT rate for the hospitality sector.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the 
Marine, Mr. Charlie McConalogue, T.D., regarding reconvening the national fodder 
committee.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Finance, Mr. Michael 
McGrath, T.D., regarding reconvening the national fodder committee.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Minister for Rural and Community 
Development, Ms. Heather Humphreys, T.D., regarding the future direction and purpose 
of the LCDC.  
• 
Resolution from the Municipal District of Ballybay-Clones regarding public representation 
on the Ukrainian Response Forum.  
• 
Resolution from Louth County Council regarding the Good Friday Agreement.  
 
 
Additional Correspondence  
 
2.1  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda 
had issued was also circulated:  
• 
Letter from the Private Secretary to the Minister of Further and Higher Education, 

 
 
Research, Innovation and Science, Mr. Patrick O’Donovan, regarding GEM students access 
to the SUSI Grant. 
• 
Letter from Matt Carthy, T.D., regarding additional funding for the road network in County 
Monaghan.  
• 
Email from Ms. Rachel Kelly, Department of Environment, Climate and Communications, 
regarding the National Grid.  
 
Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr B. McKenna, seconded by Cllr S. Coyle, it was agreed that this Council, 
rewrites to the Minister for Social Protection to reconsider the decision not to implement a 
policy change that would allow participants in Community Employment Schemes (CES), Rural 
Social Schemes (RSS) and Tús programs to continue their valuable contributions until the age 
of 70.  
On the proposal of Cllr C. Bennett, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed that this 
Council, rewrites to the to the Department to obtain clarification on the future direction 
and purpose of the LCDC in the county as they will be no longer required be the local action 
group for leader funding. There is serious concern felt by all members of the LCDC, many of 
whom have given up their time voluntarily. We seek direction from the Department. In 
awarding the Leader programme to a local development company, this change will have a 
detrimental impact on the LCDC which has had representatives from statutory bodies, 
Elected Members and Community groups in place for the last 10 years. The LCDC will be 
meaningless and have no input in decision making going forward for all Leader applications 
in the County.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Connolly, seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney, it was agreed that this 
Council, considers either purchasing or leasing a JCB Pothole Pro machine in view of the 
ongoing difficulties regarding potholes on roads and the value for money that could be 
achieved.  
(It was noted that Cllr. PJ O’Hanlon would not be in support of this motion) 
 
A vote by show of hands resulted in, 3 For, 6 Against, 7 Abstained – the Cathaoirleach 
declared the motion defeated. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr H. McElvaney, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that this 
Council, gives consideration to co-opting public representatives to the Ukrainian Community 
Response Forum following the Local Government Election in June. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr. A. McCooey, it was agreed that this 
Council, writes to the Chairman of the newly established Stakeholder Group on Dog Control, 
Mr. John Twomey seeking provision of the requisite finance and resources for the purpose of 
implementing the recommendations as outlined in the Report published by the Working 
Group on Dog Control, specifically relating to the hiring of the identified 40 additional dog 
wardens nationally, as without adequate enforcement, the recommendations aimed at 
enhancing dog control by our Local Authority will be unachievable.  
 
3. To consider S183 Lease of Lands to Glaslough Harriers Athletic Club 
 
On the proposal Cllr P. Connolly, seconded by Cllr R. Aughey, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the Lease of Lands at Derrygassan Upper, Emyvale, County Monaghan, to Glaslough 

 
 
Harriers Athletic Club, in accordance with the terms of the notice dated 13 February 2024 
and attached site location map under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001.   
 
4. To Consider Community & Environment Funds Allocations 2024 
 
Members noted the Reports circulated which recommended the allocation of funding under 
the Community and Environment Fund 2024.  
 
Mr. P. Sherlock, Environmental Awareness Officer, and Mr. B. Eaton, Social Inclusion Officer, 
Community Section advised that the total budget to support and assist in the delivery of 
projects for 2024 is:  
 
Environmental Services Fund: €70,000, which is allocated to Tidy Towns, Residents 
Associations and Local Community Groups (Other).  
 
Community Development Fund: €90,000, which is allocated to Community Groups.  
 
87 applications were received under the Environmental Services Fund. It is proposed to fund 
86 applications to the value of €66,150. The project not funded receives an annual allocation 
of funding from the Municipal District.  
 
127 applications were received under the Community Development Fund. It is proposed to 
fund 96 out of the 127 applications received to the value of €90,000. Projects not funded 
include those deemed ineligible or applications that may be eligible to receive funding under 
an alternative funding source. 
 
Members commended Mr. Sherlock and Mr. Eaton for all their work on the Community and 
Environment Fund.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr H. McElvaney, seconded by Cllr B. McKenna, it was agreed that the 
Council approve the allocation of funding under the Community and Environment Fund 2024 
Scheme, as per the Report circulated with the agenda.  
 
 
5. To Consider Funding Recommendation - Tourism Festival & Events funding 
 
Members noted the Reports circulated which recommended the allocation of funding under 
the Tourism Festival Fund 2024 and the Failte Ireland Regional Tourism Festival Funding 2024.  
 
Ms. D. Condra, Tourism and Marketing Executive advised that the total budget to assist in the 
delivery of these projects is:  
 
Tourism Festival and Event Fund: €10,000 
 
Failte Ireland Regional Tourism Festival Fund: €5,000 
 
15 applications were received under the Tourism Festival and Event Fund. It is proposed to 
fund 7 applications to the value of €10,000. Projects not funded included those deemed 
ineligible under the scheme i.e. those deemed more suitable under an alternative funding 
source such as the Community Development Fund.  
 
6 applications were received under the Failte Ireland Regional Tourism Festival Fund. It is 
proposed to fund 2 applications to the value of €5,000. 4 applications were assessed but 

 
 
were not proposed to be funded. 1 of the applications had been inadvertently submitted 
under this scheme, however, was deemed more suitable under the Tourism Festival and 
Event Fund Scheme. The remaining 3 projects did not meet the eligibility threshold under 
the evaluation criteria outlined in the guidelines advertised.  
 
Members commended Ms. Condra for all of her work on the Tourism Festival and Event Fund 
and Failte Ireland Regional Tourism Festival Fund.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Campell seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney it was agreed that the 
Council approve the allocation of funding under the Tourism Festival and Event Fund 2024, 
as per the Report circulated with the agenda. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Campell seconded by Cllr H. McElvaney it was agreed that the 
Council approve the allocation of funding under the Failte Ireland Regional Tourism Festival 
Fund 2024, as per the Report circulated with the agenda. 
  
 
6. To note the Annual Financial Statements and approve Over expenditure and Transfers to 
Capital Account for the Financial Year 2023 
 
The Members noted the Annual Financial Statement for 2023 which had been circulated 
with the agenda for the meeting.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr H. McElvaney seconded by Cllr S. Coyle it was agreed to note the Draft 
Annual Financial Statement (AFS 2023) and to approve over-expenditures and transfers to 
Capital Account, as per schedules submitted to the Members, as follows: 
 
Over Expenditure 
 
Transfers 

 
 
 
 
7. To receive a presentation from Waterways Ireland on the proposed opening of the Marina, 
Clones  
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Mr. Garret McGrath, Regional Manager, Northern Region, 
Waterways Ireland, to the meeting to update Members on the Ulster Canal Restoration 
Project. He informed the meeting that he had recently received a tour of the new marina 
facility in Clones alongside Cllrs, McElvaney, Treanor, Truell, Gilliland, Coyle and he 
commended all those involved in the project.  
 
Mr. McGrath commenced by providing Members with a brief background in relation to the 
work of Waterways Ireland and history of the Ulster Canal. He stated that Waterways Ireland 
are the cross-border navigational authority responsible for the management, development, 
maintenance, and promotion of over 1000km of inland navigable waterways, principally for 
recreational purposes, across Ireland.  
 
Mr. McGrath advised the members that the Ulster Canal restoration is a flagship North-South 
project, supported by the Shared Island Fund, the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, and the Department of Rural and Community Development and is managed by 
Waterways Ireland.  
 
He provided an overview of the project in terms of progress to date, current status and future 
works to be completed on a phased basis: Key points to note were:  
 
- 
Phase 1 – Lough Erne to Castle Saunderson is complete. This involved the restoration of 2.5 
kilometers stretch of the Ulster Canal from Upper Lough Erne in County Fermanagh to Castle 
Saunderson near Belturbet in Co. Cavan, dredging of the Finn River and installation of a new 
floating jetty.  

 
 
- 
Phase 2 – Clones to Clonfad which is nearing completion involved the development of a new 
42 berth marina in Clones, two new access bridges, repairs to an existing masonry arch 
bridge, and a sustainable water supply. It also included approximately 1km of restored canal 
and towpath, with a looped walk and an amenity area on the route of the 180-year-old Ulster 
Canal in Clones. The amenity area will include a car park with EV charging, service block and 
picnic area and will be connected to the town and the existing playground. The Marina works 
are due to be completed by early June 2024.  
- 
Phase 3 – Castle Saunderson to Clonfad is the major blueway stage of the restoration 
project, connecting a 10 kilometres cross-border route between Castle Saunderson and 
Clonfad and linking the town of Clones by navigable waterway to the Erne System and 
onward to the wider waterway network of the Shannon-Erne Waterway, Shannon Navigation 
and the Royal and Grand Canal. 
 
Mr. McGrath advised that the primary areas of focus at present, in relation to Phase 3 will 
be on land acquisitions in the Northern Ireland section of the project and the resubmitting 
of planning applications in relation to the land that falls under Irish jurisdiction.  He 
informed the members that subject to funding and land acquisitions the estimated 
completion date for phase 3 is estimated to be 2028/2029.  
 
Mr. McGrath responded to queries from the elected members.  
 
The members joined the Cathaoirleach in commending Waterways Ireland, the Contractor 
and all those involved in the Ulster Canal Restoration Project and thanked Mr. McGrath for 
his presentation.  
 
8. To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group 23 April 2024 
 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 23 April 
2024, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr P. Treanor, it was agreed that the minutes 
of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 23 March 2024 and the recommendations 
contained therein be approved.  
 
9. To receive Management Report – April 2024 
 
The members noted the Management Report for April 2024 which had been circulated with 
the agenda.  
    
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected 
members.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., in relation to reviewing the funding 
allocation for Low-Cost Safety Schemes. The figure this year is €259,380, which is down on 
last year. These figures were not increased which is very disappointing considering that costs 
are rising significantly.   
 
10. To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events. 
The members noted the reports from Cllrs Carthy, S. Conlon, and B. McKenna, in relation to 
their attendance at the following Conference/Training events:  
 
• 
AILG, Local Election 2024, 23rd March 2024, Hodson Bay Hotel, Athlone, Co. Westmeath  

 
 
• 
AILG, Local Elections 2024, 21st March 2024, Hotel Kilkenny, Co. Kilkenny  
• 
LAMA, Spring Seminar, 19th-20th January Abbey Hotel, Donegal Town, Co. Donegal 
• 
Association of Irish Regions, Regions in Focus Seminar, 7-8th February 2024, Woodlands 
Hotel, Co. Limerick 
• 
AILG, Annual Conference 2024, 14th-15th February, Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow  
 
11. Business submitted by Chief Executive 
There were no items for consideration under this item.  
 
12. Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held 08 April 2024 
In response to a query from Cllr N. Keelan in relation to the review of the speed limit that had 
been announced last year, Cllr R. Aughey advised that a meeting of the Speed Limit 
Committee had taken place last week and that an update would be provided to members at 
the next meeting.  
 
There were no further matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 08 
April 2024. 
 
 
13. To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services gave the following update in relation to the N2 
National Primary Road Schemes:  
 
- 
The Ardee to Castleblayney road scheme remains suspended.  
- 
Environmental surveys continue on the Clontibret to the Border Road scheme. The 
ground investigations work is scheduled to take place later in the year and will inform the 
detailed design. The current design phase that will see the corridor reduced to a designed 
road alignment, is scheduled to conclude in late 2025 or early 2026. 
- 
 
14. To receive update on North/South Interconnector project 
No further update. 
 
 
15. To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update. 
 
 
16. Questions and Replies 
 
Cllr P. Connolly asked:  
1. 
In relation to the proposed new building of a County Council office  
A) 
Which offices currently occupied by Monaghan County Council will be vacated in the event of the 
new County Council Offices being built? 
Reply: The Glen, Mtek 1, Mtek 2 and the Motor Tax offices.  
 
B) 
What savings will accrue, per building, as a result of vacating these buildings currently occupied 
by Monaghan County Council?  
Reply: The Preliminary Business Case prepared by GT (Grant Thornton) and presented to the Elected 
Members on the 19th of April 2021 estimated an overall potential saving of €900,000 per annum. The 
Cost Benefit Analysis estimated the following cost savings, categorised by expense type:  

 
 
 
There may also be cost savings circa €15-22k each on areas such as Security, travel, storage and IT 
which are not detailed on the above table.  
 
Cllr C. Bennett asked: 
2. 
Can Monaghan County Council please provide me an update on plans for the Sliabh Beagh area, a 
summary of the recent consultation and what income streams are being applied for to ensure that 
this area is invested in.  
Reply: Monaghan County Council’s Biodiversity Officer, in conjunction with partners, submitted an 
application under Peace Plus in March seeking funding of €3.25M for a peatland recovery and hen 
harrier management project for Sliabh Beagh. This aims to restore 608ha of peatland, remove Sitka 
spruce regeneration; control predators and enhance Hen Harrier habitat on Sliabh Beagh with the 
involvement of the local community and stakeholders. The outcome is expected in Autumn. 
The recent Shared Island feasibility study developed detailed plans for walk/cycle linkages to existing 
trails to provide up to 60km routes on Sliabh Beagh, in addition to directional and gateway signage and 
a business case for eco-tourism investment. These developments are required to be submitted to An 
Bord Pleanala because of the designations in the area and funding opportunities are being explored by 
the three partner councils.   
3. 
Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with a summary of upcoming funding applications 
that are available to all communities.  
Reply: Administered through the Community Section we currently have the following call for 
applications open: 
Monaghan Sports Partnership’s Sports Club Small Grant Scheme 
Open to registered sports clubs in the county 
Max of €500 per application for sports equipment, education / training 
Opened 18th April 2024 
Closing date – 15th May 2024  
 
However, there are a number of other grants programmes in specific areas that are currently open to 
community groups but not administered through the Community Section, see below:  
 
Festivals Investment Scheme from The Arts Council: Apply from 30 April 2024. 
Closing date 17:30, Thursday 30 May 2024 
Maximum awarded €45,000 
 
Artform and practice(s) Architecture, Arts participation, Circus, Dance, Festivals, Film, Literature, 
Music, Opera, Spectacle, Street arts, Theatre, Traditional arts, Visual arts, YPCE 
For more information and to apply click here. https://visualartists.ie/.../open-call-festivals.../... 
The Ireland Funds’ Heart of the Community Fund is open to applications until May 3. 
details at https://irelandfunds.org/grants/ 
 
 

 
 
Local Youth Club Grant Scheme Online Application is now Open. CMETB Youth Services are delighted 
to announce that the Local Youth Club Grant Scheme is now open and local volunteer led youth 
groups are invited to apply online for funding via https://cmetb.submit.com/show/10. The Local Youth 
Club Grant Scheme is provided by the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and 
Youth and aims to support voluntary youth club/group activities and engagement for young people; 
with priority given to volunteer led clubs/groups catering for young people aged 10–21 years. The 
primary focus of the Local Youth Club Grant Scheme is to assist local volunteer-led youth clubs/groups 
that provide a programme of youth work activities for young people. In addition, other clubs/groups 
that work with young people, but are not specifically providing youth work, are also entitled to apply 
for funding under the Scheme. 
 
Closing date for receipt of applications is Friday, 26 April at 5pm. 
(Maximum grant allocation per group – €3000) 
For further information – please contact our local CMETB offices: 
Cavan – Unarudden@cmetb.ie or Telephone – 049 4331044 
Monaghan – Sonyamcquaid@cmetb.ie or Telephone – 047 30888 ext. 2 
 
Funding now available for Parent & Toddler groups under the Government's 'First 5 Strategy'.  
Particular emphasis is on groups supporting parents from Ukraine. 
Two grants available: 
1. Funding of €800 for existing Groups and €1,000 for the establishment of new Groups. 
2. Funding of up to €300 to establish and operate Buggy Walking Groups. Can be by a new or existing 
groups. Must be 6 or more walks. 
Funding can be used towards: 
- Toys, equipment and books for indoor and outdoor activities, and children’s refreshments. 
- Storage for equipment. 
- Training for parents, e.g. paediatric first aid, committee skills, parenting courses, facilitate sessions. 
- Promotional Leaflets including any required translations. 
- Children’s activities, e.g. arts and crafts, music. 
- Limited funding will be available towards insurance or rent, up to a maximum of 50% of total funding 
for existing services. 
- Limited funding will be available towards insurance or rent, up to a maximum of 70% of total funding 
for new services and buggy walking groups. 
 
Applications must be made through your local County Childcare Committee. Contact Monaghan 
County Childcare Committee 047 72896 for further info.  
 
Funding available for community groups dealing with the issue of suicide amongst vulnerable groups 
of people: 
HSE Connecting for Life Cavan Monaghan - Call for applications for funding 2024 
HSE Cavan Monaghan Mental Health Service and HSE National Office for Suicide Prevention are 
seeking applications for once off funding of a minimum of €8,000 from local community and voluntary 
groups. This funding is aimed at initiatives to reach at risk/vulnerable groups in relation to improving 
their mental health and wellbeing and reducing the risk of self-harm and suicide. 
 
Specific at risk groups to be targeted include:  
(1) Young People (particularly young men);  
(2) People who have been bereaved by suicide;  
(3) Travellers;  
(4) Members of the LGBTQ+ community; 
(5) Victims of domestic violence;  
(6) Other groups to be determined by local need (this could include people with alcohol or drug misuse 
problems, gambling addiction, Refugees & Asylum seekers, people with mental health difficulties or 
chronic physical health conditions etc). 
Overview of the type of projects that may be funded: 
• Initiatives to support wellbeing and access to supports and services, including early intervention and 
postvention supports for people/groups at risk of mental health difficulties, including self-harm or risk 
of suicide; 
• Initiatives, programmes, group activities, support groups – to reach at risk groups in relation to 
supporting their mental health, and reducing risks of suicide and self-harm. Such events/activities 
could, for example, address known risk factors such as: 
§ Alcohol or drug misuse 
§ Sense of isolation 
§ Lack of social support 
§ Losing a loved one through suicide 

 
 
§ Relational or social losses  
§ Stressful life events 
§ Stigma associated with help-seeking behaviour. 
Applications on behalf of a number of small organisations working collaboratively are welcome. 
Further information, including the Application form, can be obtained from Emer Mulligan, HSE 
Resource Officer for Suicide Prevention at emer.mulligan@hse.ie.  
Closing date is Friday 26th April 2024  
(please note applications received after this date will not be considered). 
4. 
Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with numbers waiting on the Local improvement 
Scheme.  
Reply: There are currently 76 live applications waiting on the LIS. 36 of these applications have been 
assessed and prioritised based on the eligibility criteria prior to the ministers 2024/2025 LIS 
announcement and funding allocation this month. There are 40 applications that have been submitted 
this year since MCC reopened the application process and they are awaiting assessment. 
Due to the recent changes to the eligibility criteria Monaghan County Council intend on reviewing the 
deadline for 2024 applications. 
5. 
Can Monaghan County Council please update me on a grant that is available to upgrade septic tanks. 
Is this available to all households that cannot avail of a public sewage scheme.  
Reply: On 1 January 2024, the Domestic Waste Water Treatment System (DWWTS) Grant was 
updated. The grant increased from €5,000 to €12,000 and the qualification criteria changed so people 
could get the grant even if they hadn’t registered their septic tank by 1 February 2013. The Grant is 
available to repair, upgrade or replace Domestic waste water treatment system if required. The Grant 
funding is 85% of the cost of the repairs to the system or a new system, up to a maximum of €12,000. 
There are 3 different types of septic tanks grant schemes in Ireland, please note that this is not a 
universal Grant and is subject to the household meeting the criteria for each septic tank grant are 
different as outlined below. 
• 
DWWTS grant under the National Inspection Plan - In order to be eligible for this 
grant, works to the DWWTS must arise directly from an inspection carried out 
under the National Inspection Plan, and the subsequent issue of an Advisory 
Notice to the householder by the local authority. Monaghan County Council are 
required to carry out a minimum of 41 inspection this year as per the EPA National 
Inspection Plan, Monaghan County Council will exceed this number. This year’s 
inspections are targeted in a area where there is the greatest risk to human health 
and water quality from DWWTS. Monaghan County Council will carry out 
additional inspections where there is evidence that individual DWWTS or clusters 
of DWWTS are causing particular water quality problems in an area. 
• 
DWWTS grant in Prioritised Areas for Action - In order to be eligible for this grant, 
the DWWTS serving a house must be situated in a Prioritised Area for Action in 
accordance with the River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018-2021, and the 
applicant must have received a letter from the Local Authority Waters Programme 
Office (LAWPO) on behalf of the local authority, confirming eligibility to apply for a 
grant. 
• 
DWWTS grant in High Status Objective Catchment Areas - In order to be eligible for 
this grant, the DWWTS serving a house must be situated in a High Status Objective 
Catchment Area in accordance with the River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 
2018-2021, and the applicant must have received a letter from the local authority 
confirming eligibility to apply for a grant. 
6. 
Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with their plans to lead public consultation on 
Village Plans. Which villages have received plans and which villages are yet to be done? Is there a 
timeframe for these? 
Reply:  
While it is an ambition of the Council to provide community plans for each community group that 
would benefit from one, their delivery requires significant financial and resource investment. In the 

 
 
past funding has come through the DRCD Town and Village fund and this fund was used to develop the 
Drum and Rockcorry vision plans. Currently there is no funding scheme that MCC can avail of to assist 
in the development of village plans however the Community section is developing a framework that 
will facilitate an efficient bottom up approach to plan development. The communities identified with 
the greatest need through analysis of the CSO and Pobail statistics will be prioritised in this regard. All 
avenues for financial assistance will also be investigated. 
  
The Community section is currently working with the community of Smithboro and it is hoped that a 
draft plan will be developed by the end of the summer. The community of Emyvale also has a plan at 
an advanced stage of development and it is intended to produce a draft plan in Q4 of this year. Plans 
have already been developed for Oram; Newbliss/Killeevan; Aughnamullen; Scotshouse; and 
Ballinode. 
   
  
Cllr A. McCooey asked: 
7. 
Can Monaghan County Council provide the latest update and status of the 10 year masterplan for the 
Hope Castle and Lough Muckno?  
Reply: A tender for consultants to provide professional services has been advertised, with a deadline for 
submissions of 24 May 2024. Following the appointment of the successful consultants, formal work on 
the preparation of the Masterplan and Framework shall commence. 
 
8. 
Can Monaghan County Council provide an update on plans to put a roof on Hope Castle, 
Castleblayney?  
Reply: The Council has engaged the professional services of a Structural Engineer and Conservation 
Architect to inspect the current condition of the Hope Castle building. Having regard to the professional 
reports prepared, the Council intend to commence preparation of tender documents in May to procure 
a contractor to clear out and remove all existing internal materials/debris from the building. Following 
completion of the clear out works, survey companies will be engaged to carry out relevant surveys of the 
building to inform design proposals for remedial works. Subsequently, the Council will commence 
procurement of professional consultants to prepare design proposals and an associated part 8 planning 
application for remedial protective works inclusive of a new roof structure to secure and stabilise the 
building. 
9. 
Can Monaghan County Council provide details on what reports and surveys are being undertaken for 
Hope Castle and the Annex? Particularly in relation to the structural integrity of each?  
Reply: Structural Inspection Reports and Asbestos Survey Reports have been completed for the Hope 
Castle and Annex buildings. Following completion of proposed clear out works to remove the significant 
quantities of internal materials/debris, it is proposed that a detailed topographical survey (floor 
plans/elevations) and wet/dry rot timber survey will be completed to inform design proposals for 
remedial protective works to both buildings. It should be noted that the design consultants may require 
other surveys to be completed during the design development given the current building conditions. 
 
Cllr S. Conlon asked: 
10 With only a limited supply of industrial / commercial zoned lands, seven hectares in total, owned by 
Monaghan County Council available to attract and provide future commercial / industrial 
development, and increased employment opportunities, will the Executive initiate an advertisement 
campaign seeking expressions of interest, and potential purchase from landowners to provide such 
a land-bank, similar to the Housing Section’s efforts at seeking lands for social housing?  
Reply:Monaghan County Council are currently actively pursuing the acquisition of zoned industrial land 
across the County. 
 
11 For Housing Adaptation Grant applications that are submitted by families with a child or family 
member(s) with profound autistic diagnoses, and where existing living accommodation precludes 
internal modifications, does the eligibility criteria extend to providing grants to build extensions for 
sensory rooms, or stand-alone habitable units located in rear gardens?   
Reply: Extract from the Guidelines for the delivery of the Housing Adaptation Grants states that: 
• 
“Local authorities should note that all applications for grant aid in respect of people suffering 
from Autistic Spectrum Disorders shall be considered under the Housing Adaptation Grant for 

 
 
People with a Disability, provided that the works are reasonably necessary for the purposes of 
rendering a house more suitable for the accommodation needs of that person” 
• 
“Grant aid may be considered for the provision of infrastructural and safety related adaptations 
to create appropriate space for applicants with specific sensory needs. Applications of this nature 
should be supported by a multidisciplinary assessment of the applicant by specialist healthcare 
professionals. This should outline who will be responsible for therapy services and/or the 
provision and upkeep of sensory related equipment. The Department does not fund the provision 
of sensory equipment……..” 
• 
“The types of works allowable under the scheme can be varied and can include the provision of: 
(FYI - this covers types of works for the whole scheme not specific to Autistic Spectrum Disorders) 
o 
access ramps; 
o 
stair lifts; 
o 
downstairs toilet facilities; 
o 
accessible showers; 
o 
fixed track hoists (excluding any servicing, maintenance or training costs); 
o 
adaptations to facilitate wheelchair access; 
o 
extensions (typically a bedroom and/or bathroom); 
o 
Any other works that are reasonably necessary for the purposes of rendering a house 
more suitable for the accommodation of a person with a disability” 
  
12 Considering the substantial investment of Monaghan County Council and Municipal District funds in 
building the Bio-Connect Centre at Knockaconny:   
a) 
what is the anticipated date of commencement of operations at Bio-Connect? The Construction 
Contract is programmed for substantial completion in Quarter 3, 2024.  
Reply: Operations will commence over the months following substantial completion. 
b) 
at commencement, what number of employees will occupy the building, and what is the 
forecast for expansion of staff?  
 
Reply: BioConnect will build an initial team of 4 direct employees (one in place now) to enable 
operations to begin. Further recruitment to build a wider team to deliver biotechnology projects 
for partners and biotechnology training will be dependent on securing further funding. Various 
large funding opportunities have been identified and are in progression. Leasing of the upper floor 
of the facility and expansion of direct project and training activities is expected to generate up to 
150 new jobs. 
c) 
Has a promotion / recruitment drive been initiated to attract employees to take up posts at this 
highly specialised facility?  
Reply: Soft promotional activities have commenced ahead of the formal launch. 
 
d) 
Who are the committed industry stakeholders, and what level of finance / resources have they 
committed to the project?  
Reply: Multiple industry partners have committed to almost €500k of cash support in addition to 
committing to carrying out projects at BioConnect once operations commence. Initial member 
companies contributing to BioConnect include MBio (Monaghan Biosciences) Lakeland Dairies, 
Manor Farm, BioMarine Ingredients, Herbel Crest, SilverHill Foods, Dutch DNA. 
  
e) 
What are the core objectives, and anticipated outcomes, of Bio-Connect?  
Reply: The core objective of BioConnect is to support companies (start-ups, existing SMEs and large 
organisations) seeking to innovate using state-of-the-art biotechnology to develop new high value 
products and processes with a clear focus on reduction of environmental impact (reduced carbon 

 
 
emissions, waste minimisation / valorisation). Such products/processes will include biogas / 
biomethane, products from precision fermentation eg enzymes, novel foods etc. Outcomes will be 
companies commercialising new products with lower carbon footprint, a vibrant hub for innovative 
biotechnology in the region and a pipeline of skilled talent. 
 
From day 1, BioConnect will form a key part of the national bioeconomy strategy across the island 
of Ireland along with existing programmes at the Irish Bioeconomy Foundation, multiple 
Universities, Teagasc and industry with a particular focus on activities in and needs of the local 
region.   BioConnect will also provide training in state-of-the-art commercial biotechnology to 
ensure the delivery of a skilled workforce to support these new opportunities in member and 
partner companies. 
 
f) 
what agency / stakeholder will have managerial oversight, and on what basis will annual 
running costs of the facilitybe met?  
Reply: BioConnect will convert its existing board into a governance board and techno-commercial 
advisory board. 
The role of the governance board will be managerial oversight and will comprise existing board 
members from MoCoCo, industry partners and representatives of Enterprise Ireland and 
government agencies. Additional members will be invited from key academic and education 
partners. The advisory board will be created to advise BioConnect on activities, partnerships, 
technical matters and commercialisation. Its membership will include industry technical experts, 
key academic partners and innovation specialists. Operational costs will be met through a 
combination of income from customer projects, rental income from first floor leasing, training 
income and large strategic grant funding. 
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked: 
13. Can the Housing Section give an update on our housing waiting list with a breakdown of MD areas? 
Can we also have a list of the numbers of applicants in receipt of HAP & RAS, again, by MD area?  
Reply 
 
SOCIAL HOUSING WAITING LIST - as at 23.04.2024 
  
TOTAL 
HAP 
RAS 
Monaghan MD 
532 
263 
35 
Carrickmacross/Castleblayney MD 
367 
133 
10 
Clones/Ballybay 
146 
70 
7 
  
  
  
  
  
1045 
466 
52 
 
 
14. What is the latest update on ‘taking in charge’ of Alderwood (Carrickmacross) and Conabury Hill estate 
(Castleblayney)?  
Reply:  
 
Alderwood: Following completion of assessment by the Water Services section, consultation 
commenced with Uisce Eireann.  Uisce Eireann raised several queries which have been passed to 
the developer’s agent for action.   
 
Conabury Hill: Uisce Eireann have requested that that ownership of the waste water pumping 
station in the estate be transferred to Monaghan County Council / Uisce Eireann before the taking 
in charge can be progressed.  It is noted that the pumping station lands are in the ownership of a 
company which is dissolved.  The local authority is currently investigating the compulsory purchase 
of the lands.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17. Notice of Motion 
 
Cllr D. Maxwell proposed, Cllr P. Treanor seconded –  
1. That Monaghan County Council request independent legal advice on whether the 
planning permission for the proposed North South interconnector has expired. 
  
Secondly that the independent legal advice should be sought from a Senior Counsel who 
has not previously engaged with EirGrid and who has experience in planning 
and development matters with the qualifications necessary to interpret the planning 
legislation for strategic infrastructure in Ireland. 
  
Thirdly, to ascertain legally who is responsible for compliance with the conditions of the 
development approval granted to EirGrid as "the undertaker" for the proposed North 
South interconnector. EirGrid as a standalone legal entity cannot endorse a 
separate legal entity ESB Networks to undertake construction as ESB networks 
wasn’t granted the planning permission in the first instance by Board Pleanala. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
Cllr S. Coyle proposed, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon seconded – 
1. That Monaghan County Council requests the Government and the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government & Heritage,  Mr. Darragh O'Brien, T.D., to immediately review and 
increase the rates of grants/payments to applicants to the Housing Adaptation Grant for 
Older People and People with a Disability, under the Housing Adaptation Grant for People 
with a Disability, Mobility Aids Grant and Housing Aid for Older People Grant in line with 
the increase in construction costs, since the Covid Pandemic, shortage of materials, 
shortage of skilled labour/trades people, rising labour costs, increase in the cost of 
construction materials, geo political issues, war in Gaza, Ukraine, transport costs etc. as 
the applicants to these grant schemes are among the most vulnerable in Irish Society.  
 
In line with this increase in rates, Monaghan County Council request an increase in our 
overall annual grant allocations so we can continue to support the same number of 
applicants annually as we have been over the last number of years (or more if possible). 
We further request that grant allocation is increased from 80% to 90% to assist the Local 
Authority in providing this financial assistance to this vulnerable group. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
Cllr D. Maxwell proposed, Cllr P. Conlon seconded –  
2. That Monaghan County Council re-examines its policy of putting dogs to sleep at 14 days 
of being in the pound. This can be too short of time to get the info out about a dog that 
could be given a loving home this timeframe needs to be increased to give a dog every 
chance of being re-homed. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
 
 

 
 
Cllr A. McCooey proposed, Cllr PJ O’Hanlon seconded - 
3. That this council writes to Minister for Education, Ms. Norma Foley TD, urging that the 
procurement of materials for the fulfilment of the 'Free Education Scheme' will be at the 
autonomy of each individual school to tender for their own supplier. For ETB schools to 
have one centralised supplier it will have an enormous impact on local suppliers who 
depend on the back-to-school season to keep their doors open. 
 
We ask that, if passed, this motion be circulated to all Local Authorities and to our local 
Oireachtas members. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
18. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
Ruairi Duffy, General Operative, Municipal District of Monaghan on the death of his 
sister, Genevieve (Jenny) Duffy, late of 168 Beechgrove Lawns, Monaghan Town. 
• 
Michael Leonard, GSS, MD of Ballybay-Clones, on the death of his brother, John 
Leonard, former employee of Monaghan County Council, late of Annagoes, Newbliss, 
Co. Monaghan.  
• 
Jim Duffy, General Operative, MD of Carrickmacross-Castleblayney, on the death of his 
father Alo Duffy, late of Garybawn, Latton, Castleblayney, Co Monaghan.  
• 
Caroline Hunt, Community and Enterprise, on the death of her mother, Della Hunt, late 
of 20 Glenview Drive, Monaghan Town, Co. Monaghan.  
• 
Siobhan Mallon, Assistant Engineer, Water Section on the death of her mother, Susan 
Murnaghan, late of, Garrybawn, Latton, Castleblayney, Co. Monaghan. 
• 
Chris Mallon, Ganger/Driver A, Ballybay/Clones MD, on the death of his Mother-In-Law, 
Susan Murnaghan, late of, Garrybawn, Latton, Castleblayney, Co. Monaghan. 
 
It was agreed votes of congratulations would be extended to the following: 
 
• 
John Deery, on his appointment as Chairperson of the National Ploughing Association.  
• 
Colm Birdy, on being voted the Translink Ulster GAA Coach of the Year 2023.  
 
 
Urgent Business 
 
Cllr C Bennett proposed, Cllr P. Treanor seconded, that Monaghan County Council writes to the 
Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Mr Eamon Ryan and the Cavan 
and Monaghan Oireachtas members, to call on Eir to remove the mast recently erected in 
Scotstown village and to rescind plans to erect a mast in Scotshouse village. Both the mast in 
Scotstown and the proposed mast in Scotshouse are located close to people's homes and public 
consultation did not take place.  
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and it was 
agreed unanimously. 
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach concluded the meeting. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Signed: 
 
 
 
 
                              Cathaoirleach 
 
 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
Date:  ________________________ 
 
