Minutes of the Meeting of Monaghan County Council held in the Council Chamber, M-Tek 
Building, Armagh Rd, Knockaconny, Monaghan, on Monday 16 December 2024 at 2.00pm 
 
Chair: 
Cllr P. Gibbons, Cathaoirleach  
 
Present: 
Cllrs Aughey, Campbell, Carthy, Clerkin, P. Conlon, S. Conlon, Coyle, Flynn, Gilliland, 
Johnston, Keelan, McAree, McCooey, O’Hanlon, P. Treanor, S. Treanor and Truell 
 
  
Mr. R. Burns, Chief Executive, Mr. C. Flynn, Ms. C O’Hare, Directors of Services, Mr. G. 
McMahon, A/Director of Services, Mr. D. McElwaine deputising for Ms P Monahan;  Ms. 
D. McQuaid, deputizing for Ms. O. McConnon, Ms. M. McGarvey, Meetings 
Administrator, Ms. A. McMeel, Assistant Staff Officer. 
 
At the outset of the meeting, the Leas Cathaoirleach, Cllr P. Conlon, welcomed Niamh 
McCooey of Sinn Féin and Alan Johnston of Fine Gael who were selected by their respective 
parties to be co-opted on to the Council to fill the vacancies created by the recent election to 
the Dáil of their respective party colleagues, Cathy Bennett (Sinn Féin) and David Maxwell, 
(Fine Gael). 
 
Cllr. P. Conlon congratulated their former colleagues Cathy Bennett and David Maxwell on 
their election to the 34th Dáil and wished them well in their new roles and then proceeded 
with the co-option of the two new members.  
 
1. 
Casual Vacancy 
i) To fill the casual vacancy arising from Cathy Bennett's election to Dail Eireann 
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr B. McAree, it was agreed that Niamh 
McCooey be co-opted on to Monaghan County Council to fill the seat vacated by Cllr C. Bennett.  
 
ii) To fill the casual vacancy arising from David Maxwell's election to Dail Eireann 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Clerkin, seconded by Cllr S. Gilliland, it was agreed that Alan Johnson 
be co-opted on to Monaghan County Council to fill the seat vacated by Cllr D. Maxwell.  
 
2. 
Election of Cathaoirleach of the County of Monaghan 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, it was agreed that Cllr P. Gibbons 
be elected Cathaoirleach of the County of Monaghan.  
 
3. 
i) Confirmation of Council Meeting Minutes held on 04 November 2024  
On the proposal of Cllr P. Conlon, seconded by Cllr S. Conlon, it was agreed that the minutes of 
the Council meeting held on the 04 November 2024 be confirmed.  
 
ii) Confirmation of Statutory Budget Minutes held on 19 November 2024  
On the proposal of Cllr B. McAree, seconded by Cllr S. Flynn, it was agreed that the minutes of 
the Statutory Budget meeting held on the 19 November 2024 be confirmed.  
 
 
4. 
Correspondence  
The following correspondence was circulated with the agenda for the meeting:  
 
• 
Acknowledgement email from the office of the Taoiseach regarding the resolution 
passed requesting the Government to adopt a zero-tolerance approach towards 
domestic, sexual and gender-based violence. 

• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Health, 
regarding the resolution that the eligibility of the Primary Medical Certificate scheme 
be widened to allow for applicants ‘without the use of one of their hands/arms or one 
of their legs and who require modifications to their vehicles in order to be able to 
drive’. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance, 
regarding the resolution that the eligibility of the Primary Medical Certificate scheme 
be widened to allow for applicants ‘without the use of one of their hands/arms or one 
of their legs and who require modifications to their vehicles in order to be able to 
drive’. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Transport Minister’s office regarding the request 
for funding for a Roadside Tree Survey and that MCC also be put forward as a pilot for 
the national scheme.  
• 
Acknowledgement email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Transport 
regarding the continued underfunding of Active Travel measures throughout Co. 
Monaghan. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from the National Transport Authority regarding the 
continued underfunding of Active Travel measures throughout Co. Monaghan. 
• 
Acknowledgement email from Minister Brendan Smyth, T.D., regarding the resolution 
that the eligibility of the Primary Medical Certificate scheme be widened to allow for 
applicants ‘without the use of one of their hands/arms or one of their legs and who 
require modifications to their vehicles in order to be able to drive’ 
• 
Acknowledgement email from Senator Robbie Gallagher regarding the resolution that 
the eligibility of the Primary Medical Certificate scheme be widened to allow for 
applicants ‘without the use of one of their hands/arms or one of their legs and who 
require modifications to their vehicles in order to be able to drive’. 
 
 
4.1  
Additional Correspondence  
The following additional correspondence which had been received after the agenda had 
issued was also circulated:  
 
• Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister of Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., 
regarding Ash dieback. 
• Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance, T.D., regarding the Disabled 
Drivers and Disabled Passengers Scheme (DDS).  
• Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister of Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D., 
regarding Active Travel funding.  
• Email from the Private Secretary to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, Mr. Darragh O’Brien, T.D., regarding the additional costs of Retained Fire 
Officers, should be covered by DHLGH. 
 
• Resolution from Wexford County Council calling on IPB to provide affordable 
underwriting options for insurance cover specifically tailored to the needs of community 
centres and similar community organisations and playgrounds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Proposals arising out of correspondence: 
On the proposal of Cllr. C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr. S. Flynn, it was agreed that this Council 
writes to the Office of An Taoiseach requesting that the review of the National Disability 
Strategy, specifically around the work carried out to progress NDIS proposals for needs-based, 
grant-aided, modern vehicle adaption supports to replace DDS, continue and, where possible, 
be expedited in order to allow those who need vehicle adaptions to be given the supports they 
need as quickly as possible. 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr N. Keelan, it was agreed that, further to 
correspondence received from the Department of Transport, and given that a response is still 
yet to arrive from the National Transport Authority from the previous proposals dated 
November 4th, that this Council seeks clarification from both agencies regarding the €3 million 
Active Travel budget announced for 2024. Furthermore, asking has this total been allocated to 
Monaghan County Council to develop the multiple projects considered ready for 
implementation in the months ahead, and that we make a further appeal for an increase to 
the Active Travel budget for 2025. 
 
 
5. 
To consider Variation No. 6 of the Monaghan County Development Plan 2019-2025 – Change 
of Zoning of lands at Shirley House Lane, Carrickmacross from Existing Residential to Town 
Centre. 
 
Mr D Hurley, Senior Executive Planner, presented the screening reports and CE report relating 
to the proposed variation.   
 
In relation to the proposed variation, he outlined the background to the report and the 10 
submissions received.  D. Hurley stated that a number of comments were received from 
various consultees but that no formal objection had been made to the proposed variation and 
the screening determinations. 
 
Mr Hurley advised that the proposal accords with the proper planning and development of 
the area and recommended that the proposed variation be made, and proposed 
determination be issued (relating to the screening decisions), without modifications. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr PJ O’Hanlon, seconded by Cllr C. Carthy, it was agreed that the Council 
approve Variation No. 6 of the Monaghan County Development Plan 2019-2025 – Change of 
Zoning of lands at Shirley House Lane, Carrickmacross from Existing Residential to Town 
Centre. 
 
6. 
To consider Section 183 - Clones Technology Park 
Mr G. McMahon, A/Director of Services, referred to proposed disposal of plot of land for 
Clones Business Technology Park building located at 98 Avenue, Clones, Co. Monaghan.  The 
land to be disposed of is the footprint of the building.   Monaghan County Council will retain 
the car park and will provide a licence to Monaghan County Enterprise Fund for access and 
egress for the upkeep or use of their buildings.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr P. Treanor, seconded by Cllr S. Coyle, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the disposal of sale of lands at Clones Technology Park, in accordance with the terms 
of the notice dated 23rd January 2023 and attached site location map in accordance with S183 
of the Local Government Act 2001.  

7. 
To consider Monaghan County Libraries Development plan 2024-28 
 
 
Ms. M. Treanor, Senior Executive Librarian, introduced ‘Libraries Make Lives Better’, the 
Monaghan County Libraries Development Plan 2024-2028.  She advised that Library Services 
are obligated to produce a 5-year plan. The plan highlights the key achievements over the past 
5 years and the objectives for the next 5 years.  
 
 The high level aims that will guide the delivery of the library services over the next five years 
are: 
 
Aim 1: Enable - we aim to enable reading, learning and cultural opportunities for everyone by 
developing user-centred library services and collections.  
 Aim 2: Create - we aim to create user-centred outreach and engagement programmes that 
deliver reading, literacy and cultural opportunities for everyone. 
 Aim 3: Promote – we aim to raise awareness of our work so that more people know about 
library resources and services.  
 Aim 4: Enhance – we aim to enhance our capacity so that we can continue to support the 
changing needs of our communities.  
 
 
She referred to the significant investment by Monaghan Co Council in library infrastructure 
with two new library branches, one in Castleblaney and one at The Peace Campus in 
Monaghan town.  She also referred to the redevelopment of the Market House in Ballybay as 
a new library space.  
 
 
Ms. Treanor concluded her presentation stating that reading and literacy are at the heart of 
everything Monaghan County Libraries do. Monaghan County Libraries’ vision is to enable and 
support everyone to be informed, connected, literate and skilled for life.   The libraries mission 
is to make lives better in Monaghan by providing free access to resources, services and 
programmes that support literacy, lifelong learning and cultural engagement.  
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked Ms. M. Treanor for the very informative presentation and she 
responded to queries from the elected members.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Campbell, seconded by Cllr S. Coyle, it was agreed that the Council 
approve the Monaghan County Libraries Development plan 2024-28. 
 
8. 
To consider Corporate Plan 2024-2029 
 
Ms. C. O’Hare, Director of Services, referred to Corporate Plan 2024-2029 and advised 
members in accordance with Section 134(2) of the Local Government Act 2001 there is a 
requirement on the Council to adopt a Corporate Plan within 6 months of the date of the 
Annual meeting, in an election year.   
 
 
The purpose of the plan is to provide a strategic framework for Monaghan County Council 
over the next five years, aligning with national, regional, and local strategies. Stakeholders 
(Council Staff and management, elected representatives, the Public Participation Network 
(PPN), and the wider community) have been included in surveys, workshops, focus groups, 
interviews, and invitations for submissions. The facilitation process has been guided by Crowe 
Ireland.  
 

The Plan takes into account a wide range of regional, national and international plans and 
policies which are relevant to the Council’s activities.   It also takes account of the various 
policies and objectives set out in the Councils other plans and strategies.  Key local and 
national plans included the County Development Plan, Climate Action Plan, and Local 
Economic and Community Plan (LECP).  Ms O’Hare referred to the significant changes in the 
Councils services and operating model since the adoption of the previous plan - Covid 
aftermath, remote working, International Protection and integration, all of which have been 
incorporated in this plan. 
 
The Plan sets out Five Core Corporate Goals: 
 
1. A Great Place to Live: Addressing housing, planning, and town regeneration 
2. A Thriving Community: Community development, transport, culture, and public 
safety 
3. A Strong Economy: Economic growth and tourism development 
4. A Sustainable Future: Climate action, biodiversity, and waste management 
5. A High-Performing Council: Emphasis on governance, innovation, and staff 
development 
 
There are a total of 16 objectives incorporated into the plan with a number of cross-cutting 
themes - Alignment with the UN Sustainable Development Goals, Commitment to the Public 
Service Human Rights Duty, Adoption of Age-Friendly Principles and Integration of climate 
action into all objectives.  
 
 
To ensure the Plan is delivered, there will be a clear link between the Goals and Objectives of 
the Corporate Plan and the Annual Service Delivery Plan, the budgetary process, the 
Performance Management Development System, the internal and Local Government Audit 
Systems and the monthly Management Reports.  
 
The Chief Executive thanked all those who have contributed to the Corporate Plan 2024-2029, 
in particular C. O’Hare and her team.   He stated that it is a very meaningful plan and it is 
deliverable and he is confident this plan can be achieved.  
On the proposal of Cllr S. Conlon, seconded by Cllr A. Campbell, it was agreed that the 
Corporate Plan 2024-2029 be adopted.  
9. 
To consider recommendations and minutes from Corporate Policy Group 19 November 2024 
 
The members noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 19 November 
2024, which had been circulated.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Carthy, seconded by Cllr R. Truell, it was agreed that the minutes of 
the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 19 November 2024 and the recommendations 
contained therein be approved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

10. 
To receive a delegation from Irish Farmers Association 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed a delegation from the Irish Farmers Association to the December 
meeting.  The speakers raised their concern in respect of farming in the county with the 
members.   
 
Mr. Frank Brady, Regional Chairman of Ulster/North Leinster expressed the IFA’s concerns 
regarding the proposed Mercosur trade deal agreed recently by the EU. The ability of poultry 
producers to make a sustainable income is being jeopardised by the importation of sub-
standard products. The IFA state that the deal would grant market access for 99,000 tonnes 
of beef and 180,000 tonnes of poultry, both at a zero-tariff rate, which could ‘decimate’ both 
the Irish and EU beef and poultry sectors, especially in high value cuts like steak and chicken 
fillets. The poultry sector is of significant economic importance in Co. Monaghan and this deal 
will have a detrimental effect on the industry.  Mr. Brady appealed to the elected members to 
raise their concerns with their respective parties.  
 
The Cathaoirleach and members thanked the IFA delegation for the very informative 
presentation, highlighting the issues affecting their industry.  
 
 
 
11. 
To receive Management Report – November 2024 
 
The Chief Executive introduced the Management Report for November 2024 which had been  
circulated with the agenda. He referred to the development of 72 new houses in Monaghan 
town across two sites; work on the new development will start on site in the coming days. He 
is particularly pleased to see the Council embracing modern methods of construction to 
increase the pace and scale of housing delivery. The ambition is to deliver at least 120 new 
houses every year which would be well in excess of the Government targets set for them. 100 
houses have been delivered this year, 20 through acquisition. 180 grants have also been 
approved and nearly 50% have been paid out fully. The Council is also actively dealing with 
vacancy and dereliction. Overall, this represented a significant body of work by the housing 
team. 
 
The Chief Executive and Directors of Services responded to queries from the elected members. 
 
The members noted the Management Report for November 2024 which had been circulated 
with the agenda.  
 
12. 
To receive reports from Members attending Conferences/Training events 
The members noted the reports from Cllr S. Conlon, Cllr R. Truell and S. Flynn in relation to 
their attendance at the following Conferences/Training events: 
• 
LAMA Autumn Seminar, 17th & 18th October, Newgrange Hotel, Navan, Co. Meath 
• 
IPB, 4th October, Mullingar Park Hotel 
• 
AILG, 28th September, Bridge House, Tullamore 
• 
Women’s Regional Caucus plenary meeting, 15th October, Sligo Park Hotel 
 
13. 
Business Submitted by the Chief Executive 
 
The Chief Executive informed the members that there were no matters for consideration 
under this item.  

 
14. 
Matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meetings held on 04 November 2024   
There were no matters arising out of the minutes of the Council meeting held on 04 November  
2024. 
 
15. 
To receive update on N2 National Primary Road Schemes 
The following correspondence was received in relation to the N2 National Primary Road 
Schemes:  
 
• 
Letter from the Department for Infrastructure, Western Division, regarding the A5 
Western Transport Corridor (A5WTC) Notice of Making a Vesting Order and enclosed 
was a copy of the Vesting Order Notice dated 15 October 2024 which will become 
operative on 25 November 2024.  
 
Mr. G. McMahon, Director of Services, noted a court case lodged by a group of 
residents and landowners against the dual carriageway scheme has been scheduled 
for March 2025. Donegal County Council has assumed the Secretarial role for the A5 
in the coming year and a meeting will be scheduled in early 2025 to discuss the issues.  
 
 
16. 
To receive update on North/South Interconnector project 
On the proposal of Cllr N. Keelan, seconded by Cllr N. McCooey, it was agreed that Monaghan 
County Council: 
1/ writes to Eirgrid requesting that they cease all activities immediately in relation to the North 
South Interconnector project pending the outcome of the judicial review proceedings brought 
before the High Court in Belfast on Monday last the 9th of December. 
2 / writes to all our Oireachtas members for this constituency seeking their support for our 
motion, and that they also would make contact with Eirgrid. 
 
17. 
To receive update on the Ulster Canal project 
No further update on the Ulster Canal project. 
 
18. 
Questions and Replies 
 
Cllr S. Flynn asked:  
1. 
Can Monaghan County Council please advise on the meeting held with TII in October & 
whether the issue with regards traffic congestion in Monaghan Town was discussed? 
 
Reply: The Chief Executive, Director of Service and Senior Engineer met with the TII in 
October 2024, and the Traffic Congestion in Monaghan Town was discussed. The TII made 
specific reference to the need for the development of a strategy i.e., The Local Transport 
Plan (LTP) which is currently being prepared for Monaghan Town. This LTP may provide 
the robust evidence of how the introduction of planned Active Travel facilities, public 
transport hubs/links would benefit from rerouting vehicular traffic (particularly HGVs) 
away from the urban core, and therefore strengthen the case for a bypass/ring road. If 
the LTP can successfully outline the need for a Monaghan Town By-pass, the next step is 
to put the project forward for inclusion the National Development Plan, which is up for 
review in 2025.     
 

 
2. Can Monaghan County Council please provide me with a list of traffic calming measures 
for villages & towns in Co Monaghan, in particular Ballybay to Doohamlet, Smithboro & 
Cremartin. 
 
Reply:  
Traffic Calming measure are incorporated at MD level. Examples of traffic calming 
implemented by the MD’s in 2024 are as follows: 
• Rockcorry – Road markings and high friction surfacing.   
• Cremartin GAA – High friction surfacing and additional road markings. 
• Scotstown Village - Road markings and signage. 
• Mullan Village – Road markings and signage. 
 
Ballybay Clones MD have applied for funding for 2025 under the Low-Cost Safety 
Improvement works for the following locations: 
• Ballybay approach roads to the town – Driver feedback signs and additional road 
markings. 
• Cremartin – Additional signage, Remove and set back hedges and fencing for 
improved visibility, high friction surfacing, lane narrowing and driver feedback signs. 
• Doohamlet - Additional signage, High friction surfacing, lane narrowing and additional 
road markings. 
 
• The Carrickmacross/Castleblayney MD has applied for funding to implement a traffic 
calming scheme on Muckno Street, Castleblayney, under the Low-Cost Safety 
Improvement Works programme 2025. 
 
• The Monaghan MD have applied for funding to complete the following traffic calming 
scheme at R937 Old Dublin Road – Installation of a raised pedestrian crossing, roads 
marking and signage. 
 
3. 
Can Monaghan County Council examine extending the speed limit on both sides of 
Smithboro village and also on the Ballybay - Castleblayney Road?  
 
Reply: 
A national road speed limit review is to take place in 2025.  Speed limit modifications 
proposed by MCC, Elected Representatives and Members of the Public will be considered 
and assessed in line with the Guidelines for Setting and Managing Speed Limits in Ireland 
(DOT).   The N54 on both approaches to Smithboro will be considered.   
 
4. Can Monaghan County Council please confirm whether there are additional services & 
routes to be offered by the local link throughout the county and whether the NTA have 
additional services planned for other areas? In particular, the route from Clones to 
Monaghan via Smithboro village & Monaghan to Clones via Smithboro village, where 
there is a high demand for public transport with limited services currently available.  
 
Reply:  
Local link has issued Monaghan County with a list of proposed new locations where local 
link services are to be provided. Monaghan County Council have assessed the locations 
from a road safety prospective and returned comments to local link for their 
consideration before rolling out these new services.   

Cllr P. Gibbons asked:  
 
5. 
Has the provision of fully serviced camper van and/or caravan stands been considered 
for the Lough Muckno area? If so, what was the oncome of these considerations?  
 
Reply:  
Lough Muckno park was assessed for suitability for motorhome parking (Aire de Service), 
and the Council has now received the assessors report.  The location has been highlighted 
by the assessor as having high potential for this purpose, if properly developed, due to its 
proximity to both the town centre, the park and the lake, and the availability of all 
amenities within walking distance.  The assessor identified 3 potential areas for 
development within the park.  MCC intends to apply for funding under the Town and 
Village scheme to progress the development of suitable Aires de Services sites in each of 
the MDs.  
 
6. 
Have any funding applications been recently submitted and awaiting a decision or else 
are being prepared for new playgrounds in the County? 
 
Reply:  
Funding of €136,000 was secured under the Community Recognition Fund 2023 for the 
provision of a sensory garden/play area and outdoor educational space, including the 
upgrade of existing gravel pathways, to enhance existing recreational amenities at 
Cloughvalley. Existing facilities at Cloughvalley include a children's play park, MUGA, 
basketball/tennis court and playing fields. This project aims to complement and enhance 
these facilities, to provide for a more inclusive and accessible recreational and 
educational space for the community.  
Playpark extension at Rossmore Forest Park. This project will extend the playpark to 
provide additional play equipment that will allow more space for children to play within. 
Funding of €150,000 was received under the Community Recognition Fund 2023. 
The new Peace Programme will provide funding for the following playgrounds: 
• A playground in Scotstown village.  
• Drumillard Park Castleblayney. 
• Upgrade surface on Basketball Court at Ballybay Park to a polymeric rubber surface.  
 
 
7. 
What is the update on the proposed housing development on the site of the old fire 
station at the Commons, Castleblayney? Can the number and type of dwelling, current 
status of project and proposed timelines for construction and completion of this project 
be provided? 
 
Reply: 
The Old fire station at the Commons, Castleblayney project consists of the provision of 
22 dwellings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Details of the proposed dwellings are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
Draft planning drawings have been circulated to the relevant departments with 
comments returned and actioned by the designers.  
 
The Cost analysis is being undertaken by the consultants in preparation for stage 2 
submission (within the next 4/6 weeks) and on approval of this, planning will be 
submitted.  
 
It is anticipated that construction on this site will commence by Q4 2025. 
 
 
 

8. 
What is the whole-time equivalent staffing number for Monaghan County Council and 
how many staff are currently employed? What is the longest unfilled staff vacancy? 
 
Reply: 
As of 31st October 2024, the staffing Whole Time Equivalent (WTE) number for Monaghan 
County Council was 462.15.   
 
The actual headcount of staff employed by Monaghan County Council as of 31st October 
2024 was 482 plus 61 Retained Fire Fighters. 
 
The HR department strives to fill vacancies within as quick a timeframe as possible. 
However, in certain instances there are outside factors impacting this timeframe, e.g. we 
need to get sanction from Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage for 
new posts and senior level posts. In addition, recruitment of senior posts is carried out 
for local authorities by the Public Appointments Service (PAS).  The post of Senior 
Executive Engineer (new post for Housing) is longest unfilled vacancy, the request to fill 
this post is with the Public Appointments Service. 
 
9. 
How many referrals have been received by the Housing Repair team for council housing 
stock so far this year, and what is the average time of close out of these referrals? 
Reply:  
Total Referrals Received year to date: 1796 
Total repairs closed :1117 
Average time to close out repairs: 30 days. (This is measured from date of call until 
contractors/craftworkers indicate that job is finished)  
 
Cllr C. Carthy asked:  
10. What is the latest update regarding the Clos na Droimainne unfinished estate in 
Carrickmacross? 
 
Reply: 
No further updates are available. Housing Section continues to liaise with the AHB on this 
matter. 
 
11. Can the housing section give a detailed breakdown of our housing applicants based on 
house size and family size (or single applicants), with a Municipal District breakdown?  
Reply:  
 
 
 

12. What plans are in place to create and deliver amenities/public spaces for teenagers and 
young adults throughout Co. Monaghan?  
 
 Reply: 
Ballybay/Clones MD together with the Town Team applied under CLÁR 2024 for the 
provision of a dedicated teenage hangout space within Ballybay Town Park, featuring the 
installation of an innovatively designed Youth Shelter.  This application was successful in 
securing funding of €39,150 plus match funding of €4,350 (provided by the MD) for the 
delivery of this project. To add to this funding, Monaghan Sports Partnership have been 
successful through the Dormant Accounts Fund to install accessible fixed equipment such 
as outdoor table tennis table, innovative sports equipment storage / use solution to 
encourage increased play and activity and complement other developments at the park. 
It is envisaged that these projects will provide a safe, inclusive and positive environment 
for the Youth of Ballybay which will benefit both the teens themselves and the wider 
community. 
 
Dormant Accounts Funding has also been secured in the sum of €30,000 by Monaghan 
Sports Partnership for the purpose of Urban Outdoor Adventure and will be used in 2025 
to support activity at Clones Marina with a focus on teens and young adults.  
Monaghan County Council acquired McMahon’s ‘Red Boy’s, Main Street, Emyvale under 
Town & Village – Building Acquisition Measure. The property will be considered as an 
amenity for teenagers as part of a multi-use community hub. Currently the project is at 
development stage with community consultation taking place on Thursday 28th 
November 2024.  
 
Monaghan Sports Partnership have also secured funding of €15,000 for the development 
of open changing shelter at Emy Lough to support outdoor swimming. 
Funding provided from Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media 
through Sport Ireland of €60,000 towards the installation of 3 Outdoor Basketball courts 
at two locations, Lough Muckno and Ballybay Town Park (both projects supported by 
additional funding of €18,750 for the purposes of Biodiversity development at both sites 
(as an additional funded condition to be included).  
The new Peace Programme will provide funding for the following amenities suitable for 
young adults and teenagers: 
 
• Outdoor recreational exercise equipment in Oram Village.  
• Teen Haven Clones  
The Community Development section in collaboration with the MD’s continue to utilise 
all funding opportunities to source new playgrounds across the county and enhance 
public spaces and amenities for teenagers and young adults. 
 
13. Following the recent campaign by our Vacant Housing team to bring derelict properties 
in Co Monaghan back into use; has the Executive any reports on the response, so far, 
from building owners and/or plans to deal with properties that have been highlighted? 
Reply: 
Following the approval of the Councils new policies and procedures in relation to derelict 
sites, the Town Regeneration Section successfully engaged with the Department of 
Housing and Local Government regarding URDF Call 3 for Monaghan town and increased 
the number of properties approved for funding significantly from 22 to 50.  

Under this programme, following engagement with owners, 2 properties have been 
returned to use, 7 properties owners are undertaking renovations, 9 properties are listed 
for sale and 2 properties have been compulsory acquired, one which will be advertised 
for sale on the open market by December 2024 and the other will facilitate the 
progression of the Dublin Street Regeneration scheme. 
Discussions are ongoing with the remaining property owners, and it is expected that 
further progress in bringing these properties back into use will be made in Q1 2025.   
Throughout the rest of the county, the Town Regeneration Section have engaged with a 
further 95 property owners. To date feedback has been generally positive with 38% of 
owners committing to conduct renovation works and 16% are in process of selling their 
properties. We have entered 36% of properties onto the derelict site register. 5% of 
properties were not derelict on further review and the remaining 5% have been given 
time to respond with plausible actions to make property non derelict. 
The Town Regeneration Section have compulsory acquired a further 2 properties/sites in 
2024. The Councils Housing section have identified a need to redevelop one property in 
Newbliss and the other site in Monaghan town will be either developed by the Housing 
Section or offered to the open market for resale.  
CPO process will be completed on an unfinished housing estate in Carrickroe in January 
2025. The Councils Housing Section will complete the unfinished properties, and the local 
community have issued a scoping report for a community hub building at this location.  
It is proposed to commence the Compulsory Acquisition process on a number of 
properties that have been entered on the Derelict Site Register. 9.no properties have 
been initially identified to be compulsory acquired and resold on the open market in Q1 
2025. 
The Croí Cónaithe (Towns) Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant has 177 approved 
grants amounting to over €10 million with more than €2.1 Million successfully paid out 
to date. 
550.no Engagements have been undertaken with the Vacant homes officer since March 
2024 with 143.no new applications received in 2024.  
The Vacant homes officer has conducted public consultations in Carrickmacross, Clones 
and Monaghan along with presenting at open evenings (retrofit ready) in Ballybay and  
Glaslough. There has also been numerous social media posts through the MCC platform 
and a article printed in the Northern Standard demonstrating success stories as well as 
presenting the achievements of the grant at October’s council meeting. 
Cllr N. Keelan asked:  
14. What plans have the council to upgrade the regional roadway (R178) from the 
Carrickmacross to Shercock town in particular which is a very important economic link 
and currently not fit for purpose given the large numbers of HGVs using this roadway 
on a daily basis and also given the number of accidents on this stretch of roadway?  
 
Reply: 
The Department of Transport (DOT) and County Council Senior Engineer working group 
meet regularly to identify strategically important sections of the East/West link Project 
which includes the section on the R178 from Shercock to Carrickmacross and Dundalk. It 
is planned to apply for funding for this section along with other Strategically important 
sections in the county under the DOT Strategic/Specific Improvement Scheme.     
 

15. In or around April time of this year 2024 a number of potholes appeared along the N2 
at Broomfield, as a result of this some vehicles were very badly damaged, luckily no one 
was injured. Could the council give the members some information or a report on this 
serious issue, when this issue was reported, what action was taken and when, who is 
responsible for carrying out urgent repairs etc? 
 
Reply:  
MCC secured funding from TII under the Capital Maintenance Programme, to address 
localized distressed sections of the national road network. This included the N2 at 
Broomfield.  Works were implemented over the months of Sept/Oct 24.  MCC made a 
further funding application to TII under this Program, as additional sections of the network 
were showing signs of distress, however, TII insisted that additional funding is not 
available in 2024.  MCC will make a further funding application in Q1 2025 to carry out 
repairs on a prioritized basis.   
 
16. In order to support local businesses across the county, what is the council policy in terms 
of buying goods and services locally, what plans have the council to run a (Shop local 
campaign) in the run up to Christmas, working with local chamber of commerce 
organizations and town teams etc.?  
 
Reply:  
Monaghan Town MD: 
The council run a Shop Local campaign every Christmas and will run another campaign 
this Christmas.  
The Monaghan Municipal District also operate the Monaghan Town Voucher which can 
only be spent in the Monaghan Town and Municipal district area. 
The voucher sales for 2023 were over €1.8m 
 
Ballybay-Clones MD: 
The Ballybay Clones MD are involved in County Council the Shop local campaign like 
previous years. 
The MD have also provided funding for the erection and installation of the Christmas lights 
and Christmas Lights turn on events in both Ballybay and Clones to attract people to the 
towns and shop local.   
The turn on event in Clones attracted over 3,000 people into the town and on Friday night 
last and the Christmas Market and switch on in Ballybay attracted over 2,000 into the 
town. 
Funding was also provided to villages such as Rockcorry, Scotshosue and Newbliss. 
This year the Council assisted by the Ballybay Town team hosted a very successful 
Christmas market event which provided a platform for local vendors to showcase their 
products and produce whilst also preserving the local and cultural heritage and provided 
a boost to the local economy. 
 
 Carrickmacross-Castleblaney MD: 
The Municipal District provides an annual contribution to both the Carrickmacross 
Chamber of Commerce and Castleblayney Town Regeneration Team to help create a 
trade-friendly environment in both main towns in the run up to Christmas. With the 
support of the Municipal District, both the Carrickmacross Chamber of Commerce and 
the Castleblayney Town Regeneration Team lead initiatives and events such as Shop Local 
campaigns, the promotion of Town Voucher Schemes and Christmas lights switch on. 

 
17. Over the course of the last 4/5 years what has been the approximate percentage 
increase in the costs of resurfacing and upgrading roadways? 
 
Reply:  
There are many different factors that influence the cost of roadworks. From 2019 the 
National Oversight and Audit Commission has required Local Authorities to report on 
those costs for publication in the annual Performance Indicators Report. Based on that 
data, the cost of local road strengthening (Restoration Improvement) in County 
Monaghan in 2020 was €24.85/m2. By 2023 the cost had increased to €43.67/m2, an 
increase of 76% over three years.  
 
18. How many litter fines have been handed out over the course of this year 2024?     
Reply: 37 Fines 
 
Cllr A. Campbell asked:  
 
19. With the recent works having being carried out by Monaghan County Council in the 
Hope Castle and the Annex. 
(a) What surveys works etc. have now to be competed? 
(b) When will these works be completed? 
 
Reply:  
Monaghan County Council have conducted a procurement competition for the provision 
of Topographical, Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) and Measured Building Survey 
Services for Hope Castle, Annex & Adjacent Outbuilding in Lough Muckno Estate. 
Following completion of the tender assessment process, the executive is currently 
awaiting the preferred tenderer to submit supporting information. Subject to the 
satisfactory submission of relevant documents, it is expected that the contract for 
engagement of the surveying company will be executed in December 2024. It is 
anticipated that the surveying services will commence before the end of the year and are 
expected to be completed in January 2025. 
 
20. With regard to the Master Plan for Muckno, Hope Castle and the Annex and the 
surrounding area. 
(a) Has the process to appoint a consultant concluded? 
(b) When will the work on this process begin? 
(c) What important steps have been put in place with this process to include public 
consultation? 
(d) What time scale will this process take. 
 
 
Reply: The evaluation of tenders for consultancy services is substantially complete. The 
preferred tender has been identified and subject to the submission of the requested 
information by them, it is anticipated that the appointment of the Consultant can be 
made before the end of the year. Work on the Masterplan shall commence immediately 
following their appointment, with an anticipated completion period of 9 – 12 months. 
 
 

In respect of public consultation, and in order to ensure comprehensive engagement, the 
Consultant shall be required to prepare and implement a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, 
details of which shall be agreed with the Local Authority following appointment. 
 
21. What is the update on the tender process to begin the works at the Market House in 
Castleblayney? 
 
Reply:  
A total of six tender submissions were received under Stage 1 of the procurement 
procedures in relation to prequalification of contractors through suitability assessment. 
The Stage 1 tender evaluation process is substantially complete, the executive is currently 
awaiting submission of requested information to verify the tenderers that are to be 
shortlisted for Stage 2 of the procurement process. Following conclusion of the Stage 1 
tender obligations, Monaghan County Council will commence preparation of a detailed 
Project Brief & Procurement Strategy for submission to the DRCD, seeking approval to 
progress Stage 2 of the tender process.  
 
 
22. With the plans to now in place to build new homes on the old machinery yard and fire 
station. 
 
• How many houses are envisaged to be build out in this town centre site? 
• When is it hoped that this work will commence? 
• How long will this project take to complete? 
 
Reply - See reply to Q 7. 
 
 
19. Notices of Motion 
 
1. 
Cllr C. Carthy proposed, Cllr P. Treanor seconded, 
 
That Monaghan County Council calls on the new Minister for Housing: 
 
• To significantly increase funding for social and affordable housing in order to deliver a 
lot more homes over the coming years. 
• To introduce the necessary reforms to enable Councils to increase and accelerate the 
delivery of public housing and to ensure that affordable homes to rent and buy are 
delivered at prices that working people can actually afford. 
• To introduce a 3-year rent freeze to secure private rental accommodation while the 
delivery of public housing is ramped up. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting. A 
vote by show of hands resulted in 9 for and 7 against. The Cathaoirleach declared the 
proposal carried. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2. 
Cllr P. Clerkin proposed, Cllr S. Gilliland seconded, 
 
That Monaghan Co Council ask the Department of Housing and Uisce Éireann to 
investigate expensive connection fee costs.  
 
Several families, building their first homes have been charged over €15,000 for connection 
fees, which is putting extreme stress on their finances. 
 
When queried, local contractors said they would do the same work, for 50% less than 
what Uisce Éireann had quoted. 
 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and 
it was agreed unanimously.  
 
 
3. 
Cllr P. Clerkin proposed, Cllr B. McAree seconded,  
That Monaghan County Council ask the Department of Health, The Department of State 
for Mental Health and the HSE to provide sustainable funding and support to SOSAD (Save 
Our Sons and Daughters). 
• For 17 years, SOSAD Ireland has been at the forefront on mental health and suicide 
 prevention across Co. Monaghan. The future of the organisation is at imminent risk of 
closing due to the lack of state funding. 
• This is not just a financial issue, it is a humanitarian issue and I would ask that funding 
be made available to SOSAD, so they can continue their critical service in our 
community. 
Following a short discussion on the motion, the Cathaoirleach put it to the meeting, and 
it was agreed unanimously. 
 
20. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations 
 
It was agreed that votes of sympathy would be extended to the following: 
 
• Monica (Mona) Hughes, née Murphy, Knockbane, Middletown, Co Armagh on 
Saturday, 23rd November 2024 (Mother of Stephen Hughes, IS Technical Officer, IS 
Department) 
• Former Cavan/Monaghan TD, Andrew Boylan, Derrygarra, Butlersbridge, Cavan, on 
6th December 2024.  
 
It was agreed that votes of congratulations would be extended to: 
•  Monaghan Fire & Civil Protection who were awarded in the Emergency Services 
category at the 15th Leading Lights in Road Safety Awards. 
• Oran Kiernan on winning the Adult Handball Singles final in Monaghan. 
• Shane McGurk from Aughnamullen on winning the 2024 Mens World Darts 
Championship.  
 
Civic Reception 
The members agreed that a Civic Reception be held in honour of Shane McGuirk in 
February 2025 to mark his achievement.  

 
The Cathaoirleach thanked the Executive for their work throughout the year. The Chief Executive 
thanked the Members for their efforts and contributions and staff for their work during the year.  
 
The meeting then concluded.  
 
 
 
Signed:  
________ 
  
 
               Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ________________________ 
Meetings 
Administrator 
 
Date: 
____________________ 
