MINUTES OF SPC FOR TOURISM, RURAL & COMMUNITY DEV., AN GHAELIGE & CULTURAL
SERVICES MEETING HELD AT 2.30pm on Monday 24th February 2025, MTek 1
Present
Cllr. Sean Conlon
Cllr. Pat Treanor
Cllr. Niamh McCooey
Cllr. Aidan Campbell
Cllr Raymond Aughey
Packie McCarville
Fiona McGuinness
Emer Brennan
Carol Smyth
Noel Treanor
Seån Ö Murchadha
Apologies
Cllr. Paul Gibbons
Deirdriu McQuaid
In Attendance
Gareth McMahon
Patricia Monahan
Olga McConnon
Leona Keenan
SPC Chairperson, Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Business / Commercial (Tourism/Hospitality Sector)
Business / Commercial (Tourism/Hospitality Sector)
PPN — Environment Electoral College
PPN — Social Inclusion Electoral College
PPN — Community & Vol Electoral College
PPN — Community & Vol Electoral College
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
County Librarian Monaghan County Council
A/Director of Service Monaghan County Council
Director of Services Monaghan County Council
Director of Services Monaghan County Council
Administrative Officer Monaghan County Council
Tourism and Marketing Executive Monaghan County Council
Dympna Condra
Arts Officer Monaghan County Council
Somhairle MacConghail
Liam Bradley
Nial O'Connor
Kara Ward
Aoife Duffy
Mairéad Treanor
Marcella Babington
Yvonne Kelly
Lisa Connolly
Museum Curator Monaghan County Council
Senior Executive Officer Monaghan County Council
Heritage Officer Monaghan County Council
Clerical Officer Tourism Monaghan County Council
Senior Executive Librarian Monaghan County Council
Clerical Officer Heritage Monaghan County Council
Assistant Staff Officer Tourism Monaghan County Council
Assistant Staff Officer Community Monaghan County Council
1. Welcome & Introductions
Cllr. Conlon welcomed everyone to the inaugural meeting and all members introduced themselves.
He encouraged all members to fully participate in the meetings and that everyone is equal around
the table.
1
2. Review of Standing Orders 2025-2029
Cllr. Conlon updated members on the Adopted Standing Orders 2025-2029 and the contents of
same.
A hard copy was provided to the members.
3. Nial O'Connor Irish Language Officer An Ghaelige Annual Report
Nial O'Connor Irish Language Officer delivered a presentation on the An Ghaelige Annual Report.
Nial informed members that An Ghaelige is new to the SPC's and this addition reflects the council's
commitment to the Irish Language. Nial gave members an overview of the activities and initiatives
such as Gaeltacht scholarships which will be happening over the next year. Monaghan County Council
provide funding to students to participate in An Gaeltacht annually.
Seån Ö Murchadha asked if the Council would consider increasing the budget for An Gaeltacht
scholarships to allow disadvantaged families avail of the scheme to enable equal opportunities of
young people to attend.
The Chairman and members thanked Nial for his presentation.
4. Presentation of Draft County Outdoor Recreation Strategy 2025 — 2030
Cllr. Conlon introduced Aideen Martin and Karen Coulter from Outscape Consultants who are
developing the County Outdoor Recreation Strategy 2025-2030. Local Authorities have been asked to
prepare this strategy following publication of "Embracing Ireland's Outdoors" the National Outdoor
Recreation Plan.
Outscape outlined how the Strategy is being developed and the processes involved to do this.
Following the presentation by Outscape members posed questions to the consultants.
Cllr. Conlon encouraged Outstcape to engage with Monaghan Integrated Development (MID) and
they replied this engagement is happening. Noel Treanor said that site-based activity can discourage
people from walking on our roads for safety reasons. Karen Coulter replied that they are aiming to
provide plenty of opportunity for walking in the Strategy.
Cllr. Campbell thanked Dympna and Outscape for the presentation. He said the success that
Monaghan has had in Town and Village Renewal Funding and Outdoor Recreation Scheme signifies
the need for this Strategy.
Cllr. Treanor reiterated other members positive feedback and commended everyone involved in the
development of the Strategy. He asked if Waterways Ireland and Coillte are involved with process to
which Karen replied they are very engaged.
Fiona McGuinness enquired if there were any plans for South Monaghan for off road cycling trails.
Karen replied that no specific action for this is identified. They are aware though of other projects
being developed in Carrickmacross.
2
Cllr. McCooey mentioned the increase in number of visitors to forest in Castleshane and is there any
plans for increase in parking and accessibility. Dympna replied this has been identified in the
consultation process.
To conclude, Dympna informed the committee that the next step is for the Draft County Recreation
strategy 2025-2030 to be presented to the Corporate Policy Group (CPG) for review.
Members thanked Outscape and D. Condra for their presentation.
5. Presentation of County Monaghan Arts Strategy 2025-2031
Somhairle MacConghail, Arts Officer informed the committee that the Draft Arts Strategy 2025-2031
sets out the targets for the Arts sector for the coming six years.
Vincent O'Shea Consultant retained to develop the Strategy provided an overview of how the Strategy
is being developed and the processes involved to do this. Vincent began his presentation by
acknowledging the commitment to the Arts sector in Monaghan and that this came through strongly
in the consultation process.
One of the main challenges is finding studios for artist rehearsals.
Cllr. Conlon asked are we considering inflation in the funding commitments for the Plan. Somhairle
replied this is being considered as this has significant impact on artists.
Cllr. Treanor said that the Arts sector is very valuable to our society and great to see such great work
ongoing in our county. He also said that engaging with schools is very important. Somhairle replied
that the Creative Schools Programme is developed in Monaghan with Arts Council. If a school is
successful in funding that additional supports are provided to the school. CMETB are very supportive
also.
Carol Smyth asked that Vincent expand on Item 12 of the Strategy "Monaghan County Council will
seek to support professional arts initiatives impacting on our Tourism and Heritage". Vincent
replied outlining the positive impact that the Arts sector has on tourism in the county, highlighting
many examples from across the county. He also outlined the impact on our hospitality sector.
Cllr. Campbell said that a successful Arts sector in a county has very positive impacts on tourism and
highlighted the Patrick Kavanagh sector as one of these.
Seån Ö Murchadha drew attention to the Arts funding stream in relation to the Irish Language, The
Irish-Language Theatre Award.
To conclude, Cllr. Conlon thanked Vincent for his informative presentation. The next step is to bring
the Strategy to the CPG.
On the proposal of Aidan Campbell and seconded by Cllr Raymond Aughey, the County Monaghan
Arts Strategy 2025-2031 was agreed for presentation to CPG.
6. Presentation of Monaghan County Museum Policies
Liam Bradley presented to the committee Monaghan County Museum policies for their review. He
also gave an informative overview of the new home for Monaghan County Museum and encouraged
3
members to attend. Liam also offered to talk to community groups about the exhibitions and
initiatives of the Museum.
Monaghan County Museum has been selected to host the National Museum Conference in 2026
which is a great honour and will be very beneficial to the County.
Cllr. Conlon thanked Liam and all his staff and congratulated them on producing such a large body of
work.
Cllr. Campell congratulated Liam on his role with Project Children.
Carol Smyth asked Liam to outline role between Museum and community sector. Liam replied that
the PPN will play an important role in development of the Strategic Plan and Stakeholder Plan. He
outlined the many initiatives the Museum has delivered on in recent years with support of PPN in
promoting these. The roles Museums play now in interacting with people has transformed and this
will be even more so now in the home of Monaghan Peace Campus.
The Monaghan County Museum Policies was approved which was proposed by Cllr. Aidan Campbell
and
Seconded by Cllr. Sean Conlon.
7. County Monaghan Heritage Plan 2026-2030
Kara Ward Heritage Officer introduced herself to the committee and informed the meeting that it is
her intention to prepare a Draft Heritage Plan 2026-2030 which will be brought before SPC members
later in the year.
The Chairman and members thanked Kara for her update.
8. Work Programme
Leona Keenan circulated a Draft SPC Work Programme to members. This will be updated regularly
throughout the term of the SPC, and the members will be updated on any amendments.
9. Schedule meetings 2025
Cllr. Conlon said SPCs typically meet 4 times a year. He encouraged members to communicate with
each other in advance of meetings and to ask for support if required.
Noel Treanor asked the Chair to consider people who work when scheduling meetings. His point was
noted.
10. Date of the next meeting
Wednesday 28th May @ 3.00pm
This concluded the business of the meeting.
4
Signed:
CHAIRPERSON
Date.
5
