1 
 
Minutes of Strategic Policy Committee (Economic Development & Enterprise Support) meeting 
 
held 26th February 2025 @ 4pm in Council Chamber at MTek 1,   
 
In attendance: 
Cllr. Peter Conlon (A/Chair) 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Colm Carthy 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Niamh McCooey 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr. Pat Treanor 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
 
Mr. Peadar Black 
 
 
PPN- Community and Vol or Social Inclusion Electoral College 
Mr. Pete McMahon  
 
 
Business/Commercial Reps 
Ms. Eileen Collery 
 
 
Business/Commercial Reps 
Mr. Tom Treanor 
 
 
Agri/Farming 
Mr. Ciaran McEntee 
 
 
PPN - Environment Electoral College 
 
 
Mr. Cathal Flynn 
 
 
DoS, Planning, Econ Dev, Fire, Building, Capital, Corporate 
Ms. Angela Gallagher 
 
 
Administrative Officer, Planning Section 
Ms. Denise O’Neill 
 
 
Assistant Staff Officer, Planning Section 
Ms. Pamela Kerr 
 
 
Head of Local Enterprise Office 
Ms. Michelle Boyle 
 
 
Senior Staff Officer, Finance Section 
Ms. Siobhan McKenna  
 
Revenue Collector, Finance Section 
 
Apologies 
Cllr. Sean Gilliland (Chair) 
 
Monaghan County Council  
Cllr. P.J. O’Hanlon  
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Mr. Adrian Hughes  
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
 
 
In the absence of Cllr. Sean Gilliland, Cllr. Peter Conlon was A/Chairperson for this meeting. 
 
1. Welcome  
 
Cllr. Peter Conlon welcomed everyone to the meeting and introductions were made.  
 
 
2. Overview of SPC Committees and scope of Economic Development & Enterprise Support SPC  
 
Mr. Cathal Flynn gave a brief overview of the role of Strategic Policy Committees; outlining the 
significance and work of the Committee within Local Government. 
  
 
3. Rates Vacancy Abatement Scheme & Waiver Scheme 
A brief introduction was provided by Ms Michelle Boyle on the background to the proposed schemes 
and advised that public consultation will take place regarding any new proposals/schemes. Ms Boyle 
advised that a draft Policy Document will be brought before this group at the end of April.  
 
A presentation on the two schemes was carried out by Ms. Siobhan McKenna.  
 

2 
 
Ms. Eileen Collery asked if the ownership of the vacant properties were local, pointing out that 
advertising the schemes in the Local Paper might not be sufficient.  
 
Ms. Michelle Boyle stated that the majority of the owners are local and that they will be contacting 
them regarding the proposed schemes.  
 
Cllr. Pat Treanor asked for clarification on the Waiver and Abatement Schemes? 
 
Ms. Michelle Boyle stated that Owners of Vacant properties currently pay only 20% of the rates and 
receive an abatement of 80%.  The Waiver is given to new Rates Customers who are just going into 
business to help them starting out.  
 
Cllr. Colm Carthy stated the Abatement Scheme was introduced in Monaghan not to raise revenue but 
to encourage owners of vacant properties to do something with their property, either rent it out or 
sell it on.  
 
Cllr. Niamh McCooey asked how long can they access the waiver? 
 
Ms Michelle Boyle stated 1 financial year.  
 
Mr. Peadar Black referred to the number of poorly maintained buildings in the towns & county and 
asked is the onus on owners to keep them in good condition? 
 
Mr. Cathal Flynn referred to the Derelict Sites Act and stated that some of the properties which have 
been issued with a Derelict Sites Notice, may end up being acquired by CPO by the Local Authority.  
 
Mr Peter McMahon advised the group that it is costing 7% more to run a business than it did 3 years 
ago and that the last 5 shops to open in Castleblayney has been mobile phone shops.  
 
Mr Cathal Flynn asked Michelle to circulate the draft schemes to the SPC Members 1 week before the 
next SPC meeting to enable the members to read over the document and make any 
suggestions/recommendation at the next SPC meeting.  
 
Cllr. Pat Treanor asked that the public consultation go through the PPN, social media and the 
Community Groups to get the information out.  
 
A copy of the presentation will be circulated to all members.  
 
 
4. Overview of the Local Enterprise Office  
 
Ms. Pamela Kerr provided the members with an overview of the Local Enterprise Office and a number 
of the Grant Schemes which are currently available for people considering going into business.  
 
Ms. Pamela Kerr advised the group that Local Enterprise Week is on From Monday 3rd March 2025-
Friday 7th March 2025 and that they will be in the Peace Campus on Wednesday along with SEAI.  
 
Cllr. Peter Conlon stated that the workshops are a good way of letting the public know what supports 
and grants are available.  
 

3 
 
Ms Pamela Kerr stated that they plan to run a workshop in each of the Towns over the year and are 
considering also hosting lunch & learns.  
 
Ms. Eileen Collery asked if there is still a high volume of requests for grants? 
 
Mr Cathal Flynn advised that there continues to be significant interest in the Local Enterprise Office 
supports. The Local Enterprise Office have 4 evaluation committee meetings per year for the Measure 
1 Grant Supports (Business Expansion and Feasibility Grant) and hundreds of requests for the smaller 
grants.  
 
Ms Pamela Kerr stated that there is a lot of work involved for the business-person starting out, 
however the Local Enterprise Office is with them every step of the way and get really involved with 
their clients.   
 
Cllr. Colm Carthy emphasised the importance of Digital Marketing and how it can supplement income 
and can help businesses which are currently struggling.  
 
A copy of the presentation will be circulated to all members.  
 
 
5. Suggested Dates of SPC Meeting for 2025  
Cllr. Peter Conlon advised the group that the following dates have been suggested for 2025,  
 
• 
Wednesday 30th April 2025 at 4pm 
• 
Wednesday 24th September 2025 at 4pm 
• 
Wednesday 26th November 2025 at 4pm 
 
Ms. Angela Gallagher advised the Elected Members that she would insert these dates into Decision 
Time.  
 
 
6. AOB 
Mr Cathal Flynn advised that the Rates Abatement/Waiver Draft Policy will be on the next Agenda 
and asked if there was any other topic that the group would like? 
 
Mr Cathal Flynn suggested that they receive an update from the Town Regeneration Team 
regarding dereliction and the Croi Conaithe Grant Scheme and provide the group of some 
examples of where the Policy has worked.  
 
Cllr Peter Conlon stated that the Government are considering introducing a scheme to deal with 
apartments/properties above shops 
 
Cllr. Pat Treanor referred to a joint committee which used to meet between ETB & Monaghan 
County Council to look at any skills gaps in the County, perhaps this is something that can be 
looked at again as there is a need for trades people in the County.  
 
Mr Cathal Flynn suggested a presentation at a future SPC Meeting, be arranged with CMETB to 
demonstrate the range of training, development and support services available through CMETB.  
