MINUTES OF SPC FOR TOURISM, RURAL & COMMUNITY DEV., AN GHAELIGE & CULTURAL
SERVICES MEETING HELD AT 3.OOpm on Tuesday 28th May 2025, Peace Campus.
Present
Cllr. Sean Conlon
Cllr. Pat Treanor
Cllr. Niamh McCooey
Cllr. Aidan Campbell
Cllr Raymond Aughey
Cllr. Paul Gibbons
Packie McCarville
Fiona McGuinness
Emer Brennan
Carol Smyth
Noel Treanor
Seån Ö Murchadha
In Attendance
Patricia Monahan
Deirdriu McQuaid
Olga McConnon
Leona Keenan
Dympna Condra
Liam Bradley
Lisa Connolly
Apologies
Gareth McMahon
SPC Chairperson, Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Elected Member Monaghan County Council
Business / Commercial (Tourism/Hospitality Sector) (Online)
Business / Commercial (Tourism/Hospitality Sector)
— Environment Electoral College
— Social Inclusion Electoral College
PPN
— Community & Vol Electoral College
PPN
PPN — Community & Vol Electoral College
Director of Services Monaghan County Council
County Librarian Monaghan County Council
Director of Services Monaghan County Council
Administrative Officer Monaghan County Council
Tourism and Marketing Executive Monaghan County Council
Museum Curator Monaghan County Council
Assistant Staff Officer Community Monaghan County Council
A/Director of Service Monaghan County Council
Somhairle MacConghail Arts Officer Monaghan County Council
I.Welcome
Cllr. Sean Conlon, Chairman welcomed everyone to the meeting and noted apologies.
2. Minutes of Meeting 24.02.2025
Seén Ö Murchadha requested that in the presentation of the Arts Strategy, references to the
new Arts funding stream in relation to the Irish Language performances be added to the
minutes. On the proposal of Cllr. Niamh McCooey and seconded by Noel Treanor, the
minutes of the SPC meeting held on 24th February 2025, were unanimously agreed.
3. Business referred from the Council (Disability Steering Committee)
Cllr. Sean Conlon read out correspondence from the Disability Federation of Ireland for
consideration, the Disability Federation of Ireland documents from their report, 'Bridging the
Gap: Local Authorities and Disability Inclusion motion in relation the Disability Steering
Committee
Cllr. Conlon informed the meeting that the Advocacy Group was made up of people who had
a disability themselves. There is interaction especially in the housing section engaging with
people with disabilities it is very important and should be given consideration.
Cllr. Conlon requested that we defer to the next SPC and that Leona Keenan would circulate
the report to the members before the next SPC Meeting.
This action was proposed by Cllr. Sean Conlon and seconded by Cllr. Aidan Campbell
4. Presentation of Museum Draft Strategic Plan 2025-2030
Liam Bradley delivered a presentation on the Draft Strategic Management Plan for Monaghan
County Museum.
Liam informed the meeting that the purpose of presenting the Draft Plan to SPC was to ensure
that the committee can review same in advance of the presentation to full Council.
A discussion followed and Liam responded to queries from the members.
The Draft Strategic plan was proposed by Cllr. Raymond Aughey and seconded by Cllr. Paul
Gibbons.
5. Draft Festivals & Events Policy
Deirdriü McQuaid, County Librarian & Head of Cultural Services presented the draft Festival
and Events Funding Policy. Deirdriü advised the committee that they have being working on
this policy for the last 12 month and that it came about due to a number of grant/funding
schemes coming in which each sections administrators individually and the policy is to
ensure a strategic approach is adopted. This is a 2-year plan, a 2 year working policy and MCC
will make adaptions as and when it is needed.
The purpose of the policy is to access current needs and caps, to review what we are funding
how it is funding and is it still relevant.
A discussion followed to which a number of members contributed and Deirdriü responded.
6. Schedule meetings 2025-
Thursday 18th September 2.30pm
Wednesday 3rd December 2.30pm
7. AOB
Cllr. Aidan Campbell drew the committee's attention to the great news that Michael Gallen
has won the Fedora Prize, the world's largest award for new opera. Cllr. Campbell
congratulated the success of Micheal Gallan and acknowledged that Monaghan County
Council granted Michael seed funding to stage his first show
Cllr. Campbell concluded with "Mighty oaks from little acorns grow!"
Date of next meeting - Thursday 18th September @2.030pm
This concluded the business of the meeting
Signed
Chairperson
Date: