4SPC For Transport 
Minutes of Meeting held on Wednesday 19th February 2025 10am. MCC Chamber Mtek I & 
Microsoft Teams. 
 
Present: 
Cllr Raymond Aughey (Chair)  
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr Noel Keelan 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr Sean Conlon 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr Pauric Clerkin 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Cllr Alan Johnston 
 
 
Monaghan County Council 
Emily Treanor  
 
 
PPN – Business/Commercial 
Gordan Read  
 
 
PPN – Business/Commercial 
Conan Connolly 
 
 
PPN - Environmental 
Samantha Farrell (Online) 
 
PPN – Trade Union 
Fergal McMahon (Online) 
 
PPN – Social Inclusion 
 
In attendance from Monaghan County Council: 
Gareth McMahon 
 
 
A/Director of Services – Transportation and Community  
Kevin West 
 
 
 
A/Senior Engineer – Roads 
Bernadette McArdle 
 
 
SEE Active Travel 
Brian Braniff 
 
 
 
SEE National Roads 
Roisín Moore  
 
 
SEE National Roads (N2 Major Projects) 
Seamie Mc Mahon 
 
 
Administrative Officer – Roads 
Kevin Murray  
 
 
Clerical Officer - Roads 
 
Apologies Cllr Bronagh McAree MCC 
Absent John Connolly PPN-Community 
 
 
1. Welcome & Introduction 
Chairman Cllr. Raymond Aughey welcomed the members to the meeting and congratulated them 
on their nominations to the Transport Strategic Policy Committee (SPC). 
 
2. Priorities and Strategic Objectives of Strategic Policy Committee 
Gareth McMahon, A/Director of Services gave a presentation to the meeting giving a brief outline 
of the proposed topics and meetings of the SPC for the year. Schedule of meetings was agreed 
for remainder of the year.   
Schedule of Meetings as follows: February, May, September, November. (Request for two 
additional meetings in June & October) 
 
3. Road Maintenance Strategy 

Kevin West, Senior Engineer & Roisín Moore, SEE delivered a presentation on the proposed Road 
Maintenance Strategy for Regional & Local Roads for 2025-2030. Presentation outlined the 
process currently in place for road maintenance, current state of the roads and identifying new 
ways of working and improving the process. A proposed Pilot Strategy was presented for 2025-
2030 to improve better efficiency and outcomes, carbon reductions and with the potential to 
secure additional resources. 
The members welcomed this presentation and thanked the executive for their in depth 
presentation. 
Questions following Presentation: 
Conan Connolly noted that the plan was very car centric, enquired about modal shift and 
possibility of introducing weight restrictions also local roads to improve durability. Also enquired 
about the possibility of streamlining resources/staff out of the MDs and into a central base. 
Kevin West gave an overview of the Reclaimed asphalt used on a Greenway project in Cork and 
the carbon beneﬁts. And that the staff allocations for the MD’s were up for review.  
Gareth further added that the plan was not car centric but was road centric, he talked about the 
quiet road concept from Scotstown to Ballinode and how this gives priority to cycle/walking 
traffic. Also talked about integration strategy for sustainable transport to get people out of cars 
into other modes of transport. 
____ 
Cllr Alan Johnston queried slides showing a projection that the state of roads will be in by 2030. 
Roisín Moore responded that this is a projection of what state the roads will be in if nothing 
changes from the current way maintenance is being carried out. This will change depending on 
agreed interventions such as funding and allocation.  
____ 
Cllr Noel Keelan raised the point that funding is not keeping up with inﬂation and current needs. 
Said that spending priorities need to be assessed and make the most of initiatives like RAP and 
climate initiatives.More needs to be done on Active Travel and Local Link services also. 
Cllr Alan Johnston asked if the plan was realistic/deliverable, given the current shortfall could 
additional funding be secured. 
Kevin West responded that something must change. That the used of IAPDM could be maximised 
to provide better value for money. Investment from own resources could also be considered to 
increase. Pilot Pavement Maintenance Plan is to be proposed to DOT, which could potentially 
increase funding as could provide beneﬁts at a national level. 
____ 
Cllr Sean Conlon asked was there any provision made for potholes & verge slippage in the current 
year similar to last year. He also asked about green procurement and if there was a matrix to score 
local suppliers higher than those traveling from a signiﬁcant distance. He raised concerns over 
the talk of increasing the use of own resources as part of funding. 

Kevin advised that there was not a speciﬁc budget for potholes as there was in the prior year. And 
that there was a scoring matrix in place for tenders. Noted that for certain schemes eg the CIS the 
contribution could be increased by a small % to increase the number of projects that could be 
completed. 
____ 
Gordon Read suggested that the app being used to track emissions as part of the road 
maintenance should be made available to business also. He queried where NOAC get their 
information from and raised concerns over the surface of the roads that were being reduced in 
speed limits that they would not received the same level of treatment due to the speed limit 
change. 
Kevin informed Gordon of the process of how the data is recorded and submitted to NOAC. 
Gordon was assured that the reduction in speed limits would not result in the speciﬁc treatment 
that 80Km/h roads receive being removed as a result of the reduction. 
____ 
Emily Treanor asked if the contribution from community business was made to improve roads, 
could they receive a reduced rates amount and how this would be achievable for agricultural 
business. She proposed more stops on the local link services that would service their business. 
Cllr Clerkin said that requests can be made directly to the local link. 
Feargal McMahon added his support to the proposed increase to the local link services 
 
 
4. Clones Mobility Plan 
Bernadette McArdle, SEE Active Travel delivered a presentation on the Clones Town Urban 
Mobility Plan. This provided an overview of the project, objectives and status of the plan, which is 
open for public consultation. 
The members welcomed this initiative and thanked Bernadette for her presentation. 
Conan Connolly asked was their support for the enforcement of traffic laws as part of the plan. 
Gareth McMahon informed that there is a traffic warden in place in the Clones MD and that 
Monaghan County Council are hoping to recruit more traffic wardens. 
Gordon Read asked if a traffic ﬂow/people ﬂow study had been carried out and where this 
information was gathered from, and if the potential for a Park&Ride system could be implemented 
from Clones to Monaghan as part of the Plan.  
Bernadette McArdle advised that the information in the Mobility Plan was from a number of 
sources such as the Census, Schools & Local business. Also, that the Park&Ride would be 
addressed under the County Transport Plan. 
 
 

5. AOB 
Fergal McMahon raised a question around the build up of traffic at the traffic lights in Monaghan 
Town on the Coothill and Clones Roads. He also raised concerns of how the Aldi site would 
impact the level of traffic in the town centre. 
Kevin West informed that a Traffic impact assessment had to be submitted by Aldi as part of their 
application. This assessment doesn’t show that there will be a major impact on the traffic. 
Cllr Raymond Aughey said that this was submitted 5 years ago and that traffic has got worse in 
this timeframe. 
Kevin West informed that this Traffic assessment was re-done last year, showing minimal 
impact. 
Cllr Alan Johnston raised a point regarding the disconnect between reports and the reality of the 
situation, stating that the new carpark, new pedestrian crossings and convent have all been a 
contributing factor in the traffic situation getting worse and that Aldi would also contribute to this.   
Gareth McMahon noted that Adli submitted that they have a steady flow of customers with no 
peak times. Irt was highlighted the benefits of this development economically would balance out 
the issues of congestion. There are plans in place to deal with the traffic issue from Margaret 
Skinnader Roundabout to Old Cross Square as part of the Monaghan Mobility Strategy. 
____ 
Cllr Pauric Clerkin raised concerns around Bog roads, Particularly the road from Smithboro to 
Scotstown. The traffic has increased on this road and others as HGVs are trying to avoid the town 
centre, leading to deterioration in these roads. He also highlighted safety concerns around 
speeding in Villages, and used the example of Corcaghan  and how this could be applied to other 
villages.  
These topics are included in the outline and are to be discussed at later meetings. 
___ 
 
Cllr Raymond Aughey highlighted the problems with National Roads coming into the town centre. 
He talked about the Tullybryan CPO and how this was a lengthy process and that a plan for a 
bypass of Monaghan needs to be developed. 
____ 
 
Gordon Read asked if a traffic flow could be completed now and done again when Aldi opens so 
a comparison could be made. 
Gareth replied that the traffic survey completed is an established traffic modelling process and 
that the current study has a 30 year projection. Brian Braniff noted that this does not take into 
account any modal shift, and therefore projects a worst case scenario. 
 
Gordon also asked about possibility of cable being put underground. 
Gareth responded that there are ongoing discussion and workshops but this was not at a local 
level. There was the opportunity to give feedback at a national level and that feedback has been 
submitted. 
 
____ 
 

Cllr Noel Keelan asked who was responsible for keeping power/internet cable lines clear 
following the recent storm. He also asked about road openings and how these were managed. 
Gareth informed Noel that ESB/Eir were responsible for their own Network. Regarding Road 
openings there is a specific member of staff that has been employed to deal with the Road 
Openings, and that this information was feed into NOAC. 
____ 
Cllr Raymond Aughey highlighted the importance that a situation like the Glen Road Culvert does 
not occur again. 
Gareth informed that the issues regarding this were down the errors by the contractor at key 
moments of the project. Delays were not as a result of an oversight by Monaghan County Council. 
Contractors are due to be off site by 7th March. It was noted that the traffic lights in town would 
not revert to normal until Aldi had finished their works. 
____ 
 
Next meeting was agreed to be held in May 2025. 
 
 
