1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
23 Bealtaine, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Céadaoin 
28 Bealtaine, 2025 ag 10.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe 
leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
 
County House 
 
 
Lifford. 
 
 
 23rd May, 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Wednesday 28th May, 
2025 at 10.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
 

2 
 
AGENDA  
 
1. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000 (as amended)  
Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of lands at Carraickmacafferty Lower, 
Derrybeg, Co Donegal to Edward McAteer.  
 
2. Housing Capital Update. 
 
3. Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme. 
 
4. Reception of Delegation from the Construction Industry Federation at 12 
noon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 28th MAY 2025 
C/230/25 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, F Bradley, C Brogan, P Canning, T S 
Devine, A Doherty, M Harley, D M Kelly, M Mc Bride, M Mc Clafferty, D 
Mc Gee, P Mc Gowan, G Mc Monagle, Naughton and J S O’ Fearraigh  
Online: Cllrs Beard, Blaney, Boyle, J Brogan, Carr, Crossan, G 
Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, N Jordan, J Kavanagh, M C Mac Giolla 
Easbuig, M Mc Dermott, P Mc Garvey, D Meehan , Nic Mheanman and 
Scanlon. 
 
C/231/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services, 
Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate and Cultural Services, 
Meetings Administrator, John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing 
Capital, Donal Walker, A/Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, Eamonn 
Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, Donna Mc Groarty, 
Area Manager, Housing Design, Thomas Melly, Senior Staff Officer, 
Housing  & Corporate, Eamonn Gillen, Executive Engineer, Housing 
Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Cliona Ni Ghallachoir, 
Rannóg na Gaeilge, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William 
Colvin, Assistant Communications Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff 
Officer, Corporate Services. 
 
C/232/25 
APOLOGIES  
Apologies were received from the Chief Executive who was unable to 
attend the meeting.  
 
C/233/25 
IRISH CONSTRUCTION EXCELLENCE AWARDS  
The Cathaoirleach informed members that Donegal County Council 
and Lowry Construction had received the “Residential Award” at the 
Irish Construction Excellence Awards held recently in Dublin for the 
Trusk Road, Friendly Housing Project. She highlighted the fact that this 
visionary project had set out to create high-quality exemplary homes 
for older people designed to adapt as needs change, thus enabling 
residents to “age in place” in comfort and safety within their own 
communities. She congratulated all involved and said that the award 
was well deserved. This sentiment was echoed by the Director of 
Housing, Corporate  & Cultural Services, Mr Patsy Lafferty and the  
Members of the Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal District. 
 
Cllr Canning concurred and said that it was imperative going forward 
that consideration was given to the installation of generators and water 
storage tanks in social housing projects given recent issues with the Air 
to Water Heating system during power cuts.  
 
C/234/25 
DISPOSAL OF LAND AT CARRAICKMACAFFERTY LOWER, 
DERRYBEG, CO DONEGAL TO EDWARD MCATEER.  
 
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  

4 
 
On the proposal of Cllr O’ Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr Mc Gee, it was 
resolved to dispose of lands at Carrickmacafferty Lower, Derrybeg to 
Edward McAteer, in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Sec-
tion 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).    
 
C/235/25 
PRESENTATION - HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE AND ENERGY 
RETROFIT PROGRAMME  
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, introduced the 
presentation and gave an overview of the items to be covered. 
 
Mr Donal Walker, Senior Executive Engineer, confirmed that a total of 
130 units were being progressed under the Turnkey process and listed 
the status and number of housing units associated with each project. It 
was noted that 18 of the units had been completed with 118 at various 
stages of construction throughout the county.  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, updated members in relation to 
the various in-house, design and build projects and the status of same 
together with an outline of the Letterkenny Flagship projects. 
 
Ms Donna Mc Groarty, Area Manager, Housing Design, provided a 
detailed analysis of the Turnkey Acquisition Model. She outlined the 
processes involved and applicable to each developer and explained 
the rationale involved in the completion of the solution template form 
and the provision of the overall solution costs. Members were provided 
with a breakdown of the scored assessment criteria applicable for 
turnkeys and it was noted that a minimum of 70% of the overall mark 
available were required to progress to the next stage in the process.  
 
Concluding the Housing Capital update, Mr Donal Walker, A/Senior 
Executive Engineer updated members on the benefits of the 
competitive dialogue procurement process. He said that the cost 
criteria for turnkeys utilised the Department of Housings Building Units 
Costs (BUC’S) as a guide. These, he added, were reviewed annually in 
accordance with market trends and informed by tender data from local 
authority direct delivery projects. The 2023 Turnkey process, he 
advised, had generated 23 valid submissions from 18 developers with 
the potential to deliver 800 homes. Developer costs, he said, were 
reviewed by an independent Charted Quantity Surveyor and the report 
submitted to the Department for consideration. It was noted that the 
submission deadline for Pre-Qualification Questionnaires under the 
current procurement model was the 30th September 2026. 
 
In relation to the Part V process, it was confirmed that when making 
Part V Agreements for private housing developments, the local 
authority had to consider value for money and in all cases the cost of 
the dwelling should have regard to the basic unit cost or that of a 
similar new build in the local authority area.  

5 
 
Cllr A Doherty referred to the fact that recent Ministerial 
correspondence had directed local authorities to scale up housing 
delivery in accordance with the revised national framework. This, he 
noted, had asked all local authorities to update their County and Local 
Development Plans to realign with the framework. He thus asked for an 
in depth response to the Minister’s request and to outline and provide a 
timescale as to when our own County Development Plan was going to 
be reviewed to reflect housing requirements. 
 
He noted that Uisce Éireann had in their recent presentation to 
Government indicated that they needed an additional €2 billion to 
deliver their programme nationally and queried what impact this would 
have on development locally.  
 
The Northwest, he advised had considerable catch up to play and 
suggested that a presentation be given at the next Special Plenary 
Meeting as to how these issues would be dealt with.   
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing provided detail in 
relation to the number of properties retrofitted in the period 2021 to 
2025 with 52 houses retrofitted in 2021 at a cost of €935k and a 
projected number of 166 units to be completed in 2025 with a projected 
funding allocation of €5.64m. Details in relation to the current status of 
the 2025 programme on a Municipal District basis was provided with 
196 properties earmarked for delivery in 2025. 
 
Mr Eamonn Gillen, Executive Engineer, Lifford/Stranorlar MD gave an 
overview of the Donegal County Council approach to property 
selection. He said that there was a focus on poor energy performing 
estates and a concentration in high density areas. There was an 
acknowledgement of the fact that the overall costs would increase into 
the future when the geographical spread of properties would be 
greater. He alluded to the fact that each MD utilised the same contract 
documents and that the 5 MD housing engineers met once a month to 
discuss programmes. Members were informed that there were 
challenges associated with the programme and that going forward the 
existing heating and plumbing network would possibly need to be 
retrofitted. He noted that there was an issue with mould growth in 
certain properties and that demand control ventilation and mechanical 
extraction ventilation had been introduced to combat same. A number 
of case studies were presented outlining the impact of the retrofit 
works. Concluding, he said, that the programme had been of great 
benefit in terms of reducing energy/fuel costs, leading to improved 
living conditions and generating a positive environmental impact.  
 
Overall, it was noted that the value of the properties concerned 
increased and that there was a reduction in terms of the annual 
maintenance budget. All in all, he contended, there were considerable 
economic benefits and Donegal County Council compliance with 

6 
 
energy performance standards was increased. These all, he said, led 
to improved tenant satisfaction.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate  & Cultural Services 
acknowledged the contributions and noted that the case studies 
alluded to, reflected the real life status of the programme. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
noted the earlier comments from Cllr Doherty and said that he would 
be happy to come back in greater detail on the comments raised at the 
Special Meeting in June. He noted that when the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government & Heritage had visited the county on the 12th May, 
he had been given an update on the status of the of the County 
Development Plan and the various Town Plans. He had also been 
informed, he added, of the fact that other strategic towns in the county 
were being looked at and that members would be consulted later in the 
year with regard to draft plans and the public consultation process.  
 
He said that there was significant headroom in these to facilitate further 
housing delivery and that the Minister’s letter would be looked again in 
detail, and an additional response would be forwarded to the Minister 
and shared with members. 
 
At this juncture, he confirmed that he was leaving the meeting to attend 
another appointment.  
 
The Cathaoirleach opened the meeting to the floor and the following 
issues were raised: 
 
• What is the situation regarding the houses in Falcarragh? 
• Independent Living accommodation urgently needed in all areas  
• Has there been any update in relation to the Social Housing 
Remediation Scheme? 
• Considerable difference in the cost and pricing of retrofit 
materials. Value for money aspect needs to be looked at.  
• Noted that the real barometer of housing delivery would be the 
number on the housing waiting list in the next 5 to ten years.  
• Every opportunity outlined by the Department for housing 
delivery must be acted on including further collaboration with the 
Approved Housing Bodies and the construction industry to 
deliver the maximum amount of housing given the projected 
population increase.   
• Price of housing generally a major issue and this has created a 
massive issue for local authorities generally with an increased 
demand for social housing. 
• Mould an issue in properties that have been retrofitted.  
• Query as to the actual number of houses that have been built in 
each MD over the last 10 years. Need for all stakeholders to be 
on one wavelength in terms of housing delivery as current 
delivery times are far too slow.  

7 
 
• Delivery of housing in Letterkenny not on par with the rest of the 
county. Southern Letterkenny left for development, but the 
relevant services are not in place.  
• Issues with the Office of the Planning Regulator where viable 
developments are being overturned because they are too far 
from the town centre and despite all the services being in pace.  
• Rental costs creating homelessness and creating additional 
pressure for social housing.  
• Not enough land for housing in the Ballyshannon area.  
• Lack of housing provision in the Pettigo, Laghey and 
Mountcharles areas despite the relevant infrastructure being in 
place. 
• Suggested that the services of a quantity surveyor be sought to 
progress turnkey development and that they are present on all 
jobs.  
• Issues raised in relation to abnormal costs and the fact that just 
over 100 houses had been delivered in the Donegal MD over 
the last ten years.  
• Poor condition of the Ard na Guala Duibhe development in 
Moville highlighted and a suggestion made that the apartments 
on site be taken away and 4/5 bedroom houses built in their 
place. Noted this would allow for defective concrete block 
affected households to be rehoused in the short term and allow 
for the remediation of affected properties. Concern expressed 
that many defective concrete affected estates were now in a 
serious state of deterioration. 
• Delay in Social Housing Remediation Scheme a cause for 
concern.  
• Emergency measures should be put in place by the Government 
to deal with the current housing emergency which is contributing 
to increased homelessness. 
• What funding will be allocated to the Inishowen MD for retrofit 
works in 2025? 
• Concern that homeowners had received no instruction in relation 
to the proper ventilation measures associated with the Air to 
Water Systems.  
• Solar panels should be the norm in all housing stock and would 
help with overall electricity costs which have increased 
significantly. 
• Review needed as to how the Air to Water System is working. 
Noted that the filters associated with the system were in need of 
regular replacement and radiators systematically cleared. 
Concern expressed that in some houses the radiators were too 
old to allow for the efficient working of the heating system. 
• Tenants need to get proper training in the management of the 
Air to Water System.  
• Query as to who is responsible for the replacement of the 
pumps in the Air to Water units.  

8 
 
• Has there has been any negative feedback in relation to the new 
heating system based on overall house size? 
• Additional staff needed to manage the Council’s housing stock. 
• Need to re-examine projects that have fallen off the radar. 
• Traffic light system needed to enhance housing development 
and flag where the relevant services are in place. Must be 
backed up with ongoing engagement with the Department and 
the Office of the Planning Regulator.  
• Shortage of contractors and no available workforce a major 
source of concern.  
• 1318 housing units needed in the Letterkenny/Milford Municipal 
District where approximately 700 HAP tenancies are in a 
perilous situation because of ongoing rent increases.  
• Proper water and roads infrastructure needs to be in place at 
Ballymacool to accommodate the additional 170 planned 
housing units.  
• Uisce Éireann need to be brought around the table as the lack of 
water and sewerage infrastructure is the biggest hindrance to 
housing delivery at present. Highlighted the fact that members 
are experiencing difficulties in arranging meetings with Uisce  
Éireann. 
• Housing delivery in West Donegal an issue and there needs to 
be pressure put on Uisce Éireann to replace and upgrade the 
water and sewerage infrastructure.  
• Query as to why more use has not been made of the S179 (A) 
provision in housing delivery. 
• Concern that lack of water and sewerage capacity was hindering 
development in Ramelton, Milford and Carrigart.  
• 17 houses sitting completed in Milford. Every effort must be 
made to progress the purchase of same either through the 
developer or with an Approved Housing Body and in 
consultation with the Department.  
• What is happening with the houses in Falcarragh and Annagry? 
• Query regarding the overall length of time taken to complete a 
turnkey acquisition. 
• Delay in getting planning permission holding up development. 
• Suggested that the 1.5% cap on abnormal costs was not 
realistic and needed to be addressed. 
 
Follow-Up 
• Request that correspondence issue to the Minister in relation to 
the remediation of defective concrete block affected houses at 
Ard na Guala Dubha as residents need to be out of these 
houses before the Autumn. 
• Update requested on the number of houses being provided 
throughout the county and how this compares with provision 
nationally.  

9 
 
• Need to engage with the Minister in terms of getting a special 
dispensation for Donegal in light of the defective concrete block 
crisis. 
• Call for Donegal County Council to support the use of 
dehumidifiers in all defective concrete houses. 
• Housing delivery must be ramped up and rezoning issues sorted 
to accommodate same.  
• Dedicated team must be put in place comprising Donegal 
County Council, Uisce Éireann, Planning staff, Quantity 
Surveyors and developers to look at all aspects of delivery and 
where it can be expedited. Housing team must liaise closely with 
the construction industry  
• Clarification needed in relation to abnormal costs.  
• Need to contact Government and request that where lands are 
built in within three years there is a refund of any residential 
zoned land tax paid. 
• Requested that a report on “Housing First” be brought to a  
meeting and as to how the various problems encountered are 
addressed. 
• Asked that where a couple of sites were side by side especially 
on land near town centres that Donegal County Council looks at 
the overall masterplan and liaises with the developer in order to 
move projects forward. Specific reference made to land on the 
Letterkenny Road outside Stranorlar.  
• It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr 
Mc Gowan that the Government be contacted, and request 
made that that where designated lands are built on in within a 
three year period that there is a refund of any residential zoned 
land tax paid so as to encourage development. 
• Cited the need to sit down with developer in relation to the 15 
houses in Letterkenny as a matter of urgency as this has an 
impact for the 47 units in Ballyshannon. 
 
C/236/25 
PRESENTATION BY THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY 
FEDERATION 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed the following members of the 
Construction Industry Federation to the meeting and outlined the 
general protocol for visiting delegations: 
 
➢ Mr Justin Molloy, Director Western Midland & Northern Region 
C.I.F 
➢ Mr Dermot Gildea, MBC Construction, Chair Donegal Branch, 
C.I.F 
➢ Mr John Gildea, MBC Construction  
➢ Mr Bernard O’ Donnell, Source Civil 
➢ Mr Dessie Dorrian, Dorrian  Construction 
➢ Mr Daniel Doherty, GDL Ire Ltd 
➢ Mr Michael Kelly, Glebe Construction 

10 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by  Mc Gowan it resolved 
to suspend Standing Orders No 51 and 52 to facilitate a detailed 
discussion on the housing issue.  
 
Mr Justin Molloy, Director Western, Midland & Northern Region C.I.F  
thanked members for the invitation to address the meeting and noted 
that the CIF frequently met with Donegal County Council to pinpoint 
obstacles to housing and to discuss potential solutions. He outlined the 
key challenges to housing delivery and gave an overview of the current 
housing situation in Donegal. He alluded to the fact that the strong 
construction programme presented by Donegal County Council in 2024 
for the development of 650 new homes offered much needed stability 
and confidence for local contractors and would address 22% of the 
county’s housing need. The average contract value per unit, he noted 
was €286,000 (hard costs) and represented an investment of €186 
million.  
 
In relation to turnkey developments, he noted that there were no 
staged payments in this process and that this impacted on the 
developer’s cash flow thus increasing costs. Completion of such 
projects, he said, could take up to four years with the contractor 
covering the entire cost over that period. He highlighted the fact that 
the turnkey procurement process was based on the principle that 
payments for such units were capped at the Departments Basic Unit 
Costs plus a max of 1.5% to cover abnormal or additional works. Thus, 
he contended, only developments with abnormals or costs below 1.5% 
were viable for delivery thus rendering many potential sites financially 
unviable for development.  
 
CIF, he said, recommended that where the basic unit’s costs were to 
be used for assessing turnkey developments that abnormal costs 
should be assessed based on actual costs as determined by the 
quantity surveyor appointed by the local authority.  
 
It was also acknowledged that Approved Housing Body’s costs varied 
often falling below the basic unit costs and consistently remaining 
under the market rates. He recommended that Part V proposals be 
evaluated in line with the guidance issued by the Department and 
Donegal County Council in 2021 and that a quantity surveyor 
appointed by the Council approve the evaluations. Viable Part V 
agreements needed to be achieved, he added, otherwise the financial 
viability of any remaining private units in a development could be 
undermined. Concluding he recommended the following: 
 
The appointment of a professional quantity surveyor by the Council to 
assess contractor and developer led proposals for all housing delivery 
methods and evaluate in line with the Department guidelines. 
 
Stage Payments needed across all housing delivery methods. 
 

11 
 
Donegal County Council needs to work proactively with all service 
providers to ensure critical infrastructure is extended to areas adjacent 
to zoned lands. He referred to the need for all stakeholders to 
collaborate on the delivery of housing and said that the C.I.F looked 
forward to meeting the challenges and working with the Council to fulfil 
the county’s housing needs.  
 
Mr Dermot Gildea, Chair Donegal Branch C.I.F, following up on the 
points raised by Mr Molloy in relation to basic unit costs and abnormals 
said that builders faced similar costs to local authorities on direct build 
projects in terms of hard and soft costs and had to deal with the same 
site conditions, development challenges etc. Increasing the allowable 
abnormal cost threshold would, he contended, make more sites 
financially viable. He said that developers were experiencing cash flow 
issues compounded with infrastructure deficits that had to be remedied 
onsite and outside site boundaries. All, he said needed to be 
addressed for the mutual benefit of all concerned as often the cost of 
delivery placed an additional burden on the contractor in respect of 
projects which often had a far reaching impact for the wider community 
concerned.  A better and collaborative approach to cost sharing was 
needed, he added. 
 
He informed members that there were many sites across Donegal 
ideally suited for residential development but were located just outside 
the town boundaries. The local authority, he said, should be able to 
access such sites on a case by case basis and as the need arose for 
residential development. Another issue of concern, he stated, was the 
slow turnaround time in accessing Uisce Éireann services and the 
excessive upfront fees involved in procuring same.  
 
Alluding to the Residential Zoned Land Tax and its proposed aim of 
making land available for development, he said, that it was having a 
negative effect on housing delivery in Donegal. Developers would, he 
said, be spending the money on paying the tax rather than clearing and 
developing sites. Small builders would not have the resources, he 
advised, to pay the tax and develop the land and thus were effectively 
discouraged from buying land in the first place. These, he said, were 
the key issues that needed to be addressed to deliver housing in 
Donegal.  
 
Members welcomed the informative presentation, and a lengthy debate 
took place during which members raised the following issues: 
 
• That Donegal County Council needed to work with the C.I.F on 
all aspects of housing delivery and that it was possible to find 
the middle ground to progress this aim.  
• General support for the C.I.F recommendations.  
• Noted that a substantial number of houses were being builtan 
and available but that this needed to translate into acquisition. 

12 
 
• It was acknowledged that every site was different and that the 
basic unit cost plus 1.5% provision would not work going forward 
as all sites were different should not be judged on the same 
criteria.  
• Acknowledged that there were issues for developers getting Part 
Vs accepted and taken over. Issues need to be sorted at an 
early stage and an agreed price determined. 
• Highlighted the fact that C.I.F could be of assistance in 
progressing projects that had fallen off the Housing Programme. 
• Needs to be engagement between Donegal County Council and 
the C.I.F in terms of the overall procurement process and that   
the national procurement process needed to be simplified.  
• Query as to what the C.I.F could do to encourage more 
apprenticeships and to bring young people into the trade and the 
construction industry.  
• Noted that the developer was in instances caught in terms of the 
planning aspect and that there needed to be flexibility here.  
• Members asked what the C.I.F saw as being the major 
drawbacks to housing delivery. 
• How can the C.I.F help Donegal County Council in dealing with 
the defective concrete block crisis in terms of repairing and 
rebuilding homes? 
• Responding to the recommendation that a professional Quantity 
Surveyor be appointed by Donegal County Council the question 
was asked as to how many houses could be delivered and how 
quickly if this was put in place. 
• Query as to whether there was an average requirement for an 
abnormal cost and where did the 1.5% come from? 
• When the Approved Housing Bodies submit an independent 
evaluation to the Department which must include confirmation of 
need and back up from the local authority, who is actually 
responsible for refusing an application? 
 
Follow-Up 
➢ Request that the C.I.F report be digested, and a report brought 
back to the Housing SPC as to what can and cannot be 
accommodated. 
➢ Cllr Mc Gowan proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Bride that the 
key recommendation identified in the C.I.F presentation be 
adopted and that a further meeting take place in 6 months’ time 
to assess same. 
➢ Suggested that Donegal County Council and the C.I.F come 
together and work on a plan to deal with the housing crisis.  
➢ Request that the C.I.F assist in any way possible with access 
issues on the N56 as it is still possible to make a relevant 
submission to the Office of the Planning Regulator.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that it was hoped to focus for the remainder of the meeting on the 

13 
 
issues raised by the CIF and that queries raised earlier in the meeting 
in relation to a range of issues would be followed up by the Housing 
team with the members concerned and through the Municipal Districts.  
 
He thanked Mr Molloy and Mr Gildea for their input and noted that 
there were regular meetings with the C.I.F and a good two way 
communication process. 
 
Everybody, he said, was on the one page and that all stakeholders 
despite coming from different perspectives wanted to deliver social 
housing. Alluding to the range of items covered in the presentation, he 
said that he would be happy to look at the recommendations. 
 
It was important, he said, that there was a recognition of what exactly 
was under the Council’s control and that the broader issues such as 
water and sewerage utilities together with labour shortages were 
matters outside of the Council’s remit. A continued effort, he advised, 
would be made to lobby the Department on the need for the 
introduction of staged payments but that this also necessitated 
lobbying through the political system. An effort had been made, he 
sated, to phase payments but this had not been possible on all sites.   
 
With regard to abnormals, he advised, that the competitive dialogue 
process laid out the criteria for the spending of public monies and 
allowed the Council to make funding submissions to the Department 
based on the public spending code and the value for money aspect. 
There were challenges, he advised, and the competitive dialogue 
process was up for review again in 2026. The new Housing 
Programme would, he said, look further at the abnormals issue. It 
would be possible, he added, to talk to other local authorities and look 
at their processes as there was no one fits all strategy for dealing with 
turnkeys. Ongoing efforts would be made it was confirmed to strike a 
reasonable balance and improve the processes in place.  
 
The presentation would, he confirmed, be looked at in further detail and 
in the context that the issues raised are being looked at presently. It 
was acknowledged that this could be discussed at the SPC as 
suggested.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride proposed, seconded by Cllr Naughton that 
representatives from the Approved Housing Bodies together with the 
Council for Social Housing be invited to meet with members.  
 
Responding to a query from Cllr Naughton in relation to when a review 
of the abnormal costs and the appointment of a quantity surveyor 
would take place, Mr Donal Walker, A/Senior Engineer, said that a 
quantity surveyor looked at every final tender and every assessment 
that goes to the Department in respect of every turnkey project.  
 

14 
 
Mr Justin Molloy, C.I.F said the issue here was the 1.5% for abnormal 
costs as each site was different and thus the designation of a specific 
% was not always workable for the contractor. He suggested that the 
abnormal costings could be drawn up by the contractor’s quantity 
surveyor and presented to a quantity surveyor appointed by the local 
authority who could then liaise on the specific details of same. Thus , 
he contended, the development in question could be looked at in the 
round and a recommendation made which would be satisfactory to 
both parties.  
 
The Director of Service confirmed that the process had started in terms 
of the reviewing this aspect. He noted that the current competitive 
dialogue procurement process ending next year and the anticipated 
publication of the new Housing Programme would potentially also 
include changes.  
 
Cllr Naughton expressed concern that only 100 units had been 
completed. All involved, he contended, wanted the same outcome and 
queried who decided when the tender went to the quantity surveyor 
and at what stage were the Council using the quantity surveyor. The 
issue, he said, was the slow pace of delivery and this needed to 
change.  
 
Cllr C Brogan asked if the competitive procurement policy being used 
was the council’s own or in line with departmental guidelines as there 
were issues with the interpretation of this process and it was too late to 
wait until next year for the required amendments. He cited the need 
openness and transparency as the current model of delivery was not 
working. The message needed to go out, he added, that the Council 
was open for business as that its priority was to get people off the 
housing list. 
 
Mr Dessie Dorrian, C.I.F noted that the Minister’s letter had referenced 
the fact that abnormals should be separately classified, thus 
necessitating the need for anything under this classification to be 
separately measured, rated and costed and then checked by a quantity 
surveyor. This would then, he advised, be checked by the quantity 
surveyor in the Department who would be able to see the scope of the 
work carried out in relation to abnormal items. It did not necessarily 
mean, he said, that the contractor would get more money but be 
adequately compensated for supplying the additional infrastructure.  
Staged benefits, he said, would benefit many builders and that the 
option alluded to in the Minister’s letter provided for the cost of finance. 
He said that if the contractor was allowed to add for the cost of finance 
this would make a huge difference to the cost of delivering the houses. 
Citing the example of a house costing €284,000, he said that if it was 
permitted to add the cost for abnormals, finance costs and the risk 
margin to same  then a figure could be reached for the supply of 
houses which would be beneficial to all concerned.  
 

15 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle noted that a previous Minister for Housing had said 
that there was no impediment to Department funding or support in 
terms of housing delivery, yet provision of accommodation remained 
slow. He said that the C.I.F recommendations and solutions needed to 
be looked at and that there was room for flexibility. The current 
approach, he said was too rigid and cautious. It was imperative, he 
said, that the C.I.F were met halfway and that Uisce Éireann had 
access to additional funding to invest in the necessary infrastructure.  
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked members and the C.I.F delegation for their 
input and welcomed the positive and constructive comments. 
Responses would issue, she said, in relation to the queries raised.  
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
 
