1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
21 Márta, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Déardaoin  
27 Márta, 2025 ag 10.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe leis 
seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
 
County House 
 
 
Lifford. 
 
 
 21st March, 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Thursday 27th March 
2025 at 10.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 

2 
 
AGENDA  
 
 
1. Housing Capital Update  
 
2. Land Acquisition Presentation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 27th MARCH 2025 
C/83/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs J Kavanagh, Leas-Cathaoirleach, F Bradley, C Brogan, J Brogan,  
A Doherty, A Farren, N Jordan, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, P Mc Garvey, 
P Mc Gowan, M Mc Mahon, G Mc Monagle, M Naughton, and J. S. O’ 
Fearraigh.  
Online: Cllrs J Beard, L Blaney, P Canning, B Carr, D Coyle, T 
Crossan, T. S. Devine, M Farren, M Harley, D M Kelly, M Mc Clafferty, 
M Mc Dermott, D Mc Gee, J Murray, D Nic Mheanman, and M Scanlon.  
 
C/84/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate and Cultural Services, 
Meetings Administrator, John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing 
Capital, Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, 
Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, Housing Design, Jim Boner, 
Senior Executive Engineer, Housing Design, Donna Mc Groarty, Area 
Manager, Housing Design, Thomas Melly, Senior Staff Officer, Housing  
& Corporate, Margaret Doherty, Executive Engineer, Housing 
DesignRóise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Cliona Ni 
Ghallachoir, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Frances Friel, Communications 
Officer, William Colvin, Assistant Communications Officer, Patrick 
Gallagher, IS Technician, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, 
Corporate Services. 
 
C/85/25` 
APOLOGIES 
Apologies were received from the following who were unable to attend 
the meeting: 
 
• Cllr Declan Meehan 
• Chief Executive, Mr John Mc Laughlin 
• Director of Planning & Community Development, Mr Liam Ward 
• Director of Economic Development, Information Services & 
Emergency Service, Mr Garry Martin. 
 
C/86/25 
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE/LAND ACQUISITION 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer updated members in relation to 
Housing Capital developments and provided detail on the status of 
Turnkey Acquisitions county-wide. 
 
It was further acknowledged that 8 no. turnkey proposals had received 
Stage 1-2 Departmental approval for an additional 178 units with 4 of 
these proposals already progressing to planning stage. Members were 
informed that 2 further turnkey proposals were with the Department of 
Housing for Stage 1-2 consideration and that a turnkey project located 
in Annagry had received departmental approval and had moved to 
contract stage.  
 
He proceeded to give an overview of the various in-house projects 
including those on-site and at planning, tender and design stage. 

4 
 
Detail in relation to several Design and Build projects at various 
locations across the county was also provided. 
 
Members received an update on the Letterkenny Flagship projects.  
 
Ms Margaret Doherty, Executive Engineer, addressing the meeting 
provided an overview of the current land acquisition programme. She 
outlined the approach taken and the processes involved with each 
stage of acquisition giving an appraisal of the following:- 
 
• Land Assessment & Appraisal  
• Land Acquisition Process 
• Expressions of Interest 
• Housing Land Identification 
• Land at Conveyance Stage 
• Lands Purchased 
• Land Status Summary 
 
Concluding she advised that a total of 481 sites had been looked at to 
date  with 229 not proceeding for a variety of reasons. Thus ,it was 
noted that 239 were being actively considered and that 27 offers had 
been made with 13 accepted to date. 4 sites, it was noted, had been 
acquired at this juncture. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer said that the provision of social 
housing was progressing utilising the various delivery methods, but that 
a dedicated land bank was crucial to future proof the delivery of 
housing. He acknowledged the assistance of the elected members in 
this regard and said that a sufficient land bank was needed to allow the 
different mechanisms of social housing delivery to move forward.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
advised that considerable work had been done to date in terms of land 
acquisition and acknowledged the contribution of all involved in the 
process. He said that in order to speed up the delivery process, the 
design and planning aspects were being pursued in conjunction with 
the conveyance process. 
 
A lengthy debate ensued, and the following issues were raised: 
 
➢ Special Housing Meetings could have more impact if held at MD 
level. 
➢ Social Housing needed in the Bun na Leaca and Machaire 
Rabhartaigh areas so as allow families live in their own 
localities. 
➢ Housing rents an issue, and the result is that young people are 
emigrating thus decimating rural areas. 
➢ S.I Housing policy needs to be opened up and more accessible.  

5 
 
➢ Retrofit Programme must be extended and progressed. Concern 
regarding the lack of retrofit works in the Glenties Municipal 
District. 
➢ Issue in relation to the planning permissions on Tory arising 
from the boiled water notices in place.  
➢ Tenant Liaison Officer needed in each Municipal District. 
➢ Suggested that a Social Worker be allocated to each Municipal 
District to deal with a range of social issues. 
➢ Long-term Homeless Refuge a priority. 
➢ Naming of Estates in Irish. Much needs to be done to ensure 
that this initiative is progressed.  
➢ Noted that little or no land is being acquired in the Donegal 
Town area.  
➢ Developers need help and assistance. Staged payment would 
be of benefit here.  
➢ Emphasis should be on readymade sites  
➢ Ard na Guala Duibhe Estate in Moville needs urgent 
remediation.  
➢ Lands need to be purchased in advance of the RZLT coming 
into effect.  
➢ Modular Homes option must be explored in light of the housing 
crisis and defective concrete block issues.  
➢ Void in turnkey provision and the delivery of Approved Housing 
Body accommodation in the Inishowen area. 
➢ Proactive approach needed to deal with the vacancy issue 
including the use of apartments, commercial units and upstairs 
vacancies to alleviate the housing need. 
➢ Members need greater access to Úisce Eireann and more 
frequent update on what is happening on the ground in each 
respective Municipal District. 
➢ Building of reservoirs in Donegal must be prioritised together 
with rainwater harvesting so as to combat the infrastructural 
deficits. 
➢ Access issues on the N56 need to be resolved.  
➢ Donegal County Council need to take ownership of the estates 
in Dun Luiche and An Fál Carrach. 
➢ Consideration must be given to taking over vacant commercial 
buildings and properties in our towns and villages. 
➢ Executive should visit and look at the Ballyconnell Estate in An 
Fál Carrach given that it has the potential to serve many 
purposes and could be used for housing purposes. 
➢ Land Acquisition must be progressed in the Letterkenny area.  
➢ Acknowledged that there were specific issues in Letterkenny 
with 1300 people on the housing waiting list all of which 
indicated that the current model of provision was failing, and that 
the procurement process was not effective.  
➢ Need to engage with the Department in relation to the funding 
and a review of the overall procurement process.  

6 
 
➢ Could be more of an impact if Housing Capital was based in 
each of the Municipal Districts as the centralised system in 
operation is causing a disconnect at present.  
➢ No mention of temporary housing or modular homes all of which 
is very concerning given that people are living in crumbling and 
unsafe homes.  
➢ Alternative methods of construction should be pursued. 
➢ Delay in a Social Housing Remediation Scheme is causing 
needless harm.  
➢ Tenant-in-Situ Scheme did allow families to remain in their own 
homes but was flawed in that the cap on what the Local 
Authority could pay was far too low. 
➢ Not enough land zoned for development around our towns and 
villages.   
 
 
Queries 
▪ Does land have to be bought in proximity to shops and 
educational facilities? 
▪ What is being done to link in with Údarás na Gaeltachta’s 
housing initiative in the Glenties Municipal District? 
▪ What progress had been made on the serviced sites initiative? 
▪ What has been done to ensure that 85% of the tenants placed in 
estates in the Gaeltacht areas are fluent in the Irish language? 
▪ Concern that the Approved Housing Body route was not the way 
to go, and that the Council should move to build more houses 
itself. 
▪ Has the Scandinavian model of social housing allocation been 
looked at for the development in An Clochán Liath, as opposed 
to the standard social housing mix? 
▪ Update needed in relation to the schemes in An Clochán Liath,  
and Anagaire. 
▪ Is there a specific reason why the houses in Anagaire have not 
been let? 
▪ Why are communal houses and play areas not a feature in all 
housing estates? 
▪ What has been done to progress the independent living aspect 
including any planned interaction with Cluid and the Respond 
Housing Bodies.  
▪ Is it the person selling the land that carries out the survey in 
relation to service availability? 
▪ Who makes the decision as to what a developer will get for 
selling a house to the Local Authority? 
▪ What considerations are looked at when acquiring land in terms 
of the range of services available  
▪ How relative is heritage and the historical aspect to the land 
acquisition process? 
▪ Has the Council taken into consideration the University of Ulster 
study carried out on lands at Churchland Quarter in Carndonagh 
and the presence of a double circular enclosure at that location. 

7 
 
Cllr A Doherty advised that there was a family interest in the 
land at Churchland Quarter.  
▪ Has there been an affirmative conversation with Úisce Eireann 
in relation to infrastructure deficits and the role that they need to 
play in assisting with the delivery of social housing? 
▪ What is the expected lifespan of timber frame housing and has 
there been a move away from the utilisation of concrete blocks/ 
▪ How many housing completions are expected by the end of 
2026 and where will the houses be located? 
▪ What efforts are being made to meet existing demands given 
that the planned number of units up until the end of 2026 is 
1268? 
▪ How many applications were received under the Tenant-in-Situ 
Scheme and how many were processed? 
 
Follow-up 
o Resolved on the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr Mc 
Gowan that the Construction Industry Federation be invited to 
the next Special Plenary Housing Meeting. 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he was opposed to the 
Construction Industry Federation addressing members and said 
that he was against the privatisation of housing provision. 
o Update requested in relation to the Ballyshannon Scheme and 
the status of water and sewerage provision.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that there was clear evidence that an inroad was being made into the 
overall delivery process. He said that continued efforts would be made 
to push and address the issues outside of the Council’s control. He 
said that he had no issue with arranging a meeting with the 
Construction Industry Federation and agreed to invite a deputation to 
the next meeting. 
 
He informed member that a meeting had taken place with Department 
officials on the 26th March in the Custom House in Dublin and that all 
concerned were anxious to get the Social Housing Remediation 
Scheme up and running and to ensure that it was clear and 
streamlined. He said he was happy that the Department were 
committed to progressing same and that a further meeting was to take 
place in April 2025.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig again outlined his concern at the Construction 
Industry being invited into a meeting and was informed by the Leas-
Cathaoirleach that he could put forward a counter motion if he wanted 
to make a formal objection. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, responding to a number of 
queries raised by members said that the Council were looking at land 
in all settlements and in areas close to shops and schools etc. He said 
that contact would be made with Údarás na Gaeltachta in relation to 

8 
 
housing issues in Gaeltacht areas and that the Serviced Site initiative 
was being actively progressed.  
 
S.I Housing it was acknowledged was being pushed forward and that 
policy issues could be looked at by the Housing & Corporate SPC. 
Comments in relation to the fluency of Irish for social housing tenants 
in Gaeltacht areas were noted and would require a cross-directorate 
conversation. 
 
He advised that the water issue on Tory Island was not a Housing 
Capital issue but would pass on the concerns to the relevant 
personnel. 
 
Mr Gallagher said that he would speak directly to the member 
concerned who had queried the use of the Scandinavian model in 
Dungloe. He said that there was no contractual issues with the 
Contractor in Gaoth Dobhair but that the Council had taken an 
observational role onsite. It was confirmed that in accordance with the 
contract monies would be released on completion of each phase of 
development. It was noted that the contactor had left the site of his own 
free will and that there was continued interaction with same.  
 
With regard to the project in Anagaire, he said that it was at final 
contract stage and Department approval was in place. Th developer 
concerned, he added, had proposed a change to the contract and that 
now needed to be dealt with. There had been considerable 
engagement, he advised on the matter and at present necessary 
amendments to the contact were being looked at.  
 
He advised members of the following:- 
 
➢ That the issues raised in relation to anti-social behaviour had 
been noted and he confirmed that there was ongoing interaction 
with the HSE in relation to such matters.  
➢ As Úisce Eireann was the Water Utility for the county, ongoing 
consultation was taking place in terms of mains, water and 
sewerage services for the development of social housing 
including an appraisal of any emerging challenges. 
➢ Acknowledged that there were challenges but that a good 
working arrangement was in place between both organisations.  
➢ The provision in the County Development Plan for the provision 
of sewerage treatment on site where mains sewerage was not 
available did allow for some element of flexibility. 
➢ Comments raised in relation to the Treatment Plant in Gaoth 
Dobhair were noted, and it was confirmed that there was 
engagement with Úisce Eireann in terms of infrastructural 
deficits at that location. Calls for a specific application by 
Donegal County Council to the Department for a Treatment 
Plant were also noted.  

9 
 
➢ Attention was drawn to the fact that there was a facility on the 
website where interested parties could register an interest in 
instances where particular lands were available for sale. Basic 
details it was confirmed were required and after that any 
proposal would be reviewed in conjunction with the Roads and 
Planning Sections, with any issues arising addressed before 
funding was applied for. 
➢ Ongoing meetings with the Construction Industry Federation 
since 2017/2018 at which they are briefed on various housing 
projects and the mechanisms of delivery. Confirmed that a 
meeting was scheduled with the Construction Industry 
Federation on the 10th April.  
➢ Recognition that the lack of staged payments was an issue for 
the C.I.F and that this was something that could only be sorted 
out at Departmental level.  
➢ Turnkey process must be done on a competitive basis and 
based on the relevant criteria. There are ongoing discussions 
with developers in terms of costings which are reviewed by the 
Council, an independent quantity surveyors and by the 
Department.  
➢ Members would receive further detail on the Ballyconnell Estate 
proposal. 
➢ Briefing note to be circulated on the utilisation of Timber Frame 
housing.  
➢ Further options to be explored in terms of increasing the land 
bank in Letterkenny. 
➢ Information to be provided on the projects in train and the staff 
working on same.  
➢ Visit has taken place to Dundalk to view the 3D printing method 
employed by Louth County Council and that contact has been 
made with the company concerned in order to get further detail.  
➢ All viable modern methods of construction to be looked at.  
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Area Manager, Housing & Corporate responding to 
queries on the homelessness issue outlined the fact that the Homeless 
Action Plan 2023 -2028 had advocated the move away from B&B 
vouchers with the preferred option being hostel type accommodation. 
This, he said, was now being piloted and regular updates would be 
provided through the Housing SPC and the Special Meeting process. 
 
In relation to Anti-Social Behaviour, there was, he confirmed a policy in 
place which was worked through as specific situations arose. A budget 
was now in place, he stated, for the employment of Housing Liaison 
Officers and job descriptions were being finalised to ensure that their 
work did not overlap with existing Housing roles. It was hoped, he said, 
that these would be in a position to get involved an early stage before 
anti-social behaviour got a chance to materialise. It was anticipated, he 
added, that a HLO would be based in each Area Office. He noted the 
comments in relation to the employment of social workers but said that 

10 
 
it was intended to get the HLOs in situ and to monitor their impact after 
which the involvement of social workers could be looked at again. 
 
Mr Brown alluded to the fact that a smaller allocation had been 
received in 2025 in respect of the Energy Retrofit Programme even 
though Donegal had been particularly successful in delivering the 
programme to date. Contact had been made with the Department in 
relation to addressing the issue, he added, and indications had been 
that the Department were willing to look at addressing same. Works 
had commenced in the Letterkenny/Milford MD and the Donegal MD, 
he advised, and it was hoped that the Department would be amenable 
to providing additional funding.  
 
Affordable Housing was being delivered, he confirmed, in Donegal 
through the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant, the First Home 
Scheme , the Help to Buy Scheme together with the Local Authority 
Housing Loan Scheme. He alluded to the fact that the Affordable 
Housing Scheme had been piloted in the Glenties MD but that there 
had been little or no uptake. 
 
The Council it was noted had engaged with Údarás na Gaeltachta in 
relation to affordable housing and serviced sites and that further 
clarification was to be sought regarding Údarás na Gaeltachta’s 
position on lands that they owned and their policy if any in relation to 
housing.  
 
It was confirmed that there was regular contact with the Approved 
Housing Bodies in Donegal and that the general rule was that they 
approached the Council first, with any prospective proposal being 
examined in the context of the overall social housing need in any given 
area.  
 
Members were informed that the “Tenant-in-Situ Scheme was in the 
process of being amended and that specific changes were being made 
to certain aspects of the scheme with €365 million being made 
available nationally. Donegal, he said, would not receive a stated 
amount and would have to avail of a capital allowance thus putting the 
onus on the Local Authority to get as much as it could from the stated 
allowance. 
In terms of what the local authority could pay, he underlined the fact 
that cost was not the overriding factor given that in Donegal the 
permitted threshold for the authority was €242,000 yet the median 
market price was in the region of €180k.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services, 
said that it would be possible to invite the Construction Industry 
Federation into the next Special Plenary meeting on the 28th April. 
 
He noted that the AHB delivery mechanism had been in place for years 
with changes to the CALF Scheme in 2024 giving more impetus to this 

11 
 
method of housing provision. There would, he advised, be continued 
interaction with the AHBs and the HSE in terms of housing provision, 
group homes etc.  
 
Concluding Mr Eamonn Brown, Area Manager, Housing & Corporate, 
advised that there was ongoing consultation with the HSE in relation to 
Group Homes. The Housing & Corporate Area Managers, had, he 
noted, regular contact and meetings with the HSE in terms of housing 
need. The Council, was, he confirmed, proactive in delivering as many 
Group Homes as it could but needed the assistance of AHB sector to 
progress same.   
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
