1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnith 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
15 Iúil, 2025 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 21 Iúil 2025 ag 11.00 
r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach 
chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************************************D
ONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House  
Lifford 
 
15th July 2025 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 21st July 2025 at 11.00am in 
the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join the 
meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
_____________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the May Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 26th of May, 2025. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 28th of May, 2025. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 30th of June, 2025. 
d) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Annual General Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 30th of June, 2025. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of a plot of land at St Mary’s Terrace, 
Ramelton to Ramelton Community Garden Committee. 
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 
To approve the carrying out of works in relation to the upgrading of several 
existing pedestrian crossings located on the N15 within the Twin Towns of 
Ballybofey and Stranorlar (Improved Pedestrian Crossing Scheme - N15 
Ballybofey & Stranorlar)  
 
4. Corporate   
a) Selection of substitute representative to the Conference of Peripheral 
Maritime Regions. 
b) To reschedule the Special Plenary Meeting on Monday 28th July 2025 
to Friday 25th July, 2025 at 11am. 
 
5. Environment 
To note the Donegal County Council Climate Action Plan 2024-2029 
Progress Report for 2024. 
 
6. Roads & Transportation 
To approve the Plant Purchase and Refurbishment Plan 2024-2028. 
 
7. Finance 
a)  To consider and note Donegal County Council’s Audited Financial 
Statement 2024. 
b) To consider and note the Local Government Audit Report on the Annual 
Financial Statement for 2024. 

3 
 
c) To note the report from the Donegal County Council Audit Committee 
on its consideration of the 2024 Audited Financial Statement and Audit 
Report for 2024 of Donegal County Council as required by Section 
121(3) of the Local Government Act, 2001 (as amended). 
d) To consider and note the Donegal County Council Audit Committee 
Report 2024. 
 
8. Planning 
To consider motion from Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal District in relation to 
Variation No 1 of CDP 2024-2030 in connection with lands at Mullindrait, 
Stranorlar. 
 
9. Endorsement of Minutes 
a) To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on 
the 19th May 2025. 
b) To endorse the minutes of the meeting of Cruinniú Choiste na Gaeilge 
held on the 8th May 2025.  
 
10. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025 (as amended). 
 
Training  
• AILG Autumn Training Seminar to be held on the 17th & 18th September, 
2025 in the Westport Woods Hotel, Westport, Co Mayo.  
 
 
Abroad 
• Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CPMR General 
Assembly in Barcelona from the 19th to the 21st November, 2025. 
 
11. Conference Reports 
• Attendance of Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle at St Patrick’s Day Festival in 
Rudolstadt, Germany from the 20th March 2025 to the 23rd March 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty at the Annual Planning 
Conference 2025 on the 11th April in the Salthill Hotel, Galway. 
• Attendance of Cllr Jack Murray at events in St Charles, Missouri from 
the 21st May 2025 to the 30th May 2025. 
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
Corporate  

4 
 
12. Cllr Fionán Bradley  
“That this Council prioritise the provision of its basic and essential 
services through its own human and financial resources as opposed to via 
outsourcing and external procurement.” 
 
  
13. Cllr Albert Doherty  
"Donegal County Council urge the Irish Government and the Northern 
Executive to take the necessary steps to enhance co-operation between 
the existing health services North and South and move towards the full 
integration of service planning and delivery on an island wide basis. 
DCC state that reform must be implemented in a planned, systemic, 
strategic way to build an all-island Irish National Health and Care service. 
DCC further contend that it is essential that all of this work is accountable 
to the Irish Government, the Northern Executive and transparent to the 
public." 
 
14. Cllr Terry Crossan  
"That Gardaí are adequately resourced to tackle the ever increasing 
incidents of anti-social driving in our villages and public spaces 
endangering life and causing criminal damage to both public and private 
property.” 
 
 
  
Defective Concrete Blocks  
15. Cllr Ali Farren  
“That this Council issue the letters of assurance that was promised as part 
of the 40 year guarantee for homeowners that completed work as part of 
the DCB scheme as soon as possible.” Families who have completed the 
remedial works were promised a guarantee but to the best of my 
knowledge the DCC have yet to issue them.  
 
16. Cllr Joy Beard  
“As everyone involved in the administration of the Enhanced Defective 
Concrete Blocks Scheme knows, the timely payment of claims is essential 
to ensure that contractors are able to keep projects on schedule.  
 
However, despite the dedication of the Defective Blocks team - who are 
working under extremely challenging conditions providing vital support to 
many distressed homeowners - an increasing number of claimants are 
reporting delays in the time taken to process payments. 
 
Members of the Defective Concrete Blocks Committee have previously 
been told that the aim is to process claims within three weeks from receipt. 
 
However, we are aware of many claims taking longer, which is causing 
unnecessary stress to homeowners already under extreme pressure. 
 
This motion calls on Donegal County Council to undertake an urgent and 
comprehensive assessment of the staffing and administrative resources 
allocated to the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme. 
 

5 
 
Necessary steps should then be taken to ensure that claims are processed 
and paid within three weeks, and that should further information be 
required, such requests must be issued by Council staff within one week of 
submission.  
 
Minor or administrative issues, such as missing Eircodes or trivial 
miscalculations, must not stall progress where the bulk of the claim is 
otherwise in order.  These can be dealt with prior to payment of the next 
claim. 
 
Furthermore, this motion calls on Donegal County Council to include the 
following information in the monthly Activity Report, which is sent to 
Members and can be viewed on the Council’s website: 
 
• The number of claims submitted. 
• The number of claims processed within three weeks. 
• The average time for claims to be processed. 
• The number of claims delayed beyond that timeframe; and 
• The reasons for any such delays.” 
 
 
  
Tourism  
17. Cllr Martin Mc Dermott  
“That this Council issue a letter of support in relation to the hosting of the 
2029 World Sheep Shearing Championships”. 
 
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT”. 
 
Community Development  
18. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
“That this Council support my motion in this Council by purchasing the 
land site of the Creeslough Tragedy by a way of negotiation with the 
owner or CPO, if need be, and sit down with the families and design a 
memorial garden in memory of all those affected.” 
 
Housing  
19. Cllr Declan Meehan   
“That this Council write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage to express concern over the exclusion through ineligibility of 
County Donegal from key national affordable housing schemes, including 
cost rental initiatives, and to request an urgent review of the eligibility 
criteria and geographic rollout of such schemes to ensure they are 
 
  
extended to rural and peripheral counties like Donegal, where housing 
 
  
need is significant but often underrepresented in national policy.” If 
passed, I would ask that this motion is circulated to all other local 
authorities. 
20. Cllr Ciaran Brogan   
 I propose that this Council host a number of workshops in our county to 
 help inform our electorate of all the different opportunities available in all 
areas of housing supports, housing initiatives, local authority home loans, 
mortgage support etc including grants available for home energy 

6 
 
upgrades and defective block scheme. 
 
 Roads & Transportation  
21. Cllr Liam Blaney   
That this Council requests extra funding from the Department for the 
Local Improvement Schemes.” 
 
 
 
 
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Roads & Transportation   
22. Cllr Noel Jordan 
“I am calling on the Roads Directorate to conduct a report on purchasing 
a road lining machine against the hiring of this vehicle 
 
 
   
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
 
 Corporate   
23.  Cllr Micheál Choilm Mac Giolla Easbuig  
“Go dtacaíonn Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall le #cuiran10úleis 
(#addthe10th), comhghuaillíocht atá ag iarraidh go mbeidh stádas 
socheacnamaíoch aitheanta mar an 10ú bhforas de leithcheal a 
dhéantar, i reachtaíocht um chomhionannas na 26 Contae, a dtugtar An 
tAcht um Stádas Comhionann agus An tAcht um Chomhionannas 
Fostaíochta, Nollaig 2021, orthu. Iarrann muid ar an Rialtas i mBaile Átha 
Cliath reachtaíocht a leagan síos don athrú ríthábhachtach seo gan a 
thuilleadh moille”. 
 
“Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall supports #addthe10th an alliance 
which seeks to have socio- economic status recognized as the tenth 
ground of discrimination in the 26-Counties equality legislation, namely 
the Equal Status Act and the Employment Equality Act,1 Dec 2021. We 
call on the Government in Baile Átha Cliath to legislate for this important 
change without further delay”. 
 
Housing  
24.  Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
“This motion calls on Donegal County Council to declare a housing 
emergency situation in Donegal due to the lack of housing in the county 
coupled with the defective housing crisis.  It is imperative that central 
government acknowledge the fact that, though defective concrete has 
been discovered in other Irish counties, Donegal remains the epicentre of 
the disaster with an estimated 30,000 homes affected (Rabach, 2024, 
Society Social Studies of Science) This motion is calling on Donegal 
County Council to do whatever is required for Donegal to be assigned 
special status regarding housing and responses to be given the urgency 
required.” 
 
   
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  

7 
 
Corporate  
25. Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman  
“That this Council calls on the Government not to increase the student 
fees to €3000 this coming year which will be €1000 higher than they were 
last year, and that, 
This Council asks that the Government adheres to the "Programme for 
Government" in which they have outlined that they will reduce the student 
fees and not increase them.” 
 
Roads & Transportation  
26. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan  
“That this Council write to Minister Darragh O Brien, Minister for Climate 
Change, Environment and Energy and the Department of Transport 
seeking a meeting to discuss the need to ensure the N15 upgrade is 
completed as far as Lifford. This remaining part of N15 needs to be 
included in any review of the National Development Plan. This remaining 
section of the N15 road in the county, is in urgent need of upgrading by 
realignment of the corners and the addition of a hard shoulder on both 
sides similar to the Ballybofey to Bundoran section .The narrow width 
along with the continual bends from Stranorlar to Lifford is well below 
National Primary Road standards on the very busy cross border road 
which has resulted in a lot of accidents. This National Primary Road was 
included in the Governments original National Roads upgrade over ten 
years ago, but it is not included in the present Ten-T.” 
Can a copy of this motion be sent to the Department Of Transport, T.I.I, 
the National Transport Authority and all our Donegal Oireachtas 
members asking for their help in organising a meeting with all the above? 
 
Environment  
27. Cllr Martin Scanlon  
“That this Council establishes a facility for the collection and disposal of 
spent sheep dip to support farmers who currently do not have the proper 
facilities or conditions to dispose of these chemicals properly.” 
 
28.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
29. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
Corporate   
30. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Corporate Services for a detailed breakdown of 
the total cost of streaming meetings of this Council live over a 12 month 
period. I would like information including the financial cost, the number, 

8 
 
type and frequency of meetings which were streamed as well as 
information in relation to the number of staff it takes to live stream each 
of these meetings. 
 
Corporate   
31. Cllr Albert Doherty 
How is Donegal County Council supporting and promoting "green 
apprenticeships", who are the relevant and principal stakeholders, what 
benefits accrue to the county and are current and future training 
provisions threatened by reported funding allocation shortfalls? 
 
Housing   
32. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Housing what immediate steps the Council have 
taken to amend the processes, policies and procedures the Council has 
in relation to house building in an effort to accelerate delivery following 
the publication of the Department of Housing's league tables which 
placed this Council at the bottom of the pile. 
 
33. Cllr Joy Beard   
During 2025, what methods have been used to test the concrete and 
aggregates used in the building of social housing units?  Could members 
be sent the results? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
34. Cllr Joy Beard   
To ask the Director of Service, 
Are requests to draw down funds from central government to pay claims 
made under the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme being 
processed on a timely basis? 
 
Water & Environment 
35. Cllr Albert Doherty   
The Housing Commission has highlighted the need for increased 
investment by Uisce Eireann in water and wastewater infrastructure to 
support housing development, the review of the NDP is expected in July 
2025, 
 
My motion on Mar 31st last, adopted by DCC members demanded a 
special and urgent meeting between DCC and Uisce Éireann including 
the provision by Uisce Éireann of an infrastructure works plan for the 
County. 
What response from Uisce Éireann has DCC received to date, and will 
council outline the follow up, meetings and representations to Uisce 
Éireann that have occurred since March 31st last? 
 
Planning 
36. Cllr Terry Crossan   
Will D.C.C fully engage, in a meaningful way, with the next public inquiry 
on the Dalriadian Application for a Goldmine in the Sperrins so as to fully 
represent the citizens of Donegal and the R.O.I ? 

9 
 
 
37. Cllr Terry Crossan   
Dalriadian Application 
Can a copy of the D.C.C submissions to the previous inquiry be made 
available to members? 
 
 
  
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing 
38. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
Can I get an update as to where we are at with defective social houses 
being rebuilt and is there any update from the Housing Minister? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
39. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
Can I get a breakdown of staff handling payments for DCB homeowners 
and can we request extra staff to speed up and handle more payments as 
they come in, as some people are waiting long on payments which is 
affecting builders on site? 
 
Community & Planning 
40. Cllr Declan Meehan 
Can we be provided with the number and proportion of successful 
Derelict and Vacant Homes Grants awarded in 2024 and so far in 2025, 
which relate specifically to houses located within the boundaries of 
settlements (urban), and the number and proportion of same for the same 
period, which relate specifically to houses located outside settlements (in 
rural areas)? 
 
41. Cllr Ciaran Brogan 
Can we get an updated report on our capital projects funded under RRDF 
and URDF and a timeframe for delivery? 
 
Roads & Transportation 
42. Cllr Declan Meehan 
In January 2025's plenary meeting, I submitted a motion calling on DCC 
to write to the Minister for Transport to seek a meeting regarding funding 
for a feasibility study into rail connection between Letterkenny & Derry, to 
match the ongoing feasibility study in the North around rail connection 
between Derry and Portadown. In the response I was informed that 
Directors would be meeting with Translink about this study. Have 
meetings taken place between Donegal County Council and Translink 
and, if so, what were the outcomes from those meetings? Please provide 
details. Has a letter been sent from Donegal County Council, in line with 
my January motion, to the Minister for Transport seeking a meeting to 
discuss funding for a feasibility study into rail connection for Letterkenny 
to Derry? 
 
43. Cllr Ciaran Brogan 

10 
 
Can we have an updated report on the TEN-T project including the 
Bonagee Link, Letterkenny Relief Road, Manorcunningham to Lifford and 
the Ballybofey-Stranorlar By-Pass? 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
Housing   
44. Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman  
Can I get a list of payments that are included as income that are used to 
calculate rent on local authority homes?  
 
 
Regeneration   
45. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan   
Can I get an update on the RRDG projects for the county especially the  
"Seed Project" and can a letter be sent to the Minister Dara Calleary 
asking for his support in moving the projects forward? 
 
 
Water & Environment   
46. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan   
Can I have an update on Group Water Schemes that are with the 
Department awaiting approval? 
 
Corporate  
47. Cllr Martin Scanlon   
What step are the Council taking to retain the current staffing levels i.e. 
(job security, long term guarantees of tenure ) and what are they currently 
doing to try to fill the 70+ vacancies that are currently within the Council? 
 
48. Motions from other Councils/Bodies  
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL 
“Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, James Browne T.D, to review and amend the 
terms of the Defective Concrete Block Scheme to allow for applications, 
where individuals are living long term in supported housing provided by 
charitable bodies. These are the homes of individuals & deserve equality 
of treatment with all other homeowner. If passed, that the motion be 
circulated to all LA’s.”  
 
 
DERRY CITY & STRABANE DISTRICT COUNCIL  
“That this Council writes to the Minister for Infrastructure to record our 
devastation in light of the recent High Court ruling on the A5, and 
repledges this Council’s full support for the A5 upgrade.  
 
Welcomes the commitment from the Minister to work constructively with 
the A5/N2 Cross Border working group at its meeting this week and 
supports the Minister assessing the judgement and urgently considering 
options for a way forward.  
 

11 
 
Commits to working with the other four Councils who have an interest in 
this project and will write to them directly asking them to also repledge 
their support to working with the Minister to see this project proceed as 
soon as possible. Also to seek an immediate and urgent meeting with the 
Minister and the four relevant Councils.  
 
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“I propose that we write to the Minister for Housing to call for an 
immediate review of the Affordable Housing Policy, to facilitate wider 
development catchment. I also propose that motion is forwarded to all 
local authorities.” 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Limerick City and County Council call on the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, James Browne, TD, to amend the 
Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme 2016/S.I. No. 619/2023, to allow 
tenants to purchase their Council house after a period of five years and 
not a ten-year period as is currently required.” 
 
MID ULSTER DISTRICT COUNCIL  
That the Council:  
• Seeks a meeting with the Minister for Infrastructure to discuss the 
A5WTC; 
• Writes to the Minister for Infrastructure to record our 
disappointment in light of the recent High Court ruling on the 
A5WTC and re-pledge support to the A5 upgrade,  
And  
• Commits to working with the other four Councils who have an 
interest in the A5 project, Fermanagh & Omagh District Council, 
Derry City & Strabane District Council, Monaghan County Council 
and Donegal County Council, and ask them to also re-pledge their 
support to working with the Minister to see the project proceed as 
soon as possible.  
 
WATERFORD CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL   
“Waterford City & County Council calls upon the Central Bank to take all 
possible steps to discontinue facilitating the sale of Israeli bonds.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
MINUTES OF JULY MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 21st 
JULY, 2025 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/248/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F Bradley 
C Brogan, D Coyle, T Crossan, TS Devine, A Doherty, A Farren, M 
Harley, N Jordan, D. M Kelly, M McBride, M Mc Clafferty, M McDermott, 
P McGarvey, D McGee, P McGowan, D Meehan, A Molloy, M 
Naughton, D Nic Mheanman, and M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs J Brogan, B Carr, G Doherty, M Farren, J Kavanagh, M 
MacGiolla Easbuig, M McMahon, G McMonagle, J Murray.  
 
C/249/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of 
Housing, Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Liam Ward, 
Director of Community Development & Planning Services, Bryan 
Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director 
of Finance, Johnny McGettigan, A/Director of Water & Environment, 
Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner, Lorraine Arbuckle, Senior Ex. Engineer, 
Laboratory, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, 
ASO, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní Ghallachóir, 
Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff 
Officer.   
 
C/250/25 
APOLOGIES  
Apologies were received from Cllr N Kennedy and Mr Garry Martin who 
were unable to attend the meeting. 
 
C/251/25 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY AND ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING 
Cllr Mc Dermott proposed, seconded by Cllr A Doherty a vote of 
sympathy to the Mc Laughlin family in Carndonagh who had lost their 
daughter Natalie and granddaughter, Ella in tragic circumstances at the 
beginning of July. He said that it had been a very difficult time for the Mc 
Laughlin family and the wider community in Carndonagh. He extended 
condolences on behalf of Donegal County Council and acknowledged 
the work of the various emergency services who had attended the 
scene of the accident. Tribute was also paid to the staff of Altnagelvin 
Hospital and the Royal Victoria Hospital who had looked after Natalie 
and Ella with such great care. 
 
Cllr Brogan paid tribute to the late Gavin Burke, formerly of the Library 
Service, and extended sympathy to the Burke family. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty offered condolences to the Scott family in Dunfanaghy 
on the death of Edgar Scott.  
 
The meeting was adjourned for a short recess as a mark of respect to 
all of the bereaved families.  
 
 
 

13 
 
C/252/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MAY MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 26TH MAY, 2025  
 
On resumption of the meeting Cllr Coyle proposed, seconded by Cllr 
McBride, to adopt the Minutes of the May Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 26th May, 2025. 
 
C/253/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 28TH MAY, 2025  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Brogan, seconded by Cllr Coyle, the Minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 28th May, 2025 
were adopted.  
 
C/254/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 30TH JUNE, 2025   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McDermott, the 
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 30th 
June, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/255/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ANNUAL GENERAL  
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 30th JUNE, 
2025      
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Meehan, the Minutes 
of the Annual General Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 30th 
June, 2025 were adopted. 
 
C/256/25 
FORMAT OF THE MEETING 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that he was seeking a proposer 
and seconder for each of the statutory items on the agenda and would 
then deal with motions. Where further discussion was needed in 
relation to a statutory matter, he said, that this could take place once 
the motions had been debated. This format, he advised, would allow for 
a more concentrated emphasis on members business and lead to 
greater efficiency in the operation of the meetings. This was 
unanimously agreed.  
 
C/257/25 
DISPOSAL OF PLOT OF LAND AT ST MARY’S TERRACE, 
RAMELTON TO RAMELTON COMMUNITY GARDEN COMMITTEE  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGarvey, seconded by Cllr Blaney, it was 
resolved to disposal of a plot of land at St. Mary’s Tce, Ramelton to 
Ramelton Community Garden Committee  in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, 
(as amended).     
 
C/258/25 
 UPGRADING OF SEVERAL EXISTING PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS 
LOCATED ON THE N15 WITHIN THE TWIN TOWNS OF 
BALLYBOFEY AND STRANORLAR      
 
Members considered the reports circulated with the agenda in relation 

14 
 
to the above.  
Cllr Scanlon proposed, seconded by Cllr McGowan, that the carrying 
out of works in relation to the upgrading of several existing pedestrian 
crossings located on the N15 within the Twin Towns of Ballybofey and 
Stranorlar (Improved Pedestrian Crossing Scheme – N15 Ballybofey & 
Stranorlar) be approved, in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & 
Development Regulations 2001(as amended).   
 
C/259/25 
SELECTION OF SUBSTITUTE REPRESENTATIVE TO THE 
CONFERENCE OF PERIPHERAL MARITIME REGIONS  
   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr A Doherty, it was 
resolved that Cllr O’Fearraigh be selected as substitute representative 
to the Conference of Peripheral Maritime Regions.   
 
C/260/25 
RESCHEDULING OF SPECIAL PLENARY MEETING ON MONDAY 
28TH JULY, 2025 TO FRIDAY 25TH JULY, 2025 AT 11A.M 
 
It was unanimously agreed to reschedule the Special Plenary Meeting 
on Monday 28th July, 2025 to Friday 25th July, 2025 at 11a.m.   
 
C/261/25 
TO NOTE THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL CLIMATE ACTION 
PLAN 2024-2029 PROGRESS REPORT FOR 2024  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr Coyle, members noted 
the Donegal County Council Climate Action Plan 2024-2029 Progress 
Report for 2024.  
 
C/262/25 
TO APPROVE THE PLANT PURCHASE AND REFURBISHMENT 
PLAN 2024-2028. 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
The Cathaoirleach noted that discussions had taken place in relation to 
the operation of the Machinery Yard. Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig outlined 
his support for the plan. Cllr C Brogan said that there had been 
concerns previously in relation to procedures being operated in the 
Machinery Yard. He alluded to the fact that Cross Party Working group 
had met on two occasions with the Executive and the Machinery Yard 
Team. A specific template, had, he confirmed been agreed but it had to 
be acknowledged that this was a work in progress and that a 
commitment had been given by the Director of Service that there would 
be continued liaison with all involved. He said that it had also been 
agreed that the presentations delivered to the Working Group would be 
circulated at MD level and members kept informed of developments and 
in relation to the ongoing role of the Machinery Yard model. It was 
important, he added, that all concerned were confident that a competent 
model was in place and that the value for money aspect was being 
adhered to. It was imperative, he said, that members were in advance 
of the next budgetary process confident that all relevant options had 
been explored.  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr C Brogan, 

15 
 
it was resolved to approve the Plant Purchase and Refurbishment Plan 
2024-2028.  
 
C/263/25 
TO CONSIDER AND NOTE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL’S 
AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENT 2024. 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance gave a summary of the overall 
financial position for 2024. He noted the fact that Donegal County 
Council was one of the first local authorities to present the 2024 audited 
accounts to Council and something that it had been in a position to do 
over the past number of years. It was noted that the adopted budget for 
2024 had been €185.6 million with an actual outturn of €217.6 million 
thus providing for an additional spend of €32m that had not been 
budgeted for. He drew attention to the fact that this had not been an 
overspend but rather the result of extra grant funding which had added 
to Council activity over the year.  
 
 
He confirmed that income had exceeded expenditure by €1.2m thus 
generating a surplus in 2024 and that the revenue deficit was continuing 
to decline. All in all, he confirmed that the financial strategy in place was 
working. Attention was also drawn to capital expenditure d with a 
breakdown per service provided. Members were informed that capital 
expenditure had amounted to €183.5 million in 2024 as opposed to 
€161.6 million in 2023. It was noted that capital expenditure had 
increased from €25 million to in excess of €183 million over the past 13 
to 14 years.  
 
 
Cllr C Brogan acknowledged the work of the Finance team and the input 
of the elected members. He said that record levels of funding were 
being received and complimented the Director of Finance and his team 
on the manner in which they delivered and presented all aspects of 
financial data. He said the current financial strategy was working but 
that there was room for improvement in terms of the spend on housing 
and housing maintenance.  
 
 
Cllr A Doherty asked for additional clarity on the concerns raised by the 
Local Government Auditor in relation to the collection performance on 
housing loans.  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Meehan the 
Donegal County Council Audited Financial Statement for 2024 was 
noted.  
 
C/264/25 
TO CONSIDER AND NOTE THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUDIT 
REPORT ON THE ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR 2024.  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, advised that the audit opinion 

16 
 
was included on page 17 of the report and was a positive audit opinion. 
He noted that a number of issues had been raised by the Local 
Government Auditor and that the associated management response to 
same was included on pages 1 to 14 of the report. He highlighted the 
fact the percentage performance in terms of commercial rates collection 
had been the best ever. Member’s attention was also drawn to the fact 
that €13m had been paid in the Business Support Grant supported by 
central Government and the fact that the new legal services team for 
enforcement was in place. The low housing loan collection rate 
referenced in the report was directly related to the fact that Donegal was 
not able to access the Mortgage to Rent Scheme in the same way as 
other councils given the issues with the Defective Concrete Blocks 
Grant Scheme.  
 
The Chief Executive said that the performance had been good overall. 
He alluded to the fact that that an internal audit report had been 
referenced which drew attention to some irregularities in terms of plant 
hire. This would be dealt with going forward, he added, and due 
process applied.  
 
He said that Donegal was not a highly wealthy county but that it was 
running well and that challenges would be worked through collectively. 
He cited the need to be realistic and noted that cross party deputations 
In their meetings with the various government departments had been 
particularly successful in securing additional funding allocations. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott proposed, seconded by Cllr A Doherty that data on the 
difficulties being encountered in Donegal in terms of not being able to 
access the Mortgage to Rent Scheme be highlighted and tabulated for 
presentation to department officials visiting Donegal on the 24th July 
with specific reference to defective concrete block affected  
homeowners. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty asked if the Council was able to engage with PEPPER  
 
 
and if there had been engagement with other mortgage companies.  
 
 
 
 Cllr C Brogan asked that an update be provided at the September 
meeting in relation to outstanding issues on the Uisce Éireann central 
management charge and the overall transition aspect.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Meehan the Local 
Government Audit Report on the Annual Financial Statement for 2024 
was noted.  
 
C/265/25 
TO NOTE THE REPORT FROM THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
AUDIT COMMITTEE ON ITS CONSIDERATION OF THE 2024 
AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENT AND AUDIT REPORT FOR 2024 
OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL. 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 

17 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance said the report was a summary 
of the meeting that had taken place between the Audit & Risk 
Committee and the Local Government Auditor and was part of the 
overall framework of governance in the organisation.  
 
Members noted the contents of same.  
 
C/266/25 
TO CONSIDER AND NOTE THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT 2024 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance advised that the report reflected 
the activity of the Audit & Risk Committee over the previous financial 
year. He said that there was a statutory obligation to circulate the report. 
 
Members noted the contents of same.  
 
The Director of Service confirmed that detail would be provided on the 
Mortgage to Rent Scheme as requested by Cllr Mc Dermott. 
 
He said that Mortgage to Rent Scheme referenced was one solely for 
Council borrowers and that he would send out information on same as 
requested by Cllr Mc Clafferty.  
 
 
An update on the central management charge he said could be 
provided for the September meeting.  
 
 
C/267/25 
TO CONSIDER MOTION FROM LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MD IN 
RELATION TO VARIATION NO. 1 OF CDP 2024-2030 IN 
CONNECTION WITH LANDS AT MULLINDRAIT, STRANORLAR  
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
noted that the Planning Department was in the process of moving 
forward with Variation No 1 to the County Development Plan 2024-2030 
and that this was at an advanced stage of preparation.  
 
This would he said involve pre-draft consultation and a series of 
workshops with members in relation to the proposed area plans. The 
scope of the current variation includes, he added, new area plans for An 
Clochan Liath, Ballyshannon, Bridgend, Carndonagh, Donegal Town, 
and Killybegs. It also included, he said, residential rezoning at Cockhill 
in Buncrana, Residential Zoned Land Tax related rezonings and the 
replacement of designations in relation to national heritage areas in 
Letterkenny with local environment zonings.  
He proceeded to outline the timeframes associated with the progression 
of the variation.  
 
The motion as submitted by the Lifford/Stranorlar members he noted 

18 
 
referenced lands at Mullindrait, Stranorlar and the request was to 
include these lands in the environmental process and to include in the 
variation process.  
 
Thus, Cllr Mc Gowan proposed, seconded by Cllr Scanlon that the 
lands at Mullindrait, Stranorlar as referenced in the attached report be 
included in Variation No 1 of the County Development Plan 2024-2030  
 
 
 
It was clarified by the Director of Service that clarification in relation to 
the variation would be provided at the September MD meetings. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that there were issues in Carndonagh regarding 
Uisce Éireann that needed to be clarified and additional clarity on 
several zoning issues in the town. 
 
 
The Director of Service said that there would be further engagement at 
MD level before September. He advised that a note would issue to the 
Inishowen members later in the week in relation to Uisce Éireann 
related issues.  
 
 
C/268/25 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE 
POLICY GROUP HELD ON THE 19TH MAY, 2025    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Meehan, the minutes 
of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 19th May, 
2025 were noted.  
 
C/269/25 
 TO ENDORSE THE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF CRUINNIU 
CHOISTE NA GAEILGE HELD ON THE 8TH MAY, 2025    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr Coyle it was resolved to 
endorse the minutes of the meeting of Cruinniu Choiste Na Gaeilge held 
on the 8th May, 2025.    
 
C/270/25 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 
668 of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) 
Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister 
for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the 
Local Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 
2014 -2025(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr McGowan attendance 
at the following was approved.   
 

19 
 
 
Training  
• AILG Autumn Training Seminar to be held on the 17th & 18th 
September, 2025 in the Westport Woods Hotel, Westport, Co Mayo.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Mc Bride, seconded by Cllr Jordan attendance at 
the following was approved 
 
 Abroad 
• Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CPMR General 
Assembly in Barcelona from the 19th to the 21st November, 2025. 
 
C/271/25  
CONFERENCE/EVENT REPORTS  
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr McBride the following 
conference report was noted: 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle at St Patrick’s Day Festival in 
Rudolstadt, Germany from the 20th March 2025 to the 23rd March 
2025. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Molloy, seconded by Cllr McBride the following 
conference reports was noted: 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty at the Annual Planning 
Conference 2025 on the 11th April in the Salthill Hotel, Galway. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Crossan, seconded by Cllr Jordan the following 
conference report was noted: 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Jack Murray at events in St Charles, Missouri from 
the 21st May 2025 to the 30th May 2025.    
 
C/272/25 THAT THIS COUNCIL PRIORITISE THE PROVISION OF ITS BASIC 
AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES THROUGH ITS OWN HUMAN AND 
FINANCIAL RESOURCES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council prioritise the provision of its basic and essential 
services through its own human and financial resources as opposed to via 
outsourcing and external procurement.”    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Bradley said that Donegal County Council was duty bound to provide a 
range of basic services but that many of these were being outsourced and 
thus control lost over the overall quality aspect. Many of the operators 
concerned, he said, had a monopoly on the services provided.  
 
He alluded to various services such as road lining, house building, house 
maintenance etc which had been impacted. A road lining team, he advised 

20 
 
could be utilised full-time in any Municipal District in the county. There was 
room also, he noted, for the employment of an in-house quantity surveyor 
to speed up the house building process. Reference was also made to the 
fact that there was no street sweeping service in Buncrana and that this 
too had been impacted by outsourcing. This was something, he added, 
which could be done more efficiently in-house. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott supporting the motion said that the impact of outsourcing 
was being seen in all our towns and villages. He complimented the work 
Of the various Tidy Towns Committees but cited the need for the Roads 
Directorate to get involved again with some of the smaller jobs such as 
drain cleaning, verge clearing etc. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that the Council’s financial resources in relation to normal day to day 
revenue expenditure for a range of services and associated maintenance 
were set out and considered as part of the Revenue Budgetary process. 
This process would commence shortly, he said, for 2026 with members 
consulted initially at MD level. He said that back on the early nineties 
staffing levels had been higher and that these had not yet been restored 
following the recessionary period in 2008-2009. He said that the Council 
had submitted a workforce plan to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government  & Heritage outlining the staffing provision required over the 
next four years to ensure effective service delivery. Ultimately, he said, 
that the level of resources was directly linked to what the Council could 
afford financially either through own resources or provided directly by the 
various Government Departments.  
 
C/273/25 ENHANCED CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE EXISTING HEALTH 
SERVICES NORTH AND SOUTH  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Nic Mheanman it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"Donegal County Council urge the Irish Government and the Northern 
Executive to take the necessary steps to enhance co-operation between 
the existing health services North and South and move towards the full 
integration of service planning and delivery on an island wide basis. 
DCC state that reform must be implemented in a planned, systemic, 
strategic way to build an all-island Irish National Health and Care service. 
DCC further contend that it is essential that all of this work is accountable 
to the Irish Government, the Northern Executive and transparent to the 
public."     
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Doherty urged the Northern Ireland Executive and the Irish 
Government to take collective responsibility for the delivery of a fully 
integrated health service. 

21 
 
 
He alluded to the draft strategy circulated at a recent meeting of the North-
West City Region which referenced the need for a focus on a number of 
long term ambitions including the overall health aspect. This, he said 
emphasised the importance of cross-border delivery in terms of health and 
education and outlined a number of key interventions in terms of health 
and resilience and the need to focus on the shared challenges involved. 
This document, he noted, clearly acknowledged the partnership and 
collaboration that already existed between the Health Service Executive, 
the Department of Health and Western Health and Social Services. It also 
outlined the need to maintain a focus on the cross-border provision and 
health care collaboration.  
 
Cllr Doherty referenced the fact that travelling time was a key issue in 
terms of access to services and specialist healthcare in the northwest.  
 
He alluded also to the critical importance of having a surgical hub located 
in Letterkenny and expressed concern at the lack of information on the 
status of same. There were concerns also, he added, in terms of 
recruitment at Letterkenny University Hospital which needed to be 
addressed. A recent Sinn Fein document on the provision of a world class 
health service for a new Ireland, he said, highlighted many of the points 
outlined today.  
 
He asked that the motion be brought to the attention of the Taoiseach, the 
Tánaiste, the First and Deputy First Ministers in the Northen Ireland 
Executive and to the Health Ministers in each jurisdiction. 
 
It was acknowledged that there were a number of core areas in health 
provision that could be improved through the integration process.  
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman said that it was essential that there was on-going co-
operation and that there were no barriers for people who wanted to access 
the health system.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that it would be possible to write to the relevant political personnel as 
outlined above. 
 
Concluding Cllr Doherty said that his motion called for additional resources 
in the North-West highlighting the need for collaboration in all aspects of 
health delivery through enhanced service delivery.  
 
C/274/25 THAT GARDAI ARE ADEQUATELY RESOURCED TO TACKLE THE 
EVER INCREASING INCIDENTS OF ANTI-SOCIAL DRIVING IN OUR 
VILLAGES AND PUBLIC SPACES    
 
On the proposal of Cllr Crossan, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 

22 
 
 
"That Gardaí are adequately resourced to tackle the ever increasing 
incidents of anti-social driving in our villages and public spaces 
endangering life and causing criminal damage to both public and private 
property.”    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Crossan said that there had been a number of serious incidents in 
small urban areas and that it was only a matter of time until there was a 
serious accident. He called for a more proactive approach and a greater 
visual Garda presence and asked that the motion be forwarded for the 
attention of the Chief Superintendent.  
 
Cllr A Doherty seconding the motion said that the motion was timely and 
highlighted the seriousness of the problem in the Inishowen area. He 
noted that the former Chief Superintendent had highlighted the fact that 
the Garda Station in Carndonagh was no longer fit for purpose. It was 
essential, he added, that Gardaí had access to modern facilities and 
resources and said that this was particularly relevant in Inishowen and in 
the Carndonagh area.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that the Chief Superintendent would be contacted as requested. 
 
The Cathaoirleach noted that the Local Community Safety Partnership 
was due to be up and running at the end of September and that this was 
something that could be brought to the attention of same. 
 
Cllr Crossan welcomed the response and thanked members for their 
support.  
 
C/275/25 LETTERS OF ASSURANCE FOR HOMEOWNERS THAT COMPLETED 
WORK AS PART OF THE DCB SCHEME  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Farren, seconded by Cllr Beard it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 
“That this Council issue the letters of assurance that was promised as part 
of the 40 year guarantee for homeowners that completed work as part of 
the DCB scheme as soon as possible.” Families who have completed the 
remedial works were promised a guarantee but to the best of my 
knowledge the DCC have yet to issue them.    
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment, DCB 
Scheme and Facilities Management in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Farren said that the standard reply seemed to be that the letters were 
imminent and that the matter was being looked at. Many homeowners, he 
said, wanted to move on and sell their properties. He was he said 

23 
 
concerned about the delay and noted that letters of assurance had been 
issued by Mayo County Council.  
 
 
Cllr Beard said that not one letter had issued in Donegal and that this was 
concerning as people needed to move on, relocate etc for various reasons 
and were now sitting in limbo. All she contended had navigated the 
scheme and put their trust in it. It was essential, she added, that the 
Council issue the letters and provide the homeowners concerned with 
security. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
The Chief Executive informed members that the matter was in its final 
stages and noted that the letters applied to those who had retained 
blockwork and not those who had availed of the demolition option.  
He said that an update would be issued as soon as possible to all 37 
members.  
 
Cllr Farren acknowledged the response and called for the letters to be 
issued as soon as possible.  
 
C/276/25 DELAYS IN THE TIMELY PAYMENTS OF CLAIMS IN THE ENHANCED 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS SCHEME  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr Devine it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-   
 
 
“As everyone involved in the administration of the Enhanced Defective 
Concrete Blocks Scheme knows, the timely payment of claims is essential 
to ensure that contractors are able to keep projects on schedule.  
 
However, despite the dedication of the Defective Blocks team - who are 
working under extremely challenging conditions providing vital support to 
many distressed homeowners - an increasing number of claimants are 
reporting delays in the time taken to process payments. 
 
Members of the Defective Concrete Blocks Committee have previously 
been told that the aim is to process claims within three weeks from receipt. 
 
However, we are aware of many claims taking longer, which is causing 
unnecessary stress to homeowners already under extreme pressure. 
 
This motion calls on Donegal County Council to undertake an urgent and 
comprehensive assessment of the staffing and administrative resources 
allocated to the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme. 
 
Necessary steps should then be taken to ensure that claims are processed 
and paid within three weeks, and that should further information be 
required, such requests must be issued by Council staff within one week of 
submission.  
 

24 
 
Minor or administrative issues, such as missing Eircodes or trivial 
miscalculations, must not stall progress where the bulk of the claim is 
otherwise in order.  These can be dealt with prior to payment of the next 
claim. 
 
Furthermore, this motion calls on Donegal County Council to include the 
following information in the monthly Activity Report, which is sent to 
members and can be viewed on the Council’s website: 
 
• The number of claims submitted. 
• The number of claims processed within three weeks. 
• The average time for claims to be processed. 
• The number of claims delayed beyond that timeframe; and 
• The reasons for any such delays.”     
 
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment, DCB 
Scheme and Facilities Management in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Beard said the motion was self-explanatory and asked members for 
their support and assistance so as to alleviate the stress and heartache 
faced by  
Cllr Devine said that the situation had been well articulated by Cllr Beard 
and that delays in payments were causing undue stress for many families. 
He called for adequate resources and structure to be put in place to 
ensure the timely payment of DCB grants. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive said that the spirit of the motion was well 
acknowledged, and that the Council wanted to get people paid quickly. He 
said that there had been a bit of a backlog, but plans were in place to ramp 
up the team. He noted that there were currently 500-600 houses involved 
in the process and that considerable monies were moving through the 
system. Efforts would also be made, he added, to reduce the number of 
further information queries possibly through the webinar process.  
 
The DCB team, he advised, were doing their best to streamline the 
process all of which was geared to looking at what the Department 
wanted. They were, he said, working hard to meet the challenges and that 
good co-operation was the key to moving the applications forward. 
 
Cllr Beard welcomed the fact that steps were being taken to improve 
efficiencies and additional staff put in place. A webinar, she advised would 
help but the problem was that many homeowners who had done 
everything correctly were waiting 6-8 weeks or longer for payment. 
Builders, she said, had walked off site due to lack of payment.  
There were issues, she contended, with internal resourcing and whilst 
additional staff were welcome this resource needed to be continually 
monitored.  
 

25 
 
Payment details, she advised, needed to be included in the monthly DCB 
report so that improvements to the system could be tracked. She 
suggested that a simple validation checklist be published outlining the 
documentation needed at each stage of the process to allow applicants 
and the competent building professional to see exactly what was needed. 
 
She urged the Council to set a clear and accountable target for all claims 
to be processed and paid within three weeks and for further information 
requests to be issued within one week of submitting a claim.  
 
The Chief Executive said that he could not provide that commitment today 
but would look at the request in the spirit that it was asked.  
 
C/277/25 THAT THIS COUNCIL ISSUE A LETTER OF SUPPORT IN RELATION 
TO THE HOSTING OF THE 2029 WORLD SHEEP SHEARING 
CHAMPIONSHIPS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McDermott, seconded by Cllr Bradley it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-   
 
 
“That this Council issue a letter of support in relation to the hosting of the 
2029 World Sheep Shearing Championships”.     
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, IS & 
Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that the Clonmany Agricultural Show were going to 
make a bid to hold the 2029 World Sheep Shearing Championships as 
they were due to be held in either Ireland or Wales.  
 
 
It would, he advised, take place in the month of August in conjunction with 
the Clonmany Festival and the Clonmany Agricultural Show. Attention was 
drawn to the fact that a template already existed in terms of the plans that 
had been put in place to assist with the holding of the Irish Open in 
Ballyliffen in 2018. 
 
 
This event, he noted afforded a unique opportunity to showcase Donegal 
and would be televised worldwide attracting upwards of 10,000 visitors.  
 
The application deadline, he said, was the 15th October and asked that a 
letter of support be provided to facilitate the submission.  
 
 
 
Cllr Bradley said that he would be delighted to support the motion and was 
a fantastic opportunity to showcase Inishowen and Donegal. 
 
 
There was no position to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance said that Council representatives  
had already been in touch with the Clonmany Agricultural Show organisers 
and that this contact would remain in place as plans evolved and also to 
look at ways in which the Council could possibly assist with this event. 
Contact had also been made with Failte Ireland in relation to any 
assistance they could provide should the application be successful. 

26 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott welcomed the response and paid tribute to the organisers 
of the Clonmany Agricultural Show noting in particular the input of Gerard 
and Josephine Noone. 
 
C/278/25 PURCHASE OF THE LAND SITE OF THE CREESLOUGH TRAGEDY  
 
Cllr Devine proposed, seconded by Cllr McGee that the following motion 
be adopted:-  
 
 
“That this Council support my motion in this Council by purchasing the 
land site of the Creeslough Tragedy by a way of negotiation with the 
owner or CPO, if need be, and sit down with the families and design a 
memorial garden in memory of all those affected.” 
 
He received a response from the Chief Executive in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Devine said that he wanted to add to the motion. 
 
He called on the executive to sit down with the families concerned and 
discuss what was needed and wanted at the site of the tragedy. It was, he 
said an emotive issue and the families concerned had to relive again and 
again trauma of that day. The planning issue, he advised, was now at a 
conclusion and the time was right for meaningful discussion. He asked 
members for their support and expressed concern that the Red Cross had 
issued a statement the previous week again without consulting the 
bereaved family. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee supporting the motion said it was extremely important that the 
families concerned were put at the centre of any discussions or proposals.  
 
The Chief Executive said that the Senior Management Team in the 
Council and Elected Members were fully aware of the ongoing trauma of 
the bereaved families in Creeslough and had been to the fore in terms of 
working with the entire community in the aftermath of the tragedy of 
October 2022. This was, he admitted, an emotive issue for all concerned 
and the Council had to be transparent in any response that issued and be 
clear as to what its position was.  
 
He then read his response into the record. (See Appendix 1)   
 
Cllr Devine said the matter was not about money but rather about people’s 
lives . He welcomed the Regeneration Project for Creeslough but said his 
motion was about the site of the tragedy itself. He said he wanted this 
motion passed so that the executive could sit down with the families and 
discuss the matter and hopefully reach a different outcome. He said he 
was of the belief that no one from the Council had spoken with the families 
since the tragedy.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that those who had lost loved ones, those who were 
injured, or lost their homes in Creeslough, the entire community and all 
affected by the tragedy were at all times in his thoughts and prayers. He 
said that he had worked very closely with his colleagues in the Glenties 

27 
 
MD and with the previous Council together with the community in 
Creeslough, the Council Executive and the various agencies involved to 
provide assistance to those impacted by the tragedy. 
 
Working with the various community organisations, he said that every 
effort had been made to build resilience in the community and turn the 
situation around. He said that he had been working with Donegal County 
Council officials, community representatives, the Creeslough Working 
Group and the Regeneration Team and other voluntary and sporting 
organisations all of which were committed to the regeneration of 
Creeslough. He welcomed the strong and ongoing commitment shown to 
the community by all the relevant stakeholders.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said he believed that talking and consensus building was 
what the community needed. The use of the CPO process was, he 
contended, a very blunt response and should only be taken as a last 
resort. He queried whether any talks had taken place between the 
interested parties and the families concerned and all interested parties. 
Widespread consultation with all parties was needed, he added. All 
concerned, he said, had a responsibility to help the community recover. 
 
He thanked the Chief Executive, the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services and the staff of Donegal County Council for their 
assistance to date and paid particular tribute to Fr. John Joe Duffy who 
had helped carry the community through many dark days. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty then  proposed the following counter motion which was 
seconded by Cllr Molloy: 
 
“That the motion as submitted by Cllr Devine be deferred to the September 
meeting of Council and that prior to same, a workshop to discuss the 
motion and the ongoing works in Creeslough be convened”. 
Cllr Molloy noted that the Creeslough Working Group had been set up 
early in the process and that this had been instrumental in the 
development of the Creeslough Action Plan which was now well under 
way. He said that he was fully supportive of a workshop involving all 37 
members.  
 
Cllr Devine said that the crux of the matter was that nobody was actually 
speaking to the families concerned.  
 
The Cathaoirleach said that there was now a motion from Cllr Devine and 
together with a counter motion from Cllr Mc Clafferty to be considered. He 
said that the workshop to discuss the matter was the best option going 
forward. 
 
Cllr Devine said he was happy to accept this providing a meeting was 
arranged with the families concerned.  
 

28 
 
The Chief Executive drew attention to the fact that there were challenges 
with this recommendation as the matter under consideration was in effect 
privately owned land. 
 
Cllr C Brogan asked the media to respect the sensitive nature of the 
subject. He said that he believed that Cllr Devine was not fully informed. 
He said that the process had started with a Part 8 proposal, and this had 
been delivered by the Council with full engagement with the Creeslough 
Community Group. He referenced the work of the Town Team and the fact 
that there was full cross-party support for such initiatives. Glenties MD 
members, had, he advised, been completely involved with the 
development of the Community Hub and the associated funding aspect.  
He said he had the highest respect for the work undertaken by Donegal 
County Council management and staff who had dealt with the tragedy as it 
unfolded and in the aftermath of the event. The Council, he said, had 
engaged with the community and all relevant stakeholders. He noted that 
this was also applicable to the HSE who had been fully supportive of the 
ongoing initiatives and who would be part of the new Hub. He said he was 
supportive of the recommendation from Cllr Mc Clafferty .There had been, 
he advised, much good will and support shown to date and that it was 
important that this was built upon.  
 
Concluding, he noted, that there were issues such as the ongoing 
investigation which were outside of the remit of the Council. He said the 
issue was a sensitive one, but it needed to be acknowledged that a lot of 
good work was taking place within the community and that it would be 
wrong for the message to go out that the Council had turned their backs 
on the families in Creeslough.  
 
Cllr Devine in response said that he was not attacking the Council or being 
disrespectful to anybody but rather pleading that the families concerned 
would have the opportunity to sit around the table and discuss the situation 
regarding the site in Creeslough. 
At this juncture Cllr Devine agreed to withdraw the motion on the basis that 
a workshop be convened to discuss the issues involved. He called again 
for the Council to reach out to the bereaved families. 
 
C/279/25 EXCLUSION THROUGH INELIGIBILITY OF CO. DONEGAL FROM KEY 
NATIONAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING SCHEMES.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage to express concern over the exclusion through ineligibility of 
County Donegal from key national affordable housing schemes, including 
cost rental initiatives, and to request an urgent review of the eligibility 
criteria and geographic rollout of such schemes to ensure they are 
 
  
extended to rural and peripheral counties like Donegal, where housing 
 
  
need is significant but often underrepresented in national policy.” If 
passed, I would ask that this motion is circulated to all other local 
authorities. 

29 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Meehan said that there were two schemes namely the “Affordable 
Scheme” and the “Cost Rental Scheme” in which there was no action for 
the people of Donegal.They were, he said, designed to help people buy or 
rent homes at prices they could reasonably afford and targeted to low and 
middle income earners thus bridging the gap between those who qualify 
for social housing and those who are not able to avail of these supports. 
 
There were, he advised, an ever growing cohort of people who fell 
between the stools in terms of accessing this support. This had been 
compounded by the fact, he said, that there had been no increase in the  
associated means tests or access thresholds.  
 
All members, he noted, were contacted on a regular basis by people 
facing and dealing with housing insecurity. 
 
There had been, he added, an 90% increase in rents in Donegal over the 
past five years with no such increase in housing supports or general 
household income. It was noted that the cost of buying a house had 
increased by 63% over the same period. Department housing policies, he 
contended, needed to be reviewed even though Donegal was 
below the national average in terms of overall rent and general house 
prices.  
 
He welcomed the fact that changes were afoot in terms of the “Affordable  
Purchase Scheme” and said that every method at the Council’s disposal 
should be used to effect change in the schemes outlined above. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig supporting the motion said that decisions had 
been made politically in favour of the developers and that this had not 
been helpful to the people of rural Ireland and along the western corridor.  
Government policy, he contended, had left counties like Donegal behind 
and the result was emigration and the decimation of rural communities as 
young people cannot afford to buy or rent houses.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that there were a range of initiatives in relation to affordability which 
worked quite well including the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant 
Scheme. He alluded to the fact that Donegal had not been assigned a 
delivery target in respect of the broader Affordable Purchase Scheme but 
confirmed that the Council was actively engaging with the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage to address the issues. He said 
that a comprehensive expression of interest process had been undertaken  
looking at local affordability challenges and potential demand and same  
shared with the Department. Regarding Cost Rental Housing, he 
noted that no schemes had been developed in Donegal but that the 
Council was engaging with the Approved Housing Bodies to explore 

30 
 
opportunities for its delivery. It was anticipated, he said, that the new 
National Housing Plan would introduce Affordable Housing delivery  
targets for all local authorities including Donegal and that the work carried 
out to date could be utilised to enhance and deliver affordable housing 
options.  
 
Cllr Meehan noted that this was not specifically a Donegal issue and 
recognised that some of the other schemes such as the Vacant and 
Derelict Homes Scheme etc worked well. Affordable Schemes were, he 
said particularly necessary for low income families together with a revision 
of the relevant income thresholds.  
 
C/280/25 THE COUNCIL HOST A NUMBER OF WORKSHOPS IN THE COUNTY 
TO HELP INFORM OUR ELECTORATE OF ALL THE DIFFERENT 
OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE WITH REGARD TO HOUSING 
SUPPORTS AND GRANTS AVAILABLE.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Brogan, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
I propose that this Council host a number of workshops in our county to 
help inform our electorate of all the different opportunities available in all 
areas of housing supports, housing initiatives, local authority home loans, 
mortgage support etc including grants available for home energy 
upgrades and defective block scheme.    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Brogan said that there were so many different elements to Housing 
and people were having difficulty navigating the income challenges, finding 
available properties, acquiring information on a range of initiatives and 
services. He cited the need to be proactive and to get out and about and 
meet the people who wanted to avail of these services.  
 
He called for roadshows to be showcased in each Municipal District where 
people could have access to what was available in terms of housing 
supports. This type of initiative, he noted, had been used for the Croí 
Cónaithe Scheme and had proved to be most successful and gave 
members of the public an opportunity to ask questions and become 
familiar with the initiative. The fact that Donegal had the highest number of 
applications in the country for this scheme was reflective, he added, of 
how successful this type of initiative had been. 
 
He called on the Housing Section to organise the workshops as 
referenced in the motion and outlined the need for the banking sector, 
Credit Unions, Mortgage Lender, the SEAI etc to be included as a partners 
in the initiative. It would be helpful also, he added, to have some of the 
contractors involved with the DCB Scheme included as well. 
 
It was about face to face interaction, he contended, and asked members 
for their support in engaging with the electorate.  

31 
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that he could see how beneficial and informative that 
these types of workshops would be and would allow the public to meet 
with the people who were dealing with their applications. Regarding the 
DCB Scheme, he noted that minor elements were holding up payments. 
There was also room, he added, for the provision of information on the 
buying out of S.I Houses as issues often arose when the house has not 
been bought out. It was important, he said, that any such workshops were 
advertised so as to ensure maximum impact. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
the Housing Section would be happy to facilitate the arrangements of 
these workshops/information sessions in each MD as requested and that 
they could provide an opportunity for other agencies to get involved also.  
 
C/281/25 THAT THE COUNCIL REQUEST EXTRA FUNDING FOR LOCAL 
IMPROVEMENT SCHEMES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Naughton it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council requests extra funding from the Department for the 
Local Improvement Schemes.” 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above. 
 
 
Cllr Blaney said he had submitted a number of motions over the past 
number of years calling for increased funding. He said that over twenty 
years ago the Milford Electoral area received more funding in one year 
than that allocated at present for the entire county. 
 
Many of the lanes fixed at the time were, he said, once again in bad shape 
due to the lack of funding. Roads staff, he acknowledged did an excellent 
job with the available monies, but additional funding was needed.  
 
 
He welcomed the fact that Donegal County Council was always in a 
position to utilise additional funding if sanctioned and said that he hoped 
that the Minister would be in a position to grant extra monies. There were, 
he noted over 1500 applications in hand, but current allocations only 
allowed for a small fraction of these to proceed.  
 
 
Cllr Naughton said this was an issue which all members encountered and 
despite the regulations changing in the past number of years little inroad 
was being made into the number of schemes that had been completed. He 
said that if extra funding was received then staff were available to do the 
work. He said that contact should be made with the Department requesting 
that the LIS Schemes be brought back under the auspices of the Roads 
Section as this partnership worked very well. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 

32 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that significant 
investment was needed to address the full list of applications in Donegal. 
He said that the Department for Rural and Community Development and 
the Gaeltacht had indicated in the past few weeks that additional monies 
could be made available and querying if Donegal was in a position to draw 
down additional funding and ready to draw down same by the 7th 
November. Confirmation, he advised, had issued to the Department 
indicating that Donegal County Council was in a position to avail of the 
funding and to meet the necessary requirements. He agreed to keep 
members informed of developments and to update each Municipal District 
on the extent of their allocation.  
 
 
 
Cllr Blaney welcomed the positive response and thanked members for 
their support. 
 
C/282/25 PURCHASE OF A ROAD LINING MACHINE     
 
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“I am calling on the Roads Directorate to conduct a report on purchasing a 
road lining machine against the hiring of this vehicle.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Jordan said this was something that had been raised by both the 
Roads & Transportation SPC and the Machinery Yard Working Group. 
The issue, he advised, was the lack of road lining and the timeframe for 
getting this process completed.  
 
There was he acknowledged a value for money aspect involved and the 
fact that a specialised team needed to be put in place and adequately 
trained. This issue of road lining was, he added, a topic that came up 
throughout the county and driving instructors had indicated that the lack of 
same was impacting those doing their driving test. Poor lining at junctions 
etc was causing applicants to fail their driving tests.  
 
It was noted that there were only two contactors carrying out this type of 
work in the Northwest and that the waiting time for getting roads lined was 
particularly lengthy. It was, he contended, a matter of road safety and the 
provision of an adequate service to the public. He asked that options be 
explored in terms of the purchase of a road lining machine and the training 
of the relevant staff members.  
 
He said that approval had been given for the purchase of a high velocity 
tar sprayer and that this too had been categorised as special equipment.  
 
Cllr Jordan thus called for a study to be carried out in terms of the value for 
money aspect of buying or leasing a road lining machine.  
 

33 
 
Cllr A Doherty seconding the motion said that this matter was something 
that came up in all of the Municipal Districts and that concerns had been 
raised in relation to the safety aspect. He called on the Council to prioritise 
the response  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
The issue, he advised, was that the waiting time for works of this nature 
was much too slow and the associated delays impacted road safety. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads& Transportation said that there had 
been discussion on this topic at the Roads  & Transportation SPC and by 
the Machinery Yard Working Group. It would be beneficial, he added, for 
members to see the applicable detail in a report and said that same would 
be circulated to the Roads & Transportation SPC, the Machinery Yard 
Working Group and to all the elected members.  
 
Cllr Jordan asked that the report be prepared as soon as possible.  
 
C/283/25 DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL SUPPORT #ADDTHE 10TH - AN 
ALLIANCE SEEKING RECOGNITION FOR SOCIO-ECONOMIC 
STATUS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Meehan it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“Go dtacaíonn Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall le #cuiran10úleis 
(#addthe10th), comhghuaillíocht atá ag iarraidh go mbeidh stádas 
socheacnamaíoch aitheanta mar an 10ú bhforas de leithcheal a dhéantar, 
i reachtaíocht um chomhionannas na 26 Contae, a dtugtar An tAcht um 
Stádas Comhionann agus An tAcht um Chomhionannas Fostaíochta, 
Nollaig 2021, orthu. Iarrann muid ar an Rialtas i mBaile Átha Cliath 
reachtaíocht a leagan síos don athrú ríthábhachtach seo gan a thuilleadh 
moille”. 
 
“Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall supports #addthe10th an alliance which 
seeks to have socio- economic status recognized as the tenth ground of 
discrimination in the 26-Counties equality legislation, namely the Equal 
Status Act and the Employment Equality Act,1 Dec 2021. We call on the 
Government in Baile Átha Cliath to legislate for this important change 
without further delay”.    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig expressed disappointment that he had not been 
able to put forward a counter motion earlier in the meeting. 
 
Alluding to his motion, Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that it had to be 
acknowledged that Donegal and other counties had been left behind. He 
said that socio-economic discrimination impacted rural and working class 
areas with people being left behind in terms of job opportunities, 

34 
 
interviews, grant applications etc. He acknowledged the fact that this 
motion was one that was being driven by Senator Clare Daly.  
 
Cllr Meehan said that people were often discriminated on the grounds of 
where they were from, their employment/income status etc. The CSO, he 
added, had built up an evidence base of the various sectors experiencing 
discrimination across all sectors including government departments and 
agencies. The Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission, had also, he 
said called for socio-economic status to be included as the tenth ground 
for discrimination equality legislation. He highlighted the fact that socio-
economic status also affected people’s access to essential services such 
as healthcare and housing thus exacerbating poverty. He called for 
immediate government action.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
confirmed that the motion would be circulated to the Minister for Children, 
Disability & Equality.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig thanked members for their support and asked that 
a copy of the motion be circulated to all local authorities for their 
consideration.  
 
C/284/25 THAT DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL DECLARE A HOUSING 
EMERGENCY SITUATION IN DONEGAL  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“This motion calls on Donegal County Council to declare a housing 
emergency situation in Donegal due to the lack of housing in the county 
coupled with the defective housing crisis.  It is imperative that central 
government acknowledge the fact that, though defective concrete has 
been discovered in other Irish counties, Donegal remains the epicentre of 
the disaster with an estimated 30,000 homes affected (Rabach, 2024, 
Society Social Studies of Science) This motion is calling on Donegal 
County Council to do whatever is required for Donegal to be assigned 
special status regarding housing and responses to be given the urgency 
required.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that the severe lack of housing in Donegal warranted a 
special designation status from the Department and an urgent response to 
the crisis. This coupled with high rents he said was exacerbating the 
situation. He called for adequate resources to be put in place and 
highlighted the fact that all the elected members needed to be singing from 
the one hymn sheet regarding the housing situation. 
 

35 
 
Cllr Farren supporting the motion said that the lack of housing had been 
further compounded by the defective concrete blocks crisis. He noted also 
the fact that difficulty in getting planning permission and access to Uisce 
Éireann services were contributing to the problem.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that the scale and severity of the problem in Donegal was not on a par with 
the rest of the country and was impacting on various aspects of life for 
many people and most acutely in the delivery of housing. In addition, he 
said, that there were other systematic issues affecting same in both the 
public and private sectors for example the requirement for updated 
national standards for blockwork, concrete and aggregate, various 
infrastructural constraints inhibiting development.  
 
He was, he said, happy to write to the Minister as requested and to seek a 
formal delegation to further raise these issues.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that Uisce Éireann were stalling in terms of service 
development and this was severely impacting development throughout the 
county. Additional funding, he contended, was needed as a matter of 
urgency to help alleviate the housing crisis.  
 
C/285/25 THAT THE COUNCIL CALL ON THE GOVERNMENT NOT TO 
INCREASE THE STUDENT FEES TO €3000  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Nic Mheanman, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
  
 
  
“That this Council calls on the Government not to increase the student 
fees to €3000 this coming year which will be €1000 higher than they were 
last year, and that, 
 
This Council asks that the Government adheres to the "Programme for 
Government" in which they have outlined that they will reduce the student 
fees and not increase them.”   
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman said that it had been a slap in the face for students to 
find that their fees would be increasing by €1000 this year. Promises had 
been made in the Programme, she added, and these had not been 
adhered to. Students, she said, were being left in a precarious position 
and she thus called on the government to reverse the decision.  
 
Cllr A Doherty said that students were the country’s future and that this 
increase on top of the challenges being faced by defective concrete block 
families outlined the seriousness of the situation. The government, he 
advised had promised to reduce student fees, yet this no longer seemed to 

36 
 
be a part of the plan. He reiterated the call for the €1000 increase to be 
scrapped. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that a copy of the motion would be forwarded to the Minister for Further 
and Higher Education. 
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman thanked members for their support.  
 
C/286/25 THAT THE COUNCIL WRITE TO MINISTER DARRAGH O’BRIEN, 
MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE, ENVIRONMENT AND ENERGY 
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT SEEKING A MEETING TO 
DISCUSS THE NEED TO ENSURE THE N15 UPGRADE IS 
COMPLETED AS FAR A LIFFORD.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council write to Minister Darragh O Brien, Minister for Climate 
Change, Environment and Energy and the Department of Transport 
seeking a meeting to discuss the need to ensure the N15 upgrade is 
completed as far as Lifford. This remaining part of N15 needs to be 
included in any review of the National Development Plan. This remaining 
section of the N15 road in the county, is in urgent need of upgrading by 
realignment of the corners and the addition of a hard shoulder on both 
sides similar to the Ballybofey to Bundoran section .The narrow width 
along with the continual bends from Stranorlar to Lifford is well below 
National Primary Road standards on the very busy cross border road 
which has resulted in a lot of accidents. This National Primary Road was 
included in the Governments original National Roads upgrade over ten 
years ago, but it is not included in the present Ten-T.” 
 
Can a copy of this motion be sent to the Department Of Transport, T.I.I, 
the National Transport Authority and all our Donegal Oireachtas members 
asking for their help in organising a meeting with all the above?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan outlined the importance of ensuring that the remainder of 
the N15 from Stranorlar to Lifford was completed. He noted that there 
were issues in terms of the narrowness of the road and several bends all 
of which impacted on road safety. He alluded to the Corcam Bends and 
the fact there had been several accidents at this location. This section, he 
said, had been designed and redesigned yet nothing had been put in 
place. It was not just a matter of replacing the surface, he noted, but rather 
the need to get rid of the bends and put a hard shoulder in place given the 
level of usage. It was important, he added, that the road was brought to a 
decent standard given the level of National Primary traffic and through 
traffic that used it. He welcomed the commitment that correspondence 

37 
 
would issue to the Minster for Trans[ort, the Department of Transport and 
to the T.I.I. 
 
Cllr Scanlon, supporting the motion said this road was a vital artery with 
over a dozen roads leading into same from the border. It was, he advised, 
heavily trafficked and a main link also into the rest of the county. Over the 
years, he said, that there had been several accidents and fatalities on this 
road, and it was now imperative that it was brought to a decent standard 
for road users. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that this was a 
very significant issue for the Lifford/Stranorlar members who had raised 
the issue time and time again. This section of the N15, he noted, which 
was the only National Primary Road within the county which was not 
included in the Trans European Network comprehensive network. The 
Council, he confirmed, had continued to seek improvements on this on the 
N15 from Stranorlar to Lifford and was an ongoing item on the agenda for 
all T.I.I delegations on an annual basis. He noted that a request had also 
been made to have this section included in the National Development Plan 
review. The motion would be circulated, he added, as detailed. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan asked that this be done as soon as possible.   
 
C/287/25 ESTABLISHMENT OF A FACILITY FOR THE COLLECTION AND 
DISPOSAL OF SPENT SHEEP DIP  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Kelly it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council establishes a facility for the collection and disposal of 
spent sheep dip to support farmers who currently do not have the proper 
facilities or conditions to dispose of these chemicals properly.”  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment, DCB 
Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Scanlon said that the Agriculture Committee had received two 
presentations on the factors influencing water quality. The proper disposal 
of sheep dip was, he contended, very much a related issue. Sheep 
dipping, he said, was becoming more popular and that this was directly 
linked also to the success of the National Sheep Welfare Scheme. There 
were, he said, a significant number of farms, especially hill farms which 
had no safe way of disposing of sheep dip. These, he said, did not have 
slurry tanks or suitable ground conditions for the disposal of same. Proper 
facilities, he stated, were needed as a matter of urgency. Acknowledging 
the great work carried out by the Lough’s Agency and Inland Fishery in 
terms of water quality, he contended, that the provision of a disposal 
facility for spent sheep dip would contribute greatly to improving water 
quality. 
 

38 
 
 
Cllr Kelly seconding the motion alluded to the fact that the briefings 
delivered to Agriculture Committee had been very informative and that if a 
way could be found to assist farmers, then this would be most beneficial.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
 
Mr Johnny Mc Gettigan, Acting Director Water & Environment, outlined the 
fact that Donegal County Council had no role or remit in the provision of 
such facilities. The protection of the environment, he said, was a priority 
and the Council had worked with Teagasc, the Catchment Care Project  
and the various Fisheries bodies in producing guidance on the safe 
disposal of spent dip. Donegal County Council it was noted, was 
participating in a national working group with various stakeholders to 
assess the value of implementing a disposal scheme and to analyse the 
various methods of disposal that might be available so as to establish 
methods of good practice. He said that updates would be provided through 
the Climate Action & Environment Strategic Policy Committee and at 
Municipal District level. 
 
 
Cllr Scanlon thanked members for their support.  
 
C/288/25 Cathaoirleach’s Business 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
A vote of sympathy was proposed to the following: 
• The family of the late Phelim Doherty, Waterworks Inspector, 
Carndonagh. 
• Sadie Bradley, Roads on the death of her mother, May Bradley. 
• Liam Edwards, on the death of his mother, Kathleen Edwards. 
• Shane Smyth, Tourism Unit on the death his mother, Marie Smyth.  
• Natasha Costello, Bundoran Library on the death of her father, Donal 
Kerins (Snr). 
• Phil Loughlin, formerly Motor Tax on the death of her husband John 
Barron.  
• The family of the late Gavin Burke, formerly Library Services.  
• The family of the late Charlie Bonner, Ballybofey. 
• The family of the late Charlie Mc Ginty, Barnesmore. 
 
Schedule of Uisce Éireann Workshops 
Members endorsed the holding of the workshops outlined below: 
 
Date  
Venue  
Time  
MD  
10.09.25 
Donegal PSC  
9.15-10.45 
Donegal  
 
 
11.00-12.30 
Lifford/Stranorlar  
 
 
13.30-15.00 
Glenties  
 
 
 
 
11.09.25 
Letterkenny 
PSC  
9.15-10.45 
Inishowen 
 
 
11.00-12.30 
Letterkenny/Milford  
 
 

39 
 
Civic Reception  
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved to afford a Civic Reception in recognition of the hurling teams 
that won sixteen championships titles in a row over the period 1991 to 
2006. 
 
Congratulations  
Congratulations was extended to all involved in the organisation and 
running of the Foyle Cup and the Cathaoirleach wished all the participants 
taking part in the competition well. 
 
The Cathaoirleach  best wishes to Erin Friel from Newtowncunningham 
who had been selected to represent Ireland in the European U20 Athletics 
Championships in Macedonia. 
 
Congratulations was extended to Termon GAA team in relation to their 
return to Division 1 and to Glenfin Ladies team on winning the league 
title.  
 
Members wished Jim Mc Guinness and the Donegal Senior Football team 
every success in the 2025 All Irelan final. 
  
C/289/25 Chief Executive’s Management Report.   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda and noted the 
updates provided in relation to the following:- 
 
1.Community Development & Planning Services 
Community Development 
Clar Programme 2025. 
Capital Projects Delivery Unit & Taking in Charge of Housing Estates 
Division. 
Major Projects Update. 
Developer Provided Wastewater Infrastructure Resolution Works. 
Refugee Response Unit Update. 
Africa Day 2025 Youth Events. 
Skills Audit. 
Training for Centre Managers. 
IFEST. 
 
2. Water and Environment. 
Waste and Litter Management. 
Clean-Air Project. 
Letterkenny University Hospital Biodiversity Day. 
Oakfield Park-Festival of Food 24th & 25th May. 
Donegal County Council Compost Giveaway Events. 
National Food Waste Campaign – Free Compost Days. 
The Rubbish Film Festival 2025. 
First Ever National Relove Fashion Awards 
ADI- Anti Dumping Initiative 2025. 
Best Plastic Pollution Campaign 
Litter Free Campaign. 

40 
 
Donegal International Rally. 
Climate Action. 
Climate Action Plan  2024-2029-Progress Report 2024. 
Light for Local Authorities-Workshop Promoting Energy Efficiency and 
Responsible Lighting Practices. 
An Falcarragh/Gort an Choirce DZ Town Centre First Policy-Town Team. 
Community Drop- In Event. 
Central Laboratory. 
June Public Service Announcements. 
Defective Concrete Blocks-Update. 
 
3. Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services. 
Social Housing Delivery 
Specific Instance (SI) Housing 
Housing Grants 
Disable Person’s Grant(DPG) Scheme 
Cultural Division. 
Creative Ireland. 
Library Service. 
Skills for Life. 
Arts Service. 
38th Earagail Arts Festival 
16th Irish Aerial Dance Festival… 
2nd Donegal Mela. 
Regional Cultural Centre. 
Festivals. 
Exhibitions. 
County Donegal Heritage Office. 
Working Over by Exhibition. 
County Heritage Plan Funding. 
Heritage Week in County Donegal. 
The Laurels, Glenties Historic Towns Initiative. 
Rope Thatch Mentorship Scheme. 
Biodiversity Office. 
Wild Day Out at Inch. 
NPWS Funding Awarded for Biodiversity Projects in Donegal. 
Museum. 
 
4. Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services. 
Fire Service. 
Operations. 
Fire Prevention. 
Major Emergency Management. 
Local Enterprise Office. 
Progress Against Targets. 
National Enterprise Awards 2025. 
Harris Tweed Delegation in Donegal. 
Donegal Profit Net Engineering Network Tour of Terex Corporation. 
Ambition Female Accelerator Programme. 
Your Council Day-27th June 2025. 
Business Supports Clinics. 

41 
 
10XNorth West. 
 
5. Roads & Transportation. 
Roads Areas Update. 
Restoration Improvement and Restoration Maintenance. 
TII Emergency Pavement Scheme. 
National Roads Office Update. 
TEN-T Priority Route Improvement Project Donegal. 
A5 Western Transport Corridor 
Central Technical Services Update. 
Fintra Bridge 
EV Charging Infrastructure. 
Rail Connectivity. 
Airlink between Derry City & Dublin Airports. 
 
 
The Chief Executive said that he was available to take questions in 
relation to the items listed in the report.  
 
C/290/25 DETAILED BREAKDOWN OF THE TOTAL COST OF STREAMING 
MEETINGS OF THIS COUNCIL LIVE  
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
To ask the Director for Corporate Services for a detailed breakdown of the 
total cost of streaming meetings of this Council live over a 12 month 
period. I would like information including the financial cost, the number, 
type and frequency of meetings which were streamed as well as 
information in relation to the number of staff it takes to live stream each of 
these meetings.   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/291/25 HOW IS DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL SUPPORTNG AND 
PROMOTING “GREEN APPRENTICESHIPS”.  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How is Donegal County Council supporting and promoting "green 
apprenticeships", who are the relevant and principal stakeholders, what 
benefits accrue to the county and are current and future training provisions 
threatened by reported funding allocation shortfalls?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/292/25 WHAT IMMEDIATE STEPS HAVE THE COUNCIL TAKEN TO AMEND 
THE PROCESSES, POLICIES AND PROCEDURES IN RELATION TO 
HOUSE BUILDING  
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
To ask the Director for Housing what immediate steps the Council have 
taken to amend the processes, policies and procedures the Council has in 

42 
 
relation to house building in an effort to accelerate delivery following the 
publication of the Department of Housing's league tables which placed this 
Council at the bottom of the pile.   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
  
C/293/25 DURING 2025, WHAT METHODS HAVE BEEN USED TO TEST THE 
CONCRETE AND AGGREGATES USED IN THE BUILDING OF SOCIAL 
HOUSING UNITS  
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
 
During 2025, what methods have been used to test the concrete and 
aggregates used in the building of social housing units?  Could members 
be sent the results?   
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/294/25 ARE REQUESTS TO DRAW DOWN FUNDS FROM CENTRAL 
GOVERNMENT TO PAY CLAIMS BEING PROCESSED ON A TIMELY 
BASIS  
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
 
To ask the Director of Service, 
Are requests to draw down funds from central government to pay claims 
made under the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme being 
processed on a timely basis?   
 
She received a response from the Director of Water, Environment, DCB 
Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the above.  
 
C/295/25 SPECIAL AND URGENT MEETING BETWEEN DCC AND UISCE 
EIREANN  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
The Housing Commission has highlighted the need for increased 
investment by Uisce Eireann in water and wastewater infrastructure to 
support housing development, the review of the NDP is expected in July 
2025, 
 
My motion on Mar 31st last, adopted by DCC members demanded a 
special and urgent meeting between DCC and Uisce Éireann including the 
provision by Uisce Éireann of an infrastructure works plan for the County. 
What response from Uisce Éireann has DCC received to date and will 
council outline the follow up ,meetings and representations to Uisce 
Éireann that have occurred since March 31st last?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water, Environment, DCB 
Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the above.    
 

43 
 
C/296/25 WILL D.C.C. FULLY ENGAGE WITH THE NEXT PUBLIC INQUIRY ON 
THE DAIRIADIAN APPLICATION FOR A GOLDMINE IN THE 
SPERRINS  
 
Cllr Crossan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
Will D.C.C fully engage, in a meaningful way, with the next public inquiry 
on the Dalriadian Application for a Goldmine in the Sperrins so as to fully 
represent the citizens of Donegal and the R.O.I ?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development and 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/297/25 DALRIADIAN APPLICATION  
 
Cllr Crossan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Dalriadian Application. 
Can a copy of the D.C.C submissions to the previous inquiry be made 
available to members?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development and 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/298/25 UPDATE AS TO WHERE WE ARE AT WITH DEFECTIVE SOCIAL 
HOUSES BEING REBUILT  
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get an update as to where we are at with defective social houses 
being rebuilt and is there any update from the Housing Minister?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/299/25 BREAKDOWN OF STAFF HANDLING PAYMENTS FOR DCB 
HOMEOWNERS  
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get a breakdown of staff handling payments for DCB homeowners 
and can we request extra staff to speed up and handle more payments as 
they come in, as some people are waiting long on payments which is 
affecting builders on site?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water, Environment, DCB 
Scheme and Facilities Management in relation to the above.  
 
C/300/25 CAN WE BE PROVIDED WITH THE NUMBER AND PROPORTION OF 
SUCCESSFUL DERELICT AND VACAN HOMES GRANTS  
 
Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can we be provided with the number and proportion of successful Derelict 
and Vacant Homes Grants awarded in 2024 and so far in 2025, which 
relate specifically to houses located within the boundaries of settlements 

44 
 
(urban), and the number and proportion of same for the same period, 
which relate specifically to houses located outside settlements (in rural 
areas)?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/301/25 CAN WE HAVE AN UPDATED REPORT ON OUR CAPITAL PROJECTS 
FUNDED UNDER RRDF AND URDF  
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we get an updated report on our capital projects funded under RRDF 
and URDF and a timeframe for delivery?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community & Planning 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/302/25 FUNDING FOR A FEASIBILITY STUDY INTO RAIL CONNECTION FOR 
LETTERKENNY TO DERRY  
 
Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
In January 2025's plenary meeting, I submitted a motion calling on DCC to 
write to the Minister for Transport to seek a meeting regarding funding for 
a feasibility study into rail connection between Letterkenny & Derry, to 
match the ongoing feasibility study in the North around rail connection 
between Derry and Portadown. In the response I was informed that 
Directors would be meeting with Translink about this study. Have meetings 
taken place between Donegal County Council and Translink and, if so, 
what were the outcomes from those meetings? Please provide details. 
Has a letter been sent from Donegal County Council, in line with my 
January motion, to the Minister for Transport seeking a meeting to discuss 
funding for a feasibility study into rail connection for Letterkenny to Derry?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/303/25 UPDATE REPORT ON THE TEN-T  
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can we have an updated report on the TEN-T project including the 
Bonagee Link, Letterkenny Relief Road, Manorcunningham to Lifford and 
the Ballybofey-Stranorlar By-Pass?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/304/25 LIST OF PAYMENTS THAT ARE INCLUDED AS INCOME THAT ARE 
USED TO CALCULATE RENT ON LA HOMES  
 
Cllr NicMheanman submitted the following question:-  
 

45 
 
 
Can I get a list of payments that are included as income that are used to 
calculate rent on local authority homes?  
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/305/25 UPDATE ON THE RRDG PROJECTS FOR THE COUNTY  
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get an update on the RRDG projects for the county especially the  
"Seed Project" and can a letter be sent to the Minister Dara Calleary 
asking for his support in moving the projects forward?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/306/25 UPDATE ON GROUP WATER SCHEMES THAT ARE WITH THE 
DEPARTMENT AWAITING APPROVAL  
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I have an update on Group Water Schemes that are with the 
Department awaiting approval?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water, Environment, DCB 
Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the above.  
 
C/307/25 WHAT STEPS ARE THE COUNCIL TAKING TO RETAIN THE 
CURRENT STAFFING LEVELS.  
 
Cllr Scanlon submitted the following question:-  
 
 
What step are the Council taking to retain the current staffing levels i.e. 
(job security, long term guarantees of tenure ) and what are they currently 
doing to try to fill the 70+ vacancies that are currently within the Council?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/308/25 MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
Members noted the motions from other Councils.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL 
“Clare County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, James Browne T.D, to review and amend the 
terms of the Defective Concrete Block Scheme to allow for applications, 
where individuals are living long term in supported housing provided by 
charitable bodies. These are the homes of individuals & deserve equality 
of treatment with all other homeowner. If passed, that the motion be 
circulated to all LA’s.”  
 
 
 

46 
 
DERRY CITY & STRABANE DISTRICT COUNCIL  
“That this Council writes to the Minister for Infrastructure to record our 
devastation in light of the recent High Court ruling on the A5, and 
repledges this Council’s full support for the A5 upgrade.  
 
Welcomes the commitment from the Minister to work constructively with 
the A5/N2 Cross Border working group at its meeting this week and 
supports the Minister assessing the judgement and urgently considering 
options for a way forward.  
 
Commits to working with the other four Councils who have an interest in 
this project and will write to them directly asking them to also repledge 
their support to working with the Minister to see this project proceed as 
soon as possible. Also to seek an immediate and urgent meeting with the 
Minister and the four relevant Councils.  
 
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“I propose that we write to the Minister for Housing to call for an immediate 
review of the Affordable Housing Policy, to facilitate wider development 
catchment. I also propose that motion is forwarded to all local authorities.” 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Limerick City and County Council call on the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, James Browne, TD, to amend the Tenant 
Incremental Purchase Scheme 2016/S.I. No. 619/2023, to allow tenants to 
purchase their Council house after a period of five years and not a ten-
year period as is currently required.” 
 
MID ULSTER DISTRICT COUNCIL  
That the Council:  
• Seeks a meeting with the Minister for Infrastructure to discuss the 
A5WTC; 
• Writes to the Minister for Infrastructure to record our disappointment in 
light of the recent High Court ruling on the A5WTC and re-pledge support 
to the A5 upgrade,  
And  
• Commits to working with the other four Councils who have an interest in 
the A5 project, Fermanagh & Omagh District Council, Derry City & 
Strabane District Council, Monaghan County Council and Donegal 
County Council, and ask them to also re-pledge their support to working 
with the Minister to see the project proceed as soon as possible.  
 
WATERFORD CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL   
“Waterford City & County Council calls upon the Central Bank to take all 
possible steps to discontinue facilitating the sale of Israeli bonds.” 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
 

47 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
Appendix 1 
Motion – Cllr. Tomás Seán Devine 
Can this Council support my motion in this Council purchasing the land site of the 
Creeslough tragedy by a way of negotiation with owner or CPO if need be and sit down 
with the families and design a memorial garden in memory of all those affected. 
 
Reply: 
Before addressing the present Motion, the Council is very much aware of the background to same, 
being the unimaginable tragedy which happened in Creeslough on the 7th of October, 2022. The 
Council acknowledges that for the families who lost their loved ones that day, their grief is continuing 
and may be unending. The shock and pain of the event was felt throughout the entire community and 
indeed the whole Country. 
 
In the immediate aftermath of the tragedy, the community came together and was helped considerably 
by the efforts of a great number of organisations, public bodies and individuals. For the Council’s part 
it took the proactive step of quickly establishing the Creeslough Working Group, made up of Elected 
Members, Council Officials and most importantly representatives of the local community in 
Creeslough. 
Through this process, and with tremendous support provided by ARUP, on a pro-bono basis, the group 
carried out extensive consultations with the community in Creeslough always being mindful of the need 
for space for the thoughts and views of the families to be taken on board in all the emerging proposals. 
This thought process and engagement has continued. 
The output from this work was the development of a Creeslough Action Plan, launched in March 2024 
and the identification of a Community Regeneration Project in the village. The Council has progressed 
the project at pace with Part 8 Planning consent secured in September 2023. A successful application 
was then made under Call 5 to the Rural Regeneration & Development Fund with €12.1M secured in 
May 2024, and a co-funding commitment of€ 1.3 M from the Council to bring the total allocation to € 
13.4 M. 
 
This project was intended to be the Council’s and indeed Government’s acknowledgement and 
contribution towards a long-lasting legacy project to mark and respect the tragedy in Creeslough in 
October 2022. The project is now progressing through the detailed design phase and on to the 
procurement of a contractor to deliver the project. 
 
The Council has also established and supports a Town Team in Creeslough who will lead the 
implementation of other projects and actions identified in the Action Plan. 
Turning now directly to the above motion before Council today. 
 
1. Since submission of the motion, I had a discussion with Cllr. Devine and have 
engaged with the Corporate Policy Group of the Council I have also given very 
careful and detailed consideration to the appropriate response of the Council 
Executive to the proposed Motion. 
 
2. In responding to the Motion which directly affects the Creeslough families who 

49 
 
have endured such grief, I know that no-one within the Council (members and staff 
alike) would want to add to that grief. However, my belief is that the Motion should 
not be adopted, and I would strongly urge the members not to do so for the 
following reasons: - 
 
(a) The issue of the future treatment and use of a site where a great tragedy has taken 
place is one that can be very difficult, distressing and possibly contentious for those 
involved. Where it is public land, it is a matter within the control of the statutory 
body, agency or department concerned. Where as in Creeslough, it is private land 
same is under the direct control of the landowner(s). I believe that any decision to 
acquire the land and develop same as a memorial garden could only ever come 
about through negotiation and agreement between all interested parties - ideally 
involving the whole community. If there was such agreement, (i) potential sources 
of funding would clearly have to be explored whether public, private donation, 
other private fundraising etc. or a combination of all and (ii) the future ownership 
structure and management of such a memorial would have to be determined. It 
would not be something that the Council would take the lead role in. 
 
(b) The Council has many varied roles and responsibilities arising from the Creeslough 
tragedy across planning and community, environment and emergency services. 
However, the Council does not have a statutory role or responsibility in the 
development of a memorial site on the Creeslough lands or in the acquisition of 
lands for that purpose. Even if it did and there was no agreement with the 
landowner(s) concerned successful confirmation of a CPO would be highly 
unlikely applying normal Compulsory Purchase rules and principles. The fact that 
the Council is leading on the development of the legacy project nearby in the 
village on public lands would certainly be a string consideration. 
 
(c) It is not clear to me should the motion be adopted at the Council meeting today, 
that it can be acted upon. I say this in the context that to implement any motion 
adopted by the Council it must be consistent with the role and function of the Local 
Authority and there has to be a budget available to implement same. I do not 
believe that either of these criteria are met in this instance. In my opinion it would 
be unwise for the Council to adopt a motion where it will most likely not be capable 
of implementation and at the same time would give rise to undeliverable 
expectations for grieving families. 

 
50 
 
Summary 
I would therefore urge and recommend that the members do not adopt the present Motion and in the 
alternative that in the event there is agreement between all interested parties and the local community 
to the development of a memorial garden at the Creeslough site or at another appropriate site in the 
local Creeslough area, they consider supporting such development through the Creeslough Town 
Team or similar structure. 
It is fully understood that each time the Creeslough Tragedy is raised in a public forum, there is huge 
sympathy and empathy for the families effected and the wider community. 
It is also fully understood that the Council’s response will be seen by some as uncaring and unhelpful 
and yet the Council has no role or responsibility to purchase these private lands and create a memorial 
garden. 
The Council understands how the response will be received and yet the Council must be clear to all 
concerned and not create unrealistic expectations, which would ultimately lead to prolonged 
uncertainty and possible further distress to those most affected. It is for this reason that the Council 
wishes to provide a clear and definite response. 
 
John G. McLaughlin. 
Chief Executive 
 
