1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1st October, 2024 
 
 
 
 
TO ALL MEMBERS OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
The Adjourned September Meeting of Donegal County Council, will recommence on 
Monday 7th October, 2024 at 12 noon in the Council Chamber, County House, Lifford to 
consider the unfinished business listed below: 
 
• Items No. 8 to 50 
 
Documents can be accessed in the current meeting folder on eCouncil. 
 
An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
 
_________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
MINUTES OF ADJOURNED SEPTEMBER MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY 
COUNCIL HELD ON 7TH OCTOBER, 2024 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/321/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, M Boyle, F Bradley J Brogan, D 
Coyle, T Crossan, TS Devine, A Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, DM Kelly, M 
MacGiolla Easbuig, M McBride, M McClafferty, P McGarvey, D McGee, P 
McGowan, G McMonagle, D Meehan, JS Ó Fearraigh, M Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs L Blaney, C Brogan, P Canning, G Doherty, N Jordan, J 
Kavanagh, F McBrearty, M McDermott, M Mc Mahon, D Nic Mheanman, A 
Molloy, J Murray. 
Apologies: M Harley. 
 
C/322/24 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing & 
Corporate/Meetings Administrator, Liam Ward, Director of Community 
Development & Planning Services, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, 
Anne Marie Conlon, Head of Economic Development, Deirdre Harte, 
Project Officer, Economic Development, Stephen Flynn, Senior Engineer, 
Roads & Transportation, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William 
Colvin,Clerical Officer, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall 
MacGiolla Choill, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie 
Crawford, Staff Officer. 
 
C/323/24 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING 
On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr M Farren it 
was resolved to adjourn the meeting to later in the afternoon to facilitate 
the completion of the Special Plenary Housing Meeting. 
 
C/324/24 
TO CONSIDER AND ENDORSE SUBMISSIONS TO THE REVIEW OF 
THE NATIONAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
Ms Anne Marie Conlon, Head of Economic Development gave a detailed 
presentation on the submission to the review of the National Planning 
Framework which had been compiled in conjunction with Derry City & 
Strabane District Council. She acknowledged the input of Ms Deirdre 
Harte, Project Manager, Shared Island Project, the Planning Section of 
Donegal County Council and Planning Staff in Derry City & Strabane 
District Council. The key element of the submission, she said, was to 
ensure that the Northwest City Region realised its potential as a net 
contributor to the economy of the island and to address regional balance.  
This it was acknowledged took into consideration the following: 
1. Recognition of the Derry-Letterkenny City Region  within the 
national hierarchy of city regions.  

3 
 
2. Further strengthening of the role of Letterkenny as a key Regional 
Growth Centre in the Northern & Western Region. 
3. Identification and prioritisation of enabling and critical infrastructure 
for the NWCR. 
4. Supporting the establishment of a dedicated Economic Taskforce 
for the NWCR. 
She said that if regional development was weakened in the NPF First 
Revision then there would be wider repercussions for future priorities, 
strategies, and investment potential. 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
informed members that Donegal County Council had also made a 
submission which was very much aligned with the submission from the 
Northwest City Region. The Members of the Northwest Development 
Group were, he said, were aware that at a session in late November last 
year, Donegal County Council were invited as a city region with Derry City 
& Strabane. District Council to make an early submission which was 
forwarded in January 2024. It was disappointing, he added, that many of 
the asks in this document were not reflected in the first draft revision 
document.  
He said that it had well outlined in the presentation as to what was 
required with additional back up information and evidence provided.  The 
importance of this revision, he added, should not be underestimated in 
terms of its significance for the region and its future infrastructural needs. 
He encouraged all who had access to any political influence to use it so 
that the submissions as outlined could be reflected in the final draft 
revision document when published. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan welcomed the fact that the anomaly in relation to the 
inclusion of the remaining section of the N15 Ballybofey to Lifford section 
had been included. He said that there was an issue in that the 
Lifford/Stranorlar MD was in the Northwest region but not part of the 
ICBAN area and as a result was not party to the relevant updates. These, 
he said, needed to be provided at MD level. 
 
The Lough Mourne extension, he added, was a massive project requiring 
major funding and needed to be actively pursued. 
 
He was, he said, concerned that several terms were being used from the 
Northwest Metropolitan Area to the City Region/Growth Centre and that 
this had created confusion. It was imperative, he added, that the overall 
terminology to be used was clarified and all concerned clear as to what 
areas were included. This was, he confirmed, a region in transition and 
lagged behind the rest of the country in terms of overall development. 

4 
 
Cllr A Doherty said that time was of the essence here and that cognisance 
had not been taken of the fact that the Northwest City Region had the 
fourth largest population in the country. The draft revision, he contended, 
had removed references to regional development together with the risks 
for not achieving stated targets. He noted that the National Planning 
Revision Framework review occurred every six years and that there would 
not be another opportunity to influence the process until 2030. He alluded 
to the fact that this extended beyond the planning process and was tied in 
with several mechanisms all striving for regional balance. He cited the 
necessity of getting the message out that the Northwest City Region to be 
a vibrant and attractive region needed to be included in the National 
Planning Framework. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that the concept of the Northwest City Region had 
developed over the last ten years given the clear lack of investment in the 
NW region. There was clear acknowledgement that the only way achieve 
this status was through cooperation with Derry City & Strabane District 
Council and with the assistance of various stakeholders in the education, 
tourism, health sectors etc. He said that the region was nearly on par with 
Cork City, and it would be remiss of any government to exclude its 
potential. 
Projects such as the A5 and the TEN-T, he added, needed to be 
progressed with both acting as a definitive catalyst for the Northwest City 
Region. 
The skill set developed within the region was, he contended, as good, if 
not better than any other region. A lot of work, he said, had been done and 
the aim was that the Northwest City Region would become a net 
contributor. 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that it was imperative that all possible was done to 
ensure that this status was recognised. The presentation, he said, had 
referenced various aspects that needed investment, yet these had been 
caused by, lack of investment over the past number of years. He cited the 
need to ensure that everything possible was done to retain city status for 
the Northwest Region. 
 
Cllr C Brogan said that all concerned needed to take credit for what had 
been achieved to date. The Northwest City Region was, he said, a role 
model and the collaboration between Donegal County Council and Derry 
City & Strabane District Council clearly showed what could be achieved. 
The Irish Government, he said, had invested €46m in Magee University, 
and a good working relationship had been established between the 
University of Ulster and the Atlantic Technological University. A lot of good 
things, he said, were happening and referenced the €600m to be provided 
by the Irish Government for the A5. All of these, he added, would help the 

5 
 
Northwest City Region get on a level playing field and receive the 
investment that it needed. 
 
Cllr Boyle alluded to the fact that there ports had not been referenced in 
the submission and that there was no recognition of the marine economy 
despite Killybegs having the deepest water in Ireland. He cited the need to 
promote wind energy and said that this was something that could be 
pursued by both Councils creating jobs and boosting the economy in the 
long run. The N56 Inver to Killybegs Road, he added, required immediate 
upgrade works to facilitate industrial traffic coming from Killybegs. 
 
Cllr Canning concurred with the above and welcomed the fact that Minister 
Mc Conalogue was positively disposed to the submission. He advised of the 
need for ongoing collaboration and the fact that this had a positive impact 
for the entire Northwest. 
 
It was unanimously agreed to endorse the submissions to the review of the 
National Planning Framework.  
 
C/325/24 
 TO NOTE CHANGE IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE DONEGAL LOCAL 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and it was unanimously agreed to approve the nomination of Ms 
Eve Anne McCarron and Ms Anne McAleer as representatives of 
Letterkenny ATU and the Health Service Executive on the Donegal Local 
Community Development Committee.  
 
C/326/24 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE POLICY 
GROUP HELD ON THE 15TH JULY, 2024.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Meehan, members 
noted the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 15th July, 
2024.  
 
C/327/24 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr Bradley the 
authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 
(as amended) was adopted. 
 
 
 

6 
 
Training  
• AILG Autumn Seminar held on the 11th and 12th September, 2024 in the 
Hillgrove Hotel, Monaghan.  
• AILG Elected Members Autumn Training Programme  
• AILG & Office of the Planning Regulator Seminar “Overview of the 
Planning System” in the Bridge House Hotel, Tullamore on the 28th 
September, 2024.  
• LAMA Autumn Seminar to be held on the 17th & 18th October, 2024 in 
the Newgrange Hotel, Navan, Co Meath. 
 
Other 
• Attendance of the Mayor of Letterkenny at the 78th Independence Day 
of India event at India House, Foxrock, Dublin on the 15th August, 2024. 
• Attendance & participation of ICBAN members on the ICBAN Capacity 
Building Programme 2024-2025 
 
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Dúiche Workshop “Capitalising 
on Culture, Competing the Difference” in Leuven, Belgium from the 14th 
to the 18th October, 2024. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Golden Bridges Events in the 
USA from the 11th to the 14th November, 2024. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the EMA Forum in Amsterdam on 
the 20th and 21st November, 2024.  
• ICBAN Members Study visit to the Borderlands Region of Scotland at 
the end of November 2024. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the 135th anniversary celebrations 
for the Donegal Association of Philadelphia in Philadelphia from the 6th 
to the 8th December, 2024.  
 
Cllr J Brogan queried the cost of foreign travel and whether all of the 
trips outlined were necessary. The Cathaoirleach advised that detail in 
relation to these was included with the agenda and an approximate 
costing outlined.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan proposed the adoption of the above and said that it was 
imperative that the Council always looked where savings could be made 
and ensured that the value for money aspect was adhered to. Cllr 
Bradley seconded the proposal. 
 
C/328/24       CONFERENCE REPORTS  
 
Members noted the report submitted by Cllr McMonagle in relation to his 
attendance at the 78th Anniversary of India’s Independence Day Event at 
India House, Foxrock, Dublin.  
 
 

7 
 
C/329/24 
EXTENSION OF LOUGH MOURNE RESERVOIR  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr Kelly it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That this Council write to Uisce Éireann, the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage and to Minister Darragh O’ Brien 
unanimously calling for Lough Mourne Reservoir to be extended to include 
the Letterkenny MD and to include outlying areas not covered, upgrading 
all existing networks and upgrading reservoirs within the existing 
Lifford/Stranorlar MD".  
 
 
He received a reply from the Director of Water & Environment in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig suggested that the motion be amended to include 
reference to “Throughout Donegal”. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan said that he appreciated that many small towns and 
villages were suffering and that he was supportive of the extension in a 
measured capacity. This extension, he said, needed to be provided for 
within the confines of the National Development Framework otherwise 
nothing would happen. This project, he said, needed to go ahead 
regardless and many towns and villages in rural Donegal were in need of 
immediate assistance.  
 
 
 Cllr Kelly supporting the motion outlined the need for an adequate water 
supply in Letterkenny and said he could appreciate that there were issues 
in terms of water capacity throughout Donegal. It was, he said, an 
excellent motion and essential that it was included in the National 
Development Plan.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
C/330/24 
ROLL OUT NATIONWIDE OF THE HEALTHY AGE FRIENDLY HOMES 
PROGRAMME   
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Crossan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That this Council welcomes the roll out nationwide of the Healthy Age 
Friendly Homes Programme, particularly confirmation of the placing of co-
ordinators in each of the 31 local authorities, 
 Calls now on Donegal County Council to continue to provide and assist the 
network of support dedicated to helping all citizens live well as they age 
and ensure that older people receive the right support, at the right time, in 
the right place”.     
 

8 
 
He received a reply from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Doherty welcomed Donegal County Council’s involvement on the 
Older Person’s Council and said it was recognised that Donegal was an 
age friendly county which recognised diversity among older people.  
 
He cited a number of issues impacting on older people in Inishowen. 
These included: 
 
• The fact that eye treatment was now only available in Sligo which 
was lengthy journey for many elderly people. 
• Additional supports needed to encourage older people to move to 
smaller and more compact accommodation. 
• Housing Adaptation issues and application process needed more 
dedicated personnel. 
• Clerk of Works position in Inishowen has not been filled and this is 
holding up housing adaptation applications. 
 
Cllr Doherty asked for an update in relation to the new Age Friendly 
Strategy which was to be delivered through a multi-agency approach. He 
queried also how this would be presented to the public. 
 
Cllr Crossan said he concurred with this assessment and was happy to 
support the motion. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services  
drew attention to the fact that An Age Friendly Co-ordinator had been 
appointed in each of the 31 local authorities with Donegal being allocated 
two. These would, he said, would provide increased resources to older 
people and would be able to make representations on their behalf. The 
Housing Section, he noted worked with its elderly tenants and the Council 
itself was very proactive in several age friendly initiatives. Members, he 
said, would get an opportunity to have an input into the overall strategy.  
 
It was acknowledged that the Council worked in partnership with the Age 
Friendly Alliance and the Older Persons Council and that the Chief 
Executive and the Cathaoirleach were strongly committed to supporting 
this work. He said that an update would issue in relation to the problems 
with the Housing Adaptation Grant process.  
 
Cllr Doherty welcomed the fact that there were two Age Friendly Co-
ordinators in the county and the efforts were being made to promote active 
age equality.  

9 
 
C/331/24 
 INSTALLATION OF SPEED CAMERAS AT SPECIFIC LOCATIONS 
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTY     
 
On the proposal of Cllr T Crossan, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 "In light of the fact that 14 people, to date, have died on our Donegal 
roads, I propose that permanent speed cameras are installed at specific 
locations throughout the county. As a precursor to this, a pilot scheme, at 
least, should be initiated to evaluate the potential success and impact of 
such a scheme".   
 
 
He received a reply from the Director of Roads & Transportation in relation 
to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Crossan cited the need for an increased Garda presence and fixed 
cameras at specific locations. He noted that a lot of accidents involved 
young people and that drivers of all ages were using mobile phones whilst 
driving. More Garda resources, he said, needed to be employed to ensure 
an increased level of enforcement and hopefully reduce the deaths on our 
roads.  
 
 
Cllr A Doherty alluded to a number of tragic deaths that had taken place 
recently in Inishowen and said that prevention was the key. This, he said, 
should involve the general road network, Council Housing Estates etc so 
that road traffic accidents could be reduced or removed. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Stephen Flynn, Senior Engineer, confirmed that An Garda Siochana  
were progressing the installation of nine static speed cameras around the 
country and that these were due to be installed by the end of 2024 and 
chosen on the basis of fatal and serious injury data over the last seven 
years. These, he said, were in addition to the 58 new mobile safety 
cameras operated by GoSafe and that An Garda Siochana were 
developing a business case  for the introduction of another 100 static  
 
speed cameras.  
 
C/332/24 
THAT WE ENGAGE WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT IN 
RELATION TO ACCIDENTS ON A NUMBER OF REGIONAL ROADS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 “That Donegal County Council engage with the Department of Transport in 
relation to the Regional Roads in parts of Donegal where a number of 
accidents have occurred”.    
 

10 
 
 
He received a reply from the Director of Roads & Transport in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
Cllr Farren said that the Department had not taken on board members 
representations and that accidents were occurring regularly in specific 
locations. He referred in particular to Clar Corner and the stretch of road 
on the Redcastle side up to the Ballyrattan Road, where a number of 
accidents had taken place over the years. He noted that there had been 
plans back in 2008 to carry out works but that these not materialised due 
to lack of funding. He said that he had asked on a number of occasions for 
a counter to be put down at this location and requested that this be 
progressed as a matter of urgency.  
 
 
This, he contended, was a dangerous location and drivers were not 
adhering to the speed limit. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott supporting the motion said that this was a busy stretch of 
road and funding was needed to progress the necessary safety works.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Stephen Flynn, Senior Engineer alluded to the response provided by 
the Director of Roads & Transportation and to the fact that the Department 
of Transport invites applications for safety improvement works on Regional 
and Local Roads annually in the last quarter of each calendar year. He 
outlined the specific allocation process and said that there would be further 
engagement with the Elected Members regarding same over the coming 
months.  
 
 
Cllr Farren asked that this stretch of road be kept under consideration 
when making the funding application and said that he would welcome a 
meeting with the local roads engineer to discuss same.  
 
C/333/24 
RAISED TABLES IN AREAS THAT ARE WITNESSING HIGH TRAFFIC 
SPEED  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 "Given the success of the raised tables in Newtowncunningham, I would 
ask that the road safety team and the roads engineers within this county 
put in place a proper low-cost safety plan that includes raised tables in 
areas that are witnessing high traffic speed in built up areas".   
 
 
He received a reply from the Director of Roads & Transportation in relation 
to the above.  
 

11 
 
 
Cllr Canning cited the need to put physical restraints in place given the 
serious issue with speeding on roads in Inishowen. He noted that the 
raised tables installed in Newtowncunningham had been very successful 
and that in other areas ramps had been beneficial. Going forward, he 
advised of the need for a low-cost safety plan with adequate provision for 
raised tables.  
 
 
 Cllr C Brogan said that the issue was a serious one and noted that the 
Newtowncunningham model had worked very well. There had been issues 
in some areas, he said, where ramps had been too high and caused 
problems. He advised of the need for a clear policy and specific proposal 
in relation to traffic calming. He said that it was unacceptable that the 
Members Infrastructure Fund would be used to fund the installation of 
ramps in some Municipal Districts. 
 
 
There had been much talk, he said, over the last number of years about 
traffic calming measure but little had been done. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Stephen Flynn, Senior Engineer, said it was recognised that the 
measures in Newtowncunningham had been very successful but that 
raised tables were part of a wider suite of interventions including wider 
footpaths, crossing points etc.  
 
C/334/24 
THAT THE COUNCIL AMEND ITS EXISTING CIVIL DEFENCE PLAN TO 
PROVIDE REST CENTRES FOR ALL AFFECTED HOMEOWNERS 
DURING SEVERE WEATHER EVENTS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr McGee it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 With the winter storm season fast approaching, it is imperative that those 
homeowners who feel unsafe living in properties affected by the presence 
of defective concrete, or temporary accommodation such as static 
caravans while remediation work is taking place, have a place of refuge 
during severe weather events. 
 
 
 “This motion calls on Donegal County Council to amend its existing Civil 
Defence Plan to provide rest centres for all affected homeowners when a 
red weather warning has been issued by Met Eireann”.  
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Economic Development, 
Information Systems & Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Beard said that homeowners living in unsafe houses and in mobile 
homes were living in fear of severe weather events. She said she was not 

12 
 
happy with the reply and the fact that the Civil Defence Plan would not be 
reviewed until 2026. The situation, she contended, was extremely serious 
and represented a real emergency. It was imperative, she added, that rest 
centres were provided for families in such circumstances given that the 
vast majority of homeowners affected were not yet included in the 
Scheme. She called on the Council to provide people with a rest centres 
given that a red weather alert effectively meant damage to life.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee supporting the motion said that Donegal County Council had  
a responsibility to help and that it was not enough to wait for an increase in 
the ancillary grant to be approved. He said that people needed to have 
confidence in the Council and to see that they had their best interests at 
heart.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Ms Anne Marie Conlon, Head of Economic Development, said that it was 
important to give confidence and comfort to homeowners. She said that 
there was provision in the Civil Defence Plan and especially when faced 
with a red weather alert or any emergency incident to provide emergency 
housing. Civil Defence, she said, worked with the local housing teams in 
instances where individual families needed assistance. Community 
facilities were also identified, she added, as part of the Civil Defence Plan 
and it was important that people were aware that Civil Defence provided 
this assistance.  
 
Cllr Beard said that it was essential that community facilities were 
advertised prior to severe weather alerts and communicated through all 
available social media channels.  
 
C/335/24 
PROVISION OF SOCIAL HOUSING FOR THOSE WITH SEN, AEN AND 
PHYSICAL DISABILITIES  
 
Cllr Bradley proposed that the following motion be adopted:-  
 
 
 "That this Council will adopt a policy to provide housing in every new 
social housing development in the county for those with SEN, AEN and 
physical disabilities".    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig asked if the motion could be amended to include a 
reference to the provision of independent living facilities in new estates. 
Cllr Bradley accepted the amendment and thus on the proposal of Cllr 
Bradley, seconded by Cllr Canning it was resolved to adopt the following 
motion: 

13 
 
 
 "That this Council will adopt a policy to provide housing in every new 
social housing development in the county for those with SEN, AEN and 
physical disabilities and to facilitate the inclusion of independent living 
facilities in new estates”. 
 
 
He said that this was an issue that came up again and again. He 
acknowledged that there were many excellent organisations providing 
assistance but the one element that was missing was adequate housing 
provision for people with additional needs. People, he said, had come to 
Inishowen where there was a centre of excellence for those with special 
needs. Within the next decade, he said, there would be a marked increase 
in the number of children and adults who needed this type of 
accommodation. He cited the need for forward planning to facilitate this 
demand.  
 
 
Cllr Canning supporting the motion said that he had submitted a motion 
previously calling for a policy to be put in place guaranteeing that 5% of all 
social houses constructed in the next five years would be built for the sole 
purpose of accommodating residents with special needs. He referenced 
also the fact that there were a lot of green areas that the Council were not 
maintaining and that these could be utilised for accommodation purposes 
with access to water and sewerage facilities already in place. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services advised 
that Donegal County Council was the lead agency of Donegal’s Housing 
Disability Steering Group (HDSG) and worked closely with the HSE and 
other sectoral groups to ensure that the needs of people with disabilities 
were met through the housing delivery programme. He noted that in line 
with the County Development Plan 2024-2030 it was a requirement that all 
new multiple housing developments compromising seven or more units 
had to contain a minimum of 30% residential units built to universal design 
standards and in accordance with the requirements of the National 
Disability Authority. A minimum of one unit was to be built to these 
standards in developments of 2 to 6 units.  
 
Welcoming the discussion, he said that the Council would continue with its 
approach which was consistent with the discussions at the steering group.  
 
 
 
Cllr Bradley thanked members for their support and said he appreciated 
that there was a lot of work going on behind the scenes.  
 
 
 

14 
 
C/336/24 
THAT DCC PURCHASE THE HOMES OF FAMILIES WHO ARE 
IMPACTED BY BOTH DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS AND 
FLOODING IN AREAS OF HIGH RISK OF FLOODING 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Farren, seconded by Cllr McGee it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“I propose a motion that Donegal County Council agrees to purchase the 
homes of families who are impacted by both defective concrete blocks and 
flooding in areas where OPW and Donegal County Council are developing 
flood relief schemes. This would allow families whose homes were 
knowingly built in flood plains by the Donegal County Council planning 
department to be relocated out of these dangerous areas. Currently 
families on these flood plains cannot move forward on the enhanced 
defective block scheme because of the high risk of flooding impacting on 
the remediated home again. None of these families can obtain flood 
insurance and will therefore be unable to reinstate their remediated home 
when it does flood again. This proposal would allow these families to either 
purchase a new home or rebuild one on land that is safe to do so. 
Currently they are in limbo waiting for flood relief schemes that are going 
to take far too long to deliver and they do not have the time to wait 
because of the increasing structural damage that is being caused by 
defective blocks to their homes”.    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Farren alluded to the 9 houses which comprised the Elm Park 
Development in Buncrana and said he would like the Council to commit to 
purchasing these homes which were at high risk of flooding and return the 
lands in question to the floodplain as part of the Buncrana-Ludden Flood 
Relief Scheme. 
 
 
These he said had been impacted by the floods in 2019 and there has 
been significant work carried tout to date in relation to the catchment flood 
risk management plan for that area. Data had indicated, he said, that 
Lower Elm Park was at high risk of flooding. The homeowners concerned, 
had, he advised, indicated that rather than go through the Defective 
Concrete Block Scheme, they would be prepared to relocate out of this 
high risk area and had communicated this to the CFRAMS Unit. All but 
one, he confirmed, were eligible for the DCB Scheme. It was noted that 
the residents concerned were unable to get insurance and even if they 
could avail of the Scheme and rebuild it would be it would be six or seven 
years before the Flood Relief Scheme became operational. He said that 
the cost of rebuilding coupled with the cost of the necessary flood relief 
measures needed to be taken into consideration.  
 

15 
 
 
He thus called on the Council to open discussion with all Government 
Departments and the Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage 
regarding the possibility of funding this proposal. This he said was a viable 
option and would allow the lands to return to the floodplain whilst giving 
peace of mind to the homeowners concerned.  
 
 
He estimated that the overall cost of rebuilding would be €6 to €8m and 
that would be better spent on allowing the residents to relocate.  
 
 
 
Alluding to the response and the confirmation that the Council did not 
provide funding for DCB affected homes or for the relocation of home sin 
flood risk areas, he said that the proposal made perfect sense and 
warranted consideration by the relevant agencies concerned.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said he wanted further clarification as the Council gave the 
initial planning permission for these homes. It was, he said an sensible 
and logical proposal and needed to be followed up on. 
 
 
There was no opposition to then motion. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that he was against the Council buying houses with 
mica and that it was the Department who should step in and purchase the 
properties. 
 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said he 
was aware that the issue affected a small number of families but that there 
was no provision under the DCB Scheme to acquire housing units in this 
type of situation. He said that the OPW had responsibility for flood relief 
schemes and in other situations would have addressed issues where 
houses were in floodplains. The matter, he noted, had been raised 
recently at the recent delegation to the Department of Housing. The 
Council, he confirmed, were happy to follow-up with both the Department 
and the OPW. 
 
C/337/24 
REQUEST FOR A MEETING WITH THE MINISTER FOR HOUSING TO 
DISCUSS THE DELAYS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DCB 
REMEDIATION SCHEME  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr A Doherty, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That this Council seek an immediate meeting with Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage Darragh O Brien TD to discuss the delays 
in the implementation of the DCB Remediation Scheme, the mental and 
physical health impacts that these delays are having on hundreds of 
families forced to continue to live in these deteriorating houses and 
impress upon him the importance that this scheme be implemented 

16 
 
without further delay, furthermore call on this council to initiate a quick 
repair scheme on the worse affected homes until such times that the DCB 
Scheme for social houses is implemented”.   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
 
 Cllr Mc Monagle said that the ongoing mental and physical impact on 
families should not be underestimated. He noted that the reply referenced 
the fact that a DCB Scheme for Social Housing was imminent but insisted 
that a meeting with the Minister was still required at this stage. He called 
on the Minister to visit Donegal and see for himself the hardship being 
experienced. The need to look at modular housing options was also 
highlighted. 
 
 
Cllr A Doherty alluded to the lengthy and ongoing efforts to come up with a 
suitable scheme Members, he said, were told that it was imminent, but a 
robust scheme had not materialised. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
 
that there had been considerable discussion, and that the Council was 
anxious to move as soon as the Social Housing Remediation Scheme was 
approved. 
 
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that he appreciated that a considerable amount of 
work had been done to get to this stage. He asked if it was possible to free 
up monies so that the demolition of some of these properties could 
proceed. He was informed by the Director of Service that it was the 
preferred option to wait until Departmental approval was received before 
commencing demolition works and rebuild. He confirmed however that 
preventative works could be carried out in emergency situations.  
 
C/338/24 
REVIEW OF THE HEDGE CUTTING POLICY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That the hedge cutting policy currently in place be reviewed as it is not 
working for farmers, bus operators or contractors at present”.  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said it was generally accepted that the present policy was 
not working. He called for an extension of the hedge cutting season to 

17 
 
include the last two weeks in August. This he advised would suit many of 
the hedge cutters as their busiest period was September and October. 
This would assist the Council also in that hedges, junctions etc could be 
tidied up and ready for the start of the new school. He asked that this be 
brough to the Roads  & Transportation SPC for consideration and that the 
motion be circulated to all other local authorities.  
 
 
 Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig supporting the motion said it was an excellent 
idea and would address many of the safety issues arising from hedges 
and verges. Councillors, he said, received numerous representations on 
this matter and anything that helped streamline the process was welcome.  
 
Mr Stephen Flynn, Senior Engineer said that the response outlined the 
current policy in place. It was he said a matter for the members to bring it 
back to the Roads and Transportation and work through the issues in that 
forum. He informed the members the hedge cutting season dates were set 
by the National Parks and Wildlife Service.  
 
 
C/339/24 
THAT THE COUNCIL INSTALL ASD (AUSTISM SPECTRUM 
DISORDER) PARKING BAYS THROUGHOUT DONEGAL 
 
On the proposal of Cllr D M Kelly, seconded by Cllr Bradley, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That this Council look into installing ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorder) 
parking bays throughout Donegal please as it has been brought to my 
attention that ASD parking permits do not permit families with children with 
autism/additional needs to park in Disabled Parking Bays therefore we 
have no allocated parking bays available in Donegal to facilitate such 
families". It is vitally important that such families have the option of 
allocated bays particularly at Schools, Hospitals, Shopping Centres, and 
also on the main streets of our towns and villages please.   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Kelly said that families, Autism Support Groups and Springboard had 
all highlighted the need for greater accessibility and the introduction of 
dedicated parking bays to facilitate families with autistic children. These 
families, he said, were not able to park in Disability Bays. He informed the 
meeting that there was a company called ASD Ireland who provided such 
bays in other counties and would be willing to do the same in Donegal if 
the relevant permissions were granted. He called on the Council to reach 
out to ASD Ireland regarding the possibility of providing these in Donegal . 
It was imperative, he said, that this information was put into the public 
domain and other bodies and organisations encouraged to come on board. 

18 
 
 
The process, he advised, was simple with yearly permits issued for a fixed 
fee. Parking was an issue and stressful, he advised, for many families and 
the current anomalies needed to be addressed and obstacles overcome. 
 
 
Cllr Bradley said that there were a number of these parking bays in 
Inishowen outside local amenities and these seemed to be working very 
well.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Stephen Flynn, Senior Engineer, thanked Cllr Kelly for highlighting the 
fact that ASD Parking permits did not allow families with children with 
autistic/special needs to park in Disabled Parking Bays. He said that the 
matter could be followed-up with ASD Ireland. 
 
 
 
Cllr Kelly welcomed the response and asked that the matter be progressed 
with ASD Ireland. 
 
 
C/340/24 
CIRCULATION OF PRESENTATIONS BY EMAIL PRIOR TO COUNCIL 
MEETINGS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr TS Devine, seconded by Cllr Beard, it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"Can the Council support my motion in that all presentations be forwarded 
by email before council meetings while I respect and appreciate the 
amount of work goes into this work, I do believe they take up too much 
time at council meetings plus it would give councillors time to read over 
and ask  questions if need be". I do believe we need to use the time we 
have at meetings to discuss the issues that affect the people that elected 
us. 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Devine said it would be helpful if presentations could be circulated in 
advance of meetings. This would allow members, he said,  to use the 
allocated meeting time in a more constructive way. Cllr Beard concurred 
with this assessment and said it would also allow members to be better 
prepared for meetings. 
 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that he appreciated the sentiment expressed in the motion and noted that 
presentations were an effective mechanism for communicating issues in a 
structured manner at meetings. By and large, he said that reports and 
presentations were available prior to meetings in eCouncil. He said that 

19 
 
and effort would be made to have presentations circulated prior to or on 
the morning of the meeting. 
 
 
C/341/24 
THAT DCC PRIORITISE ITS CORE SERVICES, I.E. HOUSING, ROADS 
AND RECREATION AMENITIES IN THIS NEW COUNCIL TERM  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Brogan, seconded by Cllr Kelly, it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“I propose that Donegal County Council prioritises its core services, i.e. 
Housing, Roads and Recreation Amenities in this new council term".   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance in relation to the 
above.  
 
 
Cllr Brogan said that he was aware that a review of the various Council 
Directorates was ongoing but cited the necessity of having a separate 
Housing Directorate and actively targeting areas where there was a deficit 
in delivery. He cited the need to actively consider and progress the 
following : 
 
▪ The level of service that people expected.  
▪ The carrying out of an audit on all existing housing stock. 
▪ More hands-on approach adopted in respect of housing 
maintenance. 
▪ Tourism and Roads signage needs replaced where damaged by 
vandalism.  
▪ Service delivery strengthened to augment the huge effort that has 
been made in delivering a strong tourism brand. 
▪ Machinery Yard model outdated and should be reviewed. 
 
It was now time, he added, to strengthen the brand and take a fresh look 
at the challenges facing the organisation. This was something, he advised, 
which should be done prior to the 2025 budget to ensure that all basic 
services are fully resourced.  
 
Cllr Kelly supporting the motion said that the detail had been well outlined 
by Cllr Brogan and agreed that service delivery should be prioritised in 
forthcoming the budgetary preparations.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, said that the motion was timely 
and not just a finance issue. The Council, he advised provided a wide 
range of services and the budgetary process was simply more than an 
exercise on putting value on the level of work that needed to be done. 

20 
 
It was, he added, about prioritising services and resources in order to 
achieve the best outcome for the county. The cores services, were, he 
confirmed, still the biggest areas of spend with the spend on roads and 
housing increasing by 29% and 21% respectively over the term of the last 
Council. Capital expenditure in housing had grown by 114% in the same 
period with Road’s capital expenditure increasing by 25%.  
 
He said that as part of the ongoing budgetary process members were 
engaging in relation to the bread-and-butter issues and that there would be 
more discussion in advance of the Plenary Budget.  
 
 
The Chief Executive said that an organisation wide review was being 
carried out looking at the level of business across the county with the aim 
of matching the necessary resources. He alluded to the fact that many of 
the ongoing issues in housing had not been factor ten years ago. 
 
The ongoing Corporate Plan process would, he confirmed provide 
members with an opportunity to shape the core basic service and the 
associated work programmes. He was, he said, happy to work with the 
members to prioritise what was best for Donegal. Attention was drawn to 
the fact that the Council’s own resource options were confined and that the 
balance of monies had to be sourced from grant and match funding.  
 
Cllr Brogan noted that there had been huge investment from Government 
over the last number of years but that the issues were with discretionary 
funding. He cited the need to go back to basics and focus on the needs of 
the customer. This, he contended, warranted review and engagement 
across all the Public Service Centres.  
 
C/342/24 
THAT ALL MEETINGS OF THE DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS 
COMMITTEE BE PUBLICLY STREAMED  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Beard, it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That this Council will facilitate online public streaming of all meetings of 
the Defective Concrete Blocks Committee".   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan said that the defective concrete blocks issue and the 
difficulties being encountered were one of the biggest issues facing people 
in Donegal at present. He noted that the role of the Council was limited in 
relation to the scheme itself and there was very little it could do in shaping 
or directing the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme. The DCB 
meetings, he said, allowed the Elected Members to hold the DCB office to 

21 
 
account and were a useful forum for gathering operational data on the 
operation of the scheme . It also, he acknowledged, was a mechanism 
whereby updates from other relevant bodies such as the Housing Agency 
could be circulated and debated. 
 
 
The streaming of DCB Committee meetings, he advised, was essential as 
it would give transparency to the process and facilitate public access. 
 
 
 
Cllr Beard said that it was vital that the meetings were streamed as 
property owners needed to be kept updated. She said that they needed to 
be party to what was being discussed at these meetings and kept in the 
loop as to ongoing developments.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services drew 
attention to the fact that the Council’s policy was to provide online 
streaming of Plenary meetings of Council. Any change to this policy, 
would, he advised, require additional resources in terms of equipment, 
staffing and increased cost implications. Policy amendments would, he 
advised, have to be brought initially to a future meeting of the Corporate 
Policy Group. 
 
 
Cllr Meehan said, he was mindful that the next CPG meeting was on the 
18th November and that a DCB Committee meeting was scheduled to take 
place prior to this date.  
 
 
A decision to stream the meetings, he said, was crucial in the interest of 
transparency and accountability. 
 
 
C/343/24 
THAT THE COUNCIL CONDEMNS AND REJECTS THE SELECTIVE 
USE OF THE EXTRADITION PROCEDURE AGAINST RESIDENTS OF 
THE 26 COUNTIES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Devine, it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
  
“Cáineann agus diúltaíonn an Chomhairle seo an úsáid roghnaitheach den 
nós imeachta eiseachadta i gcoinne áitritheoirí an chontae seo agus in 
aon chuid eile de na 26 contae, imeachtaí arna n-agairt ag oifigigh na 
Breataine sna 6 chontae áitithe, bunaithe ar fhianaise a deirtear a bailíodh 
agus a tiomsaíodh na blianta fada ó shin ag Constáblacht Ríoga Uladh 
agus a bhfuil a chlú millte le fada an lá. 
 
Fórsa atá iomráiteach as a pháirteachas, a sheicteachas, a 
 chlaonpháirteachas coiriúil agus an droch-chóireáil brúidiúil ar líon mór 
daoine atá faoina choimeád. Ina theannta sin, fórsa a theip orthu minic go 

22 
 
leor fianaise ríthábhachtach a choinneáil maidir le gníomhartha dílseoirí, 
ach is cosúil go bhfuil fianaise curtha ar fáil acu anois maidir leis na daoine 
sin. 
 
Ní próiseas cuí an dlí é an rud atá ag tarlú anseo leis na himeachtaí 
eiseachadta seo, ach a mhalairt air sin, is mí-úsáid polaitiúla é chun aird a 
tharraingt ar shiúl ó fhoréigean stáit na Breataine. 
Iarraimid, mar ionadaithe tofa ar Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall, ar an 
rialtas i mBaile Átha Cliath críoch láithreach a chur leis na himeachtaí 
scannalacha seo”. 
 
"This Council condemns and rejects the selective use of the extradition 
procedure against residents of this county and any other part of the 26-
Counties, proceedings invoked by British officials in the occupied 6 counties 
based on so-called evidence supposedly collected and collated many 
decades ago by the long-discredited Royal Ulster Constabulary.  
 
A force notorious for its partisanship, sectarianism, criminal collusion and 
brutal maltreatment of countless people in its custody. A force, moreover, 
that failed so often to retain crucial evidence in relation to loyalist actions yet 
apparently has now produced evidence in relation to these individuals. 
 
What is happening here with these extradition proceedings is not the due 
process of law but is instead the misuse of power for crass political purpose 
in order to distract from British state violence. 
 
We as elected representatives to Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall 
therefore call upon the government in Baile Atha Cliath to order a halt to 
these outrageous proceedings immediately".  
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he could not support the selective use of 
the extradition procedure an asked that his motion be circulated to all other 
Local Authorities for their attention and  consideration.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee supported the motion and said that a ban on extradition was 
warranted. He commended Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig on bringing the motion 
forward as the process led to people being held in inhumane conditions.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said that 
the motion would be circulated to all other Local Authorities as requested. 

23 
 
Cllr Mc Giolla Easbuig thanked members for their support and said that as a 
republican he could never agree to Irish Republicans being extradited. 
 
C/344/24 
PROVISION OF TEST RESULTS - TESTING OF QUARRIES IN 
DONEGAL  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr A Farren, it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“I propose the motion that Donegal County Council provide test results from 
the testing of quarries throughout the county that were done according to 
the IS EN 12620 standard for raw aggregate as adopted in 2002 by the Irish 
state”. 
 
This information needs to be forthcoming at the earliest opportunity as the 
public should have confidence that the products that they are buying is of 
the recommended standard. Donegal County Council have a duty of care to 
every citizen of the county to ensure that any building products are of the 
highest standard.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said it was extremely important that this information was 
circulated for the benefit of local communities. It was important, he added, 
not only for social housing but for all those building private houses so that 
they can be assured that the blocks they are using are fit for purpose.  
 
Cllr A Farren said the motion was very relevant and those rebuilding DCB 
affected houses had concerns in relation to the standard of the blocks.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services said 
that the thrust of the motion was clear and articulated the fact that people 
wanted to be assured that the test results from quarries in the county met 
the recommended standards.  
 
Alluding to the response provided, he said that it was important to point out 
that the first section of the reply stipulated the fact that all quarries 
producing aggregates for concrete were obliged to produce to the standard 
set out in IS EN 1260. Manufacturers and Quarry owners, he advised, were 
obliged to have a CE control system in place before the product went on the 
market. 
 

24 
 
It was, he said, a matter for manufacturer of the products to ensure that 
they met the required standards and allowed a declaration of performance 
to be made setting out the essential characteristics of the product. 
 
He said that it was important for those constructing private homes and 
through the process that is laid down to comply including the appointment of 
Assigned Certifiers that the responsibility existed to ensure that the 
products specified in the design are fit for purpose and for the conditions for 
which they are intended to be used.  
 
The Council in its own capacity, he advised, as the Market Surveillance 
Authority or as a customer purchasing such products did hold results from 
tests that had been carried out by the Council or by the quarries 
themselves.  He said that there was a challenge in making results held by 
the Council available in the public domain as there was a need to balance 
the need for transparency and public interest against contractual and legal 
obligations. It was noted that where contractual or legal obligations 
mitigated against the release of test results, legal advice would be required 
to guide the decision process.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said this was a serious situation give the level of building that 
was taking place again and that people needed to be confident that the 
products they were using were up to standard. He called on the Council to 
take charge of the situation. 
 
C/345/24 
CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS  
 
Votes of Sympathy 
` 
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
 
▪ 
Brian Mc Brearty, Environment on the death of his mother, Patricia Mc 
Brearty. 
▪ 
Damien Mc Dermott, National Roads Office on the death of his father 
Seán Mc Dermott. 
▪ 
Fergal Tinney , Reprographics Section on the death of his mother, 
Kathleen Tinney. 
 
 
Events Attended 
▪ 
The Cathaoirleach advised members of her attendance at the following 
events: 
▪ 
London Irish Vintage Club Day, London on the 8th September, 2024. 
▪ 
Filming with the Big O in Letterkenny Business Park on the 11th 
September, 2024 regarding the upcoming marketing campaign around 
promoting Donegal as a great place to live, work, study, invest and do 
business.  
▪ 
Northwest Greenway Celebration Event in The Innovation Centre, Derry 
on the 12th of September 2024. 

25 
 
▪ 
Photocall for national Public Library Day in Bundoran Library on the 18th 
of September. 
▪ 
Launch of Wainfest in Donegal Castle on the 19th of September 2024. 
▪ 
Spanish Armada Event at Killybegs Harbour on the 19th of September 
2024. 
▪ 
Opening of the Smooth Point Quay Extension, Killybegs Harbour on the 
20th of September 2024. 
▪ 
Meeting with Delegation from Plymouth County, MA in Donegal Town 
on the 25th of September 2024. 
▪ 
Attendance at “The Disrupt by the Sea” Event in Rathmullan on the 26th 
of September 2024. 
▪ 
Ulster Talks Event hosted by Professor Paul Moore with the 2024 Tip O’ 
Neill Diaspora Awardees – Ulster University, Derry on the 26th of 
September 2024. 
▪ 
Tip O’ Neill Awards Irish Diaspora Awards in The Inishowen Gateway 
Hotel on the 26th of September 2024. 
▪ 
Older Persons AGM IN Bunbeg on the 2nd of October 2024. 
 
Donegal Camino. 
The Cathaoirleach said that it was proposed to designate the first Sunday of 
September as Donegal Camino Day in recognition of all the excellent 
fundraising efforts that have taken place in aid of Cancer Care West and 
place and their hard work in bringing Donegal to the world stage. She said 
that it had shone a light on the beauty of the county and drew attention to 
the Cancer Care Centre in Letterkenny which served the whole county and 
has been used by many people over the past number of years. The 
initiative, she confirmed, had attracted nationwide attention from a number 
of television and media companies. It was, she added, a prime example of 
how a body of people could bring about positive change for their 
community.  
 
Thus, it was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Mc 
Monagle that the first Sunday in September be designated as Donegal 
Camino Sunday. 
 
The Chief Executive said that Donegal County Council would going forward 
contribute to the promotion of the event. 
 
C/346/24 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to the 
above and noted the updates in relation to the following: 
 
1. Finance 
o Provision for Abatement of Commercial Rates in Respect of 
Vacant Properties 
o DETE Increased Cost of Business (ICOB) grant scheme 

26 
 
Update 
 
2. Community Development & Planning Services 
o Community Development 
o Measure 3 – Project Development Measure-Town Centre First 
Suite of Supports 2024 
o Chambers Ireland Excellence in Local Government Awards 
o Urban & Rural Regeneration & Development 
o Croi Conaithe Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme   
o Major Projects Update   
o Ukrainian and International Protection Accommodation and 
Integration Unit Update  
Planning Services Update 
 
3. Water and Environment 
Climate Action 
o DCC Inaugural Climate Action Team Meeting 
o Community Climate Action Fund 
o UN Sustainable Development Goals Week-20th to 29th 
September 2024 
o Climate Action Works Engagement Fund 
Environment 
o Public Service Announcements (PSA’s) – Water Quality 
o National Agricultural Inspection Plan 
o Bathing Waters 2024 Season 
o Faulty Septic Tanks 
o Septic Tank Grants  
Defective Concrete Blocks – Update.       
4. Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
o Housing for All 
o Land Acquisition 
o Social Housing through Turnkey Acquisition 
o Summary of Social Housing Assessments (SSHA) 2024 
o Donegal County Council Engagement with Approved Housing 
Bodies (AHB) 

27 
 
o Room for a Student – Local Authority Tenancies Scheme 
o Local Authority Purchase and Renovation Loan 
Library Service 
Arts Service 
Regional Cultural Centre 
Heritage Office 
 
5. Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services  
o Economic Development & Tourism Unit 
o Fire Service 
 
6. Roads & Transportation 
o 
National Roads Office Update 
o 
Central Technical Services Update 
o 
Roads Areas Update 
 
 
The Chief Executive said he was happy for members to contact him in 
relation to any of the issues outlined. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that it was a positive report and welcomed the update 
from the Ukranian and International Protection Accommodation & 
Integration Unit. He drew attention however to the fact that there were no 
figures provided in relation to the number of new arrivals into the county. It 
was imperative, he said, that these were provided in terms of implementing 
the relevant strategies and planning for future service delivery. He alluded 
also to the pressure that this was causing on the private rented sector. 
 
 
The Chief Executive advised that Donegal County Council were not the 
primary driver here but would possibly have more of a role in the future. He 
acknowledged that there was excellent support from all the relevant 
stakeholders. 
 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services said 
that the Council’s role was now predominantly on the integration side and 
that the Migration and Integration teams had been established and were 
working with the Community Integration Forum and the associated agencies 
involved. The issue raised by Cllr Mc Monagle, had, he confirmed, been 
raised, and discussed at a recent meeting of the Forum arising from the 
challenges that it presented. It had been, he said, identified as a key issue 
and a commitment was made to write to the Department of Children, Youth 
and Integration. It was further confirmed that the Head of the Integration 
Unit had met Department officials in relation to the matter. 

28 
 
 
 
He said that formal correspondence would issue to the Department 
regarding this issue and other wider concerns that had been raised given 
that some of the people in the new arrival category could possibly be 
classed a vulnerable.  
 
 
The following questions were noted. 
 
C/347/24 
REQUEST FOR A FACE TO FACE MEETING WITH NBI (NATIONAL 
BROADBAND IRELAND)  
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can this Council request a face-to-face meeting with NBI (National 
Broadband Ireland) to discuss how the Fibre Network is being rolled out in 
the County and what role if any is being played by the existing provider?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, IS & 
Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/348/24 
TO ENSURE THAT THE N15 IS INCLUDED IN ANY REVIEW OF THE 
GOVERMENTS NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN  
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can the Council ensure that the county’s N15 is included in any review of 
the Government's National Development Plan especially the remaining 
uncompleted section to Lifford?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/349/24 
AHBS IN DONEGAL  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How many AHBs in Donegal are presently in contact with DCC and 
developers, requesting housing need confirmation from DCC confirming an 
interest in providing additional Social Homes in Donegal and finalising 
agreements with housing developers? 
What are the current timelines between receipt by DCC and response of 
queries to AHBs on this matter? 
In what DCC municipal areas are the current AHB housing provision 
proposals located?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 

29 
 
C/350/24 
WHAT PLANS OR PROVISIONS ARE BEING MADE TO REHOUSE 
PEOPLE WITH A DISABILITY  
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
To ask the Director of Housing what plans or provisions are being made to 
rehouse those who have a disability and who live in one of our social 
houses which has DCB while their home is being remediated, when a social 
housing remediation scheme is established?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.     
 
C/351/24 
WHAT CONTRIBUTION AND SUBMISSION HAS DCC INCLUDED IN 
THE RECENT PROJECT IRELAND 2040 REVIEW THAT SUPPORTS 
AND DEMANDS REGIONAL EQUALITY IN DONEGAL AND THE NW  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
NWRA have called for "Urgent Investment" in infrastructure in the region, 
pointed out that the region received less than 10% of investment in large 
projects and stated that a policy of positive discrimination is needed to 
deliver regional equality in the region. 
What contribution and submission has DCC included in the recent Project 
Ireland 2040 review that supports and demands regional equality in 
Donegal and the Northwest area?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/352/24 
HOW MANY QUARRIES HAVE BEEN CLOSED DUE TO 
ENFORCEMENT ACTION BY THE COUNCIL    
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Since the council executive first became aware of the defective concrete 
products being supplied by manufacturers in Donegal, how many quarries 
have been closed due to enforcement action by the council?    
 
She received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.    
 
C/353/24 
 THAT DCC WRITE TO MINISTER O’BRIEN TO APPLY PRESSURE TO 
ENSURE THAT THE 10% INCREASE IN THE CAP THAT WAS 
ANNOUNCED UNDER THE “ENHANCED DEFECTIVE CONCRETE 
BLOCK SCHEME” WILL BE APPLIED RETROSPECTIVELY.    
 
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 

30 
 
 
 
Could the council write to Minister Darragh O'Brien to apply pressure to 
ensure that the 10% increase in the cap that was announced under the 
"Enhanced Defective Concrete Block Scheme" will be applied 
retrospectively? As stated by Minister O'Brien during the Dail debate on 
Thursday 20 June 2022 - "Existing applicants under the current scheme will 
not be disadvantaged from being early movers and will benefit 
retrospectively from the increased grant amounts and allowances that will 
be available under the enhanced scheme."     
 
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/354/24 
 HOW MANY SOCIAL HOUSES ARE NOW VACANT DUE TO DCB  
 
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
 How many social houses are now vacant due to DCB, and where are they 
located?   
 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/355/24 
 WILL THE COUNCIL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MAINTENANCE AND 
UPKEEP OF THE AIR TO WATER HEATING SYSTEMS IN OUR SOCIAL 
HOUSING SCHEMES  
 
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
With the roll out of Air to Water heating systems across our social housing 
schemes around the county will the Council be responsible for the 
maintenance and upkeep of these systems going forward or will it be the 
responsibility of the tenant?     
 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/356/24 
 WHAT EMERGENCY PLAN IS IN PLACE FOR COUNCIL TENANTS 
LIVING IN APPALLING CONDITIONS  
 
 
Cllr TS Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
We have council tenants living in appalling conditions due to defective 
concrete, cracks, black mould, and dampness rodents etc. What emergency 
plan is in place for these people, and can the council not go into estate 
agents throughout the county and buy homes as there are 100s for sale?  
We are steady being told that the money is not an option from the housing 
minister, surely this is a fast option to rehouse people plus sort our housing 
problem.   
 

31 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/357/24 
CAN THE COUNCIL PUT IN PLACE A PLAN TO CARRY OUT 
REMEDIAL REPAIR WORKS FOR COUNCIL OWNED DCB HOUSES  
 
Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can the Housing Directorate put in place a plan to carry out remedial repair 
works, including painting, addressing mould, and crack-filling ahead of the 
autumn and winter seasons, for Council-owned DCB houses across the 
county, in lieu of the much-anticipated, long-delayed Social Housing 
Remediation Programme for Defective Blocks?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.    
 
C/358/24 
FAST TRACK THE TAKING OVER OF UNFINISHED ESTATES  
 
Cllr TS Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can Donegal County Council please fast-track the taking over of unfinished 
estates as there are people living in appalling conditions between roads and 
water outages on a regular basis and also on the basis that numerous 
promises have been made that these issues would be fixed over the past 
number of years?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/359/24 
WHEN WILL THE WEEKLY PLANNING MEETINGS BE FULLY 
REINSTATED  
 
Cllr McBride submitted the following question:-  
 
 
When do we plan to have our weekly planning meetings fully reinstated 
around the county?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/360/24 
UPDATE REPORT ON APPLICATIONS MADE TO THE DEPARTMENT 
OF TRANSPORT AND TO THE TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE 
IRELAND  
 
Cllr C Brogan submitted the following question:-   
 
Can we get an updated report on applications made to the Department of 
Transport and to Transport Infrastructure Ireland on our behalf for Donegal, 
and the progress of 2023 and 2024 allocations to date?   
 

32 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/361/24 
TO REVIEW THE CURRENT COMMENCEMENT DATE TO CUT HEDGES  
 
Cllr D M Kelly submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can this Council write to the relevant departments requesting that the 
current commencement date to cut hedges be reviewed and pulled forward 
as the current date September 1st is too late in the year and causing 
serious havoc particularly on our roads in relation to vision lines and a 
number of other safety concerns, please?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above. 
 
C/362/24 
EXTENDING THE WINTER GRITTING PROGRAMME  
 
Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Will this Council consider the extension of the winter gritting programme to 
include public transport routes across the county, to allow for the efficient 
and dependable operation of public transport in Donegal?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above. 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above. 
 
 
C/363/24 
WHAT STEPS CAN DCC TAKE TO REMOVE AND PREVENT 
SABOTAGING AND DAMAGE DONE WITH RED PAINT  
 
Cllr C Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
What steps can Donegal County Council take to remove and prevent 
sabotaging and damage done with red paint causing huge reputational 
damage to our tourism market and our county brand of Donegal despite the 
huge efforts by so many people to invest in and promote our true potential 
in the last number of years in both private and public investment?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, IS & 
Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/364/24 
REVIEW OF THE TENDERING PROESS   
 
Cllr McBride submitted the following question:-  
 
 
When will the review by Donegal County Council regarding the tendering 
process for those wishing to tender for council work be complete?   
 

33 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/365/24 
WHAT MEASURES HAVE DCC IN PLACE TO DEAL WITH BUILDING 
REGULATIONS ENFORCEMENT  
 
Cllr D McGee submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Donegal County Council is a Building Control Authority under the Building 
Control Acts 1990 to 2014.  It has the role of monitoring compliance with 
Building Regulations and has strong powers of inspection and enforcement 
under the Acts. In the case of situations where homeowners are concerned 
that the building professional and or engineer that is engaged with the 
remediation of their home is in breach of current building regulations, what 
measures has Donegal County Council in place to deal with such situations, 
given its role of Building Control Authority as its requirement to review and 
monitor the implementation of the Enhanced Grant Scheme?  
Donegal County Council has a duty of care to protect all its citizens in these 
situations.   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/366/24 MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
Members noted the motions from other Councils/Bodies. 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council call on the Minister for Finance, Jack Chambers 
to reduce the VAT rate from 13.5% to 9% for the hospitality sector. With the 
amount of cafes, restaurants and pubs shutting due to increased operating 
costs, the cost-of-living impacting visitors and footfall, and inflation impacting 
prices, this sector is being significantly and badly impacted. I ask for this 
motion be approved and sent to other County Councils for their consideration 
and support.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council call on the Minister for Finance, and the 
Government to again look at reducing the VAT rate from 13.5% back to 9% 
for the food and restaurant sector. Restaurants & cafes are finding it 
extremely difficult to survive with the current rate of VAT.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL    
“That Leitrim County Council write to Eamon Ryan, Minister for Environment, 
Climate and Communications expressing our deep concern and 
disappointment with government plans to build a Strategic Gas Emergency 
Reserve in Ireland in the form of a Fracked Gas Import Terminal as per 
action 17 of the Energy Security in Ireland to 2030 (Energy Security 

34 
 
Package) published November, 2023. We ask him to change the new policy 
and instead ban LNG terminals in Ireland, in policy and in line with the May 
2021 Policy Statement on the Importation of Fracked Gas without conditions 
and in line with the Programme for Government.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed to write to the Minister for Environment seeking the imposition 
of tougher and increased new fines to deter illegal dumping.  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed to send a letter to the Taoiseach calling for a reduction in 
match funding requirements for major capital projects applied for by 
Roscommon County Council.  
Roscommon County Council recognises the current percentage reduction in 
match funding requirements for the North - West. However, in light of 
increasing construction costs and consultancy costs, the current percentage 
required of circa 10% is not sustainable going forward for smaller local 
authorities.  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed to send a letter to the Minister for Finance Jack Chambers and 
Minister for Tourism Catherine Martin seeking the reintroduction of the 9% 
VAT rate for the hospitality sector.  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Sligo County Council writes to the Minister for Social Protection to 
request a review of existing community employment schemes in place in the 
state with a view to putting in place an ambassador/caretaker scheme for 
every village in Ireland, that a person, or persons be paid accordingly to 
support tidy towns and community development groups with maintaining and 
enhancing their communities.  For example, a village with a settlement of 100 
or less, may be eligible for one worker, 1000 plus two workers etc.  
That this motion be forwarded to the Taoiseach, Tánaiste and all other Local 
Authorities for consideration.” 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL  
“To call on Sligo County Council to develop and rollout a scheme to build 
rural housing to support rural families and the rural communities and to seek 
funding from government for staff to implement the scheme.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Wexford County Council write to Minister Helen McEntee and An 
Taoiseach Simon Harris to ask the Government to adopt a zero-tolerance 
approach toward gender based violence and ask that mandatory minimum 
sentencing be introduced in every conviction of sexual, domestic or gender 
based violent assault.”   

35 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
