1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
        Aras an Chontae 
                                             Leifear 
                 21 Eanáir, 2025 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 27 Eanáir 2025 ag 11.00 
r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach 
chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
******************************************************************************************************** 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House  
Lifford 
 
21st January 2025 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 27th January 2025 at 11.00am in 
the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join the 
meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
______________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  
 

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 11th of November, 2024. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the November Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 25th of November, 2024. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Annual Budget Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 4th of December, 2024. 
d) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 9th of December, 2024. 
e) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Adjourned Budget Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 9th of December, 2024. 
f) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Adjourned Budget Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 11th of December, 2024. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of property by way of lease at the Donegal 
Public Service Centre, Drumlonagher, Donegal Town to Uisce Éireann. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at Drumduff, Inver to Niall and Claire 
Bruton. 
c) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at Sminver, Ballyshannon to Declan Mc 
Hugh, Anne Mc Hugh and Barry Mc Hugh.  
 
3. Corporate 
a) To consider authorisation of Council representation at the St Patrick’s Day 
events in the USA. 
b) To confirm membership of the Strategic Policy Committees for the period 
2024 - 2029. 
c) Nomination of Member for appointment to the Board of Údarás na 
Gaeltachta  
d) To fill casual vacancy on the Northwest Regional Development Group 
arising from the resignation of Cllr Martin Farren. 
e) Filling of remaining vacancy on the Donegal County Council Value for 
Money Committee. 
f) To agree date for a Plenary Workshop to discuss the operation of the 
Machinery Yard. 

3 
 
g) To note obligations on Members under the Local Elections (Disclosure of 
Donations & Expenditure) Act, 1999 as amended, to submit a donation 
statement for 2024 by 31st January, 2025. 
h) To note obligations on Members under (Part 15) Local Government Act, 
2001 Ethics Framework to submit declaration of interest for 2024 by the 
28th of February, 2025. 
 
4. Finance  
To approve, subject to the sanction of the appropriate Minister, the 
reassignment of a capital loan in the sum of €1,991,623 for the purpose of 
co-financing the refurbishment of Bundoran Waterworld. 
 
5. Planning  
a) To note the report and request Members’ agreement to the preparation of 
a draft variation to the CDP 2024-2030 (Proposed Variation No. 1) to –  
 
1. Insert new Area Plans for the towns of An Clochán Liath (Dungloe), 
Ballyshannon, Bridgend, Carndonagh, Donegal Town and Killybegs;   
2. Amend the zoning of site NR2.16 at Cockhill, Buncrana – from ‘New 
Residential Phase 2’ to ‘New Residential Phase 1’; and  
3. Amend land use zonings on foot of Residential Zoned Land Tax 
(RZLT) related landowner submissions, where appropriate, within 
affected settlements throughout County Donegal. 
 
b) To Development Contribution Scheme Review. To agree date for Plenary 
Workshop on the 24th February, 2024 at 12 noon. 
 
6. Community Development   
Establishment of Local Community Safety Partnership - Nomination of 
seven members from Donegal County Council. 
 
7. Fire Service  
To consider the Fire Services Capital Programme 2026-2030. 
 
8. Endorsement of Minutes 
a) To note minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on the 18th 
November 2024. 
b) To note minute of the Special Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on 
the 2nd December 2024. 
 
9. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under Section 
142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. 
No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the Environment, 
Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local Government Act, 
2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local Government (Expenses 
of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 (as amended).  
 

4 
 
Training 
• AILG Training Programme for 2025. 
• LAMA Spring Seminar to be held on the 30th and 31st January 2025 in the 
Kilford Arms Hotel, Kilkenny. 
 
Conference 
• Association of Irish Regions Seminar to be held in the Radisson Blu Hotel, 
Athlone on the 5th & 6th February, 2025. 
• Irish Building Control Institute -National Building Control Conference to be 
held in the Radisson Blu Hotel, Little Island, Cork on the 12th and 13th 
March, 2025. 
 
Other 
• Donegal 2040 Site visit to Galway on the 13th and 14th February 2025.  
• Attendance at the LAMA Awards 2025 in the Rochestown Park Hotel, 
Cork on the 22nd February, 2025. 
 
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the CPMR representative at the Atlantic Arc Commission 
Hub Meetings in Brussels on the 30th and 31st January 2025. 
• Attendance of the EU Cerv Project representative at the Youth & 
Democracy: Empowering Europe’s Next Generation Seminar in Figueira 
Da Foz Portugal from the 2nd to the 5th February 2025. (Travel and 
accommodation covered by Eu Cerv) 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Irish American Business Chamber 
Network Awards in Philadelphia on the 28th February, 2025. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or the Cathaoirleach’s representative at 
the Intelligent Cities Challenge Closing Conference in Brussels on the 5th 
and 6th March 2025. (Travel and accommodation covered by ERNACT)  
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the EU-Belong Final Event in 
Strasbourg, France from the 24th to the 27th March, 2025. 
• Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CPMR Political Bureau 
meeting in Bari, Italy on the 27th and 28th March, 2025.  
 
10. Conference Reports 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the Blue Economy Conference in 
Plymouth, Boston from the 15th to the 18th October 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the 25th Anniversary of the Island of 
Ireland Peace Park in Mesen, Belgium on the 11th November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley on the US Trade Mission and Golden 
Bridges Conference from the 12th to the 17th November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Donal Kelly at the Suck Valley “The Rise of Loneliness 
on the Emerald Isle” – Community Development & Planning Remedies 
Conference held on the 13th and 14th March 2024 in Hannon’s Hotel, 
Roscommon.  
• Attendance of Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty at the Suck Valley  “The Rise of 
Loneliness on the Emerald Isle” – Community Development & Planning 
Remedies Conference held on the 13th and 14th March 2024 in Hannon’s 
Hotel, Roscommon.  

5 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Jack Murray at the CPMR, General Assembly Meeting in 
Gozo from the 2nd to the 4th October, 2024 in Gozo, Malta. 
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
Community Development  
11. Cllr Michael Mc Bride   
“That Donegal County Council writes to the incoming Minister for Rural and 
Community Development asking that minimum funding of €3000 per Man's 
Shed be made available as this fund is a lifeline for the sheds.” 
 
Roads & Transportation  
12. Cllr Donal Coyle  
"That this Council write to the Minister for Transport requesting a 
substantial increase in the Winter Maintenance Allocation for the County." 
 
13. Cllr Declan Meehan  
“That this Council will write to the incoming Minister for Transport, 
requesting that they meet with a delegation from Donegal County Council, 
with the aim of discussing, securing funding for a feasibility study on a rail 
connection between Letterkenny and Derry, to progress recommendations 
made by the All-Island Strategic Rail Review of 2024, and to match the 
progression of the feasibility study underway on a rail connection between 
Derry and Portadown.” 
 
Economic Development   
14. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  
“That this Council seek an urgent meeting with the new Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage to lobby for the, 
 
• Recognition of the North-West City Region within the NPF national 
hierarchy of city regions and to,  
• Further strengthen the role of Letterkenny as a key Regional Growth 
Centre  
• Identify and prioritise enabling and critical infrastructure for the North-
West City Region.  
• Support the establishment of a dedicated Economic Task Force for the 
North-West City Region.” 
 
 
  
  
  
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Dog Control    
15. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty 
“That this Council takes action on dog owners who are not controlling their 
dogs properly in our communities, i.e. chasing sheep etc or are a danger to 
the public, children etc, and that a rule is brought in that all dogs must be on 

6 
 
a lead while in public spaces such as towns, beaches, walks, trails etc. 
Also, that this motion would be passed around to all the other Council 
offices around Ireland.” 
 
 Corporate  
16. Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh 
“That this Council call on the Government to have our emigrants abroad be 
given voting rights in our Presidential election.”    
 
 Defective Concrete Blocks   
17. Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
"That the Council advocate for a scheme to be put in place to incentivise 
landlords to rent to families who have defective block homes and need 
temporary accommodation.” 
 
There are already financial incentives in place for landlords to house certain 
cohorts. It is imperative that we put similar incentives in place in order to 
assist those who have already experienced the trauma of living in a 
defective block home, to get accommodation when it is required. 
 
 Community Development 
18. Cllr Brian Carr 
“The Council write to the incoming Minister for Rural and Community 
Development to request that €75,000 of the recently announced Local 
Enhancement Programme Fund be ringfenced for Men’s and Women’s 
Sheds in the county.” This allocation would enable 25 sheds to access a 
€3,000 sustainability grant, providing vital support for Sheds across the 
county. 
 
 
 
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT”. 
 
  Housing  
19. Cllr Jimmy Brogan  
"To ask Donegal Co Council to contact the new Minister for Housing and 
demand that they raise the means allowance substantially for applicants of 
social housing". The current means allowance is too low which is blocking 
people from getting on the housing list and availing of housing supports 
when they can't afford the exorbitant rents which are being charged and 
can't get a mortgage and is leading to the risk of homelessness.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
  Housing  
20. Cllr Martin Scanlon  
"I am submitting this motion calling on this council to write to both incoming  
ministers for social protection and housing calling for an urgent review on  
the threshold rates at which persons are allowed to be placed on the 
housing list." 
 

7 
 
Planning 
21. Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman  
“Go dtacaíonn an comhairle seo le go gcuirfear Straitéis Daonra agus 
Tithíochta Gaeltachta le chéile do gach Limistéar Pleanála Teanga  
Gaeltachta le spriocanna soiléire, intomhaiste a leagadh amach chun fás 
inbhuanaithe na bpobal Gaeltachta a chinntiú, agus soláthar cuí tithíochta a 
chinntiú chun tacú leis an bhfás sin.” 
 
“That this council supports that a Gaeltacht Population and Housing 
Strategy be drawn up for each Gaeltacht Language Planning Area  
with clear, measurable targets set out to ensure the sustainable growth of 
the Gaeltacht communities, and to ensure an appropriate supply of housing 
to support that growth.” 
 
  Roads & Transportation  
22. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
"That a full report is presented to this full Council meeting on the Council's 
current Strategic and Specific Roads Grants priority list that was agreed by 
this Council along with projects that have been completed or are being  
progressed at present and include whatever criteria was used to select.”  
 
 
   
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 Planning  
23.  Cllr Ali Farren  
In 2024 houses were being built in Donegal that have defective concrete in 
them and in approximately 15 years these new homes will be crumbling 
down just like the homes that are covered by the present “Redress” 
scheme. Every person buying or building a home deserves to know that the 
products are fit for purpose. At present we can’t be sure a home or any 
building will last because of the lack of regulation! 
 
“I am asking that this new government immediately put into place 
regulations to ensure block manufacturers produce products fit for purpose 
and to protect homeowners or any buyer of concrete products. 
We also need the Co Council to be able to visit quarries and test blocks 
before they are used.  
People cannot afford to invest in Donegal if they can’t be guaranteed that 
their homes will last and that they won’t have to go through the torture 
many of us are going through for the last 14 plus years. 
 
My first motion of 2025 is very urgent, we need to write to the National 
Standards Association, the Taoiseach, the Minister of Housing and both 
ministers of Finance (I would request this motion be sent to all TD’s as it’s 
so important they all understand how useless the present regulations are 
and that they have duty of care to all the people of this country)  
  
Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme  
24.  Cllr Joy Beard  

8 
 
“With the new government in place, this motion calls on the Executive of 
Donegal County Council to write to the leaders of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael 
reminding them of their respective commitments to voters to hold a review 
into the Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme within months of the general 
election, and to liaise with the members of the Defective Concrete Blocks 
Committee to draft a detailed submission to that review outlining the 
concerns that members have about the workings of the Scheme.”  
 
25.  Cllr Martin Mc Dermott  
"To ask Donegal county council in conjunction with the Housing Agency to 
have an information day for professionals and builders to explain exactly 
what is required when filling in forms for the Defective Concrete Block 
Scheme." 
 
 Community Development    
26.  Cllr Albert Doherty  
"That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister and Department of 
Rural and Community Development and/or relevant Dept in the new 
Government to designate, extend and include additional electoral areas 
enabling their eligibility and access for funding from the CLAR Programme”. 
 
 Housing  
27.  Cllr Jack Murray  
“That this council will prioritise the acquisition and construction of homes 
throughout County Donegal, specifically to be allocated to those with 
disabilities, in order to allow them to reside in their own community; and that 
this prioritisation would include the allocation of houses within planned 
housing developments, as well as seeking houses on the open market 
which would be suitable for such citizens.” 
 
28. Cllr Paul Canning  
“I would ask that the housing section of this council carries out a complete 
audit of all of the estates that are affected by overgrown trees that could 
and will create a hazard into the future insofar as branches falling off 
damaging solar panels, roofs along with the possibility of a danger to 
children at play with a view to managing the overgrowth of these trees.” 
 
 Corporate    
29.  Cllr Fionán Bradley  
“That this Council condemns, rejects, and opposes any and all forms of 
violence, bullying, harassment, intimidation and haranguing directed 
towards any politician or candidate who runs for public office, or towards 
their family, friends, associates, canvassers or staff. To also condemn 
damage to their property, assets, or vehicles. That we shall endeavour to 
foster an environment of respect towards each other, towards members of 
the Oireachtas and all those who are candidates for public office.” 
 
30.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
31. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 

9 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
Housing  
32. Cllr Tomás S Devine 
Can I get an update on all test results and tests carried out on all social 
homes being built in Donegal, and can we get an update on the 14 Cluid 
houses in Letterkenny? 
 
33. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle 
How many housing applicants have we across the five MDs designated as 
in need of a five bedroom house or higher as per each MD and can I be 
informed as to how many five bed houses have, we built or purchased in 
each MD since 2019? 
 
34. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle 
How many house purchase requests have been sent to the Department of 
Housing since 2019, how many of those requests were signed off on by the 
Department and finally is there a ceiling/policy from the Department on how 
many house purchases that they will sign off on for the County per annum? 
 
Planning  
35. Cllr Tomás S Devine 
Can I get an update on what unfinished estates the council are planning to 
take over this year? 
 
36. Cllr Ciaran Brogan 
Can we have an updated report on our derelict site registration across all 
our Municipal districts and the number of CPOs we have instigated ? 
 
Roads & Transportation   
37. Cllr Donal Coyle 
Can I have an update and proposed timeline for the TEN-T Project? 
 
38. Cllr Ciaran Brogan 
Can we have an updated report on the current status of the Ten-T project 
including the Bonagee Relief Road - Manorcunningham to Lifford and the 
Ballybofey-Stranolar By-pass? 
 
39. Cllr Ciaran Brogan 
Can we have a breakdown of the actual schedule of works planned for this 
year from the recent allocation from the NTA active travel? 
 
 
 
 
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Dog Control  
40. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty 

10 
 
Can I get a report of how many dog attacks happened in Ireland and in this 
county in the last 10 years on sheep or other livestock that we have 
recorded. Also, 
  
• How many humans were attacked by Dogs in the last 10 years? 
• How many dogs have the Council put down over the last 10 years 
please? 
 
 
  
   LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Roads & Transportation 
41. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan  
Can I have a copy of all the Active Travel applications under consideration 
and at early stages of planning across the County? Has there been a recent 
change as to how Active Travel projects are currently being prioritised and 
can I get an list of the latest list that was sent to the Department for 
consideration along with an explanation on how this list was created? 
 
Community Development 
42. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan  
Can I have an update on my earlier Q&M, CCTV for Ballybofey and 
Stranorlar and Letterkenny, what is the reason for the long delay? 
 
 
  
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing  
43. Cllr Albert Doherty 
Government Scheme for the Remediation of Social Homes in Donegal. 
Following the meeting on Dec 5th last between the Council delegation and 
the Department of Housing officials in Dublin, will the Council now make 
early contact with the Minister and Department of Housing highlighting and 
demanding an urgent need for the putting in place of the scheme for the 
Remediation of Social Homes in Donegal? 
 
Planning  
44. Cllr Joy Beard 
During the year ending 31st December 2024, in its role as Market 
Surveillance Authority, how many quarry inspections were undertaken by  
members of the Council's staff and what testing was carried out during each 
visit? 
 
45. Cllr Joy Beard 
In light of the public inquiry into the proposed Dalridian Gold Mine project in 
the Sperrin mountains, County Tyrone, being suspended, does the Council 
intend to hold a workshop for elected members to outline its position and the 
potential implications for Donegal if planning is approved? 
 
 

11 
 
46. Cllr Albert Doherty 
Transboundary Status application receipt and responses. 
What correspondence has DCC received from the Dept. of Infrastructure 
relating to the application to further develop mining in the Sperrins ? When 
was the correspondence received and to whom was the correspondence 
addressed? 
What responses to date have DCC forwarded to DFI? 
Following the publication of a public notice by DCC on the application, how 
many responses/submissions were received and where are they currently 
located? 
What presence, engagement and participation to date have DCC Officials 
and or Council legal representatives had at the planning enquiry in 
Omagh?(Now suspended) 
What related actions are necessary and expected from DCC when the 
planning enquiry resumes? 
 
Environment  
47. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
What update, if any, has been received from the Department of Transport, 
Tourism and Sport in relation to live applications which this Council has 
submitted for funding under the LSSIF? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
48. Cllr Jack Murray 
Can this council provide a liaison person, dedicated to answering queries 
from competent building professionals in relation to defective block grant 
queries, rather than have them wait for responses from the central helpdesk, 
as this could help address queries or issues in a more timely manner and 
help streamline the process? 
 
Roads & Transportation  
49. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
“To ask the Director for Roads what amount of funding the Council 
anticipates it will receive from the Department of Transport in 2025 for the 
LIS programme within the County.” 
 
50. Motions from other Councils/Bodies  
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Clare County Council oppose the recent decision by the GAA, 
whereby children under the age of sixteen will be charged a fee to gain 
admittance to GAA matches, and that we call on the GAA to reverse this 
decision as a matter of urgency.  It is also proposed that this Notice of 
Motion be circulated to all Local Authorities across the country.” 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL   
“We request Clare County Council to make urgent contact with the 
Department of Local Government regarding housing aid for Older People’s 
Grant in connection with the exclusion of new fossil fuel boilers, oil or gas.” 
 
 

12 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Minister Helen McEntee and Department of Justice give consideration 
to increasing the grant funding available for community groups, that will 
make the installation of CCTV in towns and villages viable an economically 
sustainable and will be significant benefit in the prevention of crime and 
motion circulated so that it is noted by all local authorities.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the next Government and all the 
elected members of both Houses of the Oireachtas to pass whatever 
legislation necessary to hold the referendum, promised by the previous 
administration, to allow our diaspora to vote in the Presidential Election to 
be held in November of this year.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL 
“It was agreed to write to the Taoiseach and the Tánaiste to consider in the 
formation of the incoming government that the matter of rural and urban 
isolation and loneliness is directly allocated to a Ministry.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Wexford County Council calls on Irish Public Bodies Mutual 
Insurances (IPB) to provide affordable underwriting options for insurance 
cover specifically tailored to the needs of community centres and similar 
community organisations and playgrounds. These centres are essential to 
the social fabric of our inclusion. However, rising insurance premiums are 
increasingly limiting the ability of community groups to operate and expand 
their services.  
By offering more affordable insurance options, IPB could ensure community 
centres to continue and enhance their work without the heavy burden of 
unsustainable insurance costs. Wexford County Council urges IPB to 
consider the positive impact of such support on communities across the 
county and to act in the interest of promoting accessible, community-based 
services for all.” 
 
 
 

13 
 
MINUTES OF JANUARY MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
27TH JANUARY, 2025 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/4/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F Bradley C 
Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, D Coyle, TS Devine, A Doherty, A 
Farren, M Farren, N Jordan, D. M Kelly, M McBride, M Mc Clafferty, M 
McDermott, P McGarvey, D McGee, P McGowan, M Mc Mahon, G 
McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, M Naughton, D Nic Mheanman, J.S Ó 
Fearraigh.  
Online: Cllrs T Crossan, G Doherty M Harley, J Kavanagh, M Mac Giolla 
Easbuig, J Murray, M Scanlon.   
 
C/5/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Liam Ward, Director of 
Community Development & Planning Services, Bryan Cannon, Director of 
Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, Garry 
Martin, Director of Economic Development, Information Systems & 
Emergency Services, Michael McGarvey, Director of Water & 
Environment, Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner, Planning,Joseph McTaggart, 
Chief Fire Officer, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, 
ASO, Martina Tully, ASO, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, 
Dónall MacGiolla Choill, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie 
Crawford, Staff Officer.   
 
C/6/25 
 CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 11th NOVEMBER, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McGonagle, the 
minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
11th November, 2024 were adopted.   
 
C/7/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DONEGAL 
COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 25th NOVEMBER, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr P McGowan, seconded by Cllr Meehan, the 
minutes of the Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 25th of 
November, 2024 were adopted.   
 
C/8/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ANNUAL BUDGET 
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 4TH 
DECEMBER, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Scanlon, the minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 4th December, 
2024 were adopted.   
 
C/9/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 9th DECEMBER, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr O’Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr McDermott, the 
minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 9th 
December, 2024 were adopted.   
 

14 
 
C/10/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ADJOURNED BUDGET 
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 9th 
DECEMBER, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr Naughton, the minutes 
of the Adjourned Budget Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
9th December, 2024 were adopted.   
 
C/11/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ADJOURNED BUDGET  
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 12TH 
DECEMBER, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Kelly, the minutes of 
the Adjourned Budget Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 12th 
December, 2024 were adopted. 
 
C/12/25 
IMPACT OF STORM ÉOWYN 
Cllr Mc Dermott thanked the Chief Executive, the Director of Water & 
Environment and the Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
for the assistance provided to Defective Concrete Blocks Families prior to 
the arrival of Storm Éowyn. He further acknowledged the work carried out 
in the aftermath of the storm by the Roads & Emergency Services teams. 
Tribute was also paid to the ESB staff who were faced with many 
challenges and obstacles.  
 
Cllr Beard reiterated the sentiment expressed by Cllr Mc Dermott and said 
she was grateful for the refuge options provided and cited the need to 
adopt a proactive approach for dealing with severe weather events in a 
timely fashion and the compilation of a comprehensive emergency plan. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Dermott, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was 
resolved that correspondence issue to the Mr James Browne, T.D. 
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage requesting that he 
meet with the full Council or the Defective Concrete Blocks Committee in 
relation to the issues at hand. 
 
Cllr Mc Bride proposed, seconded by Cllr Kennedy that Mr Ciaran 
Mullooly, MEP and Vice Chair of the EU Housing Crisis Committee also 
be invited to attend. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that members needed direct access to the ESB and 
that this was something that needed to be included on the agenda when 
the meeting with the minister was confirmed.  
 
A lengthy debate ensued, and the following issues were raised. 
 
• Was there anything that could be done to assist a number of 
vulnerable and elderly people who were not in a position to remove 
fallen trees etc. 
• Proactive approach must be taken to review and remove broken 
and damaged trees on side roads including those covered in ivy 
which are already vulnerable in any storm. 

15 
 
 
• Application should be made to the Department for funding to deal 
with dangerous trees and vegetation. Suggested that a scheme in 
operation in the early nineties which utilised seasonal workers to 
clear dangerous trees and those close to ESB lines be re-
introduced. Further engagement needed with the ESB, and the 
matter pursued by the Roads & Transportation SPC. 
• Further suggestion that Coillte be invited to attend any dedicated 
meeting and clarification provided on their role.  
• Concern regarding the state of houses affected by defective blocks 
in Ard na Guaile Duibhe in Moville and the urgent need for the 
Department to giive approval for the Social Housing Remediation. 
• Noted that the combined Donegal County Council and Civil 
Defence response had been excellent. 
• Briefing requested in relation to the role of the new Community 
Fora. 
• Noted that there had been issues with Air to Water heating systems 
as a result of power outages. Suggestion that generators could be 
installed when retrofitting works are being carried out and 
dedicated plan put in place to deal with these types of 
emergencies.  
• Uisce Éireann should be contacted regarding the installation of 
generators at pumping stations so as to ensure that water supply is 
not interrupted when there are power cuts. 
• Number of vulnerable people waiting on LIS approval had access 
issues in the aftermath of the storm. 
• Outlined need for a joint assessment of the impact/response 
mechanisms and an invitation extended to other utility 
organisations to meet and discuss the difficulties encountered.  
• Noted that there had been issues in Falcarragh in terms of access 
for the ambulance service.  
• Role of farming and community groups should be assessed and 
developed going forward. 
• Plan needed to ensure that vulnerable people are protected and 
can get to a safe environment.  
• Query as to whether fire service personnel could be trained in the 
use of chainsaws.  
 
The Chief Executive thanked members for their comments and alluded to 
the fact that there had been considerable planning in advance of the 
storm. He said that a request had been made to assist defective concrete 
block families and that the cost would be reimbursed nationally. 
 
The emphasis now, he said was on the recovery aspect and local 
authorities were now the main co-ordinators for aid. A dedicate freephone 
number and an email address had been set up, he added, and that these 
would also feed into the ESB. Support, he said, would be provided 
through the dedicated community hubs.  
 

16 
 
Every effort, he said, was being made to see where the gaps were, and 
he encouraged members to identify and report issues arising locally. He 
acknowledged the community effort that had been made in the last 
number of days. 
 
The HSE, he advised, was following up in relation to the situation in 
Falcarragh and the Council had no involvement here.  
 
The Director of Community Development & Planning Services would he 
confirmed be co-ordinating the overall response.  
 
 
 
 
 
C/13/25 
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY BY WAY OF LEASE AT THE DONEGAL 
PUBLIC SERVICE CENTRE, DRUMLONAGHER, DONEGAL TOWN TO 
UISCE EIREANN 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Naughton, it was 
resolved to disposal of property by way of lease at the Donegal Public 
Service Centre, Drumlonagher, Donegal Town to Uisce Eireann in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, (as amended).    
 
C/14/25 
 DISPOSAL OF LANDS AT DRUMDUFF, INVER TO NIALL AND 
CLAIRE BRUTON 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr J Brogan, it was resolved 
to disposal of lands at Drumduff, Inver to Niall and Claire Bruton in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, (as amended).    
 
C/15/25 
 DISPOSAL OF LANDS AT SMINVER, BALLYSHANNON TO DECLAN 
MCHUGH, ANNE MCHUGH AND BARRY MCHUGH 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr McMahon, seconded by Cllr Naughton, it was 
resolved to disposal of lands at Sminver, Ballyshannon to Declan 
McHugh, Anne McHugh and Barry McHugh in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as 
amended). 
 
 
 
C/16/25 
 COUNCIL REPRESENTATION AT THE ST PATRICKS DAY EVENTS IN 
THE USA 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 

17 
 
the above. On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr McGowan it 
was resolved to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach and Leas 
Cathaoirleach at the St. Patrick’s Day events in the USA.  
 
C/17/25 
MEMBERSHIP OF THE STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEES FOR THE 
PERIOD 2024-2029.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services noted 
that the Donegal County Council Strategic Policy Committee Scheme had 
been adopted a number of months ago and that subsequently there had 
been engagement with the various pillars to confirm the sectoral 
membership. It was now intended, he said, to nominate members to the 
specific SPCs and confirm the sectoral nominations. He proceeded to 
outline the required membership for each Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
 
 
It was unanimously agreed to defer the matter to later in the meeting. 
 
C/18/25 
NOMINATION OF MEMBER FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE BOARD OF 
UDARAS NA GAELTACHTA 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. Mr Patsy Lafferty, Meetings Administrator informed members 
that the position was for the period 2025/2026.  
 
 
Cllr Anthony Molloy was proposed by Cllr Coyle, and this was seconded 
by Cllr C Brogan. Cllr Coyle said that he was a fitting candidate and had 
over two years’ experience on the board of Údarás na Gaeltachta. He 
acknowledged also the great effort he had made to become fluent in the 
Irish language.  
 
 
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman proposed, seconded by Cllr A Doherty that the 
position be filled by Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh. She said that Cllr O’ 
Fearraigh was well qualified for the position and his considerable 
experience at community level made him an ideal candidate for the 
position. 
 
 
Cllr Devine proposed, seconded by Cllr A Farren that Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
be selected as the Donegal County Council nominee. Cllr Mc Gee, he 
said, resided in a Gaeltacht area and thus had a broad knowledge of the 
challenges and difficulties faced by Gaeltacht communities. 
 
 
As there was more than one nomination for the position a recorded vote 
was taken by the Meetings Administrator, and this resulted in the 
following: 
 
▪ 
Cllr Anthony Molloy 
 
18 votes 
▪ 
Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh 
10 votes 
▪ 
Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
 
  6 votes  
 
Those voting for Cllr Molloy included: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Boyle, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Coyle, M Farren, Harley, 

18 
 
Kavanagh, Kelly, Kennedy, Mc Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc Garvey, Mc 
Gowan, Molloy, Naughton and Scanlon . (18) 
 
 
Those voting for Cllr O’ Fearraigh included: 
 
 
Cllrs Carr, Crossan, A Doherty, Jordan, Mc Mahon, Mc Monagle, Meehan, 
Murray and Nic Mheanman and O’ Fearraigh. (10) 
 
 
Those voting for Cllr Mc Gee included: 
 
 
Cllr Beard, J Brogan, Devine, A Farren, Mac Giolla Easbuig and Mc Gee. 
(6) 
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride abstained. 
 
 
Thus, Cllr Anthony Molloy was selected as the Donegal County Council 
nominee to the Board of Údarás na Gaeltachta. 
 
 
Cllr Molloy thanked his proposer and seconder and acknowledged the 
calibre of the other candidates. He was he said looking forward to the two 
year term and would strive to do his best for the people of Donegal. 
 
C/19/25 
TO FILL CASUAL VACANCY ON THE NORTHWEST REGIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT GROUP ARISING FROM THE RESIGNATION OF 
CLLR MARTIN FARREN 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Gee, seconded by Cllr Mc Bride it was resolved 
that Cllr Tomás Sean Devine fill the vacancy on the North-West Regional 
Development Group arising from the resignation of Cllr Martin Farren.  
 
C/20/25 
FILL OF REMAINING VACANCY ON THE DONEGAL COUNTY 
COUNCIL VALUE FOR MONEY COMMITTEE   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Mc Bride it was 
resolved that Cllr Martin Scanlon fill the remaining vacancy on the 
Donegal County Council Value for Money Committee. 
 
C/21/25 
DATE FOR PLENARY WORKSHOP – MACHINERY YARD  
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold a Plenary Workshop to discuss the 
operation of the Machinery Yard on Monday 7th April, 2025 at 10am in the 
County House, Lifford. 
 
C/22/25 
TO NOTE OBLIGATIONS ON MEMBERS UNDER THE LOCAL 
ELECTIONS (DISCLOSURE OF DONATIONS & EXPENDITURE) ACT, 
1999 AS AMENDED, TO SUBMIT A DONATION STATEMENT FOR 
2024 BY 31ST JANUARY, 2025.    
 
Members noted the obligation under the Local Elections (Disclosure of 
Donations & Expenditure) Act, 1999 as amended, to submit a donation 
statement for 2024 by 31st January, 2025.  
 
C/23/25 
TO NOTE OBLIGATIONS ON MEMBERS UNDER (PART 15) LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT ACT, 2001 ETHICS FRAMEWORK TO SUBMIT 

19 
 
DECLARATION OF INTEREST FOR 2024 BY THE 28TH FEBRUARY, 
2025.   
 
Members noted obligations under (Part 15) Local Government Act, 2001 
Ethics Framework to submit declaration of interest for 2024 by the 28th 
February, 2025.  
 
C/24/25 
TO APPROVE THE REASSIGNMENT OF A CAPITAL LOAN IN THE 
SUM OF €1,991,623 FOR THE PURPOSE OF CO-FINANCING THE 
REFURBISHMENT OF BUNDORAN WATERWORLD.    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. On the proposal of Cllr Mc Mahon, seconded by Cllr Naughton 
it was resolved to approve, subject to the sanction of the appropriate 
Minister, the reassignment of a capital loan in the sum of €1,991,623 for 
the purpose of co-financing the refurbishment of Bundoran Waterworld. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Mahon thanked all involved and said that Bundoran Waterworld 
had been a great success story for Bundoran and had served the town of 
Bundoran very well. He noted that it had an excellent staff base and 
provided considerable employment in the town. Cllr Naughton concurred 
and said that it was a huge tourist attraction and a great asset for the town 
of Bundoran. 
 
C/25/25 
TO NOTE THE REPORT AND REQUEST MEMBERS AGREEMENT TO 
THE PREPARATION OF A DRAFT VARIATION TO THE CDP 2024-
2030 (PROPOSED VARIATION NO. 1)   
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was to 
resolved to insert new Area Plans for the towns of An Clochán Liath 
(Dungloe), Ballyshannon, Bridgend, Carndonagh, Donegal Town and 
Killybegs;  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Canning it was resolved 
to amend the zoning of site NR2.16 at Cockhill, Buncrana – from ‘New 
Residential Phase 2’ to ‘New Residential Phase 1.” 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to amend land use zonings on foot of Residential Zoned Land 
Tax (RZLT) related landowner submissions, where appropriate, within 
affected settlements throughout County Donegal. 
 
Cllr A Doherty asked that more information be provided on the Residential 
Zoned Land (RZLT) as there were issues that needed further 
consideration. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
thanked members for agreeing to the process in relation the review of the 
six towns outlined above and said that it was hoped to bring the relevant 
reports to the July meeting.  

20 
 
He informed Cllr Doherty that item 2 in the report detailed the update on 
the RZLT and the potential variations arising on foot of rezoning requests 
by landowners. The final revised RZLT map he advised would be 
published on the 31st January. It was noted that the Finance Act of 2024 
brought in certain mechanisms to allow landowners seek exemptions in 
cases where they had inter alia submitted a request for a change to the 
zoning of the land included on the 31st of January map. The period for 
landowners to make submissions, it was confirmed, was the 1st February 
to the 1st April 2025 and the relevant legislation was in place to facilitate 
any requests that might arise through the variation process. The Planning 
Authority were then, he said, obliged to consider such requests, evaluate 
same and consider whether or not to proceed with a variation. This legal 
provision, he advised, had the potential to add a significant number of 
rezoning elements to the variation process. Members of the public could, 
he said, after the publication of the map on the 31st January make a 
submission within the timeframe outlined above and if this meets the 
relevant criteria then same could be considered as part of the variation 
process. Cllr Doherty welcomed the fact that there was a submission 
process and designated time period for same.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott asked if the members had any say in the process after 
the relevant submissions had been made. He was informed that members 
would be advised of any requests for rezoning that were received and as 
to how these met the requirements of the Finance Act. It was confirmed 
that it was ultimately an executive decision but that members would be 
informed of same. It was also acknowledged that there was an appeal 
mechanism in place, undertaken by An Bord Pleanála and that appeals 
would only be accepted on the basis of requests received by the local 
authority for rezoning. 
 
C/26/25 
 PLENARY WORKSHOP – DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION SCHEME 
REVIEW 
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold a plenary workshop on Thursday 6th 
March 2025 at 2pm in the Council Chamber, Lifford in respect of the 
Development Contribution Scheme review.  
 
C/27/25 
ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCAL COMMUNITY SAFETY PARTNERSHIP - 
NOMINATION OF SEVEN MEMBERS FROM DONEGAL COUNTY 
COUNCIL 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
advised that there was a requirement to nominate seven number 
members from Donegal County Council.  
 
Cllr Canning said that he was disappointed at the way this had come 
about and that it was clear that the power and role of the elected members 
had been significantly reduced. Concerns in relation to same had been 
raised at the Joint Policing Committee meetings, he noted, and the 

21 
 
Partnership would now be chaired by a non-member of Council. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle concurred and said that he had not been aware until after 
the deadline of the process for selecting the Chair of the Partnership. The 
whole process, he contended, had been going on far too long and a void 
had been created with the disbandment of the Joint Policing Committee.  
 
He asked when the Chairperson would be selected and at what point 
would other agencies be invited to become involved. Further discussion 
was needed, he added. 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that he was disappointed that this had gone on for so 
long as Garda resources were continually being reduced and rural stations 
closed. He said that it was not possible to have a fitting level of policing in 
the county without the necessary resources in place. It was imperative, he 
added, that the committee got up and running and that everything possible 
was done to access the necessary funding and resources. He said that 
each electoral area should have a representative on the committee.  
 
Cllr Naughton asked for detail in relation to the two nominations for the 
Chair of the Partnership and whether or not the position had been filled. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty also highlighted the resourcing issues and the fact that 
Garda numbers in the county were not sufficient. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
said that there was a late change to the process and thus subsequently 
confirmed that Cllrs were eligible to apply for the position of chairperson. 
This, he noted, had been brought to the attention of the Corporate Policy 
Group. A public advertisement had issued, he said, for the Chairperson 
position and two applications received within the timeline. Guidance 
issued nationally had set out the selection process, he advised and that 
had included the involvement of the Chief Executive and a representative 
from the Department of Justice. The applications had been considered he 
said, and a recommendation made to the Minister for Justice who now has 
to confirm the appointment.  
 
Donegal, it was noted, was in the same position as a number of other local 
authorities and awaited confirmation form the Minister’s office. It was 
confirmed that a LCSP Co-ordinator had been appointed and that they 
would have access to a support member of staff. It was thus important, he 
said, that the nomination of the elected members was concluded today. 
 
Cllr Brogan asked that the matter be deferred to later in the meeting.  
 
C/28/25 
 FIRE SERVICES CAPITAL PROGRAMME 2026-2030 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 

22 
 
Cllr Mc Mahon proposed, seconded by Cllr Naughton that the approval of 
the programme be deferred pending the submission of a business plan to 
the Department for the construction of two new fire stations in 
Ballyshannon and Bundoran. He said this had been agreed by the 
Donegal MD members and asked all members for their support.  
 
Cllr Naughton supporting the deferral said that a decision on the 
programme could be put back until the May meeting.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott asked for an update in relation to the request for a second 
water tanker.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle queried if there were any plans to provide training on the 
use of chainsaws to the fire service and whether or not equipment of this 
nature was available in the various Fire Stations.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee cited the necessity of ensuring that fire services on the 
Islands were sufficiently resourced. 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services said that sanction would have to be sought from 
the Department to submit the 2026-2030 Capital Programme after the 
designated closing date. He noted that a very good workshop had been 
held with the Donegal MD members the previous week and that every 
effort would be made to make the best business case for the two stations 
involved based on the evidence at hand. Considerable efforts had been 
made previously, in relation to the matter, he noted, and it was anticipated 
that there would be challenges to the proposal at departmental level. The 
first task, he said, was to get an extension of time from the National Fire 
Directorate in relation to the plan and then to submit the business case as 
outlined.  
 
Mr Joseph Mc Taggart, Chief Fire Officer confirmed that a second water 
tanker would be available in the next number of months and would be 
located in line with the best needs of the service. The Department, he 
said, expected the Fire Service to locate resources which they funded in 
where they would best meet the operational needs of the Fire Service in 
Donegal.  
 
Chainsaws, he advised, were very dangerous tools and specific 
competency was required in the use of same. Any proposed use would he 
noted be most likely to be in inclement weather or when conditions were 
not most appropriate. The Health and Safety Authority, he noted, had 
decreed that in order to be competent in the use of a chainsaw, personnel 
had to be provided with the relevant tools, PPE and training all backed up 
with a dedicated level of training. Whilst the tools, PPE, and training could 
be provided, it was not possible within the Fire Service to facilitate the 
experience aspect. There were, he advised, health and safety obligations 
to be met and thus it was not intended to put chainsaws on fire appliances  
for general use.  

23 
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said, he could not accept this answer and that it was 
something that needed to be looked at again given that fire personnel 
were generally first at the scene of an accident. Experience, he said, 
would come with training and use. 
 
Cllr J Brogan concurred and noted that many members of the fire service 
were from a rural background and had experience which could be utilised.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan alluded to the fact that angle grinders were currently used 
by fire service personnel and that additional training should be put in place 
covering the use of chainsaws. He said that the services of Coillte could 
be utilised in terms of training provision. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott proposed, seconded by Cllr M Farren that consideration 
be given to locating the second water tanker in Inishowen. 
 
The Chief Fire Officer, in response said that the need for chainsaws by the 
Fire Services was extremely limited and that the scenario for dealing with 
fallen trees was very different to the skills utilised in tree cutting. The 
amount of training and the resources needed he said did not warrant the 
use of chainsaws by fire service personnel. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said , he could not agree with this response and that a 
small number of staff in each station could be trained to use a chainsaw. 
The service was, he contended, an emergency service and needed to 
respond with the tools to do the job.  
 
The Director of Service noted that there was a mixed approach across the 
country and that local arrangements were in place. Personnel, he said, 
were not experts and noted that there was duty of care to staff in terms of 
their operating environment. The current policy, he advised, was there for 
a good reason. He said that he would speak to personnel within the 
service and get their views on the matter thus keeping the issue under 
review.  
 
Concluding, he said it was of immense value to get the second water 
tanker and that every effort would be made to balance the requests made 
with the operational needs of the service.  
 
C/29/25 
ADJOURNMEMT OF THE MEETING 
 
 
It was unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting until 2.30pm. 
 
C/30/25 
ENDORSEMENT OF MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP HELD ON THE 18TH NOVEMBER 2024 
 
Members noted the minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group 
held on the 18th November 2024.  
 
C/31/25 
ENDORSEMENT OF MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP HELD ON THE 2ND DECEMBER 2024 

24 
 
Members noted the minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group 
held on the 2nd December 2024. 
 
C/32/25 
ATTENDANCE AT EVENTS  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 
of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) 
Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for 
the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 
(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Gowan, seconded by Cllr Blaney attendance at 
the following training events was approved. 
 
Cllr Blaney noted that the LAMA Awards were taking place on the 22nd 
February and highlighted the fact that seven Donegal projects were 
competing in the various award categories. Cllr Mc Mahon said he was 
disappointed that the LAMA Yearbook once again had excluded the six 
counties from the mapping. 
 
Cllr Blaney, the Donegal County Council LAMA representative said that 
he would bring the matter to the attention of the board but that the current 
reasoning was that the body only represented the 26 counties.  
 
 
Training 
▪ AILG Training Programme for 2025. 
▪ LAMA Spring Seminar to be held on the 30th and 31st January 2025 
in the Kilford Arms Hotel, Kilkenny. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Gowan, seconded by Cllr Mc Bride attendance 
at the following conference events was approved: 
 
 
Conference 
• Association of Irish Regions Seminar to be held in the Radisson Blu 
Hotel, Athlone on the 5th & 6th February, 2025. 
• Irish Building Control Institute -National Building Control 
Conference to be held in the Radisson Blu Hotel, Little Island, Cork 
on the 12th and 13th March, 2025. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Clafferty 
attendance at the following events was approved: 
 
 
Other 
• Donegal 2040 Site visit to Galway on the 13th and 14th February 
2025.  
• Attendance at the LAMA Awards 2025 in the Rochestown Park 
Hotel, Cork on the 22nd February, 2025. 

25 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved to approve the following: 
 
 
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the CPMR representative at the Atlantic Arc 
Commission Hub Meetings in Brussels on the 30th and 31st 
January 2025. 
• Attendance of the EU Cerv Project representative at the Youth & 
Democracy: Empowering Europe’s Next Generation Seminar in 
Figueira Da Foz Portugal from the 2nd to the 5th February 2025. 
(Travel and accommodation covered by Eu Cerv) 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Irish American Business 
Chamber Network Awards in Philadelphia on the 28th February, 
2025. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or the Cathaoirleach’s 
representative at the Intelligent Cities Challenge Closing 
Conference in Brussels on the 5th and 6th March 2025. (Travel and 
accommodation covered by ERNACT)  
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the EU-Belong Final Event in 
Strasbourg, France from the 24th to the 27th March, 2025. 
• Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CPMR Political 
Bureau meeting in Bari, Italy on the 27th and 28th March, 2025.  
 
C/33/25 
CONFERENCE REPORTS  
 
 
Members noted the following Conference Reports: 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the Blue Economy Conference in 
Plymouth, Boston from the 15th to the 18th October 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the 25th Anniversary of the Island of 
Ireland Peace Park in Mesen, Belgium on the 11th November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley on the US Trade Mission and Golden 
Bridges Conference from the 12th to the 17th November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Donal Kelly at the Suck Valley “The Rise of 
Loneliness on the Emerald Isle” – Community Development & Planning 
Remedies Conference held on the 13th and 14th March 2024 in 
Hannon’s Hotel, Roscommon.  
• Attendance of Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty at the Suck Valley  “The Rise of 
Loneliness on the Emerald Isle” – Community Development & Planning 
Remedies Conference held on the 13th and 14th March 2024 in 
Hannon’s Hotel, Roscommon.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved that Donegal County Council take a table at the forthcoming 
LAMA Awards Night in in the Rochestown Park Hotel, Cork on the 22nd 
February, 2025. 
 
C/34/25 
FUNDING FOR MEN’S AND WOMEN’S SHEDS 
 
 
It was resolved to take Motion No 11 and Motion No 18 at this juncture. 
 

26 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Bride, seconded by Cllr Blaney the following 
motion was adopted: 
 
That Donegal County Council writes to the incoming Minister for Rural and 
Community Development asking that minimum funding of €3000 per 
Man's Shed be made available as this fund is a lifeline for the sheds.” 
 
Cllr Mc Bride received a response from the Director of Community 
Development & Planning Services in relation to the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Carr, seconded by Cllr Mc Bride, the following 
motion was adopted: 
 
“The Council write to the incoming Minister for Rural and Community 
Development to request that €75,000 of the recently announced Local 
Enhancement Programme Fund be ringfenced for Men’s and Women’s 
Sheds in the county.” This allocation would enable 25 sheds to access a 
€3,000 sustainability grant, providing vital support for Sheds across the 
county. 
 
Cllr Carr received a response from the Director of Community 
Development & Planning Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Carr said that in previous years €1.2m of a sustainability grant was 
managed by Irish Men’s Shed’s Association and that applicants in 
Donegal were able to put in vouched receipts and obtain up to €3000 in 
funding per annum. 25 Men’s Sheds had received funding as a result with 
€75k coming into the county for these initiatives. This year, he said that 
the funding was to be allocated through the LCDC under the Local 
Enhancement Programme Fund. 
 
The main issue now, he said, was that the mechanism for funding had 
changed and only up to €500 could be sought for running costs. Funding 
of these operational costs were essential, he added, and the reduction in 
funding was severe blow to what was a vital community initiative. He 
asked that the detail of the motion be communicated to Mr Dara Calleary, 
T.D , Minister for Rural and Community Development before the 23rd 
February.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that he was in agreement with this assessment and that 
the funding decision needed to be revised otherwise the Sheds would be 
forced to close. These were, he noted, vital and effective projects and 
excellent additions to local communities.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive said that the Council would write to the Minister as 
directed.  
 

27 
 
C/35/25 
FEASIBILITY STUDY – RAIL CONNECTION LETTERKENNY TO 
DERRY 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr J Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
 “That this Council will write to the incoming Minister for Transport, 
requesting that they meet with a delegation from Donegal County Council, 
with the aim of discussing, securing funding for a feasibility study on a rail 
connection between Letterkenny and Derry, to progress recommendations 
made by the All-Island Strategic Rail Review of 2024, and to match the 
progression of the feasibility study underway on a rail connection between 
Derry and Portadown.” 
 
Cllr Meehan received a response from the Director of Roads & 
Transportation in relation to the above. 
 
 He noted that the 14th February was the 60th anniversary of the closure of 
the Great Northern Railway linking Derry and Portadown via Carrigans 
and St Johnston thus removing the last piece of rail infrastructure in 
Donegal and heightening the county’s isolation. Letterkenny, he added, 
had lost its Rail Station in 1953 and was presently the third largest town in 
Ireland without rail. With both Swords and Navan in the process of having 
rail links restored, Letterkenny it was noted would effectively become the 
largest town in Ireland with no rail link. 
 
 Donegal, he said, as a rural county had the highest levels of car 
dependency in the country and that despite a number of advances in local 
transport links two third of people commuted daily by car or van.  He 
alluded to the fact that the All-Ireland Strategic Rail review had 
recommended that the Derry to Portadown Link should be progressed 
followed by the Derry to Letterkenny element. There was, he contended, 
an urgency to progress the Derry-Letterkenny link and to seek a meeting 
with the Minister with regard to funding for a feasibility study.  
 
 Cognisance, he said, needed to be taken of the huge volume of 
interaction between Derry and Donegal and the fact that 38% of cross-
border workers were based and worked in Derry. Of these, it was noted , 
that 95% were from Donegal. This interdependency, he added, was not 
only confined to employment but extended also to the education sector. 
There was recognition also of the fact that 40% of the passengers using 
Derry City Airport were from Donegal.  
 
 Given the fact that the All-Ireland review had actively promoted the Derry 
to Portadown Rail link and the corresponding link to Dublin, it was 
imperative, he added, that Donegal had a connection into that line. 
 
Cllr Meehan said it was vital that these rail connections were progressed 
as they were important pieces of infrastructure in terms of developing the 
Northwest City Region in a sustainable way. He said that monies needed 
for a feasibility study were small compared to the €17.1 billion that was 

28 
 
available within the Irish Infrastructure Fund. He cited the need for 
ongoing engagement with Translink and for greater use of Shared Island 
funding to assist with the development of rail infrastructure in Donegal. 
There was room also, he said, for further co-operation with Derry City  & 
Strabane District Council and Fermanagh & Omagh District Council. 
 
Cllr J Brogan supporting the motion said that this was an important 
initiative given the general increase in population and said that a rail link 
from Letterkenny to Sligo to Galway would be a valuable asset in terms of 
overall linkage and associated development along the west coast of 
Ireland.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation responding said that 
that there was reference in the Chief Executive’s report to the upcoming 
discussions with Translink. It would be possible, he said, to write to the 
Minister as requested following this interaction.  
 
C/36/25 
INCREASE IN WINTER MAINTENANCE ALLOCATION  
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion: 
 
"That this Council write to the Minister for Transport requesting a 
substantial increase in the Winter Maintenance Allocation for the County." 
 
Cllr Coyle received a response from the Director of Roads & 
Transportation in relation to the above. 
 
He welcomed the comprehensive response and said that the gritting 
programme was at capacity with the only solution being increased funding 
at national level if more routes were to be included. He noted that there 
were resource issues also in terms of equipment, salt and grit stocks and 
the availability of personnel. He cited the need for additional gritting in the 
Convoy, Glenmacquin, Mongorry and Galdonagh areas.  
 
Cllr Blaney supporting the motion said that prior to 2009/2010 many more 
roads had been included on the gritting programme. The reduction of 
funding at that time had significantly reduced the programme and the 
impact was still being felt today. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation advised that Donegal 
County Council had one of the most extensive winter maintenance 
programmes in the country. He noted that there had been a review in 
2021 and an additional 135km added. It would be possible, he said, for 
the new Roads & Transportation SPC to examine the policy 
considerations as part of its work programme and that recommendations 
could be brought to MD and Plenary meetings.  

29 
 
He said that correspondence would issue to the Minister and that it should 
also be noted that logistic, human and technical resource considerations 
had also to be factored into the process.  
 
C/37/25 
 RECOGNITION FOR THE NORTHWEST CITY REGION 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“That this Council seek an urgent meeting with the new Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage to lobby for the, 
 
•  Recognition of the North-West City Region within the NPF national 
hierarchy of city regions and to,  
•  Further strengthen the role of Letterkenny as a key Regional Growth 
Centre  
•  Identify and prioritise enabling and critical infrastructure for the North-
West City Region.  
•  Support the establishment of a dedicated Economic Task Force for the 
North-West City Region.” 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle received a response from the Director of Economic 
Development, Information Systems and Emergency Services in relation to 
the above. 
 
He said that the time was right with the advent of a new Government and 
a new Minister in situ to lobby for the recognition of the Northwest City 
Region, given that it would be 2030 before there would be another review.  
 
A lot of work, he said, needed to be done to get this recognition as 
currently all the major areas of growth were located below the Dublin- 
Galway line. The Northwest, he contended, had been neglected and the 
lack of investment in the region reflected in the National Planning 
Framework.  
 
He alluded to the lack of infrastructure in the region and the need to 
develop same to accommodate additional population growth. Continued 
focus on the southern regions would, he advised, push the Northwest 
further back. This was something, he said, which needed to be 
progressed by the Oireachtas members in the county. He said the 
potential existed for the Northwest to become a net contributor to the 
overall economy. 
 
Cllr A Doherty said that the motion was timely given that the new 
Government had just taken office, and it was hoped that the regional 
independent grouping would ensure that the NW City Region got the 
support it needed.  
 
There were, he noted four key asks in the recommendation as submitted 
and unfortunately the recognition sought had not been reflected in the 
subsequent review. It was important, he said, that this together with the 

30 
 
All-Ireland Rail review and the Shared Island initiative were progressed 
and driven forward by Donegal County Council and neighbouring Councils 
given the urgent need for investment in the Northwest.  
 
This was also something, he noted, which had been advocated by the 
Northern and Western Regional Assembly together with a policy of 
positive discrimination to deliver regional equality in the Northwest. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services said that it was clear that the key 
recommendations had not been recognised in the review and that on foot 
of this letters had been sent to the previous Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage and to the previous Minister for Agriculture 
together with the Northern & Western Regional Assembly highlighting the 
fact that none of the recommendations in the submissions to the First 
Revision of the National Planning Framework had been acknowledged or 
addressed. It was timely, he said, that a such a request be forwarded to 
the incoming Minister. It was important, he said, that this accelerated 
investment was obtained to allow the region to become a net contributor 
to the economy. He agreed to follow-up with a letter to the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government & Heritage, Mr James Browne, T.D. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said it was imperative that every effort was made to 
lobby for the recognition of the Northwest City Region and increase the 
regions share of the investment and infrastructure.  He said that the 
Government also needed to be reminded that the review did not address 
many of the recommendations of the cross-border dimension of Strand 2 
of the Good Friday Agreement, many of which still apply, and which have 
implications under Brexit.  
 
C/38/25 
CONTROL OF DOGS  
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“That this Council takes action on dog owners who are not controlling their 
dogs properly in our communities, i.e. chasing sheep etc or are a danger 
to the public, children etc, and that a rule is brought in that all dogs must 
be on a lead while in public spaces such as towns, beaches, walks, trails 
etc. Also, that this motion would be passed around to all the other Council 
offices around Ireland.” 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty received a response from the Director of Housing, 
Corporate  & Cultural Services in relation to the above. 
 
He said this was an increasing problem county-wide and that dog owners 
needed to take responsibility. It was a particular problem at lambing 
season, he noted, and there were also issues on our beaches, car-parks, 
forest parks etc.  

31 
 
It was important, he said, that there was an awareness of the problem and 
that a dedicated campaign was needed to ensure that dogs were kept on 
their leads in public places. It was noted that dog fouling had also become 
a major issue. 
 
Cllr Blaney supporting the motion said that he hoped the appointment of  
second dog warden in the county would help the situation. It was to be 
noted, he said, that most dog owners were responsible and that it was a 
few who created the majority of the problems. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
provided a summary of his response, and an overview of the mechanisms 
used by the Dog Wardens for the control of dogs including the appropriate 
actions taken. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty welcomed the response an outlined the need for common 
sense in dealing with the problem.   
 
C/39/25 
EMIGRANTS ABROAD SHOULD BE GIVEN VOTING RIGHTS IN THE 
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION     
 
On the proposal of Cllr O’Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr McMahon it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council call on the Government to have our emigrants ab  
road be given voting rights in our Presidential election.”    
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh received a response from the Director of Housing, 
Corporate & Cultural Services. 
 
He acknowledged the great work carried out by President Higgins and 
said that it was very important that Irish Emigrants were given the vote for 
the next presidential election.  
 
Cllr Mc Mahon supporting the motion said that Irish people were scattered 
all over the world with many thousands undocumented in the USA. The 
right to vote, he said, would mean a lot to people in this situation. He 
alluded also to the fact that those living in the six counties did not have a 
vote and cited the need for an All-Ireland jurisdiction. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that in order to vote in a presidential election you had to be 18 or over, an 
Irish citizen and ordinarily resident in Ireland. He said that the detail of the 
motion would be forwarded to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage. 
 
 

32 
 
C/40/25 
RENTAL COSTS DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS FAMILIES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That the Council advocate for a scheme to be put in place to incentivise 
landlords to rent to families who have defective block homes and need 
temporary accommodation.” 
 
There are already financial incentives in place for landlords to house 
certain cohorts. It is imperative that we put similar incentives in place in 
order to assist those who have already experienced the trauma of living in 
a defective block home, to get accommodation when it is required.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
He noted that there were already financial incentives in place for landlords 
to house certain cohorts. It was imperative, he said, that similar incentives 
were put in place in place to assist those living in defective block homes, 
secure accommodation when required. He said that a proactive approach 
was needed to deal with high rental prices and assist families in this 
situation. 
 
Cllr A Farren said that a dedicated scheme was needed and would be a 
positive step in assisting families who had to move out of their properties. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Service said that correspondence 
would issue to the Minister as requested. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee welcomed the response and asked that it be forwarded as a 
matter of urgency.  
 
C/41/25 
MEANS ALLOWANCE - SOCIAL HOUSING APPLICANTS   
 
It was resolved to deal with Motions 19 and 20 collectively. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr J Brogan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"To ask Donegal Co Council to contact the new Minister for Housing and 
demand that they raise the means allowance substantially for applicants of 
social housing". The current means allowance is too low which is blocking 
people from getting on the housing list and availing of housing supports 
when they can't afford the exorbitant rents which are being charged and 
can't get a mortgage and is leading to the risk of homelessness.    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above. 
 
 

33 
 
Cllr Brogan received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate 
& Cultural Services. 
 
The current means allowance, he advised was too low and prevented 
people from getting on the housing list and availing of housing supports. 
They could not, he advised, afford the exorbitant rents which are being 
charged and many were unable to secure a mortgage all of which led to 
the risk of homelessness. The cost of living and a huge increase in private 
rental costs all contributed to the problem, he added. Many people on the 
lower scale of the minimum wage, he advised, were caught in this trap 
and unable to get on the property ladder. He cited the need for a 
substantial increase in the income limits to assist people in this situation. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr J Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
"I am submitting this motion calling on this Council to write to both 
incoming Ministers for Social Protection and Housing calling for an urgent 
review on the threshold rates at which persons are allowed to be placed 
on the housing list." 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Scanlon said that there was an anomaly in that people on the 
minimum wage could not avail of any additional working hours as the 
increase would put them over the income threshold for social housing and 
knock them off the waiting list. 
 
There was no opposition to the motions. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that the response provided gave a detailed overview of the relevant 
thresholds. 
 
Cllr Brogan said that the threshold needed to be urgently reviewed, and 
the relevant supports provided.  
 
C/42/25 
SUSTAINABLE GROWTH OF THE GAELTACHT COMMUNITIES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Nic Mheanman, seconded by Cllr O’Fearraigh it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“Go dtacaíonn an comhairle seo le go gcuirfear Straitéis Daonra agus 
Tithíochta Gaeltachta le chéile do gach Limistéar Pleanála Teanga  
Gaeltachta le spriocanna soiléire, intomhaiste a leagadh amach chun fás 
inbhuanaithe na bpobal Gaeltachta a chinntiú, agus soláthar cuí tithíochta 
a chinntiú chun tacú leis an bhfás sin.” 
 
“That this Council supports that a Gaeltacht Population and Housing 
Strategy be drawn up for each Gaeltacht Language Planning Area  

34 
 
with clear, measurable targets set out to ensure the sustainable growth of 
the Gaeltacht communities, and to ensure an appropriate supply of 
housing to support that growth.” 
 
She received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman highlighted the fact that there was a lack of service 
provision in Gaeltacht areas and that this had impacted on rural 
communities and forced young people to emigrate. Schools, Post Offices, 
local community services, she said, were all disappearing. 
 
Thus, she called on the Council to develop a policy to support housing in 
Gaeltacht areas and to encourage people in these areas to keep the Irish 
language alive.  
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh concurred and said that current Government housing 
policy was having a negative impact in these areas and on the people who 
lived there. It was imperative, he said, that a language policy was adhered 
to as locals were unable to buy houses because of the high prices and 
were effectively priced out of the housing market. The absence of a 
language impact assessment was also a major issue, he added. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner said that there was a policy context in 
the Development Plan process with ongoing submissions and discussions 
with the Irish language organisations in Donegal. He said that the 
Council’s own Oifigeach na Gaeilge had advocated for the adoption of and 
increase in the percentage rates and uptakes for the allocation of housing. 
It was essential , he added, that local schools and services were retained 
and that the land use planning needs of the Gaeltacht were reviewed on a 
regular basis.  
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman welcomed the response.  
 
C/43/25 
 COUNCIL’S CURRENT STRATEGIC AND SPECIFIC ROADS GRANTS   
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr Coyle it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
"That a full report is presented to this full Council meeting on the Council's 
current Strategic and Specific Roads Grants priority list that was agreed 
by this Council along with projects that have been completed or are being  
progressed at present and include whatever criteria was used to select.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan noted that in 2020 there had been intense consultation 
with the aim of drawing up a priority list for strategic roads projects  

35 
 
He referenced the road adjacent to St Mary’s National School in 
Stranorlar up by the Mill Brae and Mc Clays Corner which is going to act 
as a western link to the town. This road he said would have increased 
significance when the Bypass is built and that there had been a number of 
accidents. Stranorlar, he said, had one of the most badly laid out junctions 
in the country. 
 
He asked that detail be circulated in relation to any relevant 
correspondence with the Department, and that the roads included on the 
Strategic & Specific Roads Grants priority list be included on the agenda 
of any future meetings with the Department. 
 
He cited the need to prioritise the top 3 to 7 roads which had been 
included on the list initially and said that the urgency to upgrade same still 
existed.  
 
Cllr Coyle supporting the motion acknowledged the implications for the 
county as a whole. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation alluded to his 
response and the overview provided in relation to several projects county-
wide. He said that a number of the projects on the list had progressed with 
funding from other sources. It was acknowledged that in the case of each 
of the projects on the priority list a business case had been submitted and 
a project appraisal form forwarded to the Department in accordance with 
the requirements of the Public Spending Code.  
 
The list he advised could be revisited in terms of tapping into the various 
other funding streams and brought to the attention of the Minister at any 
future delegation meetings. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan whilst welcoming the response said the fact remained that 
the number 1 project on the list had not to date received any funding from 
this or any other source. 
 
C/44/25 
 DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS  
On the proposal of Cllr A Farren, seconded by Cllr McGee it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
In 2024 houses were being built in Donegal that have defective concrete 
in them and in approximately 15 years these new homes will be crumbling 
down just like the homes that are covered by the present “Redress” 
scheme. Every person buying or building a home deserves to know that 
the products are fit for purpose. At present we can’t be sure a home, or 
any building will last because of the lack of regulation! 
 

36 
 
“I am asking that this new government immediately put into place 
regulations to ensure block manufacturers produce products fit for 
purpose and to protect homeowners or any buyer of concrete products. 
 
We also need the Co Council to be able to visit quarries and test blocks 
before they are used.  
People cannot afford to invest in Donegal if they can’t be guaranteed that 
their homes will last and that they won’t have to go through the torture 
many of us are going through for the last 14 plus years.” 
 
Cllr Farren advised that his first motion of 2025 is very urgent, we need to 
write to the National Standards Association, the Taoiseach, the Minister of 
Housing and both ministers of Finance (I would request this motion be 
sent to all TD’s as it’s so important they all understand how useless the 
present regulations are and that they have duty of care to all the people of 
this country)  
 
Cllr Farren received a response from the Director of Water & Environment  
in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Farren said it was extremely important that all TDs received a copy of 
the motion given the need to ensure that people were familiar with the fact 
that there were still ongoing issues in terms of the quality and suitability of 
concrete products on general. The whole aspect of Market Surveillance 
needed to be reviewed, he added and a system in place to ensure that the 
final product was fit for purpose.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee supporting the motion said that the issue was lack of 
oversight and that quarries should have been closed until it was clear 
what was going on. It was essential, he said, that anyone building today 
had clarity in relation to the issues. They needed, he advised, to have 
confidence in the products that they were using. A proper standard and 
comprehensive market surveillance was the key to sorting the problem, he 
contended. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that he agreed with the sentiment of the motion but 
was unable to support same in light of a serious issue in the Glenties MD.  
 
It was agreed to defer the motion to later in the meeting.  
 
C/45/25 
 
REVIEW OF THE DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS SCHEME  
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr Devine it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 “With the new Government in place, this motion calls on the Executive of 
Donegal County Council to write to the leaders of Fianna Fáil and Fine 
Gael reminding them of their respective commitments to voters to hold a 
review into the Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme within months of the 
general election, and to liaise with the members of the Defective Concrete 

37 
 
Blocks Committee to draft a detailed submission to that review outlining 
the concerns that members have about the workings of the Scheme.”   
 
 She received a response from the  Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Beard acknowledged that there had been major flaws with the scheme 
initially and said that the Defective Concrete Blocks Committee was well 
placed to advise and provide an input into the review given the level of 
knowledge and first-hand experience of the situation within this grouping.  
 
She asked that the motion be communicated to the relevant political 
groupings as requested.  
 
Cllr Devine outlined his support for the motion and said that it was also 
important that the Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage, Mr  
James Browne T.D. was invited to meet with members to discuss the 
situation.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Service said that the motion would be 
forwarded to the parties referenced in the motion.  
 
C/46/25 
 INFORMATION DAY FOR PROFESSIONALS AND BUILDERS IN 
RELATION TO THE FILLING IN OF FORMS FOR THE DEFECTIVE 
CONCRETE BLOCK SCHEME  
On the proposal of Cllr McDermott, seconded by Cllr Canning it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
"To ask Donegal county council in conjunction with the Housing Agency to 
have an information day for professionals and builders to explain exactly 
what is required when filling in forms for the Defective Concrete Block 
Scheme."  
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott noted that DCB applicants were constantly getting 
requests for further information when it came to payment stage. Many of 
these, he said, involved simple issues that the assigned engineer or 
professional should have been able to sort. An information day, he 
contended, would allow all concerned to get together and serve to 
highlight what exactly was required in terms of the designated forms, the 
breakdown of information required, and clarity as to who should sign and 
where.This was something, he said, that needed to be done sooner rather 
than later and would assist in speeding up the payment process. 
 
Cllr Canning supporting the motion said a similar initiative had been taken 
in relation to planning issues a number of years ago and had worked well. 

38 
 
It was important, he added, that builders were aware of what they were 
singing off on and the implications of same. The importance of checking 
blocks and concrete materials prior to and during construction was 
something that needed to be emphasised, he added. Other aspects such 
as signing off on cube and sump tests, it was acknowledged, needed to be 
clarified and the importance of same highlighted. He noted that in some 
cases professionals from other jurisdictions were working on the 
applications and that they at times viewed the criteria from a different 
perspective. It was imperative, he said, that each professional knew 
exactly what they were responsible for as there was no room for error 
going forward.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director , Director of Water & Environment, 
alluded to his response and the fact that Donegal County Council’s 
responsibility lay in administering the scheme on behalf of the 
Department. Responsibility for all engineering and technical aspects, he 
advised, lay with the homeowners competent Building Professional or with 
the Housing Agency. Engagement, he stated, had taken place with the 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage regarding a training 
programme for Competent Building Professionals under the Enhanced 
DCB Scheme. He cited the necessity of this being centrally led and said 
that there was ongoing engagement with the Department in relation to 
same and that an update would be provided to the DCB Committee.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott responding said that the Council was the main cog in 
terms of the processing of payments and analysing whether or not the 
paperwork was correct. In this respect, he emphasised, the need for the  
Council to take the lead a soon as possible and referenced the fact that 
neither the Department nor the Housing Agency had shown any interest in 
providing the required training.  
 
C/47/25 
 EXTEND AND INCLUDE ADDITIONAL ELECTORAL AREAS 
ENABLING THEIR ELIGIBILITY AND ACCESS FOR FUNDING FROM 
THE CLAR PROGRAMME  
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Nic Mheanman it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
"That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister and Department of 
Rural and Community Development and/or relevant Dept in the new 
Government to designate, extend and include additional electoral areas 
enabling their eligibility and access for funding from the CLAR 
Programme”.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Doherty said that the CLÁR Programme effectively benefitted weaker 
areas where there was a singular great need and was delivered through 

39 
 
the Local Authority in consultation with Schools, local and voluntary 
groups and the Local Development Companies and was an effective 
support unit for many local areas. He said that there were a significant 
number of areas in electoral districts in Inishowen which could be included 
in any extension of eligibility. Reference was made to areas such as 
Glentogher, Carndonagh, Cloontagh, Glassalts, Rasheeny, Gaddyduff, 
Drumfries and the Illies. On foot of a previous motion, it was noted, that a 
request for the extension of CLÁR areas in Donegal had been submitted 
to the Department in 2022 following the extensive review carried out in 
2021 to no avail. 
 
Given that the new Draft Programme for Government had referenced the 
need to include rural areas previously ineligible, he cited the need to bring 
the matter to the attention of the Minister for Rural & Community 
Development & the Gaeltacht, Mr Dara Calleary, T.D. This, he contended, 
was also something that needed to be followed up on by the local 
Oireachtas members.  
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman concurred with this and said that there were similar 
discrepancies in the Lifford/Stranorlar MD. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive said that correspondence would issue as requested 
reflecting members contributions.  
 
C/48/25 
 PRIORITISATION OF THE ACQUSITION AND CONSTRUCTION OF 
HOMES THROUGHOUT DONEGAL FOR THOSE WITH DISABILITIES   
On the proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr Canning it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this council will prioritise the acquisition and construction of homes 
throughout County Donegal, specifically to be allocated to those with 
disabilities, in order to allow them to reside in their own community; and 
that this prioritisation would include the allocation of houses within planned 
housing developments, as well as seeking houses on the open market 
which would be suitable for such citizens.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Murray said this was something that all nine members in Inishowen 
were in agreement with following a recent meeting with a concerned 
parent in Inishowen. He welcomed the comprehensive response which 
had focused on physical and sensory disabilities. The case in question, he 
said, involved a child with an intellectual disability whose mother was 
seriously concerned that further down the road her daughter might have to 
be housed elsewhere. The Inishowen members, he said, had advocated 
the need to construct houses suitable for people with disabilities and of the 
need to assign a specific number of houses in large scale development for 

40 
 
this category of applicant. The need to actively look at houses on the 
market and vacant properties was also highlighted.  
 
He advised of the need for information from the Disability Housing 
Steering Group to be disseminated to all members and the issue 
highlighted above followed up through all appropriate channels. 
 
Cllr Canning alluding to the response said that in his opinion Donegal 
County Council had the capability and the personnel to take a project to 
planning application stage and thus earmark a piece of ground for this 
type of development. He noted the requirement to liaise with the HSE but 
advocated that where there was no commitment or response, the Council 
should proceed to move and put a shovel ready project in place which 
could be amended then as required.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate  & Cultural Services said 
that the Council did engage with a range of other agencies and the HSE 
through the Disability Housing Steering Group. This, he said, steered our 
own housing delivery and the builds on our own land. Efforts were made, 
he said, to secure housing for families with specific needs.  
 
In relation to Group Homes, he said, that one was to be provided in the 
new Social Housing development at Rockytown in Buncrana. The process 
for same, he said, involved more than the Local Authority and that they 
through the Department sourced the funds to build such projects but could 
only get such approval when there was confirmation that the HSE were 
going to cover the running costs.  
 
He said that the Council were open to taking on board the concerns raised 
by members and cited the possibility of providing same possibly under the 
Part 8 process.  
 
Cllr Murray welcomed the comments and the Group Home initiative in the 
Rockytown development. He cited the need for a follow-up meeting with 
the Disability Housing Steering Group in relation to the matters raised.  
 
C/49/25 
 COMPLETE AUDIT OF ALL THE ESTATES AFFECTED BY 
OVERGROWN TREES  
Cllr Canning submitted the following motion: 
 
“I would ask that the housing section of this council carries out a complete 
audit of all of the estates that are affected by overgrown trees that could 
and will create a hazard into the future insofar as branches falling off 
damaging solar panels, roofs along with the possibility of a danger to 
children at play with a view to managing the overgrowth of these trees.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  

41 
 
Cllr Canning said that he wished also to include a reference to overgrown 
and dangerous trees along main roads and thus on the proposal of Cllr 
Canning, seconded by Cllr Kelly it was resolved to adopt the following 
motion:-  
 
I would ask that the housing section of this council carries out a complete 
audit of all of the estates that are affected by overgrown trees that could 
and will create a hazard into the future insofar as branches falling off 
damaging solar panels, roofs along with the possibility of a danger to 
children at play with a view to managing the overgrowth of these trees and 
to carry out an audit on main roads of trees that are potentially 
dangerous.”   
 
Farmers, he said, had been encouraged for environmental reasons and 
under the Habitats Directives not to cut hedges/trees in between their 
fields and along the roads. 90% of these trees were now causing the 
problem for the ESB, he noted. There were issues here, he said, and 
welcomed the fact that a team was to be set up to liaise with the ESB. 
 
He alluded to a motion submitted previously and said that a budget was 
needed to cover the cost of installing generators when retrofitting social 
housing development. It was further suggested that Uisce Éireann be 
contacted in relation to the installation of generators at the various 
pumping stations so as to prevent water outages during and after power 
cuts. 
 
Cllr Kelly said the motion was timely given that more storms were 
predicted and cited to the need to be prepared for these type of weather 
events. He said that this was something that could be brought up at the 
next Agriculture Committee meeting and that correspondence should 
issue from this forum asking the Minister for Agriculture, Food  & 
Fisheries, and the Marine , Mr Martin Heydon, T.D. to look at introducing 
incentives to encourage farmers to cut trees, hedges and overgrowth 
along roadsides and verges. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services stated 
that there was ongoing maintenance of estates and that this involved an 
assessment of the general overall condition of Council estates. Any 
concerns in relation to the potential risk of trees, he said, should be 
reported to the local Housing Office who would arrange for the appropriate 
follow-up. 
 
Cllr Canning in conclusion advocated the need to address issues such as 
the location and the amount of trees in an estate at the planning 
application stage. 
 
 

42 
 
C/50/25 
THAT THE COUNCIL CONDEMNS, REJECTS AND OPPOSES ANY 
AND ALL FORMS OF VIOLENCE, BULLYING, HARASSMENT, 
INTIMIDATION AND HARANGUING DIRECTED TOWARDS ANY 
POLITICIANS AND THEIR FAMILIES  
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Brogan it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council condemns, rejects, and opposes any and all forms of 
violence, bullying, harassment, intimidation and haranguing directed 
towards any politician or candidate who runs for public office, or towards 
their family, friends, associates, canvassers or staff. To also condemn 
damage to their property, assets, or vehicles. That we shall endeavour to 
foster an environment of respect towards each other, towards members of 
the Oireachtas and all those who are candidates for public office.”   
 
Cllr Bradley said that politicians by the very nature of the job put 
themselves in the public eye. He noted that a recent report by the UCD 
Centre for Digital Policy had found that 94% of politicians and 72% of 
political staff had encountered some form of abuse in the course of their 
work. 
 
TDs and Senators had indicated that 67% of this abuse was in relation to 
immigration issues and 40% associated with housing and homelessness 
issues. Political staff had a rate of 46% and 40% respectively.  
 
A point to note, he advised was the fact that 46% of Oireachtas members 
had indicated that they avoided a specific policy issue due to harassment 
and were afraid to discuss or highlight same.  
 
73% of Oireachtas members, it was acknowledged, had received abuse 
on social media. A third of those surveyed, he noted, had received abuse 
at a social event or in the course of their daily work. 28% of political staff, 
he added, had been abused in their offices.  
 
He referenced also the abuse directed at politicians when canvassing and 
noted that there had been 36 incidents reported nationally in terms of the 
destruction of posters during the 2024 Local Election. There had been, he 
added 55 such occurrences during the recent general election with 90% of 
these related to social media.  
 
He said that the aim of his motion was to highlight the situation and 
convey the fact that this type of behaviour was totally unacceptable in any 
forum. 
 
Cllr Brogan supporting the motion said that the facts had been well 
outlined and said that mutual respect was the key issue here. 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
C/51/25 
 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS REGULATIONS 
Reverting to Cllr A Farrens earlier motion, Cllr Mc Clafferty said that he 
still had an issue and was looking for evidence and results of the tests that 
proved that the blocks being used at present were fit for purpose.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle noted that the Senior Executive Engineer, Housing had 
confirmed at the Special Meeting on the 22nd January that the Council 
carried out a test at the point of manufacture, on site and also at a later 
stage in the process in line with the standard set by Donegal County 
Council.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that it was imperative that a test was carried out on the 
stone in the quarry and the results made available in the interest of 
transparency. 
 
The Chief Executive alluded to the fact that the motion had asked for five 
specific letters to issue and that this would be followed up on. Referencing 
the reply, he alluded to the fact that where there was an issue in terms of 
non-compliance as the option existed to report same to the Market 
Surveillance Authority for follow-up. The Council, he said, was not the 
Quality Controller for block making but would follow-up in terms of its 
market surveillance obligations. He alluded also to the fact that the Senior 
Housing Engineer had also clearly outlined previously that the Council 
had increased the standard for its own social housing developments in the 
absence of the new national standard for concrete products.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said he was not happy with the response and had 
concerns in relation to the Respond development in Dungloe. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that the motion as submitted by Cllr A Farren was an 
excellent one, but that Cllr Mc Clafferty had made an important point in 
terms of what was happening in Donegal. Thus, he said, it was important 
that every effort was made to get the Department and the National 
Standards Authority to speed up the process and produce a suitable 
national standard for concrete products and give clear direction on this 
very serious issue. 
 
The scheme, he advised, clearly stated that it was the applicant’s 
responsibility to ensure that the blocks they were using were fit for 
purpose in the same way that the Council had to determine same for its 
social housing developments. 
 
The Cathaoirleach at this juncture noted that the motion had been 
proposed and seconded and said that specific issues could be debated 
outside of the meeting. 
 
C/52/25 
 
MEMBERSHIP OF THE STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEES 2024-2029 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that there had been considerable engagement during the course of the 

44 
 
meeting with the various political groupings. He said that the SPC Chairs 
had been agreed at a previous meeting as outlined below: 
 
➢ Roads & Transportation – Cllr Noel Jordan 
➢ Housing & Corporate – Cllr Liam Blaney 
➢ Community Social, Cultural & the Gaeltacht – Cllr Donal M Kelly 
➢ Planning – Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  
➢ Climate Action & the Environment – Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty 
➢ Economic Development, Enterprise & Emergency Services – Cllr 
Pauric Mc Garvey 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Roads & Transportation SPC. 
 
Sectoral 
Gareth Whitmore – Irish Farmers Association 
Bernard O’ Donnell – Construction Industry Federation  
George Mills – Public Private Network 
 
Elected Members 
Cllr Martin Harley 
Cllr Pauric Mc Garvey 
Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty 
Cllr Terry Crossan 
Cllr Brian Carr 
Cllr Martin Farren 
Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
Cllr Micheál Naughton 
Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
Cllr Noel Jordan (Chair) 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Housing & Corporate SPC. 
 
Sectoral 
John Sweeney – Irish Farmers Association 
John Gildea – Construction Industry Federation  
Marie Little – Irish Congress of Trade Unions 
Hugh Friel – Public Participation Network 
 
Elected Members 
Cllr Manus Boyle 
Cllr Martin Scanlon 
Cllr Albert Doherty 
Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman 
Cllr Terry Crossan 
Cllr Declan Meehan 
Cllr Joy Beard 
Cllr Micháel Cholm Mac Giolla Easbuig 
Cllr Martin Mc Dermott 

45 
 
Cllr Fionán Bradley 
Cllr Liam Blaney (Chair) 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Bradley it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Community, Social, Cultural & 
Gaeltacht SPC. 
 
Sectoral 
Kevin Mc Caul – Irish  Congress Trade Unions  
Sile Uí Ghallachóir - Public Participation Network 
Charles Awari - Public Participation Network 
Rachel Grant - Public Participation Network 
 
Elected Members  
Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh 
Cllr Niamh Kennedy 
Cllr Jack Murray 
Cllr Terry Crossan 
Cllr Brian Barr 
Cllr Donal Coyle 
Cllr Anthony Molloy 
Cllr Declan Meehan 
Cllr Ali Farren 
Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly (Chair) 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Planning SPC. 
 
Sectoral  
Frank Clean – Irish farmers Association  
Dessie Dorrian – Construction Industry Federation  
Vincent Callaghan - Public Participation Network 
Ann Mc Gowan - Public Participation Network 
 
Elected Members  
Cllr Manus Boyle 
Cllr Albert Doherty 
Cllr Michael Mc Mahon  
Cllr Martin Scanlon 
Cllr Paul Canning 
Cllr Micheál Naughton 
Cllr Tomás Seán Devine 
Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle (Chair) 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Climate Action & Environment 
SPC. 
 
Sectoral 
Michael Chance - Irish Farmers Association  

46 
 
Liam Gallagher - Construction Industry Federation 
Toni Devine - Public Participation Network 
 
Elected Members  
Cllr Martin Harley 
Cllr Martin Scanlon 
Cllr Martin Farren 
Cllr Brian Carr 
Cllr Gary Doherty 
Cllr Noel Jordan 
Cllr Terry Crossan 
Cllr Ciaran Brogan 
Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty (Chair) 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Bride, seconded by Cllr O’ Fearraigh it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Economic Development, 
Enterprise & Emergency Services SPC. 
 
Sectoral 
Joe Sweeney – Irish Farmers Association  
Michael Kelly - Construction Industry Federation 
Martin O’ Rourke – Irish Congress Trade Unions  
Martina Mc Ginty - Public Participation Network 
Hazel Russell - Public Participation Network 
 
Elected Members 
Cllr Martin Harley 
Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh 
Cllr Niamh Kennedy 
Cllr Albert Doherty 
Cllr Terry Crossan 
Cllr Michael Mc Mahon 
Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty 
Cllr Jimmy Brogan 
Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly 
Cllr Martin Mc Dermott 
Cllr Michael Mc Bride 
Cllr Pauric Mc Garvey (Chair) 
 
C/53/25 
ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCAL COMMUNITY SAFETY PARTNERSHIP - 
NOMINATION OF SEVEN MEMBERS FROM DONEGAL COUNTY 
COUNCIL 
Cllr C Brogan proposed Cllrs Canning and Coyle on behalf of the Fianna 
Fáil grouping. 
Cllr Mc Monagle proposed Cllrs Nic Mhenaman and Mc Monagle on 
behalf of the Sinn Féin grouping. 
 
Cllr Mc Bride proposed Cllrs J Brogan and Mc Clafferty on behalf of the 
independent grouping. 
 

47 
 
Cllr A Farren proposed Cllr Devine on behalf of the 100% Redress 
grouping. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan , seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
unanimously agreed to nominate the following to serve on the new 
Donegal Local Community Safety Partnership. 
 
Cllrs Canning, Coyle, Nic Mheanman, Mc Monagle, J Brogan, Mc 
Clafferty & Devine. 
 
C/54/25 
 
CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS  
 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
 
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
 
▪ Allison Steele, Planning, on the death of her father, Ernie Steele. 
▪ Julie Corry, Biodiversity Officer, on the death of her mother, 
Gabrielle Farrell. 
▪ Paul Christy, formerly Planning on the death of his brother, Aidan. 
▪ Seamus Canning, Housing & Corporate, Letterkenny on the death 
of his mother, Mary. 
▪ The family of the late Patsy Duffy, Stranorlar. 
▪ Deputy Marian Harkin on the death of her mother, Annie. 
▪ The family of the late Kacper Dudek, Lifford. 
▪ The family of the late David Magee, formerly Manager at Fort 
Dunree. 
 
Civic Reception 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Farren it was resolved 
to afford a Civic Reception to Naomh Padráig Uisce Chaoin on their 
outstanding achievement in winning the Ulster Junior Championships  
 
Epilepsy Awareness 
The Cathaoirleach drew attention to the fact that National Epilepsy was on 
the 10th February and cited the need to promote the promotion of “Time, 
Safe, Stay” as the three words for seizure response”. 
 
The following motion was unanimously agreed: 
 
“That this Council calls on the Chief Executive to recognise the estimated 
1400 people who live with epilepsy in Donegal and the 45,000 people who 
live with epilepsy nationally  by writing to the Minister for Health Jennifer 
Carroll MacNeill, T.D. calling for the implementation of the World Health 
Organisation’s Intersectoral Global Action Plan on epilepsy and other 
neurological conditions, seeking that an implementation plan be 
developed by the Department of Health, and that action is taken 
on  Epilepsy Ireland’s specific priorities within the plan and that the 
Council acknowledges Epilepsy Ireland’s awareness raising efforts on 
International Epilepsy Day, and that the promotion of “Time, Safe, Stay” 
as the three words for seizure response”. 
 

48 
 
Domestic Violence Awareness Campaign 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that it was intended to hold an 
awareness event/concert highlighting domestic violence in An Grianan 
Theatre on the 18th April. This she said was a very serious issue and it 
was important that issues were highlighted. It was noted that refuge 
facilities were scarce throughout the county and that it was imperative that 
all was done to secure adequate funding and the provision of suitable 
accommodation. Funding, she said, needed to be sought nationally to 
address the deficiencies. 
 
C/55/25 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
Members considered the report circulated with agenda together with the 
addendum dated the 27th January 2025 and received an update in relation 
to the following: 
1. Community Development & Planning Services 
Community Development 
Local Enhancement Programme 2025 
Planning Services 
▪ Development Applications Unit 
▪ E-Planning 
▪ Enforcement 
▪ Planning Policy 
▪ Conservation Services 
Urban & Rural Regeneration and Development 
▪ Rural Regeneration and Development Fund 
▪ Urban Regeneration and Development Fund 
▪ Croi Conaithe Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme 
Capital Projects Delivery Unit and Taking in Charge of Housing Estates 
Division 
▪ Major Projects 
▪ Taking in Charge of Private Housing Estates 
Refugee Response Unit  
▪ Offer a Home 
▪ Local Authority Integration Team (LAIT) 
2. Water and Environment  
Facilities Management  
▪ Clonleigh House 
Climate Action 
▪ Sustainable Energy Community-Pettigo 
▪ Climate Action Plan Implementation 
▪ Communities Caring for Water Conference 2024 
Environment 
▪ Natural Christmas Tree Recycling 
Defective Concrete Blocks - Update  

49 
 
3. Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
Social Housing Delivery  
▪ Social Housing Delivery Programme 
▪ Land Acquisition 
▪ Social Housing through Turnkey Acquisition 
Donegal County Council Acquisitions 2024  
Current Housing Stock  
Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme 
Library Service 
County Donegal Heritage Office  
Regional Cultural Centre  
5. Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services 
Fire Service  
▪ Major Emergency Management 
Civil Defence 
6. Roads & Transportation 
▪ Central Technical Services 
▪ Roads Area Update 
▪ National Roads Office Update  
 
C/56/25 
STORM ÉOWYN UPDATE  
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
said that he had in the course of the day attended two meetings and one 
through the Office of Local Government Chief Executives had advocated 
the setting up of Local Co-ordination Groups in every county bringing 
together the various agencies, voluntary and community groups to assist 
and respond in the aftermath of the storm. An invite had issued, he 
advised the previous evening and a meeting with all the relevant agencies 
locally had just concluded. He said that there had been an excellent 
response and an that an update had been provided by all the 
stakeholders involved. He acknowledged the many community and 
sporting organisations together with various commercial entities who had 
made their premises available to the general public.  
 
It was not intended, he said, to set up any additional community hubs but 
that a map had been circulated highlighting those in operation and 
additional facilities could be put in place if needed. 
 
A follow-up meeting, he advised, was planned and said that members 
could contact him if they became aware of any member of the public 
needing assistance.  
 
The Chief Executive noted that specific queries could be directed to the 
dedicated email address humanitarianassistance@donegalcoco.ie 
 

50 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan said the main issues had been power outages and the fact 
that the Uisce Éireann did not have generators to ensure that water 
pumping stations remained operational. There were issues, he said, 
where those that were most vulnerable were not able to be moved and 
this combined with no dedicated backup for Air to Water heating systems 
had caused considerable problems. He said it was essential that a plan 
was put in place to deal with situations such as these going forward.  
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
advised that a vulnerable person’s register was maintained with an input 
from the HSE and the Gardaí. Any concerns , he advised, could be 
forwarded to the email address alluded to above and would be checked 
against the register in question and responded to as appropriate.  
 
The Chief Executive said that the Air to Water issue, was a national issue 
and not unique to Donegal and that there had to be collective approach to 
looking at alternative options in emergency situations.  
 
Cllr J Brogan said that over the course of the weekend, he had difficulty in 
getting through to ESB personnel with calls directed to the 1800 number. 
Councillors, he advised, needed access to the relevant personnel so that 
they could relay information to the community in general during such 
emergencies.  
 
The following questions were noted 
 
C/57/25 
UPDATE ON ALL TEST RESULTS AND TESTS CARRIED OUT ON 
ALL SOCIAL HOMES BEING BUILT IN DONEGAL  
 
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I get an update on all test results and tests carried out on all social 
homes being built in Donegal, and can we get an update on the 14 Cluid 
houses in Letterkenny?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/58/25 
HOW MANY HOUSING APPLICANTS HAVE WE DESIGNATED AS IN 
NEED OF A FIVE BEDROOM HOUSE OR HIGHER  
 
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
  
How many housing applicants have we across the five MDs designated as 
in need of a five bedroom house or higher as per each MD and can I be 
informed as to how many five bed houses have, we built or purchased in 
each MD since 2019?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 

51 
 
C/59/25 
HOW MANY HOUSE PURCHASE REQUESTS HAVE BEEN SENT TO 
THE DEPARTMENT  
 
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
How many house purchase requests have been sent to the Department of 
Housing since 2019, how many of those requests were signed off on by 
the Department and finally is there a ceiling/policy from the Department on 
how many house purchases that they will sign off on for the County per 
annum? 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate &  
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/60/25 
 
UNFINISHED HOUSING ESTATES UPDATE  
 
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I get an update on what unfinished estates the council are planning to 
take over this year?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/61/25 
 
UPDATED REPORT ON OUR DERELICT SITE REGISTRATION  
 
 
Cllr C Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we have an updated report on our derelict site registration across all 
our Municipal districts and the number of CPOs we have instigated ?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/62/25 
 
UPDATE ON THE TEN-T PROJECT  
 
 
Cllr Coyle submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
Can I have an update and proposed timeline for the TEN-T Project?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.    
 
C/63/25 
 
UPDATE ON THE TEN-T PROJECT  
 
 
Cllr C Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we have an updated report on the current status of the Ten-T project 
including the Bonagee Relief Road - Manorcunningham to Lifford and the 
Ballybofey-Stranolar By-pass?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.    
 
C/64/25 
 
NTA ACTIVE TRAVEL  
 
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  

52 
 
 
Can we have a breakdown of the actual schedule of works planned for 
this year from the recent allocation from the NTA active travel?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.    
 
C/65/25 
 
DOG CONTROL  
 
 
Cllr McClafferty submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I get a report of how many dog attacks happened in Ireland and in 
this county in the last 10 years on sheep or other livestock that we have 
recorded. Also, 
  
• How many humans were attacked by Dogs in the last 10 years? 
• How many dogs have the Council put down over the last 10 years 
please?     
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/66/25 
 
ACTIVE TRAVEL  
 
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I have a copy of all the Active Travel applications under consideration 
and at early stages of planning across the County? Has there been a 
recent change as to how Active Travel projects are currently being 
prioritised and can I get an list of the latest list that was sent to the 
Department for consideration along with an explanation on how this list 
was created?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/67/25 
UPDATE ON MY EARLIER Q&M, CCTV FOR BALLYBOFEY & 
STRANORLAR  
 
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I have an update on my earlier Q&M, CCTV for Ballybofey and 
Stranorlar and Letterkenny, what is the reason for the long delay?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services.  
 
C/68/25 
GOVERNMENT SCHEME FOR THE REMEDIATION OF SOCIAL 
HOMES IN DONEGAL   
 
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
Government Scheme for the Remediation of Social Homes in Donegal. 

53 
 
Following the meeting on Dec 5th last between the Council delegation and 
the Department of Housing officials in Dublin, will the Council now make 
early contact with the Minister and Department of Housing highlighting 
and demanding an urgent need for the putting in place of the scheme for 
the Remediation of Social Homes in Donegal?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/69/25 
 
HOW MANY QUARRY INSPECTIONS WERE UNDERTAKEN IN 2024  
 
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
During the year ending 31st December 2024, in its role as Market 
Surveillance Authority, how many quarry inspections were undertaken by  
members of the Council's staff and what testing was carried out during 
each visit?   
 
She received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/70/25 
PROPOSED DALRIDIAN GOLD MINE PROJECT IN THE SPERRIN 
MOUNTAINS, CO. TYRONE  
 
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
In light of the public inquiry into the proposed Dalridian Gold Mine project 
in the Sperrin mountains, County Tyrone, being suspended, does the 
Council intend to hold a workshop for elected members to outline its 
position and the potential implications for Donegal if planning is 
approved? 
 
She received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/71/25 
TRANSBOUNDARY STATUS APPLICATION RECEIPT AND 
RESPONSES.  
 
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question  
 
 
 
Transboundary Status application receipt and responses. 
What correspondence has DCC received from the Dept. of Infrastructure 
relating to the application to further develop mining in the Sperrins ? When 
was the correspondence received and to whom was the correspondence 
addressed? 
What responses to date have DCC forwarded to DFI? 
Following the publication of a public notice by DCC on the application, 
how many responses/submissions were received and where are they 
currently located? 
What presence, engagement and participation to date have DCC Officials 
and or Council legal representatives had at the planning enquiry in 
Omagh?(Now suspended) 

54 
 
What related actions are necessary and expected from DCC when the 
planning enquiry resumes?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.     
 
C/72/25 
UPDATE ON THE LIVE APPLICATIONS WHICH THIS COUNCIL HAS 
SUBMITTED FOR FUNDING UNDER THE LSSIF  
 
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
What update, if any, has been received from the Department of Transport, 
Tourism and Sport in relation to live applications which this Council has 
submitted for funding under the LSSIF?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities in relation to the above.  
 
C/73/25 
 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS  
 
 
Cllr Murray submitted the following question:-  
 
Can this council provide a liaison person, dedicated to answering queries 
from competent building professionals in relation to defective block grant 
queries, rather than have them wait for responses from the central 
helpdesk, as this could help address queries or issues in a more timely 
manner and help streamline the process?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities in relation to the above.   
 
C/74/25 
AMOUNT OF FUNDING DOES THE COUNCIL ANTICIPATE IT WILL 
RECEIVE IN 2025 FOR THE LIS PROGRAMME WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following:-  
 
“To ask the Director for Roads what amount of funding the Council 
anticipates it will receive from the Department of Transport in 2025 for the 
LIS programme within the County.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/75/25 
 
MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
 
 
Members noted the motions from other Councils  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Clare County Council oppose the recent decision by the GAA, 
whereby children under the age of sixteen will be charged a fee to gain 
admittance to GAA matches, and that we call on the GAA to reverse this 
decision as a matter of urgency.  It is also proposed that this Notice of 
Motion be circulated to all Local Authorities across the country.” 
 

55 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL   
“We request Clare County Council to make urgent contact with the 
Department of Local Government regarding housing aid for Older 
People’s Grant in connection with the exclusion of new fossil fuel boilers, 
oil or gas.” 
  
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Minister Helen McEntee and Department of Justice give 
consideration to increasing the grant funding available for community 
groups, that will make the installation of CCTV in towns and villages viable 
an economically sustainable and will be significant benefit in the 
prevention of crime and motion circulated so that it is noted by all local 
authorities.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the next Government and all the 
elected members of both Houses of the Oireachtas to pass whatever 
legislation necessary to hold the referendum, promised by the previous 
administration, to allow our diaspora to vote in the Presidential Election to 
be held in November of this year.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL 
“It was agreed to write to the Taoiseach and the Tánaiste to consider in 
the formation of the incoming government that the matter of rural and 
urban isolation and loneliness is directly allocated to a Ministry.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Wexford County Council calls on Irish Public Bodies Mutual 
Insurances (IPB) to provide affordable underwriting options for insurance 
cover specifically tailored to the needs of community centres and similar 
community organisations and playgrounds. These centres are essential to 
the social fabric of our inclusion. However, rising insurance premiums are 
increasingly limiting the ability of community groups to operate and 
expand their services.  
By offering more affordable insurance options, IPB could ensure 
community centres to continue and enhance their work without the heavy 
burden of unsustainable insurance costs. Wexford County Council urges 
IPB to consider the positive impact of such support on communities 
across the county and to act in the interest of promoting accessible, 
community-based services for all.”   
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
