1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
24 Deireadh Fómhair, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé hAoine 
31 Mean Fómhair, 2025 ag 11.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an 
chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras 
eile. 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
 
County House 
 
 
Lifford. 
 
 
 24th October, 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Friday 31st  October 
2025 at 11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Housing  
 
Housing Capital Update. 
 
2. Emergency Services 
To consider report on submission proposed for the Donegal Fire Authority  
for “Fire Services Capital Programme 2026-2030” and the proposal that a 
submission be made to the Department of Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage requesting funding for the construction of a single fire station to 
facilitate a minimum of two pumping appliances at Finner, Co Donegal 
under the Fire Services 5 Year Capital Plan 2026-2030. 
 
3. Community Development   
To approve the nomination of Shauna Mc Clenaghan, Inishowen 
Development Partnership to fill the vacancy on the Donegal Local 
Community Development Committee in accordance with Part 6 of the 
Local Government Reform Act 2014 and Section 128C (3)(b) of the Local 
Government Act, 2001. 
 
4. Planning  
Proposed Variation No 1. to the County Development Plan 2024-2030 -  
Update. 
 
5. Roads & Transportation  
1. Approval for the Annual Transport Infrastructure Ireland delegation to 
Dublin. (Date to be confirmed) 
2. TEN-T Priority Route Improvement Project Donegal - Update 
 
6. Attendance at Conferences, Training & Events  
Attendance of the Leas-Cathaoirleach at the Donegal Association London 
Annual Ball & Awards in Wembley, London on the 22nd November, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 31ST OCTOBER 2025 
C/374/25 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, M Boyle, F Bradley, C 
Brogan, J Brogan, D Coyle, A Doherty, A Farren, N Jordan, D. M Kelly, 
N Kennedy, M Mc Clafferty, P Mc Gowan, M Mc Mahon, G 
McMonagle, M. Naughton and D Nic Mheanman. 
Online: Cllrs L Blaney, B Carr, T. Crossan, T.S. Devine, G Doherty, M 
Farren, J Kavanagh, M Choilm Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Dermott, P 
Mc Garvey, J Murray, and J.S O’ Fearraigh. 
 
C/375/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
Mr John Mc Laughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of 
Housing, Corporate and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator,  
Eamonn Brown A/Director Community Development & Planning 
Services, Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation, Garry 
Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems and 
Emergency Services, John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing 
Capital Donna Mc Groarty, /Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, 
Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, Housing Design/Construction, 
Brenda Ferguson, Senior Executive Engineer, Housing 
Design/Construction, Eilish Mc Laughlin, Housing Design/Construction, 
Michael Scott, A/ Chief Fire Officer, Edward Gallagher, Assistant Chief 
Fire Officer, Damian Mc Dermott, Senior Engineer, N.R.O, Aine Mc 
Hugh, Senior Executive Engineer, N.R.O, William Colvin, Assistant 
Communications Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, Corporate 
Services. 
 
C/376/25 
APOLOGIES 
Apologies were received from Cllrs Harley and Meehan who were 
unable to attend the meeting. 
 
C/377/25 
DONEGAL FIRE AUTHORITY - FIRE SERVICES CAPITAL 
PROGRAMME 2026-2030 – PROPOSAL FOR A SINGLE FIRE 
STATION TO FACILITATE A MINIMUM OF TWO PUMPING 
APPLIANCES AT FINNER, CO DONEGAL  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
Cllr Naughton as Chair of the Donegal Municipal District welcomed the 
report and noted that this issue had been long standing item over the 
past 40 years. He said that there had been considerable debate over 
that period with the favoured position being the locating of two separate 
fire stations in Bundoran and Ballyshannon. Agreement now to proceed 
with a single Fire Station was a positive move, he added for the 
Donegal Municipal District.  
 
Cllr J Brogan said he was appreciative of the fact that consultation had 
taken place and that there was agreement to proceed with one fire 
station.  

4 
 
Cllr Naughton thus proposed, seconded by Cllr J Brogan that a 
submission be made to the Department of Housing, Local Government  
& Heritage requesting funding for the construction of a single fire 
station to facilitate two pumping appliances at Finner, Co Donegal 
under the Fire Services 5 Year Capital Plan 2026 – 2030.  
 
It was further resolved on the proposal of Cllr J Brogan, seconded by 
Cllr Jordan that an application be made also for a new Fire station at 
Glencolmcille. 
 
Members in the Donegal Municipal District acknowledged that it had 
been a lengthy process, and that a concerted and committed effort had 
been made to try and secure two fire stations in the 
Ballyshannon/Bundoran area. The commitment of all involved in the 
process was noted and there was general acknowledgement that the 
proposed site was in the optimal location. There was also general 
agreement that every effort should be made to seek approval and 
funding for a new station in Glencolmcille.  
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Services 
and Emergency Services welcomed the endorsement by members and 
paid tribute to all who had worked tirelessly to secure the best possible 
outcome. In relation to the proposal for Glencolmcille, he said that it 
would be possible to put forward a proposal to the National Fire 
Directorate highlighting the importance of same. He said that he 
anticipated that funding would be made available for at least one of the 
projects highlighted.  
 
The Cathaoirleach paid tribute to fire service personnel and the 
competent and professional manner in which they carried out their 
duties.  
 
It was agreed that further discussion would take place at the Fire 
Service Plenary workshop on the 5th November.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan raised the issue of fire hydrants and advised of the 
need for a proper checking mechanism together with clarity as to who 
was responsible for maintaining same. It was agreed to discuss the 
matter further at the workshop on the 5th November. 
 
C/378/25  
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE DONEGAL  
Members received an update in relation to the Housing Capital 
Programme and progress made since the 26th September 2025.  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, briefed 
members and gave an overview of the projects completed in the period 
2022-2025 including projects currently on site.  
 
Ms Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, outlined the status of 
projects currently at tender stage, planning and detailed design stage, 

5 
 
together with those at pre-planning. Members were updated in relation 
to the planned actions for November 2025.  
 
A lengthy debate ensued, and the following issues raised. 
 
Issues Raised  
• SI applications and thresholds. S.I provision needs to be enhanced 
and adequate thresholds in place to accommodate those seeking to 
live on their own land in rural areas.  
• Upfront approach needed with the Department of Housing in terms 
of securing additional funding for the remediation of derelict social 
housing.  
• Delays in the payment of defective concrete blocks grants need to 
be addressed.  
• Better forward planning needed in relation to the provision of ac-
commodation for people with disabilities.  
• Additional staff needed to deal with Housing Adaptation and Essen-
tial Repair Grant applications .  
• Anomaly to be addressed in that social housing tenants who own 
their own land cannot apply for an S.I House.  
• Delays in land acquisition a problem especially in the Lif-
ford/Stranorlar Municipal District. Need to look a better way of ad-
dressing legacy issues.  
 
Queries 
▪ Is engagement continuing with Uisce Éireann in relation to develop-
ments withing the Settlement Frameworks? 
▪ What is in the pipeline for Inishowen? 
▪ Has there been any update in terms of an increase in staffing re-
sources?  
▪ Clarity requested in relation to the Competitive Dialogue process. 
▪ How long does it take from site acquisition to the completion of a 
development? 
▪ How long does it take for the granting of final approval? 
▪ What percentage of the 1805 units referenced can accommodate 
families with physical and special needs? 
▪ What is in the pipeline and what is planned in terms of housing 
those with disabilities? 
▪ What is being provided overall in respect of Group Homes? 
▪ Query as to why funding is not being sought for modular homes 
given the extent of the housing crisis in Donegal. 
 
Follow- Up  
➢ Update requested per Municipal District in relation to the Acquisition 
Programme. Land acquisition process and associated timelines to 
be presented again at the next Special Meeting.  
➢ Further correspondence to issue to T.I.I about the restriction of ac-
cess onto the N56 and the long-term impact on the provision of 
one-off housing. 
➢ Detail requested on the progress of the S.I development at Listillion.  

6 
 
➢ Update sought on the Social Housing Remediation Scheme.  
➢ Briefing note to be brought to a Special Meeting in relation to the 
ongoing engagement with Uisce Éireann.  
➢ Detailed breakdown of the Competitive Dialogue/ Turnkey process 
to be presented to members.  
➢ Cllr Coyle to be briefed on the status of the S.I at Listillion.  
➢ Cllr Beard to be updated in relation to the use of modern methods 
of construction and rapid methods of delivery. 
➢ Cllr Mc Gowan to be provided with an update on the status of land 
acquisition for social housing in the Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal Dis-
trict.  
➢ Specific queries on the payment of individual defective concrete 
block grant payments to be brought to the attention of the DCB 
Team. 
➢ Detail on the provision of Group Homes to be provided at MD level.  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer advised that a number of the 
issues raised would be dealt with through the Municipal District 
workshop process. He informed members that there was ongoing 
engagement with Uisce Éireann in respect of all the projects 
referenced and that it would be possible to provide an update on the 
engagement to date including issues raised during the meeting. It was 
acknowledged that there were challenges but that the current level of 
co-operation would remain in place. 
 
He said that there was a continuing focus on land acquisition within 
settlement frameworks where there was sufficient potential to develop. 
Several potential land acquisitions were being dealt with, he added, 
and every effort made to deal with service and utility issues at an early 
stage in the process. It was noted that there was regular contact with 
the Department in relation to same and that the expression of interest 
portal on the Council’s website was active. As always, he said, that 
there were issues in relation to conveyancing, but that these were 
being worked through. 
 
Mr Gallagher said that there was good interaction with the Housing 
Agency and supportive mechanisms in place. It was confirmed that 
every effort was made to engage with developers at an early stage so 
that the right housing could be provided in the right location.  
 
He said that it was accepted that more needed to done in terms of the 
universal design aspect but that several initiatives were being utilised 
at present. There was also, he added, substantial interaction with the 
various Housing Area Managers on the needs of those on the housing 
waiting lists and this information was relayed to the design team.  
 
Cllr Beard was informed that there was ongoing contact with the 
Department in terms of modern and rapid methods of construction and 
that there was contact with developers also in relation new methods of 
construction and rapid methods of delivery.  

7 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
alluding to Cllr A Farren’s query on S.I. eligibility related to social 
housing income thresholds generally and advised that this was not 
something that the Council had a direct decision making role on and 
was a national matter. It was noted that the matter had been raised by 
Cllr Mc Monagle in a recent motion and that correspondence had 
issued to the Department seeking the removal of Donegal from Band 3 
of the Social Housing limits and moved to Band 1. 
 
Staffing resources were an issue, he said, and it was hoped that 
current engagement with the Department in relation to the Workforce 
Plan would have positive impacts going forward. There was also 
ongoing consideration of the resource implications by the Local 
Government sector on behalf of all local authorities.  
 
With regard to a number of queries on defective concrete block 
payments, he asked the members to give him the specific details and 
he would follow up with the DCB Team. 
 
Members were informed that the number of council owned houses 
vacant at any one time was generally in the region of 25 to 35 out of a 
total of 5000. Most of these, it was noted, were casual vacancies that 
were being refurbished at present. 
 
Statistics varied, he added, and often referenced high levels of 
vacancy, but the crux of the matter was that up to 80 houses were 
vacant as a result of defective concrete issues and could not be 
renovated until the remediation scheme was in place.  
 
There was acknowledgement also that an inter-agency approach was 
in place in terms of providing Group Homes. Details of specific 
projects, he confirmed, could be provided at Municipal District level. 
 
C/379/25  
CASUAL VACANCY ON THE DONEGAL LOCAL COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved that Shauna Mc Clenaghan, Inishowen Development 
Partnership fill the casual vacancy on the Donegal Local Community 
Development Committee in accordance with Part 6 of the Local 
Government Reform Act 2014 and Section 128C (3)(b) of the Local 
Government Act 2001. 
 
C/380/25  
ADJOURNMENT 
 
 
It was unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting until 1.45pm. 
 
C/381/25  
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE DONEGAL  
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that he had spoken to the Defective Concrete Block team during lunch 

8 
 
break and advised that as of week ending 24th October there was a 
very positive update in that in general payments were being processed 
relatively speedily, with only four payment claims outstanding from the 
previous month. A small number of other cases which had been 
queried related to outstanding information that would be followed up 
individually. This was welcomed. 
 
C/382/25  
ANNUAL TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE IRELAND 
DELEGATION TO DUBLIN 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Kennedy it was 
unanimously agreed that a delegation from Donegal County Council 
would meet with Transport Infrastructure Ireland in Dublin at a date to 
be confirmed in December 2025. 
 
C/383/25  
ATTENDANCE AT THE DONEGAL ASSOCIATION ANNUAL BALL 
AND AWARDS IN LONDON ON THE 22ND NOVEMBER AND AT 
THE CPMR GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN BARCELONA FROM THE 
19TH TO THE 22ND NOVEMBER. 
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 
668 of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by 
the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in 
relation to the Local Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 
2010, and the Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations, 2014 -2025(as amended).  
 
The Cathaoirleach noted that a request had been received to attend 
the CPMR General Assembly in Barcelona.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was resolved 
to approve the attendance of the following: 
 
➢ Cllr Donal Kelly, Leas-Cathaoirleach at the Donegal Association 
London Annual Ball and Awards in London on the 22nd 
November 2025. 
 
➢ Attendance of Cllr John S. O’ Fearraigh (Alternate CPMR Rep) 
at the 53rd CPMR General Assembly in Barcelona from the 19th 
to the 22nd November 2025.  
 
C/384/25 
PROPOSED VARIATION NO.1 TO THE COUNTY DEVELOPMENT 
PLAN 2024-2030 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
Mr Eamon Brown, A/Director Community Development & Planning 
Services said that the report was an update in relation to the 
commitment by the former Director of Services, Mr Liam Ward to come 
back to members with an update on the proposed variation to the 

9 
 
County Development Plan. He said it had been agreed that there would 
be a further workshop in relation to same and that this was now 
scheduled for Wednesday 5th November. 
 
C/385/25 
TEN-T PRIORITY ROUTE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT DONEGAL 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation welcomed Mr 
Damian Mc Dermott, Senior Engineer, NRO to the meeting together 
with Ms Aine Mc Hugh, Senior Executive Engineer, NRO and Mr Brian 
Reid, Land Liaison Officer, NRO.  
 
 
 
This was, he advised, a game changing project and one of the largest 
ever undertaken by Donegal County Council. The presentation today, 
he said, was an opportunity to update members as to where the project 
was heading, the details involved, and the next steps to be undertaken. 
 
 
Ms Aine Mc Hugh, Senior Executive Engineer, outlined the criteria 
applicable for the development of the project, and the overall context 
for same. Detail was also provided in relation to the individual sections 
of the project namely: 
 
▪ Section 1 – N15/N13 Ballybofey/Stranorlar Urban Region. 
▪ Section 2 – N13 Letterkenny/Manorcunningham. 
▪ Section 3.-  N14 Manorcunningham to Lifford/ Strabane/A5 Link. 
 
Mr Brian Reid, Land Liaison Officer,NRO advised on the position in 
relation to land and property acquisition and gave an update on the 
compulsory purchase order process to date. It was noted that 475 
land/property owners were involved and that 1470 acres of land had to 
be acquired. 
 
He confirmed that 34 residential properties were impacted together 
with 4 commercial and 5 uninhabited properties. There was 
acknowledgement also of the engagement and consultation that had 
taken place with a varied range of stakeholders. 
 
Mr Damian Mc Dermott, Senior Engineer, gave an overview of the 
expected lifecycle of the project including the appraisal milestones and 
the projected completion cycles for the sections outlined above. He 
advised that this had been the first T.I.I. Project assessed under the 
new MPAG process with Donegal N.R.O leading out on the project. 
The outcome of this, he said had been that the project had 
demonstrated comprehensive robustness and had aligned with capital 
appraisal guidelines including the identification of environmental and 
climate assessment requirements. The MAJOR Projects Advisory 
Group had, he said, recommended the project as highly positive with 
an estimated cost range of €780 €915m and as an important national 
road project worthy of cabinet approval. The next major milestone, he 
advised, was the movement to the statutory phase and this was 
expected to commence in early 2026 and be completed by the end of 
2027. The Phase 5 element encompassing the enablement and 

10 
 
procurement of the project was, he stated, scheduled to star in 2027 
and be completed by the end of 2028. Construction of the project, he 
added, was expected to commence in 2028 and to be provisionally 
completed in 2032. 
 
Members complimented the team on their achievements to date noting 
that the project would bring major change to the North -West Region 
impacting both the overall economic and social status of the region and 
address considerable infrastructural and accessibility deficits in the 
county. The meeting was opened to the floor and the following items 
raised: 
 
▪ That a press statement needed to issue as soon as possible 
updating the public on the magnitude and benefits of the TEN-T 
Priority Route Project. 
▪ Query as to when compensation would be paid in respect of 
lands/property acquired under the compulsory purchase 
process. 
▪ General welcome for the plans to build a bridge over the River 
Swilly and the progression of the Bonagee Link. 
▪ Project will help address concerns in relation to air quality in 
Ballybofey/Stranorlar area.  
▪ Is the funding from EU Connect specifically for the Donegal 
TEN-T as opposed to the European TEN-T and are there any 
exceptions for an area in transition? 
▪ Peripherality aspect must be continually flagged and outlined 
when making funding applications. 
▪ Economic and social challenges in border areas need to be 
taken into consideration. 
▪ Need to keep sight of the Inver to Killybegs project. Survey 
needed and a renewed effort made at national level to secure 
funding. Need to retain on the National Roads Project listing. 
▪ N15 Road improvements must be completed in their entirety in 
the interest of road safety. Funding must be sought and upgrade 
works carried out, starting at Stranorlar and encompassing also 
the Corcam Bends. 
▪ Knotweed and invasive vegetation will be a player going 
forward.  
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked the NRO team for the presentation and 
noted that there had been significant engagement at ministerial level 
on both sides of the border. He said that environmental issues were 
going to be at the fore as the scheme progressed, especially the 
impact of invasive species and vegetation such as knotweed. 
 
Mr Damian Mc Dermott, Senior Engineer, advised that it would be 
possible to do a press release on the scheme progress to date and 
confirmed that in relation to land agreements the normal processing 
time was three months to one year. He informed members that it was 
euro wide CEF funding that was being utilised for this project. Monies 

11 
 
had been, secured for the current year, he added, and additional 
funding would be sought going forward under this funding umbrella. 
The value for money aspect would be measured, he said, in terms of 
air quality and improvement of the safety aspect. Plans for dealing with 
invasive species were included in the overall masterplan, he noted.  
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation paid tribute to all 
involved in the project, alluding specifically to the level of detail 
contained in the presentation. He said that the project would bring 
many benefits in the years ahead. The team, he said, would be 
available to deal with any queries and questions on the scheme itself 
and the land and property acquisitions. 
 
The Chief Executive stated that the TEN-T was one of the most 
positive developments ever to take place in the county and 
acknowledged the fact that the NRO team involved had been working 
for significant time on the project. The was also reflected, he added, in 
the fact that T.I.I had been particularly complimentary of the work 
carried out by the Donegal NRO team. He acknowledged the fact that 
members had been supportive of the scheme and had actively 
engaged at every level of the process. He cited the need for a 
collaborative approach going forward and noted that the overall time 
factor for completion was outside of the control of the NRO office.  
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
