1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
24 Samhain, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé hAoine 
28 Samhain, 2025 ag 11.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe 
leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
 
County House 
 
 
Lifford. 
 
 
 
 24th November 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Friday 28th  November 
2025 at 11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Housing  
 
Housing Capital Update. 
 
2. Community Development & Planning   
a. Regeneration Division Update. 
b. Capital Projects Delivery Division Update. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 28TH NOVEMBER 2025 
 
C/444/25 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, F Bradley, D Coyle, T Crossan, A 
Doherty, P Mc Gowan, M Mc Mahon, G McMonagle. 
Online: Cllrs J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, C Brogan, J Brogan, B Carr,  
T.S. Devine, A Farren, M Farren, M Harley, J Kavanagh, D M Kelly, M 
C Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Bride, M Mc Clafferty, M Mc Dermott, P 
Mc Garvey, A Molloy, J Murray, M Naughton and M Scanlon. 
 
C/445/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate and Cultural Services/Meetings Administrator, John 
Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital Donna Mc Groarty, 
Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, Claire Burke, Senior 
Executive Architect, Housing Design/Construction, Paddy Doherty, 
Divisional Manager, Community Development & Planning Services, 
Patricia Mc Intyre, Town Regeneration Officer, Sinead Mc Clafferty, 
Executive Planner, Paddy Mullen, A/Senior Engineer, Capital Projects 
Delivery Unit, Shane Sweeney, A/Senior Executive Engineer Capital 
Projects Delivery Unit, Ardal Mc Dermott, A/Senior Executive Engineer, 
Capital Projects Delivery Unit, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na 
Gaeilge, Clíona Ni Ghallachóir, Rannóg na Gaeilge, William Colvin, 
Assistant Communications Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, 
Corporate Services. 
 
C/446/25 
APOLOGIES  
Apologies were received from Cllr Kennedy who was unable to attend 
the meeting. 
 
C/447/25 
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE  
  Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer provided an update in relation to  
planning approvals, the status of projects at tender stage and the range 
of departmental submissions and approvals since the 31st October 
2025. This included an overview of projects completed in the period 
2022 to 2025, projects currently on site and those at tender stage.  
 
Ms Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, updated members on the 
various projects at planning and detailed design stage together with 
those at pre-planning stage.  
 
An analysis of the various Competitive Dialogue Projects was 
presented by the Senior Engineer together with pictorial representation 
on a range of projects at construction stage. He concluded the 
presentation with a summary of the planned actions for December 
2025 and a breakdown of the overall social housing delivery 
programme. 

4 
 
Members welcomed the presentation and complemented the Housing 
team on their efforts to date. They raised the following issues: 
 
Issues Raised 
▪ Delay in Approved Housing Bodies receiving approval and 
confirmation from Donegal County Council. How can this be 
remedied, and pressure put on the Department to give the 
overall sanction? 
▪ Reference made to Ard na Greine and Ardrawer in Letterkenny.  
▪ General welcome for the movement on S.I. Housing with 
agreement that more developments of this nature were needed.  
▪ Tenant-in-Situ Scheme is not working. 
▪ Tenants want to buy their own homes, but blanket refusals in 
some estates arising from  the defective concrete blocks’ crisis 
are having a severe impact on these requests.  
▪ 24 unit housing development in Ballyshannon needs to be 
finalised.  
▪ Welcome for the works carried out at Ard na Guala Duibhe. 
▪ Chronic shortage of contractors, tradespeople and skilled 
workers.  
▪ Noted that the impending Social Housing Remedial Scheme 
when operational would create a whole new layer of demand for 
skilled labour. 
▪ Scheme needs to be put in place to attract and retain 
tradespeople together with a dedicated apprenticeship model as 
the new national Housing Plan is not working for Donegal. 
▪ Campaign needed to encourage construction workers to return 
home. 
▪ More development needed in Letterkenny which has the highest 
housing waiting list in the county. 
▪ Special dispensation should be sought for Donegal to facilitate 
the purchase of second homes.  
▪ Housing need is very high in the Ramelton area and Uisce 
Éireann needs to be encouraged to address infrastructural 
deficits in the area.  
▪ Land needs to be acquired, and expressions of interest sought 
to facilitate housing development in our rural towns and villages. 
▪ Housing need in Dunfanaghy, Creeslough, Gweeedore and 
Glenties highlighted. 
▪ Engagement with Uisce Éireann is essential if development is to 
proceed in Falcarragh. 
▪ Ongoing commitment needed from Uisce Éireann to address 
infrastructural deficits county-wide so that the building of 
housing can proceed.  
▪ Treatment Plants needed in the Gweedore and Creeslough 
areas.  
▪ Access issues in relation to the N56 need to be addressed.  
▪ Planning objections hindering development and the overall 
objection fee needs to be raised.  
▪ Homelessness continues to be a major problem. 

5 
 
 
 
Queries 
▪ How many approvals are needed to get a contractor on site in 
respect of any individual S.I. dwelling? 
▪ What is preventing the Council from buying houses from 
landlords, and where are the blockages and does departmental 
criteria impact on this generally? 
▪ How many units are to be delivered in the High Road 
development in Letterkenny? 
▪ Are there live applications at present with regard to the Capital 
Advance Leasing Scheme? 
▪ Has there been any progress with the Department in terms of 
securing funding for the acquisition of second homes? 
▪ In relation to the site at Hughie Joes in Gweedore can the 
Council look at providing the sewerage facilities so as to deliver 
26 units rather than the designated 12 units? 
▪ Have we looked at increasing the independent living options in 
our new housing developments? 
▪ Why does the Council rely on the Approved Housing Bodies to 
provide accommodation when it could enhance its own building 
programme? 
▪ Is there any update from Respond on the eight houses in An 
Clochán Liath? 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that it was important that the message went out 
that housing development was ongoing and proceeding at a 
considerable pace across the county. He welcomed the design aspect 
in place for the building of S.I. houses and called for unused green 
areas in existing housing estates to be utilised for the accommodation 
of additional units.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
advised that it was important to note that AHB Housing Schemes were 
not Donegal County Council direct build projects and that the contract 
was in the first instance between the AHB and the developer. He 
advised that the funder is primarily the Department of Housing, and the 
Council does not have a decision making role, but as part of the 
funding process the Council is required to provide a letter of support for 
the AHB’s application to the Department primarily to confirm that there 
is sufficient housing need for a development in the location, and that it 
is within a reasonable level from a value for money aspect. Then it is a 
matter for the AHB to make application to the Department.  The 
Department and the Housing Agency then assess the application in 
detail and make an determination on whether it is approved and the 
level of approval. He advised that the normal practice for schemes is to 
obtain Department approval before going on to site, and that the same 
applied to AHB Schemes. He added that challenges have arisen in 
some instances where projects are already on site and even completed 
before an application comes to the Council or to the Department 
outside of the expected practice. Plans were afoot, it was noted, to 
phase out these cases which are termed as ‘late stage’ turnkeys. He 

6 
 
confirmed that an update would be provided to each Municipal District 
on specific projects in their own MD. 
 
In relation to the Tenant Purchase Scheme, he drew attention to the 
policy agreed by the Corporate Policy Group and Plenary Council  
and the fact that the Council was obliged not to sell any property where 
there was a concern about the condition. He said if there were specific 
cases where it was felt that this interpretation was too stringent then 
these specific examples could be brought to the Housing Strategic 
Policy Committee for further consideration.  
 
Acquisitions, were, he advised significantly curtailed under the present 
housing programme with the focus now on new build. The annual 
allocation was, he advised, restrictive and there was engagement with 
the Department to get an increase and avail of other more flexible 
options.  
 
 
The Tenant-In Situ Scheme, he advised, should be one of the 
priorities for acquisition but that had not materialised. He informed Cllr 
Mc Monagle that if there were specific examples that warranted further 
examination, then he would be willing to look at the rationale involved.  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, confirmed that the number of 
units for the High Road Scheme would be in the region of 140 to 150 
and that further clarity would be provided in due course.  
 
Donegal County Council, he stated, met regularly with Uisce Éireann 
with the aim of synchronising Uiscex Éireann’s own capital programme 
and the ambitious housing capital programme.  
 
He said that the connection issues in relation to the Turnkey in Moville 
had been resolved and every effort made to deal with the ongoing 
challenges. There had also been, he added, interaction with the 
Department in relation to progressing the Churchill site. 
 
He said that comments in relation to the red tape involved with 
progressing an S.I application are noted and would be taken on board.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan referenced lands in Stranorlar which had been zoned in 
the last three County Development Plans and were inaccessible for 
development with planning permissions being refused in respect 
because of the access issue. He asked that the matter be reviewed.  
 
Clarity was also requested in relation to the policy on the tarring of 
Back Lanes and confirmation as to which section of the Council was 
ultimately responsible for same. The Senior Engineer agreed to follow 
up on the query.  
 
 
 

7 
 
C/448/25  
REGENERATION DIVISON UPDATE  
The Cathaoirleach welcomed the Regeneration Team and 
acknowledged the work carried out by that division. Ms Patricia Mc 
Intyre, Divisional Manager briefed members on the work being carried 
out by the division together with an overview of the staffing 
complement in the Regeneration Section. She proceeded to give an 
update on the Urban Regeneration Programme in Letterkenny.  
 
Ms Sinead Mc Clafferty, Executive Planner gave a breakdown and 
general overview of the URDF Call 3 funding which had aimed to tackle 
vacancy and dereliction whilst activating housing supply. She then  
updated members in relation to Priority Programme outside of 
Letterkenny. 
 
Ms Mc Intyre proceeded to provide information on the communication 
role undertaken by the Regeneration Section. 
 
Reference was made also to the Rural Regeneration Programme and 
the range of projects being undertaken under the Town Centre First 
Initiative. She noted that €47m had been secured in funding from the 
Rural Regeneration and Development Fund to facilitate projects to the 
value of €56.76m. Concluding, she confirmed that 1,423 applications 
had been received under the Croi Conaithe Vacant Property 
Refurbishment Scheme with 1,042 approved to date  and 355 grants 
paid amounting to €20m. Donegal, she said, had the highest uptake in 
the country and that the value of the approved applications to the 
Donegal Economy was €65m. 
 
Mr Paddy Mullen, A/ Senior Engineer introduced the Capital Projects 
Team, and informed members that updated would be provided by Mr 
Shane Sweeney, A/Senior Executive Engineer and Ardal Mc Dermott, 
A/Senior Executive Engineer. 
 
Mr Sweeney updated members on the status of the following projects: 
Fort Dunree, Letterkenny SURS Phase 1, Lifford Common, Riverine 
Community Park, Repowering Buncrana, and the Creeslough 
Regeneration Programme. 
 
Mr Mc Dermott, outlined the status of the following projects: 
 
Arranmore Foreshore, Burtonport Harbour Redevelopment Phase 1, 
LK Connect- Linear Park Phase 1, Burtonport Harbour Redevelopment 
Phase 2, Killybegs 2040, Carndonagh Tús Nua, Ballybofey/Stranorlar 
SEED Project, Ramelton Re-Imagined, Letterkenny 2040 - Market 
Square, and the,Letterkenny Courthouse.  
 
The Senior Engineer, concluding the presentation gave an overview of 
the staffing complement within the Capital Projects Team. 
 

8 
 
The meeting was then opened to the floor with members raising the 
following: 
 
➢ Given that the derelict housing grant is not available in some of 
our Municipal Towns what are the long-term implications 
expected to be? 
➢ Is there any indication as to how many will tender for the Tús 
Nua project? 
➢ Concern regarding the next steps for the Fort Dunree Project 
and the timeline for same in light of the recent planning refusal. 
Funding aspect of the project needs to be looked at, as 
additional costs are anticipated and further information sought. 
Query as to when the new planning application will be submitted 
and the funding shortfall addressed. 
➢ Welcome for the Repowering Buncrana Project. 
➢ Important that the costs, design aspect etc for the SEED Project 
are not changed and that members will have an opportunity for 
further input. 
➢ Ballybofey/ Stranorlar needs to be at the fore in terms of town 
regeneration given that GeoDirectory reports Ballybofey as 
having one of the highest commercial vacancy/dereliction rates 
in the country. 
➢ General welcome for the Creeslough Project. 
➢ Additional staffing complement needed to deal with the 
regeneration aspect outside of Letterkenny.  
➢ Disappointment with the slow progress of the Alpha and Beta 
Buildings. What is the hold up and does the design need to be 
altered to accommodate a smaller development and within a 
reasonable budget?  
➢ Push needed to progress the LK-Green Connect – Linear Park- 
Phase 1. 
 
The Cathaoirleach on behalf of all the members thanked the 
Regeneration and the Capital Design team for the comprehensive 
presentations.  
 
Ms Patricia Mc Intyre thanked members for their engagement and 
ongoing courtesy and respect. She said that the revolving fund was in 
place to address dereliction and vacancy in Letterkenny, but that there 
was no fund outside of Letterkenny for rural areas. She said that this 
had been broached with the Department and a similar scheme sought 
for these areas as it was not possible acquire properties or initiate 
CPOs in these locations. It was possible, she added, to register derelict 
properties in rural areas on the derelict sites register so that they 
attracted an annual levy of 7%. 
 
Generally, she confirmed, that a Compulsory Purchase Order was the 
last approach in dealing with dereliction.  
 

9 
 
Back in 2023, it was noted that the Department had given the Council 
access to the GeoDirectory and as a result had been asked to carry out 
a survey of derelict properties and subsequently to engage with the 
owners and encourage them to activate the properties. 40% of this 
work, she said, had been undertaken and it was hoped to recommence 
the survey and associated work in early 2026.  
 
There was acknowledgement of the excellent engagement from the 
Town Teams which were now well established.  
 
Staffing it was noted was always an issue and that works were subject 
to the availability of associated funding streams.  
 
In relation to the Rural Programme, it was confirmed, that the focus 
was on the Service and Support Towns and that the Community 
Development division supported the remaining towns. She said that 
there was good interaction and co-operation within these two divisions 
that enabled maximum funding to be sought.  
 
Concluding she said that it was hoped to have public drop in events in 
2026 and build on the success of such interactions in 2026. 
 
Mr Paddy Mullen, Senior Engineer advised that that an extension had 
been issued in respect of the Tús Nua Project in Carndonagh and that 
tenders were now due in the first week of January 2026. It was 
encouraging, he added, that a number of expressions of interest had 
already been submitted.  
 
He said that a workshop would take place with the Elected Members in 
the New Year following the Fort Dunree Project Board Meeting on the 
15th December . This, he said would pave the way forward in light of 
the recent planning refusal. 
 
Alluding to the SEED Project, he said, that a decision was awaited on 
the CPO and that after that there would be an opportunity for members 
to discuss any future development. 
 
The Donegal 2040 Board, he said, had met and reviewed all of the 
decisions in relation to the Port Road development. 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services said that the Beta building was an ambitious 
project and on the site of an iconic building. The business basis, he 
said, remained the same but that one final element remained and that 
was the absence of co-funding. Meetings were ongoing, it was noted, 
in relation to this aspect. A final decision, he said, was in the pipeline 
and this was expected shortly which would reflect the ambition for the 
site. Failure to acquire the relevant funding, would, he confirmed, 
necessitate going back to the drawing board. 
 

10 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
