1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
24 Márta 2026 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 30 Márta 2026 ag 11.00 r.n in 
Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an 
chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pól Mac Giolla  
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
********************************************************************************************************
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House 
Lifford 
 
24th March 2026 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 30th March 2026 at 11.00am in the 
County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join the meeting will 
issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
____________________ 
Paul Mc Gill 
Meetings Administrator  

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the January Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 26th January 2026. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 11th February 2026. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the disposal of land at Ture, Muff, to 
Gerard and Glenda Mc Callion. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the exchange of property at Main 
Street, Dungloe to Bridgeburn Developments Ltd. 
c) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the disposal by way of lease of 
property in the Donegal Public Services Centre to North Connacht and 
Ulster Money Advice and Budgeting Service. 
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 
To approve the carrying out of works in relation to the Letterkenny 
Northern Network Project (Windy Hall Road) 
 
4. Community & Culture 
To note the Donegal LCDC Annual Report 2025. 
 
5. Economic Development     
To note report and progress made towards establishing a long term legal 
structure for ERNACT and that Donegal County Council support the 
continued pursuit of the establishment of an EGTC between Donegal 
County Council and Derry City & Strabane District Council, subject to the 
necessary national approvals. 
 
6. Finance  
To note report on irrecoverable rates for 2025. 
 
 
 

3 
 
7. Roads & Transportation  
To approve the 2026 Non -National Roads Bridge Strengthening 
Programme. 
 
8. Endorsement of Minutes 
To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the, 
19th January 2026. 
 
9. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025 (as amended). 
 
Training 
➢ AILG Annual Training Conference 2026 to be held on the 22nd & 23rd 
April 2026 in the Hotel Minella, Clonmel, Co Tipperary. 
 
Conferences 
➢ Attendance at the Irish Planning Institute Annual Conference in the 
Radisson Blu Hotel, Athlone on the 17th and 18th April, 2026. 
 
Other  
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or his representative at the Donegal 
Association – Donegal Person of the Year Award in the Bonnington 
Hotel, Dublin on the 28th March 2026. 
 
 
Abroad 
➢ Attendance of the CPMR Representative at the General Assembly of 
the Atlantic Arc Commission in Quebec, Canada on the 8th and 9th 
June 2026.  
 
10. Conference Reports 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Liam Blaney at the IBCI Conference in the 
Radisson Blu, Little Island Cork on the 12th  & 13th March 2025. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the IBCI Conference in 
Galway on the 4th and 5th March 2026. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty at the IBCI Conference in 
Galway on the 4th and 5th March 2026. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Denis Mc Gee at the IBCI Conference in Galway on 
the 4th and 5th March 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
Housing   
11. Cllr Brian Carr  
“That Donegal County Council, as a collective body, draft a letter, signed 
by the Chief Executive, Director of Housing and all councillors, urging 
Housing Minister James Brown to reverse his decision to reject the 
funding of modular homes in Donegal during remediation of vast numbers 
of social housing. Given the scale of the Defective Concrete Blocks crisis 
and housing shortage, modular homes are essential to support family 
relocations during remediation. This request should be backed by data 
from the Council and the Defective Concrete Blocks Committee.” 
 
Corporate   
12. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig  
“Go n-aithníonn an Chomhairle seo ar bhonn foirmeálta an ról a thig léi 
agus ba chóir di a imirt i ndíchoilíniú meon eagraíochtúil go gníomhach 
tríd an nGaeilge a normalú agus a chur chun cinn mar theanga bheo 
laistigh dá struchtúir féin agus ina hoibríochtaí laethúla. 
Dá réir sin, socróidh an Chomhairle trí chruinniú iomlán ar a laghad  de 
chuid na Comhairle a reáchtáil gach bliain trí mheán na Gaeilge, ag 
leanúint an nós atá leagtha síos ag údaráis áitiúla eile, agus is mian le 
Coiste na Gaeilge gach tacaíocht a thairiscint lena chinntiú go gcuirtear 
na tacaíochtaí, an oiliúint agus na hacmhainní cuí i bhfeidhm chun go 
mbeidh baill thofa agus baill foirne in ann páirt a ghlacadh go muiníneach 
agus go cuimsitheach sna cruinnithe. 
Mar údarás áitiúil a fhreastalaíonn ar cheantair Ghaeltachta agus neamh-
Ghaeltachta araon, tá ról ceannaireachta soiléir ag Comhairle Contae 
Dhún na nGall maidir le tacú leis an nGaeilge agus í a chur chun cinn 
mar theanga bheo riaracháin agus rannpháirtíochta pobail.” 
 
“That this Council formally recognises the role it can and should play in 
actively decolonising organisational mindset by normalising and 
promoting the Irish language as a living language within its own 
structures and in its day-to-day operations. 
Accordingly, the Council will move to hold a minimum of three full Council 
meetings annually through the medium of Irish, following the example set 
by other local authorities, and Coiste na Gaeilge offers full support to 
ensure that the appropriate supports, training, and resources are put in 
place to enable elected members and staff to participate confidently and 
inclusively in the meetings. 
As a local authority serving both Gaeltacht and non-Gaeltacht areas, 
Donegal County Council has a clear leadership role in supporting and 
promoting Irish as a living language of administration and community 
engagement.” 
 
 
 

5 
 
Emergency Services  
13. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty  
“That this Council write to the Minister for Health Jennifer Carroll MacNeill  
requesting that Donegal be seriously considered for a dedicated Air 
Ambulance in our County of Donegal please.” 
 
Economic Development  
14. Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh  
“That Donegal County Council write to the Minister of Transport to 
reinstate the midday flight from Donegal to Dublin which is a lifeline to 
many patients receiving cancer treatment and the passengers who use 
this flight for business and connecting flights which will also have an  
effect on our tourist industry in the County.” 
 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
15. Cllr Denis Mc Gee  
“I propose that Donegal County Council formally write to the Minister for 
Housing, James Browne, urging the removal of the 20-year clawback on 
the remediation of secondary or rental properties under the Defective 
Concrete Block Scheme.” 
 
This issue arose due to government regulatory failures and light-touch 
oversight. Homeowners—whether for primary residences or rental 
properties—placed trust in the system and were left with substandard 
homes. It is morally indefensible to burden these families with clawback 
conditions when they are simply trying to rectify a problem they did not 
cause. 
 
We call on the Minister to acknowledge that no one should be held 
financially accountable for repairing a home made defective by regulatory 
shortcomings. We urge the removal of this claw back and the recognition 
of the government’s responsibility in this crisis.” 
 
 
  
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
 
Community 
16. Cllr Tomás S Devine  
“Can I ask this Council to support my motion and write to the Justice 
Minister, Jim O Callaghan urging him to meet the families of the 
Creeslough explosion.” 
 
We passed 2 motions in this council chamber calling for a full public 
enquiry, and the very least the minister can do is facilitate this meeting. 
Why anyone refuses to meet the families is beyond belief? 
 
Planning 
17. Cllr Declan Meehan  
“That this Council, recognising the ongoing issue of vacancy and 
dereliction in town and village centres across Donegal, and the negative 

6 
 
impact this has on community vitality, housing supply, economic activity, 
and visual amenity, will: 
 
- adopt a more proactive and systematic approach to identifying 
potentially derelict properties across the county, including regular 
surveys and engagement with local communities and elected members. 
- ensure all properties that meet the statutory definition of dereliction are 
promptly investigated and, where applicable, added to the Derelict 
Sites Register without delay. 
- develop and implement a concentrated strategy to investigate and add 
properties to the Derelict Sites Register in each Municipal District; and 
- provide regular reports to elected members outlining the number of 
properties under investigation, additions to the Derelict Sites Register, 
levies applied and collected, and progress on enforcement actions.” 
 
Corporate  
18. Cllr Michael Mc Bride  
“I am asking that Donegal County Council pass a vote of no confidence 
in Larry Murrin and that he be removed as Chairman of Bord Bia.  
 
19. Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly  
"That this Council holds a civic reception for Donegal jockey, overall 
Sports Star award winner, and 2025 Irish champion jockey, Dylan 
Browne Mc Monagle, to honour and recognise all of his achievements to 
date, please." 
 
Roads & Transportation  
20. Cllr Liam Blaney  
“That this Council supports my call for funding from the Minor 
Infrastructure Fund to be also allocated to projects that would otherwise 
qualify under the Minor Tourism Infrastructure Fund, given that the Minor 
Tourism Infrastructure Fund is not available this year.” 
 
 
   
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
Housing  
21. Cllr Jimmy Brogan  
“Review and Increase of Social Housing Income Thresholds 
That Donegal County Council contact the Minister for Housing to urgently 
review and substantially increase the income thresholds for eligibility for 
social housing supports or move Donegal to Band 1 of the Means 
Assessment.” 
 
The current thresholds do not reflect the rising living costs, increasing 
rents, and the much-needed raises in the minimum wage. As a result, 
many working people earning the minimum wage, cannot work overtime 
or claim Working Family Payments without going above the eligibility 
limits, effectively excluding them from accessing social housing supports. 

7 
 
This has created a significant cohort of households who are unable to 
afford housing in the private market or obtain a mortgage, yet do not 
qualify for social housing assistance. This gap is placing families under 
increasing financial pressure and contributing to the risk of 
homelessness.” 
 
 
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Roads & Transportation 
22. Cllr Martin Scanlon  
“Calling on DCC to move away from the use of wet mix materials on all 
our local roads, CIS and LIS schemes in favour of using bitmac material 
going forward.  The use of wet mix should only be used in limited 
instances and be the exception rather than the rule.” 
 
23. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
“That Donegal County Council immediately take whatever steps are 
necessary including invoking the CPO process to provide necessary infill 
footpaths in our town centres." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate 
24. Cllr Jack Murray  
“That Donegal County Council agrees to host a civic reception 
recognising the historic achievement of the Donegal Darts Team on 
winning the All-Ireland Championship for the 15th time.” 
 
25. Cllr Fionán Bradley  
“This Council calls on the HSE to immediately tender for and begin work 
on all community hospitals in the county which have been granted 
funding under the Capital Plan and that we will write to the Area 
Manager and Minister for Health insisting on the same.” 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
26. Cllr Albert Doherty  
“Donegal County Council maintains full support for families and 
communities whose homes, lives and livelihoods have been blighted and 
traumatised by the effects of Defective Concrete Blocks. 
Donegal County Council calls on the Department of Housing and related 
government departments to adopt, advance and fund an action focused 
review of the Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme that includes and 
enables safety  remediation works to commence in Schools, Creches, 
Public Service Centres, Community  Buildings and Farm Outhouses.” 
 
 
 

8 
 
27. Cllr Joy Beard  
“That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to ensure that any review of the Enhanced 
Defective Concrete Blocks Remediation Scheme is carried out in 
consultation with Donegal County Council and homeowner 
representatives. 
 
This Council notes that the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks 
Scheme commenced in June 2023 under the Remediation of Dwellings 
Damaged by the Use of Defective Concrete Blocks Act 2022, and that a 
review of the scheme is expected approximately three years after its 
commencement, in or around June 2026. 
 
Given that Donegal has the largest number of affected homes in the 
State, this Council believes that the experience and expertise of the local 
authority administering the scheme, together with the lived experience of 
affected homeowners, must be formally considered in any review of the 
scheme. 
This Council further calls on the Minister to ensure that the review also 
takes into account the outcome of the National Standards Authority of 
Ireland (NSAI) review of IS 465, once concluded, as any revisions to this 
standard may have significant implications for testing methods, eligibility 
assessments and remediation options for affected dwellings. 
 
A copy of this motion be forwarded to the Minister for Housing, the 
Department of Housing, the Housing Agency, all Donegal Oireachtas 
Members, and the local authorities in counties currently affected by 
defective concrete blocks.” 
 
Roads & Transportation 
28. Cllr Terry Crossan  
“That Donegal County Council initiate immediate action against the large 
scale sale of vehicles on public roads and lay-byes especially where it 
impacts on school and church parking areas.” 
 
29. Cllr Ali Farren  
“That this Council look at the feasibility of developing piers and harbours 
where practical, with the aim of providing marine facilities for leisure 
users and facilitating where possible access to adjacent beaches for the 
able bodied and wheelchair users.” 
 
30.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
31. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Human Resources   
32. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig   
Ceist a chur ar Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall cad iad na bearta atá i 
bhfeidhm faoi láthair, nó atá beartaithe, chun oiliúint frith-
fhaisisteach/chiníoch a chur ar fáil do bhaill foirne na Comhairle agus do 
chomhairleoirí tofa, agus a fhiafraí ina dhiaidh sin cén oiliúint, treoir, nó 
tacaíochtaí atá á gcur i bhfeidhm chun a chur ar chumas baill foirne agus 
comhairleoirí scéalta antoisceacha ar an eite dheis a aithint, dúshlán a 
thabhairt dóibh agus deileáil go héifeachtach leo, lena n-áirítear faisnéis 
neamhchruinn agus dioscúrsa atá bunaithe ar fhuath, laistigh dá róil 
ghairmiúla agus ionadaíochta? 
 
To ask Donegal County Council what measures are currently in place, or 
are planned, to provide anti-fascist/racist training for Council staff and 
elected councillors, and to further ask what training, guidance, or 
supports are being implemented to equip staff and councillors to 
recognise, challenge, and respond effectively to far-right and extremist 
narratives, including misinformation and hate-based discourse, within 
their professional and representative roles. 
 
 
Roads & Transportation 
33. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig   
Ceist a chur ar an Chomhairle cad iad na céimeanna atá glactha chun 
rochtain ar ár n-oileáin amach ón chósta a fheabhsú agus go háirithe, an 
fhéidearthacht go bhforbrófaí tuirlingt úr farantóireacht in Árainn Mhóir 
agus in Ailt an Chorráin chomh maith. 
Rinne mé iarratas i scríbhinn anuraidh go dtiocfadh na páirtí leasmhara 
ar fad le chéile chun na deiseanna a chíoradh agus níl a fhios agam cén 
fáth nach bhfuarthas freagair agus cén fáth nár eagraíodh a leithéid? 
 
To ask the Council what steps have been taken to improve access to our 
offshore Islands and in particular the possibility of developing a new ferry 
landing at both Arainn Mhóir agus Ailt a Chorráin. Last year I had written 
a request for all stakeholders to sit down to explore these opportunities 
and I'm wondering why there has not been a response and this request 
organised. 
 
 
  
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
 Roads & Transportation  
34. Cllr Declan Meehan    
Prior to the implementation of the new Machinery Yard procurement 
policies and procedures, have there been instances where successful 
tenders for road plant use have not been used by Donegal County 

10 
 
Council in the last five years? Have lower ranked vendors been used 
ahead of winning vendors in any cases? If so, why?  
 
 
 
 Housing 
35. Cllr Declan Meehan   
Does this Council currently have a policy regarding installation of electric 
vehicle chargers in Council-owned housing estates? Does this Council 
currently allow tenants to install EV charging points at their rented 
properties? If not, will the Council work towards a policy to facilitate 
tenants moving to electric vehicles? What  
 
  
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Finance  
36. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director of Finance how much match funding is currently 
required to deliver all capital projects planned for in the county and how 
much of that funding can the Council provide in 2026. 
 
Housing & MD Services  
37. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Corporate Affairs what consultation is planned 
with Elected Members in anticipation of a second call for funding under 
the Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund and how projects will be 
prioritised in any future calls for funding to this fund under the auspices of 
the Housing Activation Office. 
 
38. Cllr Albert Doherty   
Energy Efficient Retrofitting Programme 2026 
Has DCC received confirmation of grant allocation for 2026 works, what 
number of houses are planned for in the works programme, and will the 
council confirm return and completion of works in previously commenced 
housing estates? 
 
39. Cllr Terry Crossan  
Can D.C.C clarify if those applying for the ‘Older Person’s Grant ‘, 
especially in relation to new windows are precluded unless they currently 
have single glazed, wooden framed windows? 
 
Community & Planning  
40. Cllr Albert Doherty   
Will the “Vacant above the Shop” grant, the extended grant for 
conversion of entire commercial build into residential homes commence 
as previously envisaged at end of Q1 2026, what correspondence is 
awaited or is latest and has been received by DCC from government 
department(s)? 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Roads & Transportation   
41. Cllr Ali Farren   
Has the Council got any funding to install extra EV charging units 
throughout the county or have they looked for funding to install more 
much needed charging points in the County? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
42. Cllr Joy Beard   
What is the current status of all motions submitted by me that have been 
passed by Donegal County Council and subsequently referred to the 
Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage and/or the 
Department of Housing; what correspondence, if any, has been received 
from the Minister or the Department in relation to those motions; and, 
where no response has been received, what follow-up has been 
undertaken by the Council to seek a reply? 
 
43. Motions from other Councils/Bodies   
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Clare County Council calls on the Irish Government, and in 
particular the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, to urgently 
respond to the recent appeal from the Irish Beekeepers Association and 
associated national beekeeping organisation for:  
 
The establishment of a properly resourced, dedicated and coordinated 
all-Ireland bee inspection service, to protect managed honeybees and 
wild pollinators from disease outbreaks, parasites and invasive threats.  
The immediate reinstatement and expansion of professional bee 
inspection capacity in the Republic of Ireland, working in cooperation with 
counterparts in Northern Ireland, to ensure early detection, rapid 
response and effective biosecurity controls.  
Enhanced national measures to combat invasive species and emerging 
parasites, including the Asian hornet and the Tropilaelaps (Tropi) mite;  
Proactive surveillance, preparedness and contingency planning for the 
potential arrival of the Tropilaelaps mite in Ireland; 
Full and continued Government support for the All-Ireland Pollinator Plan.  
Recognition that bees and other pollinators are essential to Irish 
agriculture, food security, biodiversity and the wider environment.  
 
This motion is to be circulated to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and 
the Marine, the Minister of State with responsibility for biodiversity, all 
Oireachtas members representing County Clare, and local authorities in 
Ireland and Northern Ireland.” 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
"As elected members of this Council, we are deeply conscious of 
the financial pressure facing many people in our communities. For 
disabled people, that pressure is significantly greater. 
 
Disabled people incur additional and unavoidable costs every 

12 
 
single day. These include higher heating and electricity usage, 
transport costs, the running of essential equipment, personal 
assistance, and the practical realities of living in environments that 
are not fully accessible. These costs rise further during winter 
months. 
 
These are not discretionary expenses. They are structural costs 
linked directly to impairment and to systemic barriers. 
 
Across our county, disabled people are making impossible 
choices: between heating and participation, between mobility and 
food, between independence and debt. This is not acceptable in a 
society that claims to value equality and inclusion. 
While local authorities do not determine national social protection 
policy, we are the closest tier of government to our communities. We 
see the impact of poverty in housing applications, in requests for 
supports, and in the growing strain on families. 
 
We are therefore calling on this Council to formally request that 
Government introduce an immediate emergency cost of disability 
payment. This payment should recognise the additional costs 
borne by disabled people and be delivered in a way that does not 
exclude those who are in employment. 
Disabled people should not be penalised for working. Nor should 
they be pushed into poverty because of unavoidable additional 
costs. 
 
A national gathering is planned for 1pm on 28 February at the Garden 
of Remembrance to highlight this issue. Many would prefer not to 
have to gather in protest, but to see leadership and action instead. 
As councilors, we have a responsibility to stand with our constituents 
and to send a clear message to Government that this matter requires 
urgent attention. 
 
We respectfully ask our fellow elected members to support this call. 
 
If successful, please forward this motion to all County Councils as 
correspondence." 
 
GALWAY CITY COUNCIL  
That in light of the increase in road traffic fatalities and incidents in 2025, 
representing a failure of national road safety leadership, that this Council 
will write to the Minister for Transport calling for the following:  
That funding will be issued to Galway City Council to pilot the installation 
of red-light cameras at key junctions on publication of the National Safety 
Camera Strategy later this year, and that any fines collected would be 
retained by Galway City Council to help offset costs of other road safety 
improvements.  

13 
 
That this Council calls for a re-valuation of the role of the RSA and that 
the recommendations of the Indecon Report 2024 should be implemented 
immediately.  
 
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL  
That this Council call upon Government to enact legislation to 
systematically, sustainably and steadily increase the provision of Irish-
medium education so that future generations of Irish children will have the 
opportunity to be educated through their national language, if they so 
desire.  
Further, that this Council-  
Requests that this motion be circulated to the Minister for Education, the 
Taoiseach, the Minister for the Gaeltacht, all Oireachtas members in the 
constituency, and the other local authorities for their information.  
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the Minister for Justice, Jim 
O’Callaghan TD, to fully implement the revised EU Anti-Trafficking 
Directive and to establish a special National Garda Unit to deal with 
human trafficking that would collaborate with labour inspectors who 
operate under Workplace Relations (WRC) and other agencies. Such 
action would deal with human trafficking for sexual exploitation and labour 
trafficking for the hospitality, construction and agricultural industries in 
Ireland.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the TII to set up a separate funding 
stream to support County Councils to carry out maintenance and repairs 
on greenways, separate from the Roads funding allocated to each County 
Council. The issue of maintenance on greenways is an issue all over the 
country as greenway demonstration stretches are developed and brought 
into use.” 
 
LONGFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
I call upon Longford County Council to write to the Minister for Children, 
Disability & Equality, Norma Foley TD and Minister of State Emer Higgins 
TD to strongly advocate for an emergency payment to be made to 
disabled people to alleviate the shortfall from cuts to disability funding in 
Budget 2026, as a mechanism to bridge the gap until an annual Cost of 
Disability payment (which the government has committed to implement) in 
2027 is put in place to address the extra expenses faced by disabled 
people.  
 
OFFALY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“This Council calls on Government to instruct party MEPs oppose 
adoption of the Mercosur Trade agreement when the agreement is 
presented at European Parliament.”  
 
 

14 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“This Council call on the Government to, 
 
• Recognise the serious harm suffered by women and children in 
Mother and Baby Homes, County Homes and related institutions.  
• Notes that over 1,090 babies and children died at Sean Ross 
Abbey, and that many burial locations remain unknown.  
• Notes that this issue is also relevant locally, including Sligo County 
Home/St. John’s Hospital and boarded-out child records.  
• Expresses concern at the continued sealing of State records 
relating to Mother and Baby Homes and the Ryan Report, denying 
survivors and families access to the truth.  
• Investigate and excavate burial sites where children are believed to 
be buried.  
• Unseal institutional records and provide survivors and families 
access to their own information.  
• Extend redress to all survivors, without exclusion.  
 
TIPPERARY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Tipperary County Council write to the Minister for Transport 
requesting the introduction of legislation to ensure the compulsory 
wearing of hi visibility jackets by all E-Scooter and E-Bike users, in 
addition to the lights they are already compelled to have on same said 
vehicles.” 
 
WESTMEATH COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Westmeath County Council write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage of Ireland and call on the Minister to increase the 
respect income thresholds for Social Housing Provision and Housing 
Assistance Payment. It was requested that the motion would be circulated 
to all other Local Authorities.  
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council calls on the Government to task Irish Public Bodies 
(IPS) with the provision of insurance cover for residential and commercial 
properties that are unable to obtain insurance from commercial insurers 
due to previous flooding events or because they are located within 
designated flood risk zones.  
This Council acknowledges that the risk profile of such properties makes it 
uneconomic for the private insurance market to provide cover on a 
commercial basis. In that context, the Council further calls on the Minister 
for Finance to introduce a modest, ring-fenced insurance levy to establish 
and support a national flood insurance claims fund, which would underpin 
the provision of such cover and ensure long term sustainability.  
This Council believes that access to insurance is essential for the 
protection of homeowners, businesses, community viability, and local 
economic resilience, and that a state supported mechanism is required to 
address this market failure.” 
 

15 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council calls on the Government to fast-track and publish the 
Legislation outlawing the use of anonymous social media accounts, 
profiles and user/chat groups on all social media platforms.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
MINUTES OF MARCH MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
30TH MARCH, 2026 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/71/26 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F Bradley, 
C Brogan, B Carr, D Coyle, T Crossan, T S Devine, A Doherty, G 
Doherty, A Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, D. M Kelly, N Kennedy, M Mac 
Giolla Easbuig, M McDermott, D McGee, P McGowan, G McMonagle, 
D Meehan, J Murray, M Naughton, J S O’ Fearraigh, M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs J Brogan, M Farren, J Kavanagh, F McBrearty Jnr, M 
McBride, M Mc Clafferty, P McGarvey, M McMahon, A Molloy, and D 
Nic Mheanman 
 
C/72/26 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Paul Mc Gill, Meetings 
Administrator, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, MD Services & 
Capital Projects, Eamon Brown, A/ Director Planning, Communities & 
Culture, Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation, Richard 
Gibson, Director of Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems,  Michael McGarvey, Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme, 
Garry Martin, Director of Human Resources, Economic Development 
and Emergency Services, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, 
William Colvin, Assistant Communications Officer, Róise Ní 
Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní Ghallachóir, Rannóg na 
Gaeilge, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer. 
 
C/73/26 
MINUTES SILENCE – AMY DOHERTY 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig it 
was resolved to hold a minute’s silence for Amy Doherty, Derry who 
had died recently in tragic circumstances. 
 
Cllr Beard said that a specific discussion was needed on violence in 
the home and consideration given as to how Donegal County Council 
could be proactive in dealing with the issue whilst highlighting same 
through the meeting process. Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig cited the need to 
look at the topic as it impacted women and children both at home and 
in the public together with the issue of violence against men.  
 
C/74/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE JANUARY MEETING 
OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 26TH JANUARY, 
2026.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the Minutes 
of the January Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 26th 
January, 2026 were adopted.  
 
C/75/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MINUTES OF THE 
SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
THE 11TH FEBRUARY, 2026.  

17 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Naughton the 
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
11th February, 2026 were adopted.  
 
C/76/26 
DISPOSAL OF LAND AT TURE MUFF TO GERARD AND GLENDA 
MCCALLION 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.    
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Crossan, seconded by Cllr A. Doherty it was 
resolved to approve the disposal of land at Ture, Muff, to Gerard and 
Glenda Mc Callion in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended). 
   
C/77/26 
EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY AT MAIN STREET DUNGLOE TO 
BRIDGEBURN DEVELOPMENTS LTD. 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that further clarification was needed and 
asked if consideration could be given to acquiring additional space at 
this location. It was agreed to defer the matter to later in the meeting. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme drew attention 
to the fact that this was not about the disposal of the land but rather the 
regularisation of the ownership of the property in question. He said that 
he was happy to explore the options presented and bring the matter 
back to the Glenties Municipal District and to the Climate Action & 
Environment SPC. 
 
 C/78/26 
DISPOSAL OF LAND BY LEASE OF PROPERTY IN THE DONEGAL 
PUBLIC SERVICE CENTRE TO NORTH CONNACHT AND ULSTER 
MONEY ADVICE AND BUDGETING SERVICE 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.    
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Naughton, it was 
resolved to approve the disposal by way of lease of property in the 
Donegal Public Services Centre to North Connacht and Ulster Money 
Advice and Budgeting Service in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) 
and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as 
amended).   
 
 
 

18 
 
C/79/26 
TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS IN RELATION TO 
THE LETTERKENNY NORTHERN NETWORK PROJECT- WINDY 
HALL ROAD 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr Blaney the carrying out 
of works in relation to the Letterkenny Northern Network Project- Windy 
Hall Road was approved, in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & 
Development Regulations 2001(as amended). 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation informed Cllr C 
Brogan that the changes agreed at the recent workshop with the 
Letterkenny/Milford members were included in the addendum to the 
report.  
 
C/80/26 
DONEGAL LCDC ANNUAL REPORT 2025 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation   
to the above and noted the contents of the Donegal LCDC Annual 
Report for 2025. 
 
C/81/26 
ESTABLISHMENT OF A EUROPEAN GROUPING OF TERRITORIAL 
COOPERATION BETWEEN DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL AND 
DERRY CITY & STRABANE DISTRICT COUNCIL 
Members considered and noted the report circulated with the agenda in 
relation to the above. 
 
They agreed to support the establishment of an European Grouping of 
Territorial Cooperation between Donegal County Council and Derry 
City & Strabane District Council subject to the necessary approvals 
being put in place. 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Human Resources, Economic Development  
& Emergency Services responding to a query from Cllr Naughton said 
that every effort would be made to advance collaboration between 
Donegal County Council and Omagh & Fermanagh District Council and 
to explore any possible specific benefits for South Donegal.  
 
C/82/26 
IRRECOVERABLE RATES FOR 2025 
 
Members noted the report circulated with this agenda in relation to the 
 above and acknowledged the excellent work carried out in this area in 
2025.  
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Services acknowledged the excellent carried out by the staff working in 
this field. It had been, he noted a strong performance for 2025 with 
€35.5m in cash collected which was up €800k on the previous year. He 
thanked all those who had paid their rates on time.  
 

19 
 
C/83/26 
2026 NON-NATIONAL ROADS BRIDGE STRENGTHENING 
PROGRAMME 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Kennedy the 2026 
Non-National Roads Bridge Strengthening Programme was approved. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan alluded to particular issues at the bridge in Dromore, 
Killygordon where the footbridge had been closed and the temporary 
traffic lights in place were out of order on a continual basis. He asked 
for an explanation as to why these items were not being dealt with in a 
timely and efficient manner.  
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation advised that he 
would be happy to update the Lifford/Stranorlar members regarding the 
specifics involved and noted that further investigations were needed in 
relation to the footbridge mentioned but that these were dependent on 
the overflow in the river. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan asked that a meeting be set up at the bridge for the 
Lifford/Stranorlar members. 
 
C/84/26 
ENDORSEMENT OF THE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP HELD ON 19TH JANUARY 2026. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney and seconded by Cllr Coyle the minutes 
of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group were noted. 
 
C/85/26 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. Following a query from Cllr Scanlon in relation to an 
upcoming Coiste na Gaeilge meeting with Cork County Council it was 
resolved to defer the matter to later in the meeting. 
 
C/86/26 
CONFERENCE REPORTS   
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Kennedy the 
following conference reports were noted 
 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Liam Blaney at the IBCI Conference in the 
Radisson Blu, Little Island Cork on the 12th & 13th March 2025. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the IBCI Conference in 
Galway on the 4th and 5th March 2026. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty at the IBCI Conference in 
Galway on the 4th and 5th March 2026. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Denis Mc Gee at the IBCI Conference in Galway 
on the 4th and 5th March 2026. 
 
C/87/26 
FUNDING OF MODULAR HOMES IN DONEGAL  
On the proposal of Cllr Carr, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it is resolved 
to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“That Donegal County Council, as a collective body, draft a letter, 
signed by the Chief Executive, Director of Housing and all councillors, 

20 
 
urging Housing Minister James Brown to reverse his decision to reject 
the funding of modular homes in Donegal during remediation of vast 
numbers of social housing. Given the scale of the Defective Concrete 
Blocks crisis and housing shortage, modular homes are essential to 
support family relocations during remediation. This request should be 
backed by data from the Council and the Defective Concrete Blocks 
Committee.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Carr outlined the need for alternative temporary housing given the 
seriousness of the housing situation in the county at present. 
This was an option, he said, which had been discussed many times but 
with little or no progress on the matter. Without effective change in the 
situation, he said, that there was no realistic way of carrying out the 
remediation of properties. He advised also of the need to identify sites 
to accommodate temporary housing solutions so that all concerned 
were sufficiently prepared to deal with the crisis. He alluded to the need 
for alternative accommodation in towns such as Glenties, Letterkenny, 
Buncrana and Carndonagh. It was imperative, he added, that new built 
housing stock was not utilised for this purpose and that every effort was 
made to secure alternative temporary housing. 
  
Cllr Mc Monagle concurred and noted that a significant number of 
families were living in houses that were not fit for purpose. This Council 
and the executive, he contended, needed to be proactive and stand 
with the members in lobbying the Department for a workable social 
housing remedial scheme that offered a realistic solution to the DCB 
crisis. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, MD services & Capital Projects 
confirmed that arrangements would be made to write to the Minister. 
Options for relocating tenants to alternative accommodation were being 
looked at, he added, and involved using casual vacancies and an 
element of new build accommodation. He advised that there were over 
80 houses vacant due to defective concrete blocks and that these 
would be used to relocate tenants once department funding for a 
remediation programme was received. He said that there was ongoing 
engagement with the Department, and that confirmation of a 
remediation scheme was anticipated. 
 
Concluding Cllr Carr proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle that an 
update be provided to the next applicable meeting in relation to the 
departmental responses on and the status of the Social Housing 
Remediation Scheme.  
 

21 
 
The Cathaoirleach responding to Cllr Mc Brearty in relation to specific 
remedial works in the Lifford/ Stranorlar MD said that this was an issue 
for discussion at MD level.  
 
C/88/26 
MINIMUM OF THREE FULL COUNCIL MEETINGS A YEAR 
THROUGH THE MEDIUM OF IRISH 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it 
is resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“Go n-aithníonn an Chomhairle seo ar bhonn foirmeálta an ról a thig léi 
agus ba chóir di a imirt i ndíchoilíniú meon eagraíochtúil go gníomhach 
tríd an nGaeilge a normalú agus a chur chun cinn mar theanga bheo 
laistigh dá struchtúir féin agus ina hoibríochtaí laethúla. 
Dá réir sin, socróidh an Chomhairle trí chruinniú iomlán ar a laghad  de 
chuid na Comhairle a reáchtáil gach bliain trí mheán na Gaeilge, ag 
leanúint an nós atá leagtha síos ag údaráis áitiúla eile, agus is mian le 
Coiste na Gaeilge gach tacaíocht a thairiscint lena chinntiú go gcuirtear 
na tacaíochtaí, an oiliúint agus na hacmhainní cuí i bhfeidhm chun go 
mbeidh baill thofa agus baill foirne in ann páirt a ghlacadh go 
muiníneach agus go cuimsitheach sna cruinnithe. 
Mar údarás áitiúil a fhreastalaíonn ar cheantair Ghaeltachta agus 
neamh-Ghaeltachta araon, tá ról ceannaireachta soiléir ag Comhairle 
Contae Dhún na nGall maidir le tacú leis an nGaeilge agus í a chur 
chun cinn mar theanga bheo riaracháin agus rannpháirtíochta pobail.” 
 
“That this Council formally recognises the role it can and should play in 
actively decolonising organisational mindset by normalising and 
promoting the Irish language as a living language within its own 
structures and in its day-to-day operations. 
Accordingly, the Council will move to hold a minimum of three full 
Council meetings annually through the medium of Irish, following the 
example set by other local authorities, and Coiste na Gaeilge offers full 
support to ensure that the appropriate supports, training, and resources 
are put in place to enable elected members and staff to participate 
confidently and inclusively in the meetings. 
As a local authority serving both Gaeltacht and non-Gaeltacht areas, 
Donegal County Council has a clear leadership role in supporting and 
promoting Irish as a living language of administration and community 
engagement.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that the holding of Council meetings in 
Irish was an important step in the promotion of the language and 
should not be viewed merely a paper exercise. Coiste na Gaeilge were, 
he advised, extremely proactive in the promotion of the language as 
evidenced in the recent collaboration with Galway City Council. He 
alluded also to the fact that a number of members were proficient in 
Irish. He said all of this augured well for the holding of meetings in Irish. 

22 
 
Cllr Scanlon said he was delighted to support the motion and that the 
holding of meetings in Irish would send out a strong message that this 
Council was prepared to champion our national language given that 
Donegal has one of the largest Gaeltacht areas in the country. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems acknowledged that the Council played an important role in 
promoting the language on a daily basis. He referenced the fact that a 
translation service was provided at plenary meetings and at a number 
of committee meetings/workshops etc. This was a matter for the 
Corporate Policy Group to consider, he said, and to look at the 
practicalities of conducting a plenary meeting entirely in Irish. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, welcomed the response and asked that a 
specific timeframe be provided as to when this would be put in place. 
He said that other counties had been able to facilitate same and asked 
that they be consulted in relation to same.  
 
The Director of Service said that information could be prepared for 
consideration by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle noted that serious consideration had to be given to 
whether the relevant supports were in place to accommodate such an 
initiative and queried the availability of resources and dedicated 
personnel. 
 
C/89/26 
DEDICATED AIR AMBULANCE FOR COUNTY DONEGAL 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McClafferty, seconded by Cllr Boyle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council write to the Minister for Health Jennifer Carroll 
MacNeill requesting that Donegal be seriously considered for a 
dedicated Air Ambulance in our County of Donegal please.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Human Resources, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services in relation to the 
above. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said this would be of enormous help to the ambulance 
service and allow patients to be moved as quickly as possible in 
emergency situations. 
 
Cllr Boyle concurred and noted that 4 new helicopters had been 
procured nationally. The time was right; he added to lobby on behalf of 
the people of Donegal. Finner, he said, would be the obvious location 
for such a service given the peripheral nature of the county.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 

23 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director of Human Resources, Economic 
Development & Emergency Services said that the motion would be 
conveyed to the Minister as requested.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty thanked members for their support and said he was in 
agreement that Finner was an ideal location for such a facility. Such a 
service would, he advised, support the excellent work already carried 
out by the Ambulance Service.  
 
C/90/26 
REINSTATEMENT OF THE MIDDAY FLIGHT FROM DONEGAL TO 
DUBLIN 
On the proposal of Cllr O’Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr Carr it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“That Donegal County Council write to the Minister of Transport to 
reinstate the midday flight from Donegal to Dublin which is a lifeline to 
many patients receiving cancer treatment and the passengers who use 
this flight for business and connecting flights which will also have an  
 
effect on our tourist industry in the County.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Human Resources, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services in relation to the 
above. 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh thanked all who had come out in support of the mid-
day service. This, he contended, was vital service for the people of 
Donegal and in particular cancer patients who travelled to Dublin for 
treatment. Donegal Airport, he said, facilitated over 46,000 people a 
year, with people using the airport to connect to other flights in Dublin. 
He alluded also to the fact that tourism would be impacted and other 
associated economic activities together with inward investment 
opportunities. Donegal, he said, needed a functioning airport and 
people should not have to travel to Dublin wondering how they are 
going to get back. This service, it was acknowledged, worked well 
given that there were limited public infrastructure options available.  
 
 
Cllr Carr acknowledged the importance of the service and said the lack 
of official confirmation on the service was unacceptable. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 Mr Garry Martin, Director of Human Resources, Economic 
Development & Emergency Services said that the motion would be 
conveyed to the Minister as soon as possible and that clarification was 
expected imminently on the status of the service. 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh thanked members for their support and said he 
awaited in a timely manner confirmation from Minister O’ Brien that the 
service would be reinstated.  
 

24 
 
C/91/26 
REMOVAL OF THE 20 YEAR CLAWBACK ON THE REMEDIATION 
OF SECONDARY OR RENTAL PROPERTIES UNDER THE 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCK SCHEME 
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr Beard it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“I propose that Donegal County Council formally write to the Minister 
for Housing, James Browne, urging the removal of the 20-year 
clawback on the remediation of secondary or rental properties under 
the Defective Concrete Block Scheme.” 
 
This issue arose due to government regulatory failures and light-touch 
oversight. Homeowners—whether for primary residences or rental 
properties—placed trust in the system and were left with substandard 
homes. It is morally indefensible to burden these families with clawback 
conditions when they are simply trying to rectify a problem they did not 
cause. 
 
We call on the Minister to acknowledge that no one should be held 
financially accountable for repairing a home-made defective by 
regulatory shortcomings. We urge the removal of this claw back and 
the recognition of the government’s responsibility in this crisis.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that the lack of regulation had caused the problem in 
the first place and that the 20 Year Clawback was unfair on property 
owners who had done nothing wrong in the first place. Despite 
numerous pleas and considerable correspondence, he noted that there 
had been little or no response from the Minister’s office to date. 
 
 
Cllr Beard supporting the motion said that homeowners were being 
penalised once again if they wanted to sell their property within 20 
years. It amounted; she added to a long-term financial restriction and 
prevented people from living with dignity as successive governments 
had not been prepared to stand over their failures. 
 
People, she said, needed to be able to sell their properties and move 
on with their lives. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Environment & Climate, Property 
Management  & Defective Concrete Blocks, confirmed that 
correspondence would issue to the Minister as requested. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee thanked members for their support and asked that the 
correspondence issue as soon as possible. 

25 
 
C/92/26 
CALL FOR THE JUSTICE MINISTER JIM O’CALLAGHAN TO MEET 
THE FAMILIES OF THE CREESLOUGH EXPLOSION 
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr McGee it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“Can I ask this Council to support my motion and write to the Justice 
Minister, Jim O Callaghan urging him to meet the families of the 
Creeslough explosion.” 
 
We passed 2 motions in this council chamber calling for a full public 
enquiry, and the very least the minister can do is facilitate this meeting. 
Why anyone refuses to meet the families is beyond belief? 
 
He received a response from the A/Director of Planning, Communities 
and Culture in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Devine said it was important that the families concerned got the 
opportunity to address the Minister and outline their concerns in relation 
to the tragedy. He said that it was important also that the families were 
invited into meet with members and indicated at this juncture that he 
wished to amend his motion to include a reference to same.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that this was another proposal and needed to 
be considered by the Corporate Policy Group or that Cllr Devine could 
introduce same by way of a motion under urgent business. He said that 
there were specific complexities in proceeding with either of these 
options.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that Cllr Devine was entitled under Standing 
Orders to propose an amendment to his motion.  
 
 
After some consideration Cllr Devine said that he would continue with 
his original motion.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee seconding the motion said this was the very least that 
could be done for families who were grieving. He outlined the need for 
an intermediary or liaison officer who could assist all concerned and 
help those impacted by the tragedy to get on with their lives. 
 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Director Planning, Communities & Cultural Services 
said that he request would be conveyed to the Minister for Justice 
accordingly.  
 
 
Cllr Devine concluding said that a solution needed to be found and 
clarity provided as to how this could be considered through the CPG 
process. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty proposed, seconded by Cllr Devine that the Creeslough 
families be allowed to address full council. The Cathaoirleach said that 
advice would be needed on this proposal.  

26 
 
C/93/26 
ONGOING ISSUE OF VACANCY AND DERELICTION IN TOWN AND 
VILLAGE CENTRES ACROSS DONEGAL 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr J Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“That this Council, recognising the ongoing issue of vacancy and 
dereliction in town and village centres across Donegal, and the 
negative impact this has on community vitality, housing supply, 
economic activity, and visual amenity, will: 
 
- adopt a more proactive and systematic approach to identifying 
potentially derelict properties across the county, including regular 
surveys and engagement with local communities and elected 
members. 
- ensure all properties that meet the statutory definition of dereliction 
are promptly investigated and, where applicable, added to the Derelict 
Sites Register without delay. 
- develop and implement a concentrated strategy to investigate and 
add properties to the Derelict Sites Register in each Municipal District; 
and 
- provide regular reports to elected members outlining the number of 
properties under investigation, additions to the Derelict Sites Register, 
levies applied and collected, and progress on enforcement actions.” 
 
He received a response from the A/Director of Planning, Communities 
and Culture in relation to the above 
 
Cllr Meehan expressed disappointment at the small number of 
properties included on the Derelict Sites Register. This, he said, was 
minimal compared to other counties and noted that there were 116 
properties listed in Galway and 257 in Mayo as opposed to 11 in 
Donegal. Donegal County Council, he said, needed to up their game 
and use the Derelict Sites Register in priority areas given that the 
county had the second highest vacancy rate in the country.  
 
Dereliction, he contended, was a scourge and an eyesore and 
impacted on the morale of the whole community. It was an item which 
needed to be looked at in terms of the overall housing crisis, he added, 
and cognisance also needed to be taken of the fact that only one third 
of the vacancy and dereliction grants had been utilised in our towns 
and villages.  
 
 
He called for a county-wide audit of sites and the instigation of a 
community mapping process. Properties, he said, were invisible if not 
included on the register and this needed to change. He queried 
whether the failure to tackle dereliction was down to resourcing and 
cited the need for greater enforcement and the use of the CPO process 
to revitalise our towns and villages.  
 

27 
 
 
The issue, he added, was about regeneration and economic 
development and called on the Planning Authority to reflect on and 
review the approach to the Derelict Sites Register.  
 
 
Cllr J Brogan seconding the motion said that the numbers on the 
Derelict Sites Register were unusually low given the quality of grant 
options available to remediate vacant properties. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Director Planning, Communities & Culture said that 
he agreed with the thrust and direction of the motion and noted that in 
2025 a Derelict Sites Policy and Procedures policy had been adopted 
setting out a priority programme for tackling dereliction. This, he 
advised, would be progressed through the Regeneration & 
Development Unit. There was now, he said, a clear organisational 
commitment to proactively address vacancy and dereliction. Survey 
work had already, he confirmed, been carried out in Ballybofey and 
Stranorlar and this would be continued in towns across the county in 
the coming weeks and months. He said that regular reports and 
updates would be circulated at Municipal District level and through the 
Chief Executive’s Management Report.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan concluding said that he appreciated the response but that  
it was important that the correct procedures were in place going 
forward. The move from policy to action was needed, he said, and the 
new Derelict Property Tax due to came into force in 2027 would 
hopefully act as a catalyst for a proactive approach to the problem of 
dereliction in Donegal.  
 
C/94/26 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING 
 
It was unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting until 1.15pm. 
 
C/95/26 
ADOPTION, ADVANCEMENT, AND FUNDING OF AN ACTION 
FOCUSED REVIEW OF THE DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS 
SCHEME 
It was unanimously agreed to deal with Cllr A Doherty’s motion at this 
juncture. On the proposal of Cllr A. Doherty, seconded by Cllr Crossan 
it was resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“Donegal County Council maintains full support for families and 
communities whose homes, lives and livelihoods have been blighted 
and traumatised by the effects of Defective Concrete Blocks. 
Donegal County Council calls on the Department of Housing and 
related government departments to adopt, advance and fund an action 
focused review of the Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme that includes 
and enables safety  remediation works to commence in Schools, 
Creches, Public Service Centres, Community  Buildings and Farm 
Outhouses.” 
 

28 
 
He received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management and Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above. 
 
 
 Cllr Doherty highlighted the fact that many schools were also impacted 
by the defective concrete block crisis and that to date there had been a 
somewhat muted response from the Department of Education. There 
was similar lack of engagement from the Department of Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage in terms of the remediation of public service 
centres, community building , farm outhouses etc.  
 
In the event that a remediation package is agreed, he cited the need for 
a contingency plan to be put in place in the interest of staff safety. 
 
 
Cllr Crossan concurred with the above and said that there was ongoing 
concern among local communities in relation to this issue.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Gravey, Director Environment & Climate, Property 
Management  & Defective Concrete Blocks, said that he would issue 
the correspondence as requested. He said that the matter had been 
raised on an ongoing basis with the Department. 
 
 
Cllr Doherty asked that it be circulated also to the Office of An 
Taoiseach. 
 
 
The Director of Service said that he would revert to the Inishowen 
Municipal District members in relation to the Carndonagh PSC Action 
Plan.  
 
C/96/26 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 
-2025 (as amended). 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon attendance 
at the following was approved.   
 
 
Training 
AILG Annual Training Conference 2026 to be held on the 22nd & 23rd 
April 2026 in the Hotel Minella, Clonmel, Co Tipperary. 
 
 
Conferences 
Attendance at the Irish Planning Institute Annual Conference in the 
Radisson Blu Hotel, Athlone on the 17th and 18th April, 2026. 

29 
 
 
 
Other  
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or his representative at the 
Donegal Association – Donegal Person of the Year Award in 
the Bonnington Hotel, Dublin on the 28th March 2026. 
 
➢ Attendance of Coiste na Gaeilge representatives at a meeting 
with Cork County Council. 
 
 
 
Abroad 
➢ Attendance of the CPMR Representative at the General 
Assembly of the Atlantic Arc Commission in Quebec, Canada 
on the 8th and 9th June 2026.  
 
C/97/26 
VOTE OF NO CONFIDENCE IN LARRY MURRIN, CHAIRMAN OF 
BORD BIA 
On The proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“I am asking that Donegal County Council pass a vote of no confidence 
in Larry Murrin and that he be removed as Chairman of Bord Bia.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said the position taken by Larry Murrin had been 
unacceptable and that there was a clear conflict of interest. His position 
was, he said, untenable and a similar resolution had already been 
passed by several local authorities. He thus called on Mr Murrin to step 
down as the chairman of Bord Bia. 
 
 
Cllr Meehan said that the reasons for the removal of Mr Murrin had 
been well outlined and there were multiple examples of a conflict of 
interest. The whole situation, he said, had caused conflict and was 
damaging the credibility of the Bord Bia.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems said that motion would be forwarded as requested. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride welcomed the support and said that the acceptance of the 
resolution would be welcomed by the farming community. 
 
C/98/26 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR DYLAN BROWNE MCMONAGLE 
On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
"That this Council holds a civic reception for Donegal jockey, overall 
Sports Star award winner, and 2025 Irish champion jockey, Dylan 

30 
 
Browne Mc Monagle, to honour and recognise all of his achievements 
to date, please." 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Kelly said that this would be a fitting tribute for a young man who 
had begun his racing career at the age of nine and who now enjoyed 
considerable success on the national and international stage. He 
outlined his achievements to date and highlighted the fact that he was 
the first Donegal person to become Irish Champion Jockey having been 
awarded this recognition in 2025. It was noted that he had to date 
chalked up 453 wins across the world.  
 
 
He said it was an honour to propose this young man for a civic 
reception as he was an exceptional role model and represented 
Donegal proudly on the world stage. 
 
 
Cllr C Brogan noted that he had also been a successful underage 
boxer. The wider horse racing fraternity, he noted, were extremely 
proud of his success. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems said that in line with the previous protocol the matter would be 
referred to the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
C/99/26 
ALLOCATION OF MINOR INFRASTRUCTURE FUND TO PROJECTS 
THAT WOULD QUALIFY UNDER THE MINOR TOURISM 
INFRASTRUCTURE FUND 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“That this Council supports my call for funding from the Minor 
Infrastructure Fund to be also allocated to projects that would 
otherwise qualify under the Minor Tourism Infrastructure Fund, given 
that the Minor Tourism Infrastructure Fund is not available this year.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Blaney said that current budgetary constraints meant that there 
was no way that all the projects currently in the pipeline could be 
adequately funded or resourced. He cited the need to look at the 
implementation of a new public lighting and infrastructure fund. 
 
Cllr Scanlon supported the motion and said that its introduction was 
timely and that the reallocation of funding would be beneficial for many 
community groups.  

31 
 
 
 There was opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation noted that 
members had adopted the 2026 Revenue Budget at the end of 2025 
and that this had included the Public Lights and Minor Infrastructure 
Scheme which had an agreed allocation of €259,000 (€7000 per 
member). This, he said, permitted discretionary allocations to be made 
by members for projects that benefitted the public road network and 
associated infrastructure. It was acknowledged that given the scale and 
condition of the public road network and the current level of funding 
available for improvements and maintenance that all funding sources 
for public road improvements, such as the Public Lights and Minor 
Roads Infrastructure Scheme are required to be spent on this aspect 
alone.  
 
 
Cllr Blaney said the response was disappointing and noted that the 
decisions taken at budget time were now having a negative impact.  
 
 
He asked that consideration be given to looking at the matter again  
 
C/100/26 
REVIEW AND INCREASE OF SOCIAL HOUSING INCOME 
THRESHOLDS 
On the proposal of Cllr J Brogan, seconded by Cllr McClafferty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“Review and Increase of Social Housing Income Thresholds 
That Donegal County Council contact the Minister for Housing to 
urgently review and substantially increase the income thresholds for 
eligibility for social housing supports or move Donegal to Band 1 of the 
Means Assessment.” 
 
The current thresholds do not reflect the rising living costs, increasing 
rents, and the much-needed raises in the minimum wage. As a result, 
many working people earning the minimum wage, cannot work 
overtime or claim Working Family Payments without going above the 
eligibility limits, effectively excluding them from accessing social 
housing supports. 
This has created a significant cohort of households who are unable to 
afford housing in the private market or obtain a mortgage, yet do not 
qualify for social housing assistance. This gap is placing families under 
increasing financial pressure and contributing to the risk of 
homelessness.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Brogan asked that contact be made with the Minister again to 
review the income thresholds and to move Donegal from Band 3 to 
Band 1. He said that the current thresholds did not take into account 
increasing rents and the increase in the minimum wage. People 

32 
 
working and earning the minimum wage, he said, were effectively 
excluded from accessing housing supports and found also found 
themselves in the position of not being able to access housing in the 
private sector.  
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig concurred and said that government policy was 
to blame for the homelessness crisis and the fact that people had to 
struggle to pay mortgages and were unable to afford rising food and 
fuel costs. He cited the need to reduce the housing waiting lists and for 
the social housing income thresholds to be changed to allow ordinary 
working families the chance to avail of affordable accommodation. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, MD Services & Capital Projects 
advised that the income eligibility thresholds had last been increased in 
January 2023 with the baseline limits increased by €5000 across all 
bands. The Council had written, he said, some months ago on foot of a 
similar motion and had received a reply to the effect that the 
Department had been examining existing limits in the context of current 
market and income conditions. He said, he would be happy to follow up 
again on the matter.  
 
C/101/26 
CHANGE FROM WET MIX MATERIALS TO BITMAC MATERIALS 
ON ROADS 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“Calling on DCC to move away from the use of wet mix materials on all 
our local roads, CIS and LIS schemes in favour of using bitmac 
material going forward.  The use of wet mix should only be used in 
limited instances and be the exception rather than the rule.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Scanlon said that the use of wet mix material was not the solution 
as potholes were appearing on roads that had been fixed after only six 
months. The same was happening, he noted with LIS schemes all of 
which, he contended, represented poor value for money. It was, he 
added, a waste of public money.  
 
 
Cllr Blaney supporting the motion said that he had raised this issue a 
number of years ago and had been told that many rural roads were not 
of a sufficient standard to facilitate bitmac. Standards had improved, he 
said, and queried whether the price differential was substantial at this 
point in time. Bitmac should be used, he contended, where roads were 
in a suitable condition. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 

33 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads  & Transportation said that he could 
appreciate where members were coming from but that to the general 
public an adequate road network was very important. He informed 
members that while bound materials could possibly give the road a 
longer design life there was a greater cost involved. Thus, he said in 
such cases, less work would be done for the same level of grant and 
that a balance had to struck as to the amount of road network that 
could be remediated. 
 
Cllr Scanlon said that he appreciated the response but would  like to 
see the use of bitmac implemented going forward. It was, he advised, 
suitable for a wide range of roads and weather conditions and its use 
would override any additional cost.  
 
C/102/26 
EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY AT MAIN STREET DUNGLOE WITH 
BRIDGEBURN DEVELOPMENTS LTD. 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty, seconded by Cllr Molloy it was 
resolved to approve the exchange of property at Main Street Dungloe 
with Bridgeburn Developments in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) 
and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as 
amended). 
 
C/103/26 
INFILL FOOTPATHS IN TOWN CENTRES 
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“That Donegal County Council immediately take whatever steps are 
necessary including invoking the CPO process to provide necessary 
infill footpaths in our town centres." 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan said this was an ongoing issue in many towns and 
villages throughout the county. 
 
He referenced particular issues at Sessiaghoneill and in Killygordon 
which had been ongoing for a considerable period. It was , he advised 
frustrating in that footpaths were laid only on one side of the street or in 
some cases dedicated sections unfinished. He thus called on the Chief 
Executive to ensure that the commitment given to the people of 
Killygordon regarding infill footpaths in the town centre would be 
honoured. He called for the CPO process to be utilised in situations 
such as these. 
 
Cllr Scanlon supporting the motion alluded to similar problems in the 
Glenties and Ardara areas. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 

34 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that improving 
facilities for vulnerable road users within our towns and villages was an 
important aspect and that the Council had delivered significant 
improvements in this regard over the past number of years. The Active 
Travel Funding Programme had been beneficial in this respect, he 
added, in terms of developing networks of footpaths and cycleways to 
address connectivity issues. The use of CPO powers, he advised , had 
not been required in the development of Active Travel projects to date 
but the option was available if needed.  
 
Referencing the projects alluded to by Cllr Mc Gowan, he said, that the 
Roads Directorate was committed to ensuring that all roads’ projects 
were completed. He noted that the local roads team had done some 
work in Killygordon but that a CPO was needed to complete project.  
 
The Chief Executive confirmed that he would along with the Director of 
Service and the relevant engineering staff meet with Cllr Mc Gowan 
onsite in Killygordon within the next few weeks.  
 
Concluding Cllr Mc Gowan said he had reservations about the actual 
authority held by the Municipal District in relation to a number of roads 
issues as matters were continually referred back to the Roads & 
Transportation SPC and to full Council. He called for roads issues to be  
dealt with through the bi-monthly meeting process.  
 
C/104/26 
CIVIC RECEPTION FOR THE DONEGAL DARTS TEAM 
On the proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“That Donegal County Council agrees to host a civic reception 
recognising the historic achievement of the Donegal Darts Team on 
winning the All-Ireland Championship for the 15th time.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Murray said that the Donegal Darts team dominated the sport 
county and country-wide and had been the winners of 15 All Ireland 
titles since 1998. Membership was, he noted, county-wide and the 
sport had become more and more popular in recent years. It offered a 
great opportunity for children, he added, to get involved and for those 
who could not play more physical sports. He asked that an invitation be 
extended also to the various community darts organisations.  
 
 
Cllr Blaney supporting the motion referenced the county-wide 
membership and said that it was fitting that the Donegal Darts team 
were honoured with a civic reception. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 

35 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems said that in line with previous protocol the matter would be 
referred to the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
C/105/26 
TENDERING AND COMMENCEMENT OF WORKS ON COMMUNITY 
HOSPITALS WHICH HAVE RECEIVED FUNDING UNDER THE 
CAPITAL PLAN 
On The proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr McGowan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“This Council calls on the HSE to immediately tender for and begin 
work on all community hospitals in the county which have been granted 
funding under the Capital Plan and that we will write to the Area 
Manager and Minister for Health insisting on the same.” 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems on relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Bradley said that this was a serious issue and that communication 
from the HSE on the matter had been disappointing. He referenced the 
ongoing issues and the delay in carrying out recommended works on 
the Buncrana Community Hospital which, he contended, was a vital 
facility for the people of Inishowen. He noted that the planned 
improvements provided for only 31 beds to comply with HIQUA 
standards when in fact there had been 41 beds previously. Capacity, 
he said, needed to be increased. The issue, he stated, was not about 
funding as there was €1.4m in the Capital Plan to facilitate the works 
and there was no reason that this could not be drawn down and works 
commence immediately. Delays, he added, lay with the HSE and 
HIQUA.  
 
He asked that correspondence issue to the HSE as a matter of urgency 
requesting the commencement of works in Buncrana and at other 
facilities in the county. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan noted that there had been similar issues in the 
Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal District and said that he recognised and 
appreciated the frustration. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems advised that correspondence would issue as requested to the 
Minister for Health and to the HSE as directed. 
 
C/106/26 
REVIEW OF THE DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS SCHEMETO 
BE CARRIED OUT IN CONSULTATION WITH DONEGAL COUNTY 
COUNCIL AND HOMEOWNER REPRESENTATIVES 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr McGee it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion: 

36 
 
“That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to ensure that any review of the Enhanced 
Defective Concrete Blocks Remediation Scheme is carried out in 
consultation with Donegal County Council and homeowner 
representatives. 
 
This Council notes that the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks 
Scheme commenced in June 2023 under the Remediation of Dwellings 
Damaged by the Use of Defective Concrete Blocks Act 2022, and that 
a review of the scheme is expected approximately three years after its 
commencement, in or around June 2026. 
 
Given that Donegal has the largest number of affected homes in the 
State, this Council believes that the experience and expertise of the 
local authority administering the scheme, together with the lived 
experience of affected homeowners, must be formally considered in 
any review of the scheme. 
This Council further calls on the Minister to ensure that the review also 
takes into account the outcome of the National Standards Authority of 
Ireland (NSAI) review of IS 465, once concluded, as any revisions to 
this standard may have significant implications for testing methods, 
eligibility assessments and remediation options for affected dwellings. 
 
A copy of this motion be forwarded to the Minister for Housing, the 
Department of Housing, the Housing Agency, all Donegal Oireachtas 
Members, and the local authorities in counties currently affected by 
defective concrete blocks.” 
 
She received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management and Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Beard said that any review necessitated an input from Donegal 
County Council and from the homeowners concerned given that the 
highest number of houses impacted were in this county. 
 
 
Time, she said, was running out and a solution was need imminently. 
 
The Government, she said, needed to be made aware of the reality of 
the situation in Donegal and to be conscious of the mistakes made in 
the past. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that he was happy to support the motion and cited the 
need for all concerned to sit around the table. It was important, he 
added, that the right people however were permitted to sit around the 
table.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Environment  & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme said that 

37 
 
correspondence would be issued to the Minister and other bodies as 
requested. He noted that a delegation was scheduled to meet with 
Department officials shortly and that the matter could be added to the 
agenda for that meeting.  
 
 
Cllr Beard said it was extremely important that any correspondence 
issued stressed the need for homeowner representation in the review 
process.   
 
C/107/26 
SALE OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC ROADS AND LAY-BYS 
On the proposal of Cllr Crossan, seconded by Cllr A. Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 
“That Donegal County Council initiate immediate action against the 
large scale sale of vehicles on public roads and lay-bys especially 
where it impacts on school and church parking areas.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Crossan said there was an ongoing problem with this issue at 
several locations across the county. Public spaces outside local halls 
and churches, he noted, were being utilised for this purpose with a 
number of cars on site at given locations. He noted that a number of 
these were also from outside the jurisdiction. 
 
 
Acknowledging the response, he said that there had been a noticeable 
improvement in recent weeks and thanked the Roads Directorate for 
their proactive approach in dealing with the situation. 
 
 
Cllr A Doherty highlighted the fact that there were safety issues 
involved when cars were left outside schools etc and welcomed the 
response.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that the 
placement or retention of vehicles for sale on public roads and lay-byes 
was an offence under Section 71 of the Roads Act 1993. This activity, 
he said, occurred on an ongoing basis and the Council had recently 
increased its measures in enforcing compliance. Issues, he advised 
should be reported to the local roads offices.  
 
Cllr Crossan said that there had been a noticeable improvement in 
recent weeks but advised of the need for ongoing vigilance.  
 
C/108/26 
DEVELOPMENT OF PIERS AND HARBOURS 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Farren, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion: 
 

38 
 
“That this Council look at the feasibility of developing piers and 
harbours where practical, with the aim of providing marine facilities for 
leisure users and facilitating where possible access to adjacent 
beaches for the able bodied and wheelchair users.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Farren said that his motion whilst general had implications locally in 
the Inishowen area. He alluded to the need for additional facilities to be 
put in place at Portmór Pier, Malin Head which was being hindered by 
the ongoing build-up of silt and sand. 
 
 
This, he noted, had been a main fishing port for years and offered 
enormous potential in terms of fishing and tourism activities.  
 
 
A  proper plan and design methodology was needed, he added, in line 
with a number of piers and harbours across the county.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott, supporting the motion said that the development of 
piers such as Portmór was important for our coastal communities and 
piers and harbours around our coasts. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
He cited the example of Bunagee Pier which was being portrayed as a 
safe haven for ships in bad weather yet the build-up of sand and silt at 
that location made it impossible for this to take place. He called on the 
Marine Section to review piers and harbours on a regular basis as 
current facilities are not up to standard. He queried as to who would 
actually be responsible if a ship could not avail of shelter due to the 
build-up of sand and silt.  
 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads  & Transportation said that the 
Council continued to investigate and pursue opportunities with the 
relevant stakeholders for the development of its piers and harbours and 
related infrastructure. There would also be, he advised, continued 
engagement with the Environment Section in relation to beach access.  
 
 
He said that there had been discussion at the recent Roads & 
Transportation SPC in relation to Harbour Byelaws and that changes 
need to be made to these to reflect the change in use at a number of 
locations.  
 
 
Issues at specific locations could, he advised be discussed with the 
members concerned in more detail. 
 
 Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that there was much work to be done and 
 that sufficient resources needed to be put in place. He said that there 
was a need for a specific meeting to discuss same. 

39 
 
Cllr Farren welcomed the reply and advised of the need to get the ball 
rolling in terms of the feasibility aspect of the piers concerned.   
 
C/109/26 
 CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS 
 
 Votes of Sympathy 
 
 Members extended a vote of sympathy to Peter Lafferty, Machinery  
Yard on the death of his mother, Mary Lafferty. 
 
  
 
 Date for Special Plenary Meeting in respect of Proposed Variation No 1 
to the County Development Plan 
 
 It was unanimously agreed to hold a Special Meeting to discuss same 
on Monday 27th April, 2026 at 10am in the County House, Lifford. 
 
 
 
 ICBAN 
 
 It was noted that correspondence had been received from Cllr Mac 
Mheanman outlining her intention to resign her appointment to ICBAN. 
It was unanimously agreed that Cllr Brian Carr would fill the casual 
vacancy arising from her resignation.  
 
 
 Civic Reception 
 
 Cllr Canning proposed that a Civic Reception be held to honour the 
achievements of Olympian Caitriona Jennings whose achievements in 
the field of ultra running deserved special recognition. This was 
unanimously agreed. 
 
 
 Launch of Big Donegal Clean-up 
 
 The Cathaoirleach informed members that they were all invited to the 
launch of the Big Donegal Clean Up at the Quay Shore, 
Newtowncunningham on the 2nd April 2026.  
 
C/110/26    CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT     
 
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and noted the following items: 
 
 
 
1.Planning, Communities & Culture 
 
1.1 
Regeneration & Development Team 
 
1.2 
Community Development  
1.3 
Refugee Response Unit 
 
1.4 
Cultural Services 
 
 
2.Environment & Climate, Property Mgt. & DCBS 
 
2.1 
Environment  
2.2 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
 
3. Housing, MD Services & Capital Projects 
 
3.1 
Housing, MD Services and Capital Projects 
 
3.2 
Housing Capital 
 
 
4. Human Resources, Economic Development & Emergency Services 
4.1 
Economic Development Division  

40 
 
4.2 
Local Enterprise Office 
 
4.3 
Emergency Services 
 
 
5. Roads & Transportation  
5.1 
Roads Areas  
5.2 
Central Technical Services  
5.3 
National Roads Office 
 
Appendix 1 – TII Allocations 2026  
 
 
 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig expressed concern at the lack of engagement  
and clarity in relation to the implementation of the Irish Language 
element of the County Development Plan specifically in respect of 
social housing allocations.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved that roads related issues be discussed as part of the Special 
Meeting process going forward and that this include an update on the 
Minor Infrastructure Fund. It was suggested that the Roads Overseers 
be invited to attend these meetings. 
 
It was noted that same could be further discussed by the Corporate 
Policy Group. 
 
Cllr A Doherty noted that there was a very real possibility that the 
Clonmany Festival would not take place this year and thus highlighted 
the need for Donegal County Council to assist where possible with the 
2026 event. 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh thanked the team in Rannóg na Gaeilge for their 
excellent work in promoting Seachtain na Gaeilge and complimented 
them on the implementation of a very successful programme of events.  
 
 
  The following questions were submitted. 
 
C/111/26 
 ANTI-FASCIST/RACIST TRAINING FOR COUNCIL STAFF 
 
 Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig submitted the following question:- 
 
Ceist a chur ar Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall cad iad na bearta 
atá i bhfeidhm faoi láthair, nó atá beartaithe, chun oiliúint frith-
fhaisisteach/chiníoch a chur ar fáil do bhaill foirne na Comhairle agus 
do chomhairleoirí tofa, agus a fhiafraí ina dhiaidh sin cén oiliúint, treoir, 
nó tacaíochtaí atá á gcur i bhfeidhm chun a chur ar chumas baill foirne 
agus comhairleoirí scéalta antoisceacha ar an eite dheis a aithint, 
dúshlán a thabhairt dóibh agus deileáil go héifeachtach leo, lena n-
áirítear faisnéis neamhchruinn agus dioscúrsa atá bunaithe ar fhuath, 
laistigh dá róil ghairmiúla agus ionadaíochta? 
To ask Donegal County Council what measures are currently in place, 
or are planned, to provide anti-fascist/racist training for Council staff 
and elected councillors, and to further ask what training, guidance, or 
supports are being implemented to equip staff and councillors to 

41 
 
recognise, challenge, and respond effectively to far-right and extremist 
narratives, including misinformation and hate-based discourse, within 
their professional and representative roles 
 
He received as response from the Director of Human Resources, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services in relation to the 
above 
 
C/112/26 
 ACCESS TO OFFSHORE ISLANDS 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig submitted the following question:- 
 
Ceist a chur ar an Chomhairle cad iad na céimeanna atá glactha chun 
rochtain ar ár n-oileáin amach ón chósta a fheabhsú agus go háirithe, 
an fhéidearthacht go bhforbrófaí tuirlingt úr farantóireacht in Árainn 
Mhóir agus in Ailt an Chorráin chomh maith. 
Rinne mé iarratas i scríbhinn anuraidh go dtiocfadh na páirtí leasmhara 
ar fad le chéile chun na deiseanna a chíoradh agus níl a fhios agam 
cén fáth nach bhfuarthas freagair agus cén fáth nár eagraíodh a 
leithéid? 
 
To ask the Council what steps have been taken to improve access to 
our offshore Islands and in particular the possibility of developing a 
new ferry landing at both Arainn Mhóir agus Ailt a Chorráin. Last year I 
had written a request for all stakeholders to sit down to explore these 
opportunities and I'm wondering why there has not been a response 
and this request organised. 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above 
 
C/113/26 
 MACHINERY YARD TENDERS 
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Prior to the implementation of the new Machinery Yard procurement 
policies and procedures, have there been instances where successful 
tenders for road plant use have not been used by Donegal County 
Council in the last five years? Have lower ranked vendors been used 
ahead of winning vendors in any cases? If so, why? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above. 
 
C/114/26 
 EV CHARGERS IN COUNCIL HOUSING ESTATES 
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
Does this Council currently have a policy regarding installation of 
electric vehicle chargers in Council-owned housing estates? Does this 
Council currently allow tenants to install EV charging points at their 
rented properties? If not, will the Council work towards a policy to 
facilitate tenants moving to electric vehicles? 

42 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above 
 
C/115/26 
 MATCH FUNDING FOR CAPITAL PROJECTS 
 
         Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:- 
 
To ask the Director of Finance how much match funding is currently 
required to deliver all capital projects planned for in the county and how 
much of that funding can the Council provide in 2026 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems in relation to the above. 
 
 
C/116/26 
 HOUSING INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT FUND 
 
 Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
To ask the Director for Corporate Affairs what consultation is planned 
with Elected Members in anticipation of a second call for funding under 
the Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund and how projects will be 
prioritised in any future calls for funding to this fund under the auspices 
of the Housing Activation Office. 
 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above. 
 
C/117/26 
 ENERGY EFFICIENT RETROFITTING PROGRAMME 2026 
 
         Cllr A. Doherty submitted the following question:- 
 
Has DCC received confirmation of grant allocation for 2026 works, 
what number of houses are planned for in the works programme, and 
will the council confirm return and completion of works in previously 
commenced housing estates? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above. 
 
C/118/26 
 HOUSING GRANTS FOR OLDER PEOPLE 
 
         Cllr T. Crossan submitted the following question:- 
 
Can D.C.C clarify if those applying for the ‘Older Person’s Grant ‘, 
especially in relation to new windows are precluded unless they 
currently have single glazed, wooden framed windows? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above. 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
C/119/26 
 VACANT ABOVE THE SHOP GRANT 
 
         Cllr A. Doherty submitted the following question:- 
 
Will the “Vacant above the Shop” grant, the extended grant for 
conversion of entire commercial build into residential homes 
commence as previously envisaged at end of Q1 2026, what 
correspondence is awaited or is latest and has been received by DCC 
from government department(s)? 
 
He received a response from the A/Director of Planning, Communities 
and Culture in relation to the above 
 
C/120/26 
 FUNDING FOR EV CHARGING UNITS 
 
         Cllr A. Farren submitted the following question:- 
 
Has the Council got any funding to install extra EV charging units 
throughout the county, or have they looked for funding to install more 
much needed charging points in the County? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads and Transportation 
in relation to the above. 
 
C/121/26 
 MOTIONS SUBMITTED BY CLLR BEARD AND PASSED BY DCC 
 
         Cllr Beard submitted the following question:- 
 
What is the current status of all motions submitted by me that have 
been passed by Donegal County Council and subsequently referred to 
the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage and/or the 
Department of Housing; what correspondence, if any, has been 
received from the Minister or the Department in relation to those 
motions; and, where no response has been received, what follow-up 
has been undertaken by the Council to seek a reply? 
 
She received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management and Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above. 
 
C/122/26 
 MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
Members noted the following motions from other Councils 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Clare County Council calls on the Irish Government, and in 
particular the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, to 
urgently respond to the recent appeal from the Irish Beekeepers 
Association and associated national beekeeping organisation for:  
 
The establishment of a properly resourced, dedicated and coordinated 
all-Ireland bee inspection service, to protect managed honeybees and 
wild pollinators from disease outbreaks, parasites and invasive threats;  

44 
 
The immediate reinstatement and expansion of professional bee 
inspection capacity in the Republic of Ireland, working in cooperation 
with counterparts in Northern Ireland, to ensure early detection, rapid 
response and effective biosecurity controls;  
Enhanced national measures to combat invasive species and emerging 
parasites, including the Asian hornet and the Tropilaelaps (Tropi) mite;  
Proactive surveillance, preparedness and contingency planning for the 
potential arrival of the Tropilaelaps mite in Ireland; 
Full and continued Government support for the All-Ireland Pollinator 
Plan;  
Recognition that bees and other pollinators are essential to Irish 
agriculture, food security, biodiversity and the wider environment.  
 
This motion is to be circulated to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and 
the Marine, the Minister of State with responsibility for biodiversity, all 
Oireachtas members representing County Clare, and local authorities 
in Ireland and Northern Ireland.” 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
"As elected members of this Council, we are deeply conscious of the 
financial pressure facing many people in our communities. For disabled 
people, that pressure is significantly greater. 
 
Disabled people incur additional and unavoidable costs every single 
day. These include higher heating and electricity usage, transport 
costs, the running of essential equipment, personal assistance, and the 
practical realities of living in environments that are not fully accessible. 
These costs rise further during winter months. 
 
These are not discretionary expenses. They are structural costs linked 
directly to impairment and to systemic barriers. 
 
Across our county, disabled people are making impossible choices: 
between heating and participation, between mobility and food, between 
independence and debt. This is not acceptable in a society that claims 
to value equality and inclusion. 
While local authorities do not determine national social protection 
policy, we are the closest tier of government to our communities. We 
see the impact of poverty in housing applications, in requests for 
support, and in the growing strain on families. 
 
We are therefore calling on this Council to formally request that 
Government introduce an immediate emergency cost of disability 
payment. This payment should recognise the additional costs borne by 
disabled people and be delivered in a way that does not exclude those 
who are in employment. 
Disabled people should not be penalised for working. Nor should they 
be pushed into poverty because of unavoidable additional costs. 
 

45 
 
A national gathering is planned for 1pm on 28 February at the Garden 
of Remembrance to highlight this issue. Many would prefer not to have 
to gather in protest, but to see leadership and action instead. 
As councilors, we have a responsibility to stand with our constituents 
and to send a clear message to Government that this matter requires 
urgent attention. 
 
We respectfully ask our fellow elected members to support this call. 
 
If successful, please forward this motion to all County Councils as 
correspondence." 
  
GALWAY CITY COUNCIL  
That in light of the increase in road traffic fatalities and incidents in 
2025, representing a failure of national road safety leadership, that this 
Council will write to the Minister for Transport calling for the following:  
That funding will be issued to Galway City Council to pilot the 
installation of red-light cameras at key junctions on publication of the 
National Safety Camera Strategy later this year, and that any fines 
collected would be retained by Galway City Council to help offset costs 
of other road safety improvements.  
That this Council calls for a re-valuation of the role of the RSA and that 
the recommendations of the Indecon Report 2024 should be 
implemented immediately.  
 
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL  
That this Council call upon Government to enact legislation to 
systematically, sustainably and steadily increase the provision of Irish-
medium education so that future generations of Irish children will have 
the opportunity to be educated through their national language, if they 
so desire.  
Further, that this Council-  
Requests that this motion be circulated to the Minister for Education, 
the Taoiseach, the Minister for the Gaeltacht, all Oireachtas members 
in the constituency, and the other local authorities for their information.  
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the Minister for Justice, Jim 
O’Callaghan TD, to fully implement the revised EU Anti-Trafficking 
Directive and to establish a special National Garda Unit to deal with 
human trafficking that would collaborate with labour inspectors who 
operate under Workplace Relations (WRC) and other agencies. Such 
action would deal with human trafficking for sexual exploitation and 
labour trafficking for the hospitality, construction and agricultural 
industries in Ireland.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the TII to set up a separate 
funding stream to support County Councils to carry out maintenance 
and repairs on greenways, separate from the Roads funding allocated 

46 
 
to each County Council. The issue of maintenance on greenways is an 
issue all over the country as greenway demonstration stretches are 
developed and brought into use.” 
 
LONGFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
I call upon Longford County Council to write to the Minister for 
Children, Disability & Equality, Norma Foley TD and Minister of State 
Emer Higgins TD to strongly advocate for an emergency payment to be 
made to disabled people to alleviate the shortfall from cuts to disability 
funding in Budget 2026, as a mechanism to bridge the gap until an 
annual Cost of Disability payment (which the government has 
committed to implement) in 2027 is put in place to address the extra 
expenses faced by disabled people.  
 
OFFALY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“This Council calls on Government to instruct party MEPs oppose 
adoption of the Mercosur Trade agreement when the agreement is 
presented at European Parliament.”  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“This Council call on the Government to, 
 
• Recognise the serious harm suffered by women and children in 
Mother and Baby Homes, County Homes and related institutions.  
• Notes that over 1,090 babies and children died at Sean Ross 
Abbey, and that many burial locations remain unknown.  
• Notes that this issue is also relevant locally, including Sligo County 
Home/St. John’s Hospital and boarded-out child records.  
• Expresses concern at the continued sealing of State records 
relating to Mother and Baby Homes and the Ryan Report, denying 
survivors and families access to the truth.  
• Investigate and excavate burial sites where children are believed to 
be buried.  
• Unseal institutional records and provide survivors and families 
access to their own information.  
• Extend redress to all survivors, without exclusion.  
 
TIPPERARY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Tipperary County Council write to the Minister for Transport 
requesting the introduction of legislation to ensure the compulsory 
wearing of hi visibility jackets by all E-Scooter and E-Bike users, in 
addition to the lights they are already compelled to have on same said 
vehicles.” 
 
WESTMEATH COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Westmeath County Council write to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government & Heritage of Ireland and call on the Minister to 
increase the respect income thresholds for Social Housing Provision 
and Housing Assistance Payment. It was requested that the motion 
would be circulated to all other Local Authorities.  

47 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council calls on the Government to task Irish Public Bodies 
(IPS) with the provision of insurance cover for residential and 
commercial properties that are unable to obtain insurance from 
commercial insurers due to previous flooding events or because they 
are located within designated flood risk zones.  
This Council acknowledges that the risk profile of such properties 
makes it uneconomic for the private insurance market to provide cover 
on a commercial basis. In that context, the Council further calls on the 
Minister for Finance to introduce a modest, ring-fenced insurance levy 
to establish and support a national flood insurance claims fund, which 
would underpin the provision of such cover and ensure long term 
sustainability.  
This Council believes that access to insurance is essential for the 
protection of homeowners, businesses, community viability, and local 
economic resilience, and that a state supported mechanism is required 
to address this market failure.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council calls on the Government to fast-track and publish the 
Legislation outlawing the use of anonymous social media accounts, 
profiles and user/chat groups on all social media platforms.  
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
  
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
