 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
20 Eanáir 2026 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 26 Eanáir 2026 ag 11.00 r.n in 
Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an 
chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pól Mac Giolla  
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
********************************************************************************************************
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House 
Lifford 
 
20th January 2026 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 26th January 2026 at 11.00am in the 
County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join the meeting will 
issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
____________________ 
Paul Mc Gill 
Meetings Administrator  

 
 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Annual Budget Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 21st November 2025. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the November Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 24th November 2025. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 28th November 2025. 
d) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Adjourned Budget Meeting of 
Donegal County Council held on the 3rd December 2025. 
e) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Adjourned Budget Meeting of 
Donegal County Council held on the 4th December 2025. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
 
 
Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the renewal of the lease of office 
accommodation in Carndonagh Public Service Centre to TEAGASC. 
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 
a) To approve the carrying out of works in relation to the proposed 
redevelopment of lands at Mount Marian, Milford to provide for a town 
park and community hub building. 
b) To approve the construction of 4 no. social housing units consisting of 
3no. 3-bed houses and 1no. 2-bed house, on street parking, connection 
to existing services and all associated site development works at 
Rathaneeny Park, Raneany West, Laghy, Co Donegal.  
 
4. Corporate    
a) Filling of remaining vacancy in the membership of Bundoran 
Waterworld. 
b) To consider and approve the adoption of the Donegal County Council 
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026, in accordance with Section 134 (a) 
of the Local Government Act, 2001. 
 
5. Planning 
a) To agree date for the holding of a Plenary Planning Workshop in 
respect of the Draft Development Contribution Scheme. 

 
 
b) To agree date for the holding of a Plenary Planning Workshop to 
discuss the Chief Executive’s Report following the public consultation 
process on the Proposed Variation No. 1 to the County Development Plan 
2024-2030.  
 
6. Finance   
To agree date for the holding of a plenary Council Workshop to discuss 
Council’s Capital Programme. 
 
7. Roads & Transportation 
To approve the Donegal County Council Policy on Public Lighting. 
 
8. Endorsement of Minutes 
To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the, 
7th November 2025. 
 
9. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025 (as amended). 
 
Training 
➢ AILG Training Programme for Quarter 1 2026. 
➢ LAMA Spring Seminar to be held on the 28th & 29th January 2026 in 
the Connacht Hotel, Old Dublin Road, Galway. 
➢ Association of Irish Regions (AIR) Training Seminar to be held on the 
25th & 26th February 2026 in the Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana.  
 
Other 
➢ Attendance of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig and Cllr Scanlon at the Irish 
Language Sub-Committee meeting of Galway City Council in Galway 
on the 30th January 2026. 
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the LAMA 2026 All Ireland 
Community & Council Awards in the Convention Centre Dublin on the 
28th February, 2026. 
➢ Irish Building Control Institute Annual Conference to be held on the 4th 
& 5th March, 2026 in the Galway Bay Hotel, Salthill, Galway. 
➢ Gaelchultúr -Irish Language Course for Elected Members.  
 
 
Abroad 
➢ Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CPMR Political Bureau 
Meeting in Nicosia, Cyprus on the 19th and 20th February, 2025. 
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or Leas/Cathaoirleach at the 
Donegal Diaspora Initiative in, Delaware County, Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, USA from the 20th to the 22nd March 2026.  

 
 
 
 
10. Conference Reports 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the Northwest City Region 
Investment Event in the Irish Embassy in London on the 4th 
December, 2023. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the Dúiche Programme in 
Leuven, Belgium from the 13th to the 18th October 2024. 
• 
Participation of Cllr Niamh Kennedy on the US Trade Mission in 
conjunction with Derry City & Strabane District Council and 
attendance at the Golden Bridges Conference in the USA from the 
11th to the 15th November 2024. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the Donegal Association of 
Philadelphia 135th Anniversary celebrations in Philadelphia on the 7th 
December 2024.  
• 
Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the Local Green Deals – 
Intelligent Cities Conference and Mayor’s Business Forum in Brussels 
on the 5th and 6th March 2025. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the St Patrick’s Day Events in 
the USA from the 14th to the 19th March 2025. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the EU Final Belong Conference 
in Strasbourg on the 25th and 26th March 2025. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at events in Worcester State 
University from the 22nd April 2025 to the 25th April 2025 and the 
acceptance of an Honorary Doctorate from Worcester State 
University. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the 2025 Plymouth County/ 
Donegal Sister County Transatlantic Alliance Conference in the City of 
Brockton, MA from the 21st to the 23rd May 2025.  
• 
Attendance of Cllr Donal Coyle at the Irish Building Control Institute 
Conference in Cork on the 13th March 2025. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr John S. O’ Fearraigh at the 53rd CPMR General 
Assembly Meeting in Barcelona, Spain on the 20th and 21st 
November, 2025. 
• 
Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall i láthair ag Oireachtas na Samhna 
2025. 
Donegal County Council represented at Oireachtas na Samhna   
2025. 
 
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks   
11. Cllr Joy Beard  
“That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to explicitly include apartments and duplexes 

 
 
affected by defective concrete  within the forthcoming Safety Defects in 
Apartments and Duplexes Remediation Bill, with full statutory entitlement 
to remediation. 
 
That this Council further calls for this inclusion to be clearly set out in the 
legislation and not left to regulation so that apartment owners are provided 
with legal certainty and are not left in prolonged limbo. 
 
Donegal County Council notes that while Government approval was 
granted in September 2024 to prioritise the drafting of this Bill, apartments 
affected by defective concrete blocks remain excluded from all existing 
remediation schemes, leaving residents in unsafe, unhealthy and 
unsellable homes through no fault of their own. 
 
Council therefore requests that the Minister provide a written confirmation 
to the Council that apartments affected by defective concrete blocks will 
be fully included within the scope of the Safety Defects in Apartments and 
Duplexes Remediation Bill prior to its publication, and that Donegal 
County Council write formally to the Minister seeking this confirmation as 
a matter of urgency.” 
 
Water & Environment  
12. Cllr Jack Murray  
“That this council notes recent prolonged water outages and boil water 
notices in Co. Donegal, reaffirms its demand for an adequate, modern, 
reliable water supply for the people for this county and calls upon Irish 
Water to scale up investment in our infrastructure, development and 
implementation of backup plans for outages; and requests an explanation 
for the most significant disruptions in the last two months.” 
 
Finance   
13. Cllr Fionán Bradley  
“That this Council hold a Plenary Workshop to discuss Capital Projects 
which are ongoing, are due to be delivered upon in the next 3 years and 
which require a match funding element from the Council. A particular 
focus of this meeting would be the Council's ability to raise and provide 
match funding to these projects.” 
 
Roads & Transportation  
14. Cllr Martin Farren  
“That Donegal County Council press forward in 2026 with the strategic 
development of our high-profile Piers and Harbours.” 
 
 Corporate   
15.  Cllr Albert Doherty  
“Donegal County Council urges the Minister for Health and the HSE 
National Capital Estates to confirm and allocate the Capital Funding 
requested and awaited by Donegal Mental Health Services that allows 
DMHS to continue to support the development of Mental Health Services 
in Inishowen and Donegal.” 

 
 
 
  
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
 
Environment 
16. Cllr Brian Carr  
“That, having been informed at a recent Municipal District meeting that 
there are currently two Dog Wardens in the county, with a third to be 
appointed, and noting that the service is outsourced, Donegal County 
Council ensures that, upon the appointment of the third Dog Warden, a 
comprehensive countywide campaign is put in place to tackle dog fouling 
and irresponsible dog owners. This campaign should include a public 
awareness and media campaign, improved signage in communities, 
provision of dog waste bags and dispensers, increased visible Dog 
Warden presence, and a strengthened enforcement approach, including 
prosecutions for dog fouling, dogs running loose, and failure to remove 
and properly dispose of dog waste. 
Also, that arrangements be put in place to ensure each elected member 
receives a commitment of regular Dog Warden patrols within their 
municipal district, and that councillors be provided with a direct contact 
point to request additional or more frequent Dog Warden visits where 
ongoing issues arise.” 
 
Housing 
17. Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh  
“That the Council review the current parking policy regarding parking for 
our tenants on Council Estates, what the policy is for public parking on 
our estates as it is causing an issue on some estates with residents, 
calling on the Council to designate parking spaces to tenants.” 
 
Information Systems 
18. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig  
“Go bhfaighidh Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall réidh le gach cuntas 
oifigiúil dá cuid ar X (Twitter roimhe seo) agus go gcuirfidh sí stad iomlán 
le haon úsáid oifigiúil ar an ardán céanna as seo amach,  
agus go n-eiseoidh sí ráiteas poiblí chun é seo a chur in iúl.  
De réir mar a thuairiscítear, is cosúil gur ardán é X a bhfuil mí-úsáid 
ghnéis agus dúshaothrú leanaí agus daoine fásta ag tarlú air agus nach 
bhfuiltear ag dul i ngleic leis seo ar ar bhonn sásúil. 
Mar eagraíocht phoiblí agus dualgas cúraim uirthi, níor chóir don 
Chomhairle a bheith ag feidhmiú ar ardán, nó meas ar bith a thabhairt 
d’ardán nach bhfuil in ann úsáideoirí a chosaint óna leithéid de dhochar. 
Ba cheart don Chomhairle bealaí cumarsáide eile a úsáid a oireann níos 
fearr dá freagrachtaí cosanta agus dá luachanna poiblí.” 
 
“That Donegal County Council immediately deletes all of its official 
accounts on X (formerly Twitter) and ceases any future official use of the 
platform and issue a public statement to outline same. 
X has become a platform where the sexual abuse and exploitation of 
children and adults is widely reported and insufficiently addressed. As a 
public body with a duty of care, the Council should not maintain a 

 
 
presence on, or lend credibility to, a platform that fails to adequately 
protect users from such harm.” 
The Council should instead use other communication channels that 
better align with its safeguarding responsibilities and public values.” 
 
Planning 
19. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty  
“That this Council discuss the Policy in the County Development Plan in 
relation to the Irish Language (Policy GAE-P-2). My understanding is 
that the policy states that 85% of houses must be for fluent Irish 
speakers and that this is providing that the head of the household is 
fluent in Irish. I respect and support the Irish Language and acknowledge 
that there is provision in the County Development Plan for this, but there 
needs to be a common sense approach taken, particularly in some areas 
where there is not enough households who are fluent in Irish, and the 
85% will not be achievable. People who are not fluent cannot be allowed 
to fall between the cracks due to this policy. Some people can speak 
Irish but may not be fully fluent. Others have no Irish. We need to 
discuss this 85% rule to ensure that while we respect and promote the 
Irish language that we take a practical and common sense approach.” 
 
 
   
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
Defective Concrete Blocks  
20. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
“I’d like this Council to support my motion that the Defective Block 
Committee be live streamed during all its meetings as it’s what defective 
homeowners raise a lot and what they want, as not everyone can make it 
to Lifford to watch the meeting and with 1000s of affected homeowners/ 
business owners/clubs’ community/halls etc all affected, it is only right 
that they can see these meetings happening.” 
 
Community  
21. Cllr Declan Meehan  
“That Donegal County Council commits to working towards the 
development and implementation of a comprehensive Anti-Poverty 
Strategy for County Donegal, recognising that Donegal continues to 
experience some of the highest levels of disadvantage in the State, 
including among the lowest average incomes and salaries, higher levels 
of deprivation, and persistent social and economic inequalities affecting 
individuals, families and communities across the county.  
 
• The motion further calls on Donegal County Council to: 
work collaboratively with key stakeholders across the county - 
including community and voluntary organisations, state agencies, 
local development companies, educational institutions, and 
relevant government departments - to maximise the effectiveness 
of the Anti-Poverty Strategy 

 
 
• ensure the lived experience of those affected by poverty informs 
the development and implementation of the strategy 
• advocate strongly at regional and national level for the resources 
and policy supports necessary to address poverty in Donegal.” 
 
Housing  
22. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle   
“That this Council reviews its Homeless Policy in particular the use of two 
hostels in Letterkenny and Bundoran.” 
 
23. Cllr Michael Mc Bride 
"That Donegal County Council put a policy in place regarding the 
remediation of the Donegal County Council Housing Stock". 
 
 
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Economic Development 
24. Cllr Niamh Kennedy  
“I am asking that Donegal Council will contact Minister Dooley and other 
relevant ministers in relation to the appointment of the taskforce for the 
fishing industry sector. 
Minister Dooley has suggested a compensation package for the fishing 
industry and processing industry, however the remit needs to extend 
further to the employees of the industry, a package is required to help 
employees to diversify, find alternative employment, to upskill and to 
have a continuation of an employment contribution paid to them. Anyone 
working in this sector who is/was on a payroll cannot avail of community 
employment schemes because of the outdated rules. If we are to support 
our coastal communities, we need to ensure our employees in the sector 
are included in any compensation.” 
 
25.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
26. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
  
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate  
27. Cllr Joy Beard   
Can I get an update on the development of a county-wide flag policy? 
 
Roads & Transportation 
28. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Roads how many prosecutions on 
landowner/occupiers who did not comply with hedge cutting notices have 
taken place over the last year? 

 
 
Environment 
29. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for the Environment how many prosecutions have 
taken place on individuals and businesses found to have littered over the 
last year? 
 
Water 
30. Cllr Jack Murray  
Why is it taking so long to repair water outages and lift boiling notices 
and what means exist to prevent such issues happening in the future 
across Donegal? 
 
Planning  
31. Cllr Albert Doherty   
What Courthouse buildings in Donegal are deemed Protected Structures, 
does Donegal Co Council have ownership and maintenance 
responsibilities currently for said Courthouse buildings? 
 
Property Management  
32. Cllr Albert Doherty   
Is Donegal County Council currently engaged or has the Council been 
invited by an Garda Siochana and or OPW to facilitate, aid and progress 
the sourcing of  suitable sites for the location of Garda Stations in County 
Donegal?  
 
 
  
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
 Housing 
33. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty   
Has the Council any updates or plans in relation to S.I. Houses to open 
up a new scheme like in years gone by where they were quite prominent 
throughout Donegal, as I feel there is a new generation now who are not  
aware that such a scheme existed?  
 
 
 
 Roads & Transportation 
34. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty   
What is the envisaged cost going forward in relation to all the directional 
signs damaged by red paint or other colours over the last number of 
years within our County and are there any plans in place to address the 
unsightly sight which is making our County look bad? 
 
 
  
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Community Development   
35. Cllr Tomás S Devine   
Can I get an update on my recent motion that was passed by Donegal 
County Council enquiring about taking over the site in Creeslough and 

 
 
where we are at about putting in place a Liaison Officer to work with the 
families moving forward? 
 
Housing  
36. Cllr Declan Meehan   
How many HAP tenancies are there across Donegal, and how many HAP 
tenancies are there which involve people aged over 60 years? How many 
HAP tenancies are families with children under the age of 12? Please 
give county-wide figures and figures broken down by MD? 
 
37. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle   
How many people have been housed in the two Homeless Hostels in 
Bundoran and Letterkenny since January 2024 the average time that 
people who presented homeless were accommodated at these hostels 
and is there provision for families at these hostels? 
 
38. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle   
Has there been any updates from Department of Housing in relation to 
the Remediation Social Housing Scheme? 
 
Roads & Transportation 
39. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine   
Can I get an update on what lands and buildings etc, that the Council 
already owns for use in the Ten-T project and is there enough land 
procured, that this project in places could be started and finished while 
we wait for existing lands to be purchased? 
 
40. Motions from other Councils/Bodies   
 
DÚN LAOGHAIRE RATHDOWN COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Dún Laoghaire Rathdown Council demands the Central Bank of 
Ireland must end any future complicity in the sale of Israeli war bonds.  
 
This Council notes that these bonds, have since 1951 raised funds for 
the Israeli Treasury for use across the Israeli economy, including help to 
finance the Israeli military in its prosecution of genocide, war crimes, and 
the expansion of illegal settlements.  
 
We note Dún Laoghaire Rathdown County Councils support for the 
international Boycott, Divestment & Sanctions (BDS) campaign in 
November, 2023.  
 
We further note, the following councils have passed similar motions 
earlier this year: Dublin City, Cork City, Galway City & County, Waterford 
City & County, Wexford County, Wicklow County, Lough County, 
Donegal County & Monaghan County.  
 
We also note that the decision to switch the European prospectus of 
such bonds to Luxemburg was not an active decision made by the ICB. 
Ireland remains the designated ‘home member state’ for the approval of 

 
 
bond sales and played an active role of transferring this process to 
Luxemburg. Israel can also after a period of 12 months or so seek to 
return to the CBI for such approval.  
 
We therefore call on the Chief Executive to write to the Taoiseach, the 
Tánaiste and the Governor of the Central Bank to demand they take 
measures to immediately and unequivocally end any future role in 
facilitating the sale of Israeli bonds”.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Clare County Council calls on the Irish Government to respond 
urgently to the concerns raised by John Collison (co-founder of Stripe) 
and by businessman Denis O’Brien regarding Ireland’s declining 
economic competitiveness, infrastructure shortages, skills mismatches in 
the labour market, and challenges in our tax and regulatory environment.  
 
Specifically, Clare County Council requests that the Government:  
 
1.Prioritise a world-class education and skills strategy that ensures 
graduates are equipped for a rapidly changing global economy and 
increasing technological demands.  
 
2.Accelerate planning and delivery of housing, transport and digital 
infrastructure in line with John Collison’s concerns that Ireland is “going 
backwards” in developing the homes, transport networks and energy 
systems needed to support economic growth.  
 
3.Promote a more agile, innovation-focused tax and regulatory system, 
addressing criticisms raised by Denis O’Brien regarding “digital 
colonialism” and Ireland’s ability to sustain a competitive enterprise 
environment for both multinational and indigenous businesses.  
 
4.Adopt a more ambitious national vision and leadership approach that 
strengthens ministerial accountability and reduces process-driven 
delays, ensuring Ireland remains future-focused and responsive to 
economic challenges”.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Clare County Council calls on the Taoiseach to initiate a full and 
urgent review of local government funding, powers, and democratic 
structures, with a view to aligning Ireland with European norms. In the 
2019 report “Democracy Works If You Let It” by Dr Mary Murphy of 
Maynooth University, it was noted that only 8% of public spending in 
Ireland occurs at Local government level, compared to an EU average of 
23%.  
The review must examine the overall financing model for local 
government, including the significant financial pressures placed on 
councils due to the requirement to fully fund pension obligations and to 
co-fund government schemes, often at levels ranging from 10% to 50%. 
It should also assess the employment status and pension arrangements 

 
 
of local authority staff, with a view to formally recognising all local 
authority employees as public servants and incorporating their pension 
entitlements into the public sector pension scheme.  
Once completed and approved by Government, the review should be 
implemented through a clear and time-bound action plan to restore 
democratic accountability, strengthen local service delivery, and ensure 
parity of esteem for the workforce delivering essential public services”.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“Clare County Council requests the Minister for Health to provide for 
Vaginal Estrogen Gels & Creams be available over the counter without a 
prescription like other countries”.  
 
LAOIS COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Laois County Council calls on the Government to establish a 
Referendum Commission to implement the recommendations of the 
Constitutional Convention, concerning the nomination process for 
Presidential elections, as the current provisions contained in the 1937 
Act are no longer fit for purpose”.  
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Limerick City & County Council write to the Minister for Culture, 
Communications and Sports, Patrick O’Donovan and the Minister for 
Justice, Jim O’Callaghan calling on them and the Irish Government to 
hold a formal national commemoration on 17th April, 2026 to mark the 
150th anniversary of the Catalpa expedition organised by John Devoy 
and John Boyle O’Reilly, which resulted in the famous rescue of six 
Fenian prisoners from a British penal colony in Fremantle, Western 
Australia and asking the Irish Government to recommend that the six 
Fenian prisoners concerned, namely James Wilson, Thomas Hasset, 
Michael Harrington, Thomas Darragh, Martin Hogan and Robert 
Cranston be granted a posthumous presidential pardon”.  
 
LONGFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Longford County Council write to the Minister for Health, Jennifer 
Carroll MacNeill and ask them to reverse the decision of the OAPs 
having to pay for their blister packs of medication from the 1st January, 
2026.  
This will cause yet another form of hardship to our older people and may 
lead to confusion around what medication to take”.  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That Sligo County Council notes with deep concern the Government’s 
decision to ratify CETA and in particular, the Investor Court System (ICS) 
 
This Council believes that ICS gives foreign corporations powers that 
undermine local democracy, threaten environmental and planning 
decisions, and risk exposing the state to costly investor lawsuits. Sligo 
County Council therefore calls on the Government to suspend Ireland’s 
participation in the ICS element of CETA pending a full independent 

 
 
assessment of its impacts on local authorities, public services, and 
environmental protections. 
 
This motion to be circulated to all local authorities, all Sligo-Leitrim TDs 
and Senators, and the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment.  
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“This Council expresses solidarity with Mary Dunlevy Greene, Mary 
Donovan, Maurice Patton O’Connell and Miriam Moriarty Owens, who 
are on hunger strike outside of Dáil Éireann, and the thousands of 
survivors of Ireland’s Industrial and Reformatory Schools. We recognise 
the injustices that many survivors continue to face, and we call on the 
Irish Government to immediately address this issue and to provide for 
the requests of these survivors including access to a full state 
contributory pension and H.A.A. medical cards”.  
 
 
 

 
 
MINUTES OF JANUARY MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
26TH JANUARY, 2026 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/1/26 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F Bradley, 
C Brogan, J Brogan, B Carr, D Coyle, T Crossan, T S Devine, A 
Doherty, G Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, D. M 
Kelly, N Kennedy, M Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Clafferty, M 
McDermott, P McGarvey, D McGee, P McGowan,  M McMahon, G 
McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, J Murray, M Naughton, D Nic 
Mheanman, JS O’ Fearraigh, M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs J Kavanagh, F McBrearty Jnr, M McBride.  
 
C/2/26 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of 
Housing, MD Services & Capital Projects, Eamon Brown, A/Planning, 
Communities & Culture, Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & 
Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services & Information Systems,  Michael McGarvey, Director of 
Environment & Climate, Property Management & Defective Concrete 
Block Grant Scheme, Garry Martin, Director of Human Resources, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services, Paul McGill, 
Meetings Administrator, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, 
William Colvin, Assistant Communications Officer, Róise Ní 
Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní Ghallachóir, Tacaíocht do 
Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer.     
 
C/3/26 
 CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ANNUAL BUDGET 
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 21ST 
NOVEMBER, 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig 
the Minutes of the Annual Budget Meeting of Donegal County Council 
held on the 21st November, 2025 were adopted.     
 
C/4/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE NOVEMBER MEETING 
OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 24TH 
NOVEMBER, 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr McGarvey the Minutes 
of the November Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 24th 
November, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/5/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MINUTES OF THE 
SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
THE 28TH NOVEMBER, 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr Kelly the Minutes 
of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 28th 
November, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/6/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ADJOURNED BUDGET 
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 3RD 
DECEMBER, 2025  

 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the Minutes 
of the Adjourned Budget Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 
the 3rd December, 2025 were adopted. Cllr Bradley said that he had 
tried and been unable to join the meeting online.  
 
C/7/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ADJOURNED BUDGET 
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 4TH 
DECEMBER, 2025  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the Minutes 
of the Adjourned Budget Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 
the 4th December, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/8/26 
RENEWAL OF THE LEASE OF OFFICE ACCOMMODATION IN 
CARNDONAGH PSC TO TEAGASC  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.    
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr T Crossan, it was 
resolved to approve the renewal of the lease of office accommodation 
in Carndonagh PSC to Teagasc in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) 
and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as 
amended).   
 
C/9/26 
TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS IN RELATION TO 
THE PROPOSED REDEVELOPMENT OF LAND AT MOUNT 
MARIAN, MILFORD TO PROVIDE FOR A TOWN PARK AND 
COMMUNITY HUB BUILDING 
 
Members considered the reports circulated with the agenda in relation 
to the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Meehan the carrying 
out of works in relation to the proposed Redevelopment of land at 
Mount Marian, Milford to provide for a town park and community hub 
building was approved, in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & 
Development Regulations 2001(as amended). 
 
Members asked that a condition of the planning permission for the 
housing development of 47 houses adjacent to Mt Marian be the 
widening of the access road through the Lr Mount Marian Estate and 
the inclusion of additional parking on the access road through the 
estate.  
 
C/10/26 
TO APPROVE THE CONSTRUCTION OF 4 NO. SOCIAL HOUSING 
UNITS AT RATHANEENY PARK, RANEANY WEST, LAGHEY    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr Boyle the carrying 

 
 
out of works in relation with regard to the construction of 4 No Social 
Housing units at Rathaneeny Park, Raneany West, Laghy, was 
approved, in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development 
Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development 
Regulations 2001(as amended). 
 
C/11/26 
 FILLING OF VACANCY – BUNDORAN WATERWORLD 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Mahon, seconded by Cllr Boyle it was 
resolved that Mr Owen Murphy fill the remaining vacancy on Bundoran 
Waterworld. 
 
C/12/26 
ADOPTION OF THE ANNUAL SERVICE DELIVERY PLAN 2026 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. A lengthy debate ensued, with members highlighting a 
number of issues which they advised needed further consideration. 
 
The Chief Executive informed members that this plan was predicated 
on the budget adopted in late 2025 and referred to overall service 
provision. It was not, he said, the works programme. 
He said that the MD Management Teams needed to pick up what work 
they had to do for the year and plan accordingly. This, he added, 
depended on state grants and plans were then put in place accordingly.  
Issues arising in terms of smaller roads projects etc, he said, could be 
incorporated early in the year when the roads work programmes were 
being agreed. Items could be discussed at this stage, he said, and 
meetings held locally to see what should be prioritised. The importance 
of top slicing monies for such projects early in the year was 
acknowledged. It was noted that there were difficulties in terms of 
recruiting and retaining staff. He cited the importance of including these 
projects in the annual work plans so that monies were spent in 
accordance with the overall framework structure.  
 
Members were informed that the Office of Public Works took the lead in 
dealing with the effects of erosion and that the Council picked up some 
of the minor works under the minor works grants.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme referenced 
the fact that there had been good engagement with the various 
Directorates. He said that up to 80% of the points raised in terms of the 
previous plan had been directly related to environmental matters, septic 
tanks, associated staffing issues, and defective concrete blocks. Issues 
raised, he said, had been relayed back to staff and to the Department. 
Additional staffing, he stated, had been put in place in the Environment 
Section and the benefits of same were now being seen. He said that he 
hoped that as a result the service plan would become more meaningful 
and reflect the targets that needed to be achieved.  

 
 
Coastal issues, he advised, were very real as the county had 1100 kms 
of coastline encompassing 15% of the entire Irish Coastline. The OPW, 
he noted, were the leading stakeholder in dealing with erosion and thus 
it was difficult for the Council to intervene. He said he would speak to 
Cllrs in relation to specific matters and that the team would see what 
could be done in relation to the bridge at Magherawarden and the 
options available at Carrickfin. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads  & Transportation acknowledged that 
there were issues in getting smaller works done outside the main 
programme. He said, he would discuss different strategies with the 
road’s teams, capacity issues etc and how they could be incorporated 
into the work programme.  
 
Green Connect was not, he confirmed, funded or delivered through the 
Active Travel Programme but rather progressed by the Regeneration 
Team. It was acknowledged that there was ongoing collaboration 
between the Active Travel and Regeneration Teams. 
 
There had been, he confirmed, significant investment in our piers and 
harbours but that there was an element of catch up to be done to 
ensure that everything in place for the next round of funding. 
Consultation, he said, was ongoing with the various funders to ensure 
the delivery of the marine capital programme. He said that he would 
respond directly to Cllr Mc Brearty in relation to the Raphoe Flood 
Relief Scheme.  
 
It was confirmed that there was a solution on the table to address 
issues in relation to the OPW funded Scheme in the Donegal MD. 
 
The Director of Roads & Transportation responding to a query from Cllr 
Mc Brearty said that the Flood Relief Scheme in Raphoe was being led 
by the OPW. He noted that there was a Special Meeting on Flood 
Relief Schemes scheduled for mid-February and that Raphoe could be 
discussed as part of this meeting. Clarity was needed, he added, in 
relation to the works to be carried out by the OPW and as to what was 
actually required. He agreed to speak directly to Cllr Mc Brearty 
regarding the CPO referenced in his commentary.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said he was not happy with the response and wanted 
answers today. 
 
Significant works had been completed and were in progress benefitting 
the various Island communities, he stated. He said that he would 
consult with the piers and harbour team to arrange a meeting with the 
stakeholders/users of these facilities. 
 
He agreed to liaise directly with Cllr Blaney in relation to the Pontoon at 
Meevagh. 
 

 
 
Cllr J Brogan proposed that the Minister with responsibility for the OPW 
should be invited to Donegal to discuss the issues in relation to the 
various flood relief schemes. Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig concurred with 
this proposal.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott it was 
resolved to refer the matter back to the various Municipal District 
Committees for further consideration.  
 
C/13/26 
TO AGREE A PLENARY PLANNING WORKSHOP ON WEDNESDAY 
11TH FEBRUARY, 2026 FOLLOWING THE SPECIAL PLENARY 
MEETING  
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold a Plenary Planning Workshop to 
discuss the Draft Development Contribution Scheme on Wednesday 
11th February, 2026 following the Special Plenary Meeting.  
 
C/14/26 
TO AGREE A PLENARY PLANNING WORKSHOP TO DISCUSS 
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPORT FOLLOWING THE PUBLIC 
CONSULTATION PROCESS  
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold a Plenary Planning Workshop to 
discuss the Chief Executive’s Report following the public consultation 
process on the Proposed Variation No. 1 to the County Development 
Plan 2024-2030 on Friday 27th March at 1p.m. in the Council Chamber, 
Lifford.  
 
C/15/26 
TO AGREE TO HOLD A PLENARY COUNCIL WORKSHOP TO 
DISCUSS THE COUNCIL’S CAPITAL PROGRAMME  
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold a plenary Council Workshop to 
discuss the Council’s Capital Programme following the Special Plenary 
Meeting on the 11th March, 2026.  
 
C/16/26 
TO APPROVE THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL POLICY ON 
PUBLIC LIGHTING 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and said that they were of the opinion that a number of 
issues warranted further discussion. Additional clarity was sought in 
relation to several items. 
 
C/17/26 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING  
 
It was unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting until 1.45pm. 
 
C/18/26 
TO APPROVE THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL POLICY ON 
PUBLIC LIGHTING 
 
On resumption Cllr Jordan said that the matter had been discussed by 
the Roads & Transportation Strategic Policy Committee, but that it was 
clear that a wider discussion was needed. He proposed, seconded by 
Cllr Carr that the matter be referred back to the Municipal Districts and 
that an update be provided in respect of the recent pilot programme 
which had looked at dimming lights in a number of villages.  
 

 
 
 
 Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation advised that there 
had been considerable discussion at SPC level, and a range of views 
expressed. He had, he confirmed, taken note of the comments and 
issues raised by members. . 
 
 
He said that the policy related to route lighting and not to sports 
grounds or community facilities. Regarding the removal of defunct 
lighting, he said that the intention was in each MD to draw up a 
schedule of lights that needed to be taken out of commission. Lighting 
in rural areas for road safety measures was important, he added, but 
the onus was on road users, pedestrians etc to ensure that they were 
clearly visible. He agreed to liaise with the Roads SPC Chair in relation 
to the next steps and to forward same to the Municipal Districts for 
consideration.  
 
 
C/19/26 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE 
POLICY GROUP HELD ON THE 7TH NOVEMBER, 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr McMonagle the 
Minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 7th 
November, 2025 were noted.  
 
C/20/26 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 
-2025 (as amended). 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McDermott, seconded by Cllr McGowan 
attendance at the following was approved.   
 
Training 
➢ AILG Training Programme for Quarter 1 2026. 
➢ LAMA Spring Seminar to be held on the 28th & 29th January 2026 in 
the Connacht Hotel, Old Dublin Road, Galway. 
➢ Association of Irish Regions (AIR) Training Seminar to be held on 
the 25th & 26th February 2026 in the Inishowen Gateway Hotel, 
Buncrana. 
 
Cllr Murray encouraged members to attend the event this event which 
has Jim Mc Guinness as a keynote speaker, and which focused on 
how regions could address national challenges through local and 
regional lens.  
 
Other 

 
 
➢ Attendance of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig and Cllr Scanlon at the Irish 
Language Sub-Committee meeting of Galway City Council in 
Galway on the 30th January 2026. 
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the LAMA 2026 All Ireland 
Community & Council Awards in the Convention Centre Dublin on 
the 28th February, 2026. 
➢ Irish Building Control Institute Annual Conference to be held on the 
4th & 5th March, 2026 in the Galway Bay Hotel, Salthill, Galway. 
     Gaelchultúr -Irish Language Course for Elected Members.  
 
 Abroad 
➢ Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CPMR Political 
Bureau Meeting in Nicosia, Cyprus on the 19th and 20th February, 
2025. 
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or Leas/Cathaoirleach at the 
Donegal Diaspora Initiative in, Delaware County, Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, USA from the 20th to the 22nd March 2026.  
It was unanimously agreed that both members attend the event. 
It was unanimously agreed that a letter of congratulations be 
extended to Ann Colley from Glencolmcille who will be in receipt of 
an award at this event.  
 
C/21/26 
CONFERENCE REPORTS   
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Dermott, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan the 
following conference reports were noted. 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the Northwest City Region 
Investment Event in the Irish Embassy in London on the 4th 
December, 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the Dúiche Programme in 
Leuven, Belgium from the 13th to the 18th October 2024. 
• Participation of Cllr Niamh Kennedy on the US Trade Mission in 
conjunction with Derry City & Strabane District Council and 
attendance at the Golden Bridges Conference in the USA from the 
11th to the 15th November 2024. 
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the Donegal Association of 
Philadelphia 135th Anniversary celebrations in Philadelphia on the 7th 
December 2024.  
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the Local Green Deals – 
Intelligent Cities Conference and Mayor’s Business Forum in Brussels 
on the 5th and 6th March 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the St Patrick’s Day Events in 
the USA from the 14th to the 19th March 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the EU Final Belong Conference 
in Strasbourg on the 25th and 26th March 2025.   
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at events in Worcester State 
University from the 22nd April 2025 to the 25th April 2025 and the 
acceptance of an Honorary Doctorate from Worcester State 
University. 

 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy at the 2025 Plymouth County/ 
Donegal Sister County Transatlantic Alliance Conference in the City of 
Brockton, MA from the 21st to the 23rd May 2025.  
• Attendance of Cllr Donal Coyle at the Irish Building Control Institute 
Conference in Cork on the 13th March 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr John S. O’ Fearraigh at the 53rd CPMR General 
Assembly Meeting in Barcelona, Spain on the 20th and 21st 
November, 2025. 
• Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall i láthair ag Oireachtas na Samhna 
2025. 
Donegal County Council represented at Oireachtas na Samhna 2025. 
 
C/22/26 
APARTMENTS AND DUPLEXES AFFECTED BY DEFECTIVE 
CONCRETE BLOCKS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by A Farren it is resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to explicitly include apartments and duplexes 
affected by defective concrete  within the forthcoming Safety Defects in 
Apartments and Duplexes Remediation Bill, with full statutory 
entitlement to remediation. 
 
That this Council further calls for this inclusion to be clearly set out in 
the legislation and not left to regulation so that apartment owners are 
provided with legal certainty and are not left in prolonged limbo. 
 
Donegal County Council notes that while Government approval was 
granted in September 2024 to prioritise the drafting of this Bill, 
apartments affected by defective concrete blocks remain excluded from 
all existing remediation schemes, leaving residents in unsafe, 
unhealthy and unsellable homes through no fault of their own. 
 
Council therefore requests that the Minister provide a written 
confirmation to the Council that apartments affected by defective 
concrete blocks will be fully included within the scope of the Safety 
Defects in Apartments and Duplexes Remediation Bill prior to its 
publication, and that Donegal County Council write formally to the 
Minister seeking this confirmation as a matter of urgency.”    
 
She received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Beard advised that this entire cohort of homeowners were excluded 
from the Enhanced Defective Concrete Block Scheme and had no clear 
route for seeking remediation. They were, she said, living in unsafe 
homes which were unsafe and had no certainty as to the way forward. 
No property, she said, should be excluded from the scheme. 
 

 
 
The Safety Defects in Apartments and Duplexes Remediation Bill 
offered some chance of a way forward, she added. It was imperative, 
she said, that homeowners were not put into the position where they 
had to beg for additional wording. She noted that words such as 
envisaged and anticipated had been used and that there was presently 
too much room for delay and exclusion. She thus called for apartments 
and duplexes to be included within the scope of the bill with full 
statutory rights to remediation. 
 
Cllr A Farren, said that the motion covered all bases and that many 
people were being left behind at present. The inclusion of apartments & 
duplexes would, he contended, be the first step in remedying these 
anomalies. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme confirmed that 
the motion as adopted would be forwarded to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government & Heritage for his attention and consideration  
 
Cllr Beard thanked members for their support and welcomed the 
response.  
 
C/23/26 
IRISH WATER TO AND INVESTMENT IN WATER AND SEWERAGE 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
On The proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr Carr it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this council notes recent prolonged water outages and boil water 
notices in Co. Donegal, reaffirms its demand for an adequate, modern, 
reliable water supply for the people for this county and calls upon Irish 
Water to scale up investment in our infrastructure, development and 
implementation of backup plans for outages; and requests an 
explanation for the most significant disruptions in the last two months.”   
 
 She received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Murray said that water outages were becoming more and more 
frequent, and businesses were being impacted by these ongoing 
disruptions. Uisce Éireann and Council staff, he said did the best with 
the resources they had, but the reality was that lack of staffing 
resources was causing a major problems in Inishowen and throughout 
Donegal. 
 
He noted that burst mains were an ongoing problem in the Inishowen 
area and that there was grave uncertainty over what should be a 
reliable public service. Reservoirs were dry he added, yet there were 

 
 
problems with roads being flooded. He referred to the fact that a boiling 
notice had been in effect in Buncrana for over three weeks and that 
some customers still had only a dribble of water. There were, he 
advised, clear infrastructural deficits and expressed concern in relation 
to the communication strategy emanating from Uisce Éireann which, he 
contended, was totally inadequate. Public services, he said, worked 
best when the decision-making aspect was on the ground and close to 
the people. The response, was, he added, frustrating but cited the need 
to continue articulating the problems, together with highlighting the lack 
of communication and local infrastructural deficits. 
 
Cllr Carr in support of the motion, said that there were no back-up plans 
in place to deal with outages and alluded to the problems in the 
Glenties area. Communication was a problem, he said, and residents 
were not getting adequate warning in relation to outages. Members, he 
stated, were also kept in the dark and queries raised at the MD clinics 
went by and large unanswered. Housing developments, he advised, 
were being held up because of the lack of adequate infrastructure. He 
said that representatives from Uisce Éireann should be asked to attend 
Municipal District meetings at least twice a year. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme acknowledged 
the representations made by Cllrs Murray & Carr. He said that the 
issues raised were a cause for concern particularly for schools, nursing 
homes, private homes & businesses etc. The reality was, he said, that 
Uisce Éireann and the direction it was moving in had been agreed 
nationally with the delivery model changing in September 2023. 200 
staff had been employed previously in water services by the Local 
Authority, and this had now dwindled to 60. He would, he said pass on 
the detail to Uisce Éireann and circulate any response received to the 
Cllrs concerned. He highlighted the various avenues available for 
members to raise queries directly with Uisce Éireann. 
 
Cllr Murray acknowledged the reply and said that the issues highlighted 
were clearly the responsibility of Uisce Éireann.  
 
C/24/26 
 COUNTY DEVELOPMENT PLAN - POLICY IN RELATION TO THE 
IRISH LANGUAGE (POLICY GAE-P-2).  
It was unanimously agreed to take the following motion at this juncture 
 
Cllr McClafferty proposed, seconded by Cllr Molloy that the following 
motion be adopted:-  
 
 “That this Council discuss the Policy in the County Development Plan 
in relation to the Irish Language (Policy GAE-P-2). My understanding is 
that the policy states that 85% of houses must be for fluent Irish 
speakers and that this is providing that the head of the household is 

 
 
fluent in Irish. I respect and support the Irish Language and 
acknowledge that there is provision in the County Development Plan for 
this, but there needs to be a common sense approach taken, 
particularly in some areas where there is not enough households who 
are fluent in Irish, and the 85% will not be achievable. People who are 
not fluent cannot be allowed to fall between the cracks due to this 
policy. Some people can speak Irish but may not be fully fluent. Others 
have no Irish. We need to discuss this 85% rule to ensure that while we 
respect and promote the Irish language that we take a practical and 
common sense approach.”  
 
 He received a response from the Director of Planning, Communities & 
Culture in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that clarification was needed in a number of areas 
including the standard and level of Irish required and whether a 
particular certificate was required. He asked if other counties had 
adopted a similar policy and queried the number on the housing list in 
the Glenties Municipal District and what would be utilised to determine 
the level of Irish that they held. He asked what would happen where the 
parents had no Irish and the children had a competent level. Another 
aspect that required consideration, he added, was to the treatment of 
people coming in from other areas.  
 
Cllr Molloy supporting the motion asked what would happen in areas 
such as Glencolmcille where Irish was not as widely utilised. He 
queried the status of those on the housing waiting list for a long period 
of time and the position in relation to applicants from other counties. 
 
This matter, he contended, needed further discussion either in a 
Special Meeting or at workshop level.  
 
Cllr Meehan said that the language in Donegal was under threat and 
that policies needed to be put in place to support the language. He said 
that he represented Gaeltacht communities and was aware of the 
importance of the need for a dedicated policy when the language was 
in decline. The policy as it stood, was, he said, of critical importance  
When the use of Irish as a community language was disappearing in 
our Gaeltacht communities. More needs to be done at national level, he 
added, to make Irish a working language given that 90% of spoken 
languages were at risk of disappearing by 2100. A radical solution was 
needed, he advised, and Donegal County Council was operating in a 
vacuum in the absence of a national Gaeltacht Housing policy. This fact 
alone, he stated, warranted the inclusion of the 85% policy as once the 
proportion of Irish spoken falls below 67% the language and the status 
of that community enters terminal decline. All of this, he confirmed, was 
evidence based linguistic research and proved why a strong policy 
such as this was necessary in Donegal.  
 

 
 
He said the policy needed to be retained as the number of Irish 
speakers in Gaeltacht communities across Donegal was shrinking and 
if Irish was not spoken then it could no longer be a Gaeltacht 
community in the long-term. There was an obligation, he confirmed to 
protect these communities and referred also to the fact that 42% of 
houses in Gaeltacht areas were now holiday homes thus outlining the 
need for a radical solution. There were, he noted policies to protect 
Special Areas of Conservation, Special Preservation Areas and 
structurally weak housing areas in rural communities. It was, he said, 
about the survival of a living language and culture.  
 
The Gaeltacht Housing policy, he said, would only work if it was 
supported by the executive and the elected members. 
 
The policy, he said, had the potential to be very effective in reversing 
the decline of Irish as a community language. Gaeltacht areas, he 
continued, were not tourist attractions but rather embodied the best of 
our unique culture. He said he wanted to submit a counter motion to 
reaffirm this Council’s commitment to the existing housing Gaeltacht 
policy and called on the executive to establish an expert stakeholder 
group including Irish language development officers, Udarás na 
Gaeltachta, social linguists, Conradh and Gaeilge and any other 
relevant bodies to strengthen and implement the policy. This was 
needed, he added, to save our culture, our language and our 
communities. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that he was not against the policy but simply 
wanted clarity on the issues referenced earlier. He asked where the 
Council stood legally if the 85% compliment was not adhered to.  
 
Cllr Molloy called for a workshop or a meeting to discuss the matter 
further. Cllr Scanlon concurred and said that it was important that the 
policy was implemented in the correct manner.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he was supportive of the comments 
by Cllr Meehan and that legal advice had been sought by a number of 
groups over the past few days. He said that the decline of the language 
was evident in areas such as na Rossa, Gaoth Dobhair and Cloich 
Ceann Fola and that some of the comments made earlier were not 
helpful. Donegal County Council, he contended, was not listening and 
cited the need for further discussion on the matter. He called on people 
to stand with the Gaeltacht areas and to put an effort into learning the 
language.  
 
Mr Eamonn Browne, Director Planning, Communities & Culture said 
that the Council recognised the importance of the language and was 
supportive of Gaeltacht areas. He read into the record Policy GAE-P-2 
noting that this was the adopted policy and that there could be no 
deviation. There was, he said, no reference in the policy to a formal 
test/qualification or certificate in terms of occupancy by Irish speakers. 

 
 
He noted that there were concerns regarding equality and the fact that 
a number of elderly people were not in favour of any kind of formal 
exam process. 
 
It was, he said, about what evidence could be accepted as proof of Irish 
language ability. In relation to Council Housing developments, this is 
what he confirmed the Planning Section would be seeking from the 
Housing Directorate in terms of complying with the 85%. His own view, 
he said, in terms of the interview, assessment process would be that it 
would be clear from our own staff who are fluent in Irish and who would 
carry out the interviews that the applicants were fluent in Irish. 
Issues had been raised, he noted, in terms of private developments 
and he confirmed that he would be happy to facilitate further discussion 
on whether this needed to be put through the variation process.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig asked why anybody in Donegal County Council 
would be asked to assess language ability without the proper 
qualifications.  
 
The Cathaoirleach said this was a policy issue and the policy was 
already in place.  
 
Mr Paul Mc Gill, Meetings Administrator, drew members attention to the 
fact that the motion as submitted by Cllr Mc Clafferty was essentially 
seeking clarity and looking for discussion on certain aspects of the 
Gaeltacht Housing policy as adopted in the County Development Plan. 
Cllr Meehan, he said, whilst making reference to a counter motion was 
clearly saying that the policy as adopted should remain as is.   
 
Both points of view, he said, were not in opposition to one another  
Cllr Meehan said that he had called for the Council to engage with an 
expert stakeholder grouping as to the implications of the policy. 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh advised of the need to ensure that this issue had 
proper consideration as the development in Gaoth Dobhair was ready 
for letting. He said it was imperative that someone was brought in from 
outside to perform these assessments. This also offered, he said, an 
opportunity for other councils to follow our example and thus keep the 
language alive. He called for a workshop to be held as soon as 
possible  
 
Cllr Mc Gee cited the importance of getting this right and of having the 
proper incentives in place to encourage Irish speakers. 
 
Cllr Molloy concurred that a workshop was needed to provide further 
clarity. Cllr Mc Clafferty agreed and said that this would facilitate 
discussion and further engagement in relation to the matter.  
 
Cllr Meehan advised of the need to invite a range of stakeholders and 
experts to add depth to the discussion. 

 
 
C/25/26 
PLENARY WORKSHOP TO DISCUSS CAPITAL PROJECTS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council hold a Plenary Workshop to discuss Capital Projects 
which are ongoing, are due to be delivered upon in the next 3 years 
and which require a match funding element from the Council. A 
particular focus of this meeting would be the Council's ability to raise 
and provide match funding to these projects.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems in relation to the above. 
 
 
Cllr Bradley noted that there were a considerable number of capital 
projects in hand and cited developments such as those at Dunree and 
Malin Head, the Tus Nua Project and Buncrana Leisure Centre as 
items which needed commentary and debate. He queried the following: 
 
▪ Number of staff working on capital projects. 
▪ What caused the delay in projects such as these getting off the 
ground? 
▪ How much had been budgeted and what were the match 
funding requirements in 2026 for capital projects given that €1m 
in borrowing capacity had been removed at the Budget Meeting 
in December. 
▪ Where is the Capital Programme now, what is ongoing and what 
is due to start in 2026? 
▪ What is the position in relation to Buncrana Leisure Centre and 
what is needed to get it up and running? 
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott concurred and said that clarity was needed. He cited 
the need for each project to have a dedicated driver who would 
progress its development. Some projects, he contended, were falling by 
the wayside because there was no one designated to oversee the 
overall completion process.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems noted that it had been agreed to hold a workshop on the 
Capital Programme on the 11th March  
 
 
 
He alluded to the documentation circulated at the Budget Meeting in 
December 2025 which outlined the fact that €270m had been invested 
in capital projects with €69m needed to co-finance same. Over the last 
three years, he confirmed, that €35m had been borrowed to realise 
these projects. Money, he advised, would be required over the next 5 to 
7 years to deliver these as projects as they matured.  
 
 
 
Further clarity, he said, would be provided at the forthcoming workshop. 

 
 
 
Cllr Bradley welcomed the reply and said that the workshop would 
provide an opportunity to discuss the match funding requirements and 
what would happen if this was not forthcoming.  
 
C/26/26 
PIERS AND HARBOURS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Farren, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That Donegal County Council press forward in 2026 with the strategic 
development of our high-profile Piers and Harbours.”    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Farren welcomed the fact that €30m had been invested in the 
county’s piers and harbours over the last four years. He said however 
that Phase 2 of the Greencastle Pier Project needed to be moved along 
in terms of the long-term development of the harbour as a commercial 
and tourist entity. He asked that the promised meetings with the 
Greencastle users’ group be set up and prioritised.  
 
 
He acknowledged the assistance and funding secured with the 
assistance of Minister Mc Conalogue in relation to the breakwater but 
contended that the Department were stalling in relation to Phase 2 of 
the project. These issues, he said, needed to be addressed given that 
€24m had already been spent on the breakwater. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott noted that the investment in Greencastle had been a 
gamechanger for Inishowen and needed to be followed up on.  
 
 
Marine issues, he stated, were often overshadowed by other items in 
the Roads Directorate and he suggested that a full county-wide 
workshop take place looking at issues such as  
 
▪ Works required on smaller piers and harbours. 
▪ Usage of various piers and any associated funding.  
▪ Difficulties in getting foreshore licences. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation referenced his 
reply and outlined the fact that considerable investment had taken 
place and that planned works on our piers and harbours were detailed 
in the 3-Year Capital plan. In terms of the usage of various piers, he 
noted that briefings had been given at the Roads SPC in relation to 
Harbour Byelaws on a number of piers and that this would continue in 
2026. 
 
 
Cllr Farren said that he would like to see movement on Greencastle 
and continued commitment from the Council in relation to Phase 2. 

 
 
He alluded to staffing issues in the Maritime Area Regulation Authority 
and said that Donegal County Council needed an input here.  
 
He asked that members be kept updated in relation to any 
developments.  
 
C/27/26 
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES IN INISHOWEN AND DONEGAL  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“Donegal County Council urges the Minister for Health and the HSE 
National Capital Estates to confirm and allocate the Capital Funding 
requested and awaited by Donegal Mental Health Services that allows 
DMHS to continue to support the development of Mental Health 
Services in Inishowen and Donegal.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems in relation to the above. 
 
 
Cllr Doherty outlined the need for capital funding and investment in 
Mental Health Services in Inishowen. He acknowledged all who worked 
to deliver and promote such services. Donegal Mental Health Services, 
he advised, had made a request to transition the building from 
residential to a recovery based intervention centre incorporating a ten 
bed step down facility. He alluded in particular to the Supervised 
Residential Unit in Carndonagh and the fact that the request for funding 
submitted by Donegal Mental Health Services for Radharc na Sléibhte 
had received little or no response.  
 
 
This request, he stated, also included plans for an outreach service, a 
day hospital service, outpatient treatment, occupational therapy, and a 
therapeutic space. 
 
 
Mental health services, he said, were an essential required support and 
funding for this project was to be considered at the next planning expert 
group meeting in January 2026. 
 
 
He asked members to lobby their colleagues at national level so that 
the funding necessary could be committed sooner rather than later.  
 
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that mental health services were struggling to 
deliver services and that there were clear deficiencies in the funding of 
capital infrastructure. Psychiatric hospital services in Letterkenny, he 
said, were not sufficient and current infrastructure unsuitable. 
 
 
He cited the need for capital investment, extra facilities, more respite 
beds and services and supports. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 

 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services and 
Information Systems confirmed that the Council would write to the 
Minister for Health and the HSE National Capital Estates as requested. 
 
 
Cllr Doherty welcomed the response and asked that the motion also be 
forwarded to Minister of State at the Department of Health, Mary Butler. 
 
C/28/26 
COUNTY-WIDE CAMPAIGN TO TACKLE DOG FOULING  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Carr, seconded by Cllr Mc Clafferty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That, having been informed at a recent Municipal District meeting that 
there are currently two Dog Wardens in the county, with a third to be 
appointed, and noting that the service is outsourced, Donegal County 
Council ensures that, upon the appointment of the third Dog Warden, a 
comprehensive countywide campaign is put in place to tackle dog 
fouling and irresponsible dog owners. This campaign should include a 
public awareness and media campaign, improved signage in 
communities, provision of dog waste bags and dispensers, increased 
visible Dog Warden presence, and a strengthened enforcement 
approach, including prosecutions for dog fouling, dogs running loose, 
and failure to remove and properly dispose of dog waste. 
Also, that arrangements be put in place to ensure each elected 
member receives a commitment of regular Dog Warden patrols within 
their municipal district, and that councillors be provided with a direct 
contact point to request additional or more frequent Dog Warden visits 
where ongoing issues arise.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Carr said that numerous complaints had been received in relation 
to this matter, yet nothing was being done. He referred to the 
considerable investment being made in relation to Greenways, walks, 
civic spaces etc all of which was being let down by irresponsible dog 
owners and a failure to address the problems. 
 
He called on the Council to introduce a strong visible advertising 
campaign utilising local newspapers and social media to send out a 
clear message in relation to this topic. He noted that there had been 
one prosecution in four years and outlined the necessity of ensuring 
that Dog Wardens were mobile and highly visible. A dedicated 
campaign, he contended, was needed to address irresponsible 
behaviour together with the provision of county-wide signage.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty supporting the motion advised of the need for tough 
legislation and an ongoing presence on the ground by the Dog 
Wardens.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion  

 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig asked that the service remain in-house.  
 
Cllr Carr welcomed the response and said this topic was raised 
repeatedly with little progress made. The employment of three Dog 
Wardens, he said, offered the opportunity to police the matter 
effectively, with the rules enforced and action on the ground. He said 
he welcomed the fact that there was a pledge to actively enforce rather 
than discuss.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme noted that the 
provision of the Dog Warden Service and the operation of the Dog 
Shelter (Pound) at Glencar had been retendered, and a contract signed 
in December 2025 with Midland Animal Care Ltd. The primary focus of 
their work, he said, would be the provision of a county-wide campaign 
promoting responsible dog ownership and care. He advised also of the 
fact that a third Dog Warden was due to be appointed in the coming 
weeks. Responding to Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, he confirmed that the 
service had been outsourced and the model in place. He said that an 
update would be provided at MD level and that prior to any change in 
the current model, the matter would be brought back to members for 
discussion. 
 
Cllr Crossan asked how many prosecutions had been initiated for dog 
fouling in the last number of years.  
 
The Director of Service said that detail would be provided to the 
Climate Action & Environment SPC.  
 
C/29/26 
PARKING ON COUNCIL ESTATES  
On the proposal of Cllr O’Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr Crossan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-     
 
“That the Council review the current parking policy regarding parking 
for our tenants on Council Estates, what the policy is for public parking 
on our estates as it is causing an issue on some estates with residents, 
calling on the Council to designate parking spaces to tenants.”    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh said that his motion was directly concerned with the 
issues that had arisen for many tenants with regard to parking at 
Council estates. It was essential, he added, that a policy was put in 
place and that consideration was given to the fact that many homes 
now had two three cars and people were able to park outside their own 
homes. He alluded to the fact that issues had arisen in Gortahork and 
said that money needed to be made available for the provision of extra 
parking spaces for tenants and visitors. He welcomed the fact that the 

 
 
Council was prepared to liaise with local resident associations to see if 
scope could be made to create additional spaces. 
 
Cllr T Crossan supporting the motion said that everything possible 
needed to be done so that people could park safely in housing estates.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, MD Services & Capital Services, 
said that the level of complaints had been small to date but that when 
they arose, they had generally to be resolved through mediation. 
 
He said that in relation to new housing developments the number of 
spaces were determined in accordance with the planning process and 
that issues in existing estates were dealt with through negotiation and 
in accordance with the scope available to create additional parking 
space.  
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh welcomed the response and said he would be happy 
to work on the development of any policy that would help to address 
the concerns raised by tenants.  
 
C/30/26 
DELETION OF ALL OFFICIAL ACCOUNTS ON X  
 
On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Meehan it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
Go bhfaighidh Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall réidh le gach cuntas 
oifigiúil dá cuid ar X (Twitter roimhe seo) agus go gcuirfidh sí stad 
iomlán le haon úsáid oifigiúil ar an ardán céanna as seo amach,  
agus go n-eiseoidh sí ráiteas poiblí chun é seo a chur in iúl.  
De réir mar a thuairiscítear, is cosúil gur ardán é X a bhfuil mí-úsáid 
ghnéis agus dúshaothrú leanaí agus daoine fásta ag tarlú air agus 
nach bhfuiltear ag dul i ngleic leis seo ar ar bhonn sásúil. 
Mar eagraíocht phoiblí agus dualgas cúraim uirthi, níor chóir don 
Chomhairle a bheith ag feidhmiú ar ardán, nó meas ar bith a thabhairt 
d’ardán nach bhfuil in ann úsáideoirí a chosaint óna leithéid de 
dhochar. 
Ba cheart don Chomhairle bealaí cumarsáide eile a úsáid a oireann 
níos fearr dá freagrachtaí cosanta agus dá luachanna poiblí.” 
 
“That Donegal County Council immediately deletes all of its official 
accounts on X (formerly Twitter) and ceases any future official use of 
the platform and issue a public statement to outline same. 
X has become a platform where the sexual abuse and exploitation of 
children and adults is widely reported and insufficiently addressed. As a 
public body with a duty of care, the Council should not maintain a 
presence on, or lend credibility to, a platform that fails to adequately 
protect users from such harm.” 
The Council should instead use other communication channels that 
better align with its safeguarding responsibilities and public values.”  

 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services and Information Systems in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said it was essential that Donegal County 
Council issued a statement confirming that it was pulling out of this 
method of communication. 
 
The sexual abuse and exploitation of children and adults on this 
platform together with other questionable content, he contended, was 
widely reported and insufficiently addressed. Material being promoted, 
he said, was twisted and perverted and served to promote a far right 
ideology among young people.  
 
Cllr Meehan said that this was not about restricting free speech but 
rather whether a local authority should continue to endorse a platform 
that no longer met basic standards of safety, accountability and 
reliability. Donegal County Council he said, had a duty of care and 
should not support or legitimise platforms where such harms were so 
inefficiently addressed. X, he advised, had become a platform for 
harassment and continued use by the Council endorsed this type of 
behaviour.  
 
The deletion of all official accounts on X would, he contended, send a 
clear message that the Council was not prepared to compromise on 
these standards. There were, he said, plenty of alternative platforms 
and communication channels that could be used to convey the 
Council’s message all without the associated risks. The motion he 
added, was principled and in keeping with the overall ethos of the 
Council.  
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems said that Donegal County Council had a responsibility to 
provide the public with information in a timely and effective manner. He 
noted that reliance on X had diminished in recent years with other 
effective communication methods widely available and utilised 
including local radio, newspapers, Facebook and press releases on 
other online platforms. Facebook, he said, was the most widely used 
social media platform. Any such move, he advised, could be facilitated 
but would require an exit strategy and would have to be implemented in 
a manner that would allow the Council put in place alternative and 
effective channels of communication. 
 
Cllr A Farren said that whilst he could understand the principle of the 
motion the fact was that X was a fast and useful way of getting out 
information and that there was a danger here of throwing the baby out 
with the bathwater. He cited the importance of the platform and used 
the example of “Love Donegal Day” which had been very successful in 
promoting Donegal over the past number of years.  
 

 
 
The Director of Service informed members that the Council had 10,000 
followers on Facebook and 800 users on X.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig thanked members for their support and said 
that a clear message needed to be sent to the government that the 
exploitation of adults and children had to be addressed as a matter of 
urgency.  
 
C/31/26 
 LIVE STREAMING OF DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS 
COMMITTEE MEETINGS  
 Cllr Devine proposed, seconded by Cllr A Farren that the following 
motion be adopted:-  
 
 
I’d like this Council to support my motion that the Defective Block 
Committee be live streamed during all its meetings as it’s what 
defective homeowners raise a lot and what they want, as not everyone 
can make it to Lifford to watch the meeting and with 1000s of affected 
homeowners/ business owners/clubs’ community/halls etc all affected, 
it is only right that they can see these meetings happening.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme.  
 
Cllr Devine said that he had been told previously that the cost of 
livestreaming meetings was €22,500. He asked that this be broken 
down and staff costings etc identified. 
 
He proceeded to call for a vote on the matter. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee supporting the motion said that the live streaming of DCB 
meetings would help the Council in the long run and dispence with 
some of the conspiracy theories that existed. It would, he said, show 
people what that the government was not doing and could only have a 
positive benefit in the long run.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme noted that the 
policy had been considered on a number of occasions and that the 
position taken had been to stream plenary meetings only. He said that 
in 2025 there had been 125 plenary and committee meetings in total 
and that the logistics of streaming all of these presented a considerable 
challenge.  
 
He suggested that the logistics of same be looked at again and an 
examination carried out in relation to the overall implications. 
 
Cllr Devine said he was concerned at this point in time with DCB 
meetings only.  
 

 
 
Cllr Beard said that the issue was not about the technical aspects but 
rather about transparency and accountability. Donegal, she said, was 
at the epicentre of the biggest building crisis that this country had ever 
seen and that similar issues were emerging in other counties. It was 
important, she added, that other areas had access to meetings and the 
associated media outputs.  
 
Cllr Blaney said that the decision had been made by the CPG not to 
livestream committee meetings, and this was the correct approach as 
there could be no control over what was said in a live broadcast. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan said that there could be issues in terms of data 
protection. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott alluded to incidences in the past where links had been 
issued for the DCB meetings. He said that snippets of the meetings had 
been shared, taken out of context and had caused himself personally 
as chair of the committee at the time considerable anguish. He would, 
he said, be very nervous of having the meetings put online again given 
the level of online abuse prevalent at the time.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that people needed to be respected not 
disrespected. He said that people needed to be mindful of the fact that 
staff were working in difficult circumstances and should not be criticised 
for the failings of the scheme. The DCB Committee was, he note, 
limited in what it could do but members were all there for the right 
reasons and to represent the homeowners. The people who made the 
decisions, he said, were not in the room and thus livestreaming 
possibly would add to the frustrations. 
 
The Cathaoirleach warned of data protection implications if all meetings 
were to be streamed live.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he was in favour of the meetings 
being streamed live.  
 
Cllr C Brogan alluded to the fact that the DCB Committee had cross-
party support and that the Executive and members had worked to 
shape a scheme that would work. He said that when the committee 
was re-established in 2024 there had been an agreement that the four 
members of the 100% Redress Committee could sit on this committee 
to represent homeowners. Members had an obligation, he added, to 
back the executive if they felt that best option at this point in time was 
not to stream the meetings. He said that further discussion was needed 
and suggested an adjournment.  
 
Cllr A Farren alluded to the decision taken previously in relation to the 
use of X as a social media platform. He called on members to make a 
decision and support Cllr Devine as this was a matter of great public 

 
 
interest and people needed to be able to get information on accessing 
the scheme.  
 
Cllr Devine said that the DCB Committee needed to be proactive and 
let people see what is going on.  
 
Cllr Blaney proposed that the decision taken by the CPG to stream 
plenary meetings only be respected and adhered to. 
 
Cllr Meehan said that he was not in favour of an adjournment and that 
if there was a seconder for Cllr Blaney’s proposal then that should be 
dealt with.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride said he was in favour of streaming as the meetings 
needed to be accessible.  
 
C/32/26 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING  
 
 
It was unanimously agreed to take a ten minute recess.  
 
C/33/26 
 LIVE STREAMING OF DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS 
COMMITTEE MEETINGS  
On resumption Cllr Meehan said that he in no way condoned online 
abuse but that if meetings were live streamed then the record could 
always be corrected on the basis of the available footage. 
 
Cllr Blaney at this juncture withdrew his proposal to adhere to the CPG 
decision and proposed that consideration be given to looking at the 
logistics of streaming all committee meetings.This was seconded by 
Cllr Mc Gowan. 
 
 
 
 Cllr Kennedy proposed that not all meetings be streamed live. This was 
seconded by Cllr Mc Clafferty.  
 
C/34/26 
 SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Gowan, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved in accordance with Standing Order No 28 to suspend 
Standing Order No. 3 and extend the meeting beyond 6pm. 
 
C/35/26 
 LIVE STREAMING OF DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS 
COMMITTEE MEETINGS  
The Chief Executive in response to a query from Cllr C Brogan  
said that the Council was content with the way things were and the 
decision taken previously by the CPG. The Council, was, he said, 
anxious to make progress with the DCB issue and cited the need for all 
concerned to work as a team to achieve this objective.  
 
Cllr Devine said that his motion referred to the DCB Committee 
meetings only and was happy to include all if that was what was 
wanted.  
 

 
 
The Meetings Administrator clarified that the vote to be taken would be 
in respect of the counter proposal by Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr 
Mc Clafferty to not extend the streaming of meetings and retain the 
policy currently in place as decided by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
Cllr Blaney withdrew his proposal at this juncture. 
 
A recorded vote was then taken by the Meetings Administrator in 
relation to the counter proposal by Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Mc 
Clafferty. 
 
Those voting in favour included: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Boyle, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Coyle, Harley, 
Kavanagh, Kelly, Kennedy, Mc Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc Garvey, Mc 
Gowan, Molloy, Naughton and Scanlon. (17) 
 
Those voting against included: 
 
Cllrs Beard, Carr, Crossan, Devine, A Doherty, G Doherty, A Farren, 
Mc Giolla Easbuig, Mc Bride, Mc Gee, Mc Mahon, Mc Monagle, 
Meehan, Murray, and O’ Fearraigh. (15) 
 
Thus, the counter proposal to retain the decision of the Corporate 
Policy Group and stream plenary meetings only was endorsed. 
 
Cllr Devine’s motion fell. 
 
C/36/26 
COMPREHENSIVE ANTI-POVERTY STRATEGY FOR COUNTY 
DONEGAL  
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That Donegal County Council commits to working towards the 
development and implementation of a comprehensive Anti-Poverty 
Strategy for County Donegal, recognising that Donegal continues to 
experience some of the highest levels of disadvantage in the State, 
including among the lowest average incomes and salaries, higher 
levels of deprivation, and persistent social and economic inequalities 
affecting individuals, families and communities across the county.  
 
• The motion further calls on Donegal County Council to: 
work collaboratively with key stakeholders across the county - 
including community and voluntary organisations, state agencies, 
local development companies, educational institutions, and 
relevant government departments - to maximise the effectiveness 
of the Anti-Poverty Strategy 
• ensure the lived experience of those affected by poverty informs 
the development and implementation of the strategy 

 
 
• advocate strongly at regional and national level for the resources 
and policy supports necessary to address poverty in Donegal.”  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Planning, Communities & 
Culture in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan said he had introduced the motion as poverty was a very 
real experience for many families, young people and the elderly. 
 
One in four people in this county, he said, were living on low incomes. 
Financial difficulty, he advised, robbed people of the ability to afford 
basic necessities and opportunities, whilst damaging health and 
lowering life expectancy through chronic illness and poor mental 
health. Data showed, he said, that people living in the most deprived 
areas lived five years less and that one in five children were likely to 
experience deprivation. An Anti-Poverty Strategy was essential, he 
said, to tackle the problem head on.  
 
 
Donegal, he added, had the lowest level of disposable income in the 
country, with higher levels of employment and multiple deprivation 
across large areas of the county.  
 
 
He advised of the need to examine the key issues involved and carry 
out an assessment of the impact of the main challenges which include, 
unemployment, lack of security, dependence on seasonal income, 
rurality, and a myriad of housing issues enhanced by the defective 
concrete block crisis. 
 
 
A county-wide council led initiative, was now needed, he added. This, 
he advised, needed to look at the root causes of poverty and seek to 
ensure that there was meaningful participation from those living in 
poverty. Poverty and disadvantage, it was noted, were due to lack of 
investment and government apathy. An anti-poverty strategy was, he 
stated, needed to address these deficits. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig outlined his support for the motion and said 
that people were being forced to leave the county because of the lack 
of opportunity and income. Government policy, he said, had failed and 
people were left in poverty. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Director Planning, Communities & Culture said that 
the Council recognised the importance of the motion and the 
contribution that a comprehensive Anti-Poverty Strategy could make to 
addressing social inclusion, social wellbeing and inequality across 
Donegal. he noted that as part of the two-year review of the Local 
Economic Community Development Plan 2023-2030 a significant effort 
would be made to update the socio-economic profile of the county. 
This, he said, would provide a robust and contemporary foundation for 
informing any future consideration of an anti-poverty strategy. At that 

 
 
point, he said, the Council would be in a stronger position to assess 
priorities, identify gaps and consider the most appropriate mechanisms 
to etc to support the progression of such a strategy. Thus, he said, the 
Council would engage and progress this work in partnership with the 
LCDC and all relevant statutory and community stakeholders.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan in conclusion said he was encouraged by the response 
and that the basis was there to commence the process and to work in 
collaboration with all relevant stakeholders.  
 
C/37/26 
 REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL’S HOMELESS POLICY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr A O’Doherty it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council reviews its Homeless Policy in particular the use of 
two hostels in Letterkenny and Bundoran.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle acknowledged the efforts of staff working in this area 
and their ongoing commitment to same. He said the motion was about 
the overall strategy involved and the fact that homeless numbers were 
based only on those sleeping rough and not those living with parents  
couch surfing. He alluded to the fact that there were numerous issues 
contributing to the problem including the high rental market, the 
shortage of social housing, inadequate HAP rates and the impact of the 
defective concrete blocks crisis. The only two hostel options, he noted 
were Bundoran and Letterkenny and this meant that families in certain 
areas of the county had to be uprooted to avail of the service. There 
was acknowledgement also of the lack of adequate mental health 
services in Donegal. and that for people incapable of independent living 
the hostel option was not suitable. Given that the number of homeless 
persons was on the rise, he called for a comprehensive review of the 
Homeless Action plan and cited the need to facilitate people outside of 
Letterkenny and Bundoran. 
 
  
He called also for the implementation of more affordable housing 
options.  
 
 
Cllr A Doherty concurred and said that problems arose when people did 
not have access to social housing. He welcomed the fact that there had 
been a move away from the B&B voucher system which had specific 
limitations. He acknowledged also the fact that it was planned to further 
review and discuss the approach to homeless supports through the 
medium of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 

 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, MD Services & Capital Projects 
noted that the provision of the two additional hostels had been a 
positive development but alluded to the fact that this initiative was still 
in the development phase and required tweaking. There would, he 
advised, be a detailed report given to the Housing SPC shortly on the 
broader issues concerned. 
 
 
 Cllr Mc Monagle said that he accepted that staff were doing all that 
they could, but the reality was that not all clients were suited to hostel 
type accommodation. He said there was a need to look at other types 
of accommodation taking into consideration the geographical needs of 
the county and the impact that the defective concrete blocks crisis was 
having.  
 
 
 Concluding, he said, that consideration needed to be given to other 
ways of housing people and to ensure that the supports provided were 
a stepping stone to permanent accommodation.  
 
C/38/26 
 REMEDIATION OF THE COUNCIL’S HOUSING STOCK  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Carr it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That Donegal County Council put a policy in place regarding the 
remediation of the Donegal County Council Housing Stock".  
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.  
 
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that he had received a considerable number of 
representations from Council tenants who were concerned as to what 
the plans for remediation were and when it would be implemented. 
 
 
This was a serious issue, he added, with 1200 properties impacted 
presently and up to 2100 possibly affected in the future. Tenants, he 
said, needed to know what was happening and whether they would be 
able to get back into their current homes. Many, he said, feared being 
relocated and wanted to be accommodated in their own localities.  
 
 
 
He said that consideration need to be given as to what houses would 
be used and whether they were fit for purpose. It was noted that 
between 80-90 houses were vacant at present but that there were 
issues with these properties in the first instance. Modular homes, he 
said, were the way forward. 
 
 
 
 
 
Another concern, he advised, was the fact that those currently on the 
waiting list would be left behind and unfairly impacted, as many had 
been on the waiting list for a considerable number of years. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
There was, he contended, a major crisis in the offing and that the 
Council was not prepared to deal with same. Thus, he called for a 
dedicated policy to be put in place.  
 
 
 
 Cllr Carr seconding the motion said that tenants had been left in the 
dark as to when testing would be done and who would carry out same. 
He expressed concern also that current maintenance works were being 
carried out of the maintenance budget and impacting other tenants. 
 
  
 
  There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
He noted that up to €1m had been used already to deal with defective 
concrete block repairs and contended that this level of input could not 
be sustained. Queries were also raised as to whether this spend was to 
be reimbursed. He said that clarity was needed and tenants especially 
in the Glenties area needed to know what was happening.  
 
  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, MD Services and Capital 
Projects  confirmed that there had been engagement with some 
tenants in relation to the impending Social Housing Remediation 
Scheme together with workshops at Municipal District level. This 
sharing of information, would, he advised, be of more benefit when 
there was more certainty with regard to a remediation scheme. There 
would, he said, be ongoing updates provided at MD and SPC level and 
continuing engagement with tenants.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that it was imperative that a policy was in place prior 
to the scheme being announced.  
 
 
C/39/26 
 FISHING INDUSTRY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“I am asking that Donegal Council will contact Minister Dooley and 
other relevant ministers in relation to the appointment of the taskforce 
for the fishing industry sector.” 
 
Minister Dooley has suggested a compensation package for the fishing 
industry and processing industry, however the remit needs to extend 
further to the employees of the industry, a package is required to help 
employees to diversify, find alternative employment, to upskill and to 
have a continuation of an employment contribution paid to them. 
Anyone working in this sector who is/was on a payroll cannot avail of 
community employment schemes because of the outdated rules. If we 
are to support our coastal communities, we need to ensure our 
employees in the sector are included in any compensation.”   
 
She received a response from the Director of Human Resources, 
Economic Development & Emergency services in relation to the above.  
 

 
 
Cllr Kennedy said that the Minister’s announcement did not extend to 
various ancillary services associated with the fishing industry such as  
electronic services, net making, etc. A package, she advised, was 
needed to help employees directly and help them find new 
employment.  
 
She referenced the need for compensation packages and the provision 
of assistance with education, social welfare and CES Scheme options 
for those impacted so that all available opportunities were in place to 
allow people upskill. Many of the fishermen today, she noted were self-
employed, and because of the tax regime currently in place found it 
hard to get social welfare.  
 
Alluding to the impact on Killybegs, she said the fishing industry was 
dying and that there was a need to look at all elements of 
diversification. Fishing quotas had been reduced and there was nothing 
to fill the gap with smaller boats unable to retain adequate crews.  
The impact on fishing and coastal communities, she said had been 
catastrophic and the there was an urgent need to have a conversation 
with the Minister. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said this was an extremely serious motion for coastal   
communities as the fishing sector was dying on its feet and there was 
little will to change this trajectory. He alluded to the salmon hardship 
fund put in place after the salmon fishing industry had been decimated. 
This, he advised, had been utilised with considerable impact in the 
Glengad area where a shed had been built and the fishermen 
diversified into making boats, which ultimately gave them a link into the 
carpentry business. Fishermen, he said, needed to have access to the 
various social welfare schemes. 
 
Smaller boats, he noted, were losing out and there was nothing to fill 
the gap in between the various fishing seasons. This motion, he 
advised, had major implications for Donegal and a conversation was 
needed with Minister Dooley on any proposed visit to the county. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive said that the letter could be written as requested 
and noted that previous taskforces on issues such as Brexit had met 
with some success.  
 
Cllr Kennedy noted that factory workers were unable to avail of many 
of these schemes and were going to be left with nothing. Intervention 
was needed, she added, and a taskforce put in place to present to the 
Minister.  
 
C/40/26 
 CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS 
 
 Votes of Sympathy 
 
 A vote of sympathy was extended to the following. 

 
 
• The family of the late Tommy Mc Nulty, formerly Housing, 
Letterkenny. 
• Majella Mc Elchar, Capital Projects Delivery Unit on the death of her 
mother, Annie Lafferty.  
• The Mc Loone family on the death of their father the late County 
Manager, Michael Mc Loone and their mother, Imelda Mc Loone. 
• Pearse Mc Crory, Environment on the death of his mother, Sarah 
Mc Crory. 
• Mary Boyle, Housing/Corporate, Dungloe on the death of her father, 
Michael Mc Garvey. 
• Darrell Lynch (Flood Relief Section) on the death of his father, 
Bernard, Lynch. 
• The family of the late Liam Mc Crossan, formerly Architects Office.  
• Leona Curran (Parking Section) on the death of her mother 
Sarahanna Fullerton.  
• The family of the late Manus Cecily Gallagher, former Harbour 
Master, Burtonport. 
• Denzil Browne, Central Library on the death of his father, David 
Nathaniel Browne. 
• The family of the late Billy Coyle, Buncrana Roads Team. 
• Former Cllr Terence Slowey on the death of his wife Patricia. 
• The family of the late Stephen Mc Cahill, Ardara.  
• The family of the late Jim Henderson, former Rate Collector, 
Buncrana.  
 
 
 Plenary Workshop – Housing Activation Fund.  
 
Members were informed that applications had to be submitted by the 
27th February 2026. It was agreed that the relevant documentation would 
be forwarded to members and that discussion on same could take place 
at a plenary housing workshop in advance of the Special Meeting 
scheduled for the 11th February 2026. 
 
 
Letter of Congratulations – Bishop Niall Coll 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that a letter of congratulations issue to 
Bishop Niall Coll on his installation as the Bishop of Raphoe. 
 
 
C/41/26   CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT     
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and noted the following items: 
 
  
1.Finance, Corporate Services & Information Systems   
1.1 
Information Systems 
 
2.Planning, Communities & Culture 
2.1 
Planning Services 
2.2 
Regeneration & Development Team 
2.3 
Community Development 
2.4 
Refugee Response Unit Update 
2.5 
Cultural Services 

 
 
3.Environment & Climate, Property Mgt. & DCBS 
3.1 
Environment 
3.2 
Defective Concrete Blocks - Update 
 
4. Housing, MD Services & Capital Projects 
4.1  
Housing & MD Services 
4.2  
Housing Capital 
 
4.3  
Capital Projects Delivery Unit (CPDU) 
 
5. Human Resources, Economic Development & Emergency Services 
5.1 
Economic Development Division 
5.2 
Local Enterprise Office 
5.3 
Emergency Services 
 
 
6. Roads & Transportation 
6.1 
National Roads Office 
6.2 
Central Technical Services 
6.3 
Roads Areas 
 
 
The Chief Executive responding to a query from Cllr Terry Crossan 
advised that an update would be issued to members together with the 
legal advice obtained in relation to the implementation of Section 34(6) 
of the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended) in respect of 
planning permissions for unfinished developments.   
 
  
 
  
 
 The following questions were submitted. 
 
C/42/26 
COUNTY-WIDE FLAG POLICY   
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get an update on the development of a county-wide flag policy?   
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services & Information Systems in relation to the above.  
 
C/43/26 
HEDGECUTTING  
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
To ask the Director for Roads how many prosecutions on 
landowner/occupiers who did not comply with hedge cutting notices have 
taken place over the last year?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/44/26 
HOW MANY PROSECUTIONS HAVE TAKEN PLACE REGARDING 
LITTERING  
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  

 
 
 
To ask the Director for the Environment how many prosecutions have 
taken place on individuals and businesses found to have littered over the 
last year?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/45/26 
WATER OUTAGES  
 
Cllr Murray submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Why is it taking so long to repair water outages and lift boiling notices 
and what means exist to prevent such issues happening in the future 
across Donegal?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/46/26 
WHAT COURTHOUSE BUILDINGS IN DONEGAL ARE PROTECTED 
STRUCTURES.  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
What Courthouse buildings in Donegal are deemed Protected 
Structures, does Donegal Co Council have ownership and maintenance 
responsibilities currently for said Courthouse buildings?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Planning, Communities & 
Culture in relation to the above.  
 
C/47/26 
SUITABLE SITES FOR THE LOCATION OF GARDA STATIONS  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Is Donegal County Council currently engaged or has the Council been 
invited by an Garda Siochana and or OPW to facilitate, aid and progress 
the sourcing of  suitable sites for the location of Garda Stations in 
County Donegal?    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/48/26 
ANY UPDATES OR PLANS IN RELATION TO S.I. HOUSES  
 
Cllr McClafferty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Has the Council any updates or plans in relation to S.I. Houses to open 
up a new scheme like in years gone by where they were quite prominent 
throughout Donegal, as I feel there is a new generation now who are not  
aware that such a scheme existed?   
 

 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services & 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.  
 
C/49/26 
DAMAGED DIRECTIONAL SIGNS  
 
Cllr McClafferty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
What is the envisaged cost going forward in relation to all the directional 
signs damaged by red paint or other colours over the last number of 
years within our County and are there any plans in place to address the 
unsightly sight which is making our County look bad?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
C/50/26 
TAKING OVER THE CREESLOUGH SITE  
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get an update on my recent motion that was passed by Donegal 
County Council enquiring about taking over the site in Creeslough and 
where we are at about putting in place a Liaison Officer to work with the 
families moving forward?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Planning, Communities & 
Culture in relation to the above.  
 
C/51/26 
HOW MANY HAP TENANCIES ARE THERE ACROSS DONEGAL  
 
Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How many HAP tenancies are there across Donegal, and how many 
HAP tenancies are there which involve people aged over 60 years? How 
many HAP tenancies are families with children under the age of 12? 
Please give county-wide figures and figures broken down by MD?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services & 
Capital Projects in relation to the above. 
 
C/52/26 
HOW MANY PEOPLE HAVE BEEN HOUSED IN THE TWO 
HOMELESS HOSTELS IN BUNDORAN AND LETTERKENNY SINCE 
JANUARY 2024  
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How many people have been housed in the two Homeless Hostels in 
Bundoran and Letterkenny since January 2024 the average time that 
people who presented homeless were accommodated at these hostels 
and is there provision for families at these hostels?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services & 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.   
 

 
 
C/53/26 
UPDATE IN RELATION TO THE REMEDIATION SOCIAL HOUSING 
SCHEME  
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Has there been any updates from Department of Housing in relation to 
the Remediation Social Housing Scheme?    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services & 
Capital Projects in relation to the above.   
 
C/54/26 
TEN-T PROJECT  
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get an update on what lands and buildings etc, that the Council 
already owns for use in the Ten-T project and is there enough land 
procured, that this project in places could be started and finished while 
we wait for existing lands to be purchased?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/55/26 
MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
Members noted the following motions from other Councils. 
 
DÚN LAOGHAIRE RATHDOWN COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Dún Laoghaire Rathdown Council demands the Central Bank of 
Ireland must end any future complicity in the sale of Israeli war bonds.  
 
This Council notes that these bonds, have since 1951 raised funds for 
the Israeli Treasury for use across the Israeli economy, including help to 
finance the Israeli military in its prosecution of genocide, war crimes, and 
the expansion of illegal settlements.  
 
We note Dún Laoghaire Rathdown County Councils support for the 
international Boycott, Divestment & Sanctions (BDS) campaign in 
November, 2023.  
 
We further note, the following councils have passed similar motions 
earlier this year: Dublin City, Cork City, Galway City & County, Waterford 
City & County, Wexford County, Wicklow County, Lough County, 
Donegal County & Monaghan County.  
 
We also note that the decision to switch the European prospectus of 
such bonds to Luxemburg was not an active decision made by the ICB. 
Ireland remains the designated ‘home member state’ for the approval of 
bond sales and played an active role of transferring this process to 
Luxemburg. Israel can also after a period of 12 months or so seek to 
return to the CBI for such approval.  
 

 
 
We therefore call on the Chief Executive to write to the Taoiseach, the 
Tánaiste and the Governor of the Central Bank to demand they take 
measures to immediately and unequivocally end any future role in 
facilitating the sale of Israeli bonds”.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Clare County Council calls on the Irish Government to respond 
urgently to the concerns raised by John Collison (co-founder of Stripe) 
and by businessman Denis O’Brien regarding Ireland’s declining 
economic competitiveness, infrastructure shortages, skills mismatches in 
the labour market, and challenges in our tax and regulatory environment.  
 
Specifically, Clare County Council requests that the Government:  
 
1.Prioritise a world-class education and skills strategy that ensures 
graduates are equipped for a rapidly changing global economy and 
increasing technological demands.  
2.Accelerate planning and delivery of housing, transport and digital 
infrastructure in line with John Collison’s concerns that Ireland is “going 
backwards” in developing the homes, transport networks and energy 
systems needed to support economic growth.  
3.Promote a more agile, innovation-focused tax and regulatory system, 
addressing criticisms raised by Denis O’Brien regarding “digital 
colonialism” and Ireland’s ability to sustain a competitive enterprise 
environment for both multinational and indigenous businesses.  
4.Adopt a more ambitious national vision and leadership approach that 
strengthens ministerial accountability and reduces process-driven 
delays, ensuring Ireland remains future-focused and responsive to 
economic challenges”.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Clare County Council calls on the Taoiseach to initiate a full and 
urgent review of local government funding, powers, and democratic 
structures, with a view to aligning Ireland with European norms. In the 
2019 report “Democracy Works If You Let It” by Dr Mary Murphy of 
Maynooth University, it was noted that only 8% of public spending in 
Ireland occurs at Local government level, compared to an EU average of 
23%.  
The review must examine the overall financing model for local 
government, including the significant financial pressures placed on 
councils due to the requirement to fully fund pension obligations and to 
co-fund government schemes, often at levels ranging from 10% to 50%. 
It should also assess the employment status and pension arrangements 
of local authority staff, with a view to formally recognising all local 
authority employees as public servants and incorporating their pension 
entitlements into the public sector pension scheme.  
Once completed and approved by Government, the review should be 
implemented through a clear and time-bound action plan to restore 
democratic accountability, strengthen local service delivery, and ensure 
parity of esteem for the workforce delivering essential public services”.  

 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“Clare County Council requests the Minister for Health to provide for 
Vaginal Estrogen Gels & Creams be available over the counter without a 
prescription like other countries”.  
 
LAOIS COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Laois County Council calls on the Government to establish a 
Referendum Commission to implement the recommendations of the 
Constitutional Convention, concerning the nomination process for 
Presidential elections, as the current provisions contained in the 1937 
Act are no longer fit for purpose”.  
 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Limerick City & County Council write to the Minister for Culture, 
Communications and Sports, Patrick O’Donovan and the Minister for 
Justice, Jim O’Callaghan calling on them and the Irish Government to 
hold a formal national commemoration on 17th April, 2026 to mark the 
150th anniversary of the Catalpa expedition organised by John Devoy 
and John Boyle O’Reilly, which resulted in the famous rescue of six 
Fenian prisoners from a British penal colony in Fremantle, Western 
Australia and asking the Irish Government to recommend that the six 
Fenian prisoners concerned, namely James Wilson, Thomas Hasset, 
Michael Harrington, Thomas Darragh, Martin Hogan and Robert 
Cranston be granted a posthumous presidential pardon”.  
 
LONGFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Longford County Council write to the Minister for Health, Jennifer 
Carroll MacNeill and ask them to reverse the decision of the OAPs 
having to pay for their blister packs of medication from the 1st January, 
2026. This will cause yet another form of hardship to our older people 
and may lead to confusion around what medication to take”.  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That Sligo County Council notes with deep concern the Government’s 
decision to ratify CETA and in particular, the Investor Court System (ICS) 
 
This Council believes that ICS gives foreign corporations powers that 
undermine local democracy, threaten environmental and planning 
decisions, and risk exposing the state to costly investor lawsuits. Sligo 
County Council therefore calls on the Government to suspend Ireland’s 
participation in the ICS element of CETA pending a full independent 
assessment of its impacts on local authorities, public services, and 
environmental protections. 
This motion to be circulated to all local authorities, all Sligo-Leitrim TDs 
and Senators, and the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment.  
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“This Council expresses solidarity with Mary Dunlevy Greene, Mary 
Donovan, Maurice Patton O’Connell and Miriam Moriarty Owens, who 

 
 
are on hunger strike outside of Dáil Éireann, and the thousands of 
survivors of Ireland’s Industrial and Reformatory Schools. We recognise 
the injustices that many survivors continue to face, and we call on the 
Irish Government to immediately address this issue and to provide for 
the requests of these survivors including access to a full state 
contributory pension and H.A.A. medical cards”.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
  
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 

 
 
 
