1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
18 Samhain 2025 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 24 Samhain 2025 ag 
11.00 r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc 
leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************************************
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House 
Lifford 
 
18th November 2025 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 24th November 2025 at 
11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online 
link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
____________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 26th September 2025. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the September Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 29th September 2025. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 31st October 2025. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the dispose of 2 plots of land at 
Ballybroughan, Frosses, Co Donegal to Michael Cunningham. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the disposal by way of lease, a plot 
of land comprising 0.896 hectares at Atlantic Way, Bundoran to 
Bundoran Adventure Park Ltd. 
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 
a) To approve the carrying out of works in relation to the proposed 
Buncrana Enterprise Centre on St Oran’s Road, Buncrana. 
b) To approve the construction of 21 no social housing units together with 
a new vehicular entrance adjoining the L-14452-0, connection to 
existing services and all associated site development works at 
Ballymagowan, Dunkineely, Co Donegal. 
 
4. Housing   
To seek the approval of the Members for increases to Standard Costings 
under the Housing Grant Schemes, with effect from 1st January 2026. 
 
5. Corporate    
a) To fill casual vacancy in the sectoral membership of Coiste na nOileán 
arising from the resignation of Mr John O’ Brien.  
b) To approve Schedule of Plenary Meetings for 2026. 
 
6. Planning 
To approve the publication of the Proposed Variation to the County 
Development Plan 2024-2030 (i.e. Proposed Variation No. 1) together 

3 
 
with the associated Environmental Report, Natura Impact Report, 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Report and Local Transport Plans for a 
4-week period of public consultation. 
 
7. Endorsement of Minutes 
To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 
22nd September, 2025. 
 
8. Community Development 
To approve the Draft Development Fund Initiative Policy 2026. 
 
9. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025 (as amended). 
 
Other 
Attendance at the Pride of Place Awards in Limerick on the 7th November, 
2025. 
Attendance at the Chamber’s Ireland Local Government Awards on the 
27th November 2025 in the Crowne Plaza Hotel, Santry, Dublin. 
 
 
Abroad 
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at a Diaspora focused event in 
Glasgow City Chambers on Wednesday 10th December 2025. Event is 
Donegal County Council led in partnership with Glasgow City Council 
and the Irish Consulate Office in Edinburgh. 
 
➢ Attendance at the St Patrick’s Day Events in the USA in March 2026. 
 
10. Conference Reports 
• Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the Red Hugh O’ Donnell 
Commemoration Events in Valladolid, Spain on the 26th and 27th 
September, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
Water & Environment  
11. Cllr Micheál Naughton   
“I am asking Donegal County Council to call on the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage Mr. James Browne TD, to change the 
regulations in relation to the well grant? 

4 
 
12. Cllr Noel Jordan  
“I am asking this Council to call on the Department of the OPW to provide 
an increase in the flood risk mitigation fund so that emergency works can 
be carried out in the interim on our released capital flood relief schemes.” 
 
 
  Corporate 
13. Cllr Niamh Kennedy  
“That this Council calls on the Minister for Housing & Local Government 
and the Minister for Education to explore and assist in every possible way 
the introduction of Politics and Society as a Leaving Certificate subject in 
our Donegal Schools, in order to encourage more gender balance and 
diversity in democracy.” 
 
 
 
     
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Community Development  
14. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty  
“I am re-submitting in the interest of real Justice, the below motion for the 
Nov 2025, full Council meeting at the end of the month, and I will be 
dealing with Minister for Justice, Jim Callaghan TD response, which took 
10 months to come back to myself and Cllr Tómas Sean Devine via the 
DCC. In fact, it shows that he has no understanding about the injustice’s 
that these families are going through daily. 
Sadly, the Minister deliberately and intentionally fails to mention in his 
reply that a legal precedent was set on the 28th day of March 2002, when 
the then Government established a Statutory Judicial Public Inquiry 
(Morris Tribunal) to investigate the biggest ever Garda Corruption scandal 
in the States history, and did so while An Garda Siochana (Carty Internal 
Garda Investigation) Criminal, Garda Complaints Board investigations and 
multiple Civil Cases were all ongoing at that time, and during the 8 year 
period of the Morris Tribunal. 
This is reflected in then Garda Commissioner Drew Harris’s comments 
concerning the below motion about a Public Inquiry, that it could be 
established by Government if that is what the family’s wanted. That is 
what the families deserve and want. Every aspect of the Sates failures 
before and after this tragedy must be fully investigated independently if 
the full truth is to be told. 
The 10 innocent victims and their loved ones deserve nothing less. All 
politics is local and the DCCs local Authority Elected Members must lead 
the push for this Public Inquiry to be established, weather they agree with 
it or not. Latin Proverb: Fiat Justitia Ruat Caelum, “Let Justice be done 
though the Heaven’s fall.” 
 
“Requesting that the new incoming Government establish within its first 
100 days an Independent Statutory Judicial Public Inquiry with an open 
terms of reference into the explosion in Creeslough, Co Donegal that 
killed 10 people on the 7th Oct 2023, and I am calling on all the elected 
members of Donegal County Council to support my motion for this much 
needed Public Inquiry.” 

5 
 
Water & Environment  
15. Cllr Martin Scanlon  
“Putting forward this motion for the council to write to the relevant minister 
or ministers to immediately review the current limits in relation to the 
timeframes regarding well grant applications, and to increase the current 
guideline cap of €15,000 per household with regards to new multi-annual 
rural water programme applications.” 
 
 
 
  
  
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
 
Roads & Transportation   
16. Cllr Fionán Bradley  
“That roadworks carried out by this Council on main and arterial routes 
which involve the closure of part or all of a section of road are from this 
point carried out at night so as to minimise disruption to motorists and all 
road users.” 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
17. Cllr Jack Murray  
“That this Council notes the recent extension of the Pyrite Remediation 
Scheme for homeowners affected by pyritic heave in Dublin and Leinster. 
 
This Council further notes that approaching 3,000 homeowners have 
availed of this  genuinely 100% redress scheme with the Housing Agency 
tasked with carrying out the remediation of properties accepted into the 
scheme. 
 
This Council calls on the Government to deliver the same redress to all 
victims of the defective concrete scandals and to urgently introduce a 
genuinely 100% redress scheme similar to the Pyrite Remediation 
Scheme for all of the victims of defective concrete blocks in Donegal.” 
 
18. Cllr Joy Beard  
“That Donegal County Council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, and separately to Mr Darren Lehane, Chair of 
the Appeals Panel, seeking an urgent intervention regarding downgraded 
determinations and the ongoing appeals backlog under the Enhanced 
Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme. 
 
This Council notes that many homeowners, who complied fully with the 
original scheme and received demolition determinations from IS 465 
Chartered Engineers, have since had those determinations downgraded 
by the Housing Agency’s Framework Engineers, often without any 
inspection. 
 
Appeals in these cases have experienced lengthy delays, in some 
instances since February 2024, during which time affected homes have 
continued to deteriorate rapidly. 

6 
 
In line with current scientific evidence, and to ensure that the science is 
adhered to in all decision-making, this Council calls for: 
 
a) The reinstatement of the original recommendation made by the 
homeowners IS465 registered engineer. 
b) The rescinding of Options 2-5, as partial remediation does not work in 
the case of an internal sulphate attack which have been scientifically 
proven to be the wrong solution.   
c) A transparent maximum timeframe for the conclusion of all 
outstanding appeals. 
 
This Council requests a written response from both the Minister and the 
Chair of the Appeals Panel.” 
 
Corporate 
19. Cllr Albert Doherty  
"Donegal County Council urges the Department of Justice & OPW to 
provide the essential state investment required that directs and enables 
the Building Committee of the Courts Service to initiate an immediate 
works plan that ensures the retention, refurbishment and restoration of 
District Court Services in Donegal." 
 
Planning 
20. Cllr Terry Crossan  
“That this Council proceeds to implement Section 34 (6) of the Planning 
and Development Act 2000 (as amended ) to grant planning permission 
in respect of planning applications for unfinished developments in rural 
areas which would materially contravene the Donegal County 
Development Plan 2024-30.” 
 
Housing  
21. Cllr Martin Mc Dermott  
“That this Council request the Executive to run a public information 
campaign reminding homeowners to have their electrical systems 
checked, particularly in respect of older homes. A number of houses 
have recently come to my attention with wiring failures, which pose a 
serious safety risk — particularly for elderly people living alone. 
Furthermore, I ask that this motion be circulated to all Councils, as this 
measure has the potential to save lives.” 
 
 
   
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
Roads & Transportation 
22. Cllr Denis Mc Gee  
“Donegal's rural areas are characterised by limited public lighting, and an 
absence of footpaths which impacts the safety and wellbeing of 
residents.  
“I ask the Council to explore and implement localised solutions to 
increase public lighting in isolated communities. I ask that the Council 

7 
 
engages with relevant stakeholders, including Transport Infrastructure 
Ireland and local communities to ensure that any measures taken align 
with the specific needs of Donegal's rural population. Improving public 
lighting in rural Donegal will significantly enhance safety, reduce isolation 
and improve quality of life for residents. By tailoring our approach to local 
conditions, we can ensure that our rural communities are safe and well-
supported 
 
Environment 
23. Cllr Brian Carr  
That Donegal County Council carry out a review of beach access for 
emergency vehicles and ensure that all necessary safety equipment, 
including life buoys, is regularly inspected and maintained. 
Furthermore, that these actions apply to all beaches used by the public 
across County Donegal, and not solely to designated Blue Flag beaches, 
in the interest of public safety and emergency response capability. 
Additionally, that Donegal County Council provide an individual 
identification number or code for every beach and pier in the county, to 
assist the public in accurately directing emergency services to the correct 
location in the event of an incident. 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate 
24. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle   
“That this Council recognises that: 
 
➢ the reunification of Ireland is an objective of Bunreacht na 
hÉireann; and 
➢ there is a growing national discussion around constitutional 
change with people from diverse backgrounds now exploring the 
possibility of Irish unity: 
 
                  notes that: 
 
➢ the Good Friday Agreement 1998 provides the democratic and 
peaceful means to achieve reunification through the provision of 
unity referendums, 
➢ the significant Joint Oireachtas Committee on the Implementation 
of the Good Friday Agreement report "Perspectives on 
Constitutional Change: Finance and Economics", recommends 
the establishment of Citizen Assemblies and other relevant 
forums, a designated Joint Oireachtas Committee and a 
Government Department to take responsibility for planning and 
preparing for constitutional change, received cross-party support: 
 
And will write to the Office of An Taoiseach, seeking the Irish 
Government to plan and prepare for Irish unity, through the following 
actions: 

8 
 
 
➢ establish an all-island representative Citizens' Assembly or 
Assemblies, to allow for informed debate, and a Joint Oireachtas 
Committee on Irish Unity to enable careful planning, 
➢ produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with 
civic society and key stakeholders, 
➢ engage with northern protestant and unionist opinion about the 
future of Ireland; and 
➢ work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in 
the Good Friday Agreement.” 
 
25. Cllr Declan Meehan   
“That this Council opposes the exclusion of trade in services in the 
Occupied Territories Bill and writes to the Tánaiste and Minister for 
Foreign Affairs and Trade, Simon Harris TD, calling on him to include a 
ban on trade in services in the government's proposed Occupied 
Territories Bill with immediate effect. 
 
Also, that Donegal County Council endorses and supports the following 
recommendations: 
 
• The Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade which strongly 
recommends progressing the Bill and that the prohibition of 
imports from the Palestinian Occupied Territories should be 
extended to include trade in services, in line with the Advisory 
Opinion of the International Court of Justice and the Resolution 
which Ireland co-sponsored at the United Nations General 
Assembly  
 
• The Joint Committee recommends that the title of the Bill be the 
‘Illegal Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory 
(Prohibition of Importation of Goods & Services) Bill’.” 
 
26. Cllr Ciaran Brogan   
“I propose that this Council's working group on our future plans for 
accommodation and in line with our review plan that we look at the 
possibility of decentralising our council services in line with our current 
plans for the regeneration of our town centres, so that there is real 
meaningful permanent employment and a presence of jobs and 
economic benefits together with the distribution of services for our 
county and its people.” 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
27. Cllr Tomás S Devine “ 
“That this Council support my motion condemning the decision taken by 
the 79 TDs to vote in favour of the Government's counter motion to the 
one put forward by Deputy Charles Ward in Dáil Eireann on the 15th 
October 2025 entitled "Reform of the Defective Concrete Redress 
Scheme.” 

9 
 
In doing so, these TDs have demonstrated their approval to the defective 
concrete crisis here in Donegal and other affected counties. This runs 
contrary to the expressed will of the 37 elected members of DCC as 
demonstrated by the unanimous passing of 27 motions since July 2024, 
highlighting the urgent and essential changes that need to be made to 
the enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme and the Governments 
approach to the humanitarian crisis. It’s only right the people affected by 
DCB know that DCC will publicly call out this Government when it makes 
decisions that are totally and morally wrong.” 
 
28.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
29. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
  
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
Planning   
30. Cllr Micheál Naughton  
Can I have update on my motion in May in relation to allocating €5million 
in the revenue budget for 2026 to deal with derelict sites and buildings? 
 
Corporate 
31. Cllr Micheál Naughton  
Can I get the full list of vacancies across all departments of Donegal 
County Council? 
 
 
  
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Roads & Transportation  
32. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Roads what steps the Council take with regard to 
hedges and overgrowth which pose a danger to road users. I understand 
the law is that it is the landowner’s responsibility to maintain vegetation, 
however in the event a landowner refuses to cut overgrowth what 
enforcement steps do the Council follow. 
 
33. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Roads when the review of the winter maintenance 
programme routes will take place. 
 
Emergency Services  
34. Cllr Joy Beard   
On 15th October 2025 Minister Browne said in Dail Eireann  "— Local 
Authorities, working together with the Office for Emergency Planning and 
the National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management have 
systems in place to assist all homeowners to remain safe and to secure 

10 
 
alternative accommodation should it be required in the case of any 
severe weather occurrence: 
 
Could I be advised on specific arrangements referenced by Minister 
James Browne specifically? 
 
What is the plan currently in place for Donegal? 
What criteria would trigger the plan? 
How and where emergency or temporary accommodation would be 
provided? 
How homeowners will be notified in advance about the steps to take and 
who to contact in such circumstances? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
35. Cllr Joy Beard   
Could I get an itemised breakdown of the costs associated with the 
streaming of the Defective Blocks Committee meetings? 
 
Community  
36. Cllr Albert Doherty   
Following my motion adopted on September 29th last re: current CLAR 
review by Dept. and Council commitment to follow up, 
 
What correspondence has been forwarded by DCC to The Department 
re: Review & increased eligibility areas for CLAR and what 
response(s) have been received from Minister Calleary and /or his 
department? 
 
Housing  
37. Cllr Albert Doherty   
Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme 
How many housing units were successfully delivered in 2025 to date and 
in what location? Did discussions with the Department result in council 
securing additional units/budget during the year? 
 
 
  
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
 Housing 
38. Cllr Brian Carr   
My question concerns the maintenance works carried out by the Council 
on social housing units suspected of being affected by defective concrete 
blocks, with funding drawn from the social housing maintenance and 
painting budgets in each Municipal District. Could you please provide 
details of the total expenditure to date from these budgets in each MD on 
such works, and confirm whether the Council has submitted a claim to 
the relevant Government Department seeking reimbursement for this 
expenditure? 
 
 

11 
 
  
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate  
39. Cllr Tomás S Devine   
Recently the Council made us aware of the cost of streaming Plenary 
meetings - €22,500 euros. Can I get a breakdown of these costs? 
 
40. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
Can we have an updated report on our legal services and the possibility 
of us employing our own in-house solicitor? 
 
Roads & Transportation  
41. Cllr Tomás S Devine   
Can this Council supply and fill salt bins in estates they have taken over 
and also on roads that are not gritted by our lorries? 
 
42. Cllr Ciaran Brogan   
Can I have an updated report on all our active travel projects in Donegal 
in the last 3 years, a breakdown of monies spent, including consultancy 
fees to date on the programme of the work, and a timeline for the 
allocations and the schedule of works for the next two years ? 
 
Water & Environment  
43. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  
How many Flood Relief Schemes have been approved by the 
Department for Donegal and what is the timeline for the starting of these 
projects and where are they located? 
 
44. Motions from other Councils/Bodies   
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Clare County Council calls on the Government of Ireland not to 
support the European Commission’s proposal to establish a single 
common fund under the new Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 
2028-2034, which would merge key EU policy instruments such as the 
Common Agriculture Fund into one overarching funding mechanism.  
This Council expresses concern that:-  
 
1. The proposed “Common fund” risks undermining the integrity and 
transparency of longstanding EU policies that have delivered 
tangible benefits to Ireland’s regions, farmers, and coastal 
communities.  
2. The Commission’s justification – that this structure would “simplify” 
the MFF – fails to recognise that simplification through 
centralisation can weaken the specific policy objectives and ring-
fenced funding that underpin regional and rural development. 
3. The proposal links the next MFF to the repayment of EU debt 
incurred under the Next Generation EU recovery instrument, 
creating fiscal pressure that is already leading to an overall 20% 

12 
 
reduction in key investment areas compared with the current 
period.  
4. The Commission’s claim that the new MFF will be “the biggest EU 
budget ever” is misleading, as this increase is largely accounted 
for by debt repayments rather than by additional funding for future 
programmes or regional growth.  
 
Accordingly, Clare County Council urges the Minister for Public  
Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform, and the Minister for Finance, to:  
 
▪ Reject any move towards a single aggregated fund that would 
erode the distinct purposes of the CAP, Cohesion, and Fisheries 
policies.  
▪ Advocate instead for a transparent, policy based MFF that 
maintains clear and separate funding streams for agriculture, 
regional development, and the blue economy; and  
▪ Support an ambitious, adequately resourced EU budget that 
ensures balanced and sustainable growth across Ireland and 
the European Union’s regions.” 
 
GALWAY CITY COUNCIL     
“Extension of Free Fares for Under-9s to Commercial Bus Operators 
That Galway City Council supports the immediate inclusion of 
Commercial Bus Operators (CBOs) in the Child Leap Card Scheme,  
which provides free bus travel for children under nine.  
Council notes: 
CBOs are an essential part of Ireland’s public transport network, already 
delivering the Young Adult Leap Card and the Department of Social 
Protection’s Travel Pass.  
Their exclusion from the under-9 scheme creates unfairness, particularly 
for rural families who depend on them, and risk a two-tier bus system.  
Extending the scheme would cost just €1 million, a modest sum that 
would support families during the cost-of-living crisis and encourage 
sustainable travel habits among children.  
Therefore, Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Transport and 
the National Transport Authority to:  
 
1.Urgently include CBOs in the Child Leap Card Scheme.  
2.Ensure a fair and consistent transport policy that treats all children  
equally, regardless of geography or bus service used.” 
 
KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Kerry County Council endorsees the End Discrimination of 
Inheritance (EDIT) campaign and calls on Ministers for Equality, Norma 
Foley, Public Expenditure, Jack Chambers and Finance Paschal 
Donoghue to commit to harmonising the inheritance laws and bands so 
that people with no direct descendants are treated the same as those 
with children under inheritance law and succession planning. Further, I 
request that upon adoption, this motion is circulated to all Local 
Authorities.” 

13 
 
KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health calling for the 
introduction of a ban on vaping in all workplaces, on the grounds of 
protecting public health and ensuring safe, aerosol-free working 
environments.  
That this motion would be referred to all local authorities for their 
support.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the Department of Social 
Protection to undertake and an urgent and immediate review around the 
habitual residence clause for carers allowance. This clause impacts 
many in border counties where family and immediately family members 
are caring for loved ones and may only be living five minutes away albeit 
in another county. Immediate action is required to address this issue.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council write to the Minister for Education, Helan McEntee TD, 
and the Minister of State for Further Education and Skills, Marian Harkin 
TD, requesting that they develop an alternative pathway for students 
following completion of the Junior Cycle through the ETB and SOLAS 
and other networks, to provide skills-based and career-orientated and 
training opportunities in construction, business, IT, tourism, cosmetology, 
healthcare and agriculture – to offer students practical routes to 
employment and further study as an alternative to the traditional Leaving 
Certificate Programme.” 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That, Limerick City & County Council call on the Ministers for Agriculture 
and for Forestry to provide an appropriate Scheme to compensate for 
the loss of their livelihoods suffered by landowners due to Ash Dieback 
disease, and that support for this Motion be sought from sister 
authorities nationally.”  
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That, Limerick City & Council Council write to the Taoiseach, Michael 
Martin TD, the Minister for Health, Jennifer Carroll-MacNeill TD, and the 
Minister of State with responsibility for Mental Health, Mary Butler TD, in 
support of the IACP’s call for increased investment in counselling and 
psychotherapy in Budget 2026. The IACP’s Budget 2026 Priorities are 
the following: (i) Removal of VAT on counselling and psychotherapy 
services; (ii) Extension of tax relief to counselling and psychotherapy 
fees; and (iii) Investment in and expansion of access to school 
counselling at the primary and secondary levels. I also ask that this 
Motion, if passed, is circulated to the thirty other local authorities, asking 
that they support this campaign.” 
 
MONAGHAN COUNTY COUNCIL    
“That this Council condemns all those involved in the neglect, 
mistreatment and abuse of residences in Nursing Homes and Care 

14 
 
Facilities for the elderly, the most vulnerable in our society and demands 
of An Taoiseach, Michael Martin TD, the Minister for Health, Jennifer 
Carroll-MacNeill TD and all of Government to immediately prioritise the 
strengthening of safe guarding protection across the Health & Social 
Care Sector, as national confidence, trust and respect for the Health 
Information and Quality Authority (HIQA), the HSE and the Department 
of Health is very low, following the revelations of recent years – 
Children’s Health Ireland (CHI), the numbers of deaths during Covid 
proved standards were very low in Nursing Homes nationally, the recent 
RTE Undercover Report exposed the abuse of residences in Nursing 
Homes and were it not for this programme, the nation would be unaware 
of these outrageous incidents; hence Monaghan County Council 
demands of all members, parties and groups in Government to act 
immediately to ensure the Health and Social Care Sector in Ireland is 
cleansed of neglect, abuse and wrong doing.”  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
“To write to the Minister for the Local Government to request that 
development fees be waived for all applicants who served a 
commencement notice prior to the required deadline in 2024. Some 
applicants served the notice within the required timeframe, but failed to 
submit the required waiver form, resulting in them receiving an invoice 
for development charges. Many applicants were unaware of the need to 
complete the form, despite meeting all other guidelines of the scheme.” 
 
TIPPERARY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Tipperary County Council supports the immediate inclusion of 
Commercial Bus Operators (CBOs) in the Child Leap Card Scheme, 
which provides free bus travel for children under nine.  
Tipperary County Council calls on the Minister for Transport and the 
National Transport Authority to: 
 
1. Urgently include CBOs in the Child Leap Card Scheme 
2. Ensure a fair and consistent transport policy that treats all children 
equally, regardless of geography or bus service used.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council endorses the End Discrimination of Inheritance Tax 
(EDIT) campaign and calls on Ministers for Equality, Norman Foley, 
Public Expenditure, Jack Chambers TD and Minister for Finance 
Paschal Donoghue TD to commit to harmonising the inheritance laws 
and bands so that people with no direct descendants are treated as 
equal to families with children in inheritance law and succession 
planning.” 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“While strengthening the welfare and health of animals, making dog 
breeders and sellers more accountable, transparent and animal welfare 
centred in their dealings; this Council calls for the reformation of the Dog 
Breeding Establishment Act (2010) to incorporate “Stout’s Law” into the 
act.  

15 
 
Stout’s Law brings forward changes in the ages, duration and 
treatment/conditions of breeding age dogs, limits the amounts of litters in 
a lifetime, the establishment of an single Independent Regulator with a 
stricter inspection regime and supports for the Local Authorities to work 
with licenced breeders while outlawing the practice of backyard puppy 
farms in Ireland.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“With winter approaching we would like to call for an urgent review of the 
Ash die back situation on our public roads. The older and bigger trees 
are now being affected and pose a serious risk to road users power lines 
and telecommunications networks, we call on Co Councils, Departments 
of Transport, Agriculture and Environment to coordinate a plan to deal 
with this crisis unfolding on our roads.” 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
MINUTES OF NOVEMBER MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
ON 24TH NOVEMBER, 2025 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/392/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, F Bradley, C Brogan, B Carr, 
D Coyle, T Crossan, TS Devine, A Doherty, A Farren, N Jordan, D. M 
Kelly, N Kennedy, M MacGiolla Easbuig, M McDermott, D McGee, P 
McGowan,  M McMahon, G McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, J 
Murray, M Naughton, JS O’ Fearraigh, and M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs L Blaney, M Boyle, J Brogan, G Doherty, M Farren, M 
Harley, J Kavanagh, F McBrearty Jnr, M McBride, M Mc Clafferty, P 
McGarvey, and Dakota Nic Mheanman.  
 
C/393/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of 
Housing, Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Bryan Cannon, 
Director of Roads & Transportation, Michael McGarvey, Director of 
Water & Environment, Garry Martin, Director of Economic 
Development, IS & Emergency Services, Richard Gibson, Director of 
Finance, Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner, Graham Diamond, Senior 
Executive Planner, John McFeeley, Executive Planner, Frances Friel, 
Communications Officer, William Colvin, Assistant Communications 
Officer, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní 
Ghallachóir, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie 
Crawford, Staff Officer.     
 
C/394/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 26TH SEPTEMBER, 
2025.     
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Coyle the Minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 26th 
September, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/395/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 29TH SEPTEMBER, 
2025.   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Coyle the Minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 29th 
September, 2025 were adopted.    
 
C/396/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 31ST OCTOBER, 
2025    
 
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the Minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 31st 
October, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/397/25 
TO APPROVE THE DISPOSAL OF 2 PLOTS OF LAND AT 
BALLYBROUGHAN, FROSSES TO MICHAEL CUNNINGHAM.   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  

17 
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was 
resolved to dispose of 2 plots of land at Ballybroughan, Frosses to 
Michael Cunningham in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 
of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).   
 
C/398/25 
 TO APPROVE THE DISPOSAL BY WAY OF LEASE, A PLOT OF 
LAND COMPRISING 0.896 HECTARES AT ATLANTIC WAY, 
BUNDORAN TO BUNDORAN ADVENTURE PARK LTD    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.    
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Naughton it was 
resolved to approve the disposal by way of lease, a plot of land 
comprising 0.896 hectares at Atlantic Way, Bundoran to Bundoran 
Adventure Park Ltd in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended). 
 
C/399/25 
TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS IN RELATION TO 
THE PROPOSED BUNCRANA ENTERPRISE CENTRE ON ST 
ORAN’S ROAD, BUNCRANA  
 
Members considered the reports circulated with the agenda in relation 
to the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Murray the carrying 
out of works in relation to the proposed Buncrana Enterprise Centre on 
St. Oran’s Road, Buncrana was approved, in accordance with Part XI 
of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of 
the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended).   
 
C/400/25 
TO APPROVE THE CONSTRUCTION OF 21 NO. SOCIAL HOUSING 
UNITS TOGETHER WITH A NEW VEHICULAR ENTRANCE 
ADJOINING THE l-14452-0 AT BALLYMAGOWAN, DUNKINEELY, 
CO. DONEGAL  
 
Members considered the reports circulated with the agenda in relation 
to the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Naughton the 
construction of 21no. social housing units together with a new vehicular 
entrance adjoining the L-14452-0, including connection to existing 
services and all associated site development works at Ballymagowan, 
Dunkineely, Co. Donegal was approved, in accordance with Part XI of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended) subject to 
cognisance being taken of access issues at the National School and in 
the interest of the overall safety impact. It was agreed that this should 
be included in the overall plan for the development.   
 

18 
 
C/401/25 
INCREASES TO STANDARD COSTINGS UNDER THE HOUSING 
GRANT SCHEMES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig 
the increases to Standard Costings under the Housing Grant Schemes, 
with effect from 1st January, 2026 were approved.  
 
C/402/25 
FILLING OF THE CASUAL VACANCY IN THE SECTORAL 
MEMBERSHIP OF COISTE NA NOILEÁN  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr 
McGee it was resolved that the vacancy on the Coiste na nOileán 
arising from the resignation of Mr John O’Brien be filled by Mr Dónal 
Coll representing Coiste Forbartha Inis Bó Finne. 
 
C/403/25 
TO APPROVE SCHEDULE OF PLENARY MEETINGS FOR 2026  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Coyle the 
Schedule of Plenary Meetings of 2026 was approved.  
 
C/404/25 
TO APPROVE THE PUBLICATION OF THE PROPOSED VARIATION 
TO THE COUNTY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2024-2030 (I.E. 
PROPOSED VARIATION NO. 1 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
Mr Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner said that it was intended to go out to 
public consultation for a four week period in the first week of January 
2026.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan referenced the fact that there were lands in Stranorlar 
that had been taken out in relation to the Residential Zoned land tax 
and that these were now impossible to access. He said that contact 
needed to be made with the T.I.I or the lands in question rezoned. 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that there would be an opportunity to consider 
this issue at the plenary workshop on the 1st December. 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was 
resolved to approve the publication of the proposed Variation to the 
County Development Plan  2024-2030 (Proposed Variation No. 1) 
together with the associated Environmental Report, Natura Impact 
report, Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Report and Local Transport 
Plans for a four-week period of public consultation.  
 
C/405/25 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE 
POLICY GROUP HELD ON THE 22ND SEPTEMBER, 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr McMonagle the 
Minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 22nd 
September, 2025 were noted.  
 

19 
 
C/406/25 
TO APPROVE THE DRAFT DEVELOPMENT FUND INITIATIVE 
POLICY 2026  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the Draft 
Development Fund Initiative Policy 2026 was approved.  
 
C/407/25 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 
668 of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by 
the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in 
relation to the Local Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 
2010, and the Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations, 2014 -2025(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Coyle attendance at 
the following was approved.   
 
 
Other 
➢ Attendance at the Pride of Place Awards in Limerick on the 7th 
November, 2025. 
➢ Attendance at the Chamber’s Ireland Local Government Awards on 
the 27th November 2025 in the Crowne Plaza Hotel, Santry, Dublin. 
 
 
 
Abroad 
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at a Diaspora focused event in 
Glasgow City Chambers on Wednesday 10th December 2025. 
Event is Donegal County Council led in partnership with Glasgow 
City Council and the Irish Consulate Office in Edinburgh. 
 
➢ Attendance at the St Patrick’s Day Events in the USA in March 
2026.   
 
C/408/25  
CONFERENCE REPORTS  
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Coyle the following 
conference reports were noted.     
 
• Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the Red Hugh O’ Donnell 
Commemoration Events in Valladolid, Spain on the 26th and 27th 
September, 2025. 
 
C/409/25  
REVIEW OF REGULATIONS IN RELATION TO THE WELL GRANT  
On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 

20 
 
“I am asking Donegal County Council to call on the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage Mr. James Browne TD, to 
change the regulations in relation to the well grant?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Naughton said that change was necessary given that there had 
been no amendments to the scheme over the last number of years. He 
said that the requirement to have lived in the property for seven years 
was outdated and the overall grant allocation figure of €5000 
insufficient. 
 
 
Alluding to the success of the Croí Conaithe Scheme which, he 
contended, had been phenomenal, he said that the seven year 
requirement was now in effect hindering development in rural Ireland. 
He referenced also the fact that there were 1400 houses in rural Ireland 
which had no access to a public water supply and said that the current 
connection fees being sought by Uisce Éireann were exorbitant and 
prohibitive. The grant, he said, needed to be increased to between €8k 
and €10k to allow young couples access housing and restore vacant 
properties.  
 
 
Cllr Scanlon supporting the motion said that people in rural 
communities were being discriminated against and welcomed the call 
for the removal of the seven year residency clause and an increase in 
the overall grant allocation.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he 
would correspond with the Department and highlight members 
concerns. He said that he would reference the issues raised by 
members including, 
 
▪ Seven Year residency clause needs to be removed for well 
grants as this preventing those availing of the vacant home 
grants from accessing funding for wells.  
▪ New builds needed to be incorporated in the scheme. 
▪ Grant increase needed to a maximum of €10k 
 
 
Cllr Naughton welcomed the response and said that the grant needed 
to be more accessible in light of the demand for housing 
 
C/410/25  
PROVIDE AN INCREASE IN THE FLOOD RISK MITIGATION FUND  
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr McMahon it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“I am asking this Council to call on the Department of the OPW to 
provide an increase in the flood risk mitigation fund so that emergency 

21 
 
works can be carried out in the interim on our released capital flood 
relief schemes.”  
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Jordan said that he was seeking an update on all flood relief 
schemes as it was clear that all of the Donegal schemes were far from 
construction at this point. He cited the need for works to be carried out 
in advance given that many residents are living with the fear of flooding 
despite the schemes themselves being released in early 2020/2021. He 
said that the Department should be contacted, and additional resources 
sought. Progress on same was, he contended, moving at a very slow 
pace and people were fearful given the number of severe weather 
events in recent years. 
 
 
Continuing Cllr Jordan referenced specific incidences in Pettigo and 
Inver and thus called on the Office of Public Works to step up and take 
responsibility.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Mahon concurred and said that everything possible had to be 
done to help homeowners and small businesses in these areas. He 
advised of the need to contact N.I. Water in relation to the situation at 
Pettigo and for a cross-border approach to be adopted. This Council, 
he said, needed to be proactive. He called the OPW to be invited to 
address members in relation to the overall county-wide situation.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach suggested that an overview of all the projects be 
brought to the attention of members at a full plenary meeting.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that the 
overall pace of delivery was slow given the need for environmental 
assessments and the time needed to deal with specific objections on 
each scheme. There was, he advised, an excellent Flood Relief Team 
in place and advance works were being carried out at certain locations. 
He noted that updates had been given at MD level and said that this 
could be repeated again in the New Year. 
 
Cllr Jordan said that whilst these updates had been beneficial there 
was a need for a county-wide update at plenary level. He said that 
things needed to move forward faster and that advance works had to 
be agreed with the OPW who needed to take full responsibility and not 
put the burden on the Roads Section. 
 
The Director of Service said that even if additional staffing resources 
were put in place there was a dedicated process to be worked through 
which was at times frustrating.  
 
It was thus agreed that a county-wide update would be provided at a 
Special Plenary Meeting in early 2026.  

22 
 
C/411/25 
INTRODUCTION OF POLITICS AND SOCIETY AS A LEAVING 
CERTIFICATE SUBJECT  
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Beard it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council calls on the Minister for Housing & Local 
Government and the Minister for Education to explore and assist in 
every possible way the introduction of Politics and Society as a Leaving 
Certificate subject in our Donegal Schools, in order to encourage more 
gender balance and diversity in democracy.”  
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate, and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Kennedy said in the 2024 Local Elections in Donegal there had 
been a total of 91 candidates and that only 19 of these had been 
women with three ultimately elected. 
 
 
 This was an ongoing trend, she contended, over the past 125 years. 
 
She referred to a meeting which had been held in the County House in 
2023 at which the gender balance had been reversed with 33 women 
and 4 men in the chamber. One outcome of this had been, she added, 
the passing of a resolution calling on the Minister for Education to make 
Politics available as a Leaving Certificate subject in all secondary 
schools.  
 
 
She acknowledged also the work of the Women’s Regional Caucus and 
the AILG together with See Her Elected (SHE) in promoting gender 
balance and diversity at local government level. 
 
 
 
Cllr Kennedy alluded to the success of the recent “ Students Shaping 
the Picture of Democracy Seminar in Donegal” which was held recently 
in Letterkenny. This event which had been a collaboration between 
Donegal County Council and SHE had brought together over 100 
students from across the county to look at the reasons for the under 
representation of women in politics in Donegal. One issue that had 
emerged was the fact that schools did not teach politics thus putting 
students at a disadvantage. It was noted that presently Politics could be  
taken as an additional exam subject but that this was at an additional 
cost to the student. 
 
 
She said that it was imperative that young people were given every 
opportunity to stand for election in the interest of democracy and that 
they had an understanding of what their role and responsibility was. 
 
 
Continuing, she cited the need for the establishment of a bursary to 
make the subject more accessible at secondary level. 
 
Cllr Beard said this was an excellent idea as politics in society was an 
important subject and everything possible needed to be done to 

23 
 
encourage female representation. Female participation, she added, 
brought a different perspective to the political forum. She noted that not 
all Donegal Schools offered politics something which was essential for 
the next generation of political leadership.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that correspondence would issue to the Minister as directed.   
 
 
 
Cllr Kennedy noted that the recent seminar in Letterkenny had been a 
great success and was a step in the right direction in terms of 
educating our young people on the importance of gender balance in 
political life. 
 
C/412/25  
 JUDICIAL PUBLIC INQUIRY INTO THE CREESLOUGH TRAGEDY 
 On the proposal of Cllr Mc Brearty, seconded by Cllr Devine it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-     
 
“I am re-submitting in the interest of real Justice, the below motion for 
the Nov 2025, full Council meeting at the end of the month, and I will be 
dealing with Minister for Justice, Jim Callaghan TD response, which 
took 10 months to come back to myself and Cllr Tómas Sean Devine 
via the DCC. In fact, it shows that he has no understanding about the 
injustice’s that these families are going through daily. 
Sadly, the Minister deliberately and intentionally fails to mention in his 
reply that a legal precedent was set on the 28th day of March 2002, 
when the then Government established a Statutory Judicial Public 
Inquiry (Morris Tribunal) to investigate the biggest ever Garda 
Corruption scandal in the States history, and did so while An Garda 
Siochana (Carty Internal Garda Investigation) Criminal, Garda 
Complaints Board investigations and multiple Civil Cases were all 
ongoing at that time, and during the 8 year period of the Morris 
Tribunal. 
This is reflected in then Garda Commissioner Drew Harris’s comments 
concerning the below motion about a Public Inquiry, that it could be 
established by Government if that is what the family’s wanted. That is 
what the families deserve and want. Every aspect of the Sates failures 
before and after this tragedy must be fully investigated independently if 
the full truth is to be told. 
The 10 innocent victims and their loved ones deserve nothing less. All 
politics is local and the DCCs local Authority Elected Members must 
lead the push for this Public Inquiry to be established, weather they 
agree with it or not. Latin Proverb: Fiat Justitia Ruat Caelum, “Let 
Justice be done though the Heaven’s fall.” 
 
“Requesting that the new incoming Government establish within its first 
100 days an Independent Statutory Judicial Public Inquiry with an open 
terms of reference into the explosion in Creeslough, Co Donegal that 
killed 10 people on the 7th Oct 2023, and I am calling on all the elected 

24 
 
members of Donegal County Council to support my motion for this 
much needed Public Inquiry.” 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that he felt it was important that the elected 
members all had an opportunity to speak on the motion given the 
importance and significance of the topic. The Cathaoirleach said that it 
had been agreed in the case of previous motions that contributions 
would be confined to those who had proposed and seconded the 
motion. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said this needed to be changed and that the CPG 
should look at amending the protocol.  
 
 
Addressing members, he said, that three years on there was still no 
criminal investigation, no inquest and numerous questions still 
unanswered, and that for this reason he had submitted the original 
motion first considered at the 2024 November Plenary Meeting.  
 
 
He read into the record the letter received from the Minister for Justice, 
Home Affairs & Migration which highlighted the fact that a criminal 
investigation was ongoing and that any commentary on the matter 
could undermine this investigation. 
 
 
He said that the correspondence had also outlined the necessity of 
allowing An Garda Siochána to continue with their investigation in 
conjunction with the Health and Safety Authority and the Commission 
for the Regulation of Utilities. 
 
 
He called on members to put pressure on their political colleagues in 
Government to lead out on the call for an inquiry. The families 
concerned, he said, did not need any more political waffle, committees 
or workshops but rather a speedy and honest answer to their 
questions. Transparency and accountability were missing at this point, 
he added. 
 
 
It was, he said, an emotional issue and one which all members should 
be allowed to contribute to. Justice, he stated, should prevail so that the 
families concerned got the justice, they deserved.  
 
 
Cllr Devine supporting the motion said that the response from the 
Minister’s Office was not adequate and that a fully transparent public 
inquiry was warranted as soon as possible.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that there were no objections to the motion and 
that there was unanimous support for same. Cllr Mc Bride concurred 
with this assessment. 
 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, A/Director Community Development & Planning 
Services said that the motion as agreed would be communicated to the 
Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration. 

25 
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that initial response from the Minister’s Office was 
late and misleading and made no reference to the fact that the 
establishment of the Morris Tribunal in 2002 had set the  precedent for 
the setting up of a public inquiry whilst other statutory investigations 
were ongoing  
 
 
Concluding he said that the silence was deafening and the fact that 
only two members commented was a poor reflection on the Council. He 
said that he would continue to stand by the people of Creeslough until 
they got the public inquiry that they deserved. The Local Authority, he 
added, had questions to answer also and particularly why the building 
concerned got planning permission in the first instance and the 
necessary safety checks and balances conducted.  
 
C/413/25  
LIMITS WELL GRANT APPLICATIONS   
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr McClafferty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 “Putting forward this motion for the council to write to the relevant 
minister or ministers to immediately review the current limits in relation 
to the timeframes regarding well grant applications, and to increase the 
current guideline cap of €15,000 per household with regards to new 
multi-annual rural water programme applications.”   
 
 He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Scanlon said the current guideline cap of €15k was insufficient in 
light of ongoing cost increases. He said that there was a need to roll out 
a robust model for the delivery of rural water on par with the NBI 
Broadband Programme. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig supporting the motion said that many rural 
areas had been left behind and referenced issues in the Rosses, Crolly 
and Gweedore areas. He said that there had been little or no progress 
in terms of services on the Islands. It was imperative, he added, that 
recognition was given to staff on the ground who did their best with the 
resources they had. Lack of investment in water and sewerage 
infrastructure, he said, had to be addressed in the long term. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he 
would write to the Department as directed. He said that he appreciated 
the comments in relation to the rural water team and noted that €22.5m 
in funding has been received to advance group water schemes. He 
said that updates on the schemes would be provided at MD level in 
Quarter 1 of 2025. 
 

26 
 
 
Cllr Scanlon welcomed the response and said it was essential that the 
cap was removed, and adequate funding was provided to progress 
these schemes going forward.  
 
C/414/25  
ROADWORKS AT NIGHTIME  
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That roadworks carried out by this Council on main and arterial routes 
which involve the closure of part or all of a section of road are from this 
point carried out at night so as to minimise disruption to motorists and 
all road users.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Bradley acknowledged the excellent work carried out by the road 
teams on a daily basis and noted that much additional work was being 
carried out at this time of year. He cited specific issues on the 
Buncrana to Derry Road at Fahan which had created long tailbacks and 
delays in the region of 40 to 50 minutes which had impacted 
significantly on road users. This type of scenario, he noted, created 
specific dangers for the emergency services in particular. There were, 
he advised, in recent weeks three sets of roadworks on the route from 
Buncrana to Letterkenny which had caused major disruption.  
 
 
He noted that works had taken place on the road at the roundabout into 
Buncrana and along the Cockhill Road during the night-time hours with 
little or no impact.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott supporting the motion said that the motion was 
extremely relevant and that there were concerns in relation to the 
impact on the emergency services. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, alluded to his response and said that although the 
risk of encountering high traffic flows was reduced by working during 
the night, other factors such as poor driver behaviour, higher speeds, 
fatigue, difficulty in judging distances and limited vision all contributed 
to increased risks in working at night. There were other drawbacks, he 
noted in terms of increased unit costs, additional safety controls with 
quality control of the works more difficult. Each site, he added, had its 
own set of considerations and that decisions on temporary traffic 
management were a matter for the competent designers based on the 
relevant criteria.  
 
 
Cllr Bradley said that he appreciated the response but that all 
roadworks should progress with minimum disruption to the road user.  
 

27 
 
C/415/25 
 DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS – EXTENSION OF THE PYRITE 
REMEDIATION SCHEME  
On the proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council notes the recent extension of the Pyrite Remediation 
Scheme for homeowners affected by pyritic heave in Dublin and 
Leinster.” 
 
This Council further notes that approaching 3,000 homeowners have 
availed of this  genuinely 100% redress scheme with the Housing 
Agency tasked with carrying out the remediation of properties accepted 
into the scheme. 
 
This Council calls on the Government to deliver the same redress to all 
victims of the defective concrete scandals and to urgently introduce a 
genuinely 100% redress scheme similar to the Pyrite Remediation 
Scheme for all of the victims of defective concrete blocks in Donegal.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
Cllr Murray welcomed the recent extension of the Pyrite Scheme and 
said that it needed to be replicated in Donegal. He said that many 
homeowners in Donegal could not access the Enhanced Defective 
Concrete Blocks Scheme and were unable to deal with the bureaucracy 
and the cost of accessing the scheme. He cited the need for a scheme 
which did not incur any costs for the homeowner. He welcomed the 
response and said that a strong message should be sent to the Minister 
in relation to the matter. 
 
 
 
There was a grave need also, he said, to have social housing included 
in the scheme as despite the ongoing building efforts there was no 
marked reduction in the housing waiting list. 
 
 
Cllr Doherty referenced the fact that in 2024 members were advised 
that a social housing remediation scheme was imminent, yet there had 
been no update on the matter to date. He said that it was eleven years 
since he had submitted a motion asking for recognition and support for 
the MICA Action Group together with the need for a redress scheme.  
 
 
 
Eleven years on, he noted, that there were major concerns on the slow 
pace of delivery of the DCB Scheme together with criticisms on the 
process with regard to decisions made by the Housing Agency who had 
downgraded particular determinations. 
 
 
 
Options 1-5 were, he advised, being downgraded and the associated 
appeals mechanism was slow and cumbersome. Outcomes applicable 
to homeowners in the Leinster were not, he advised, happening for 

28 
 
homeowners in Donegal. He called for an evaluation of the appeals 
process in light of the lengthy delays. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he 
would arrange to write to the Department as directed.  
 
 
Cllr Murray thanked members for their support. 
 
C/416/25  
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS    
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr McGee it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That Donegal County Council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, and separately to Mr Darren Lehane, Chair 
of the Appeals Panel, seeking an urgent intervention regarding 
downgraded determinations and the ongoing appeals backlog under 
the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme. 
 
This Council notes that many homeowners, who complied fully with the 
original scheme and received demolition determinations from IS 465 
Chartered Engineers, have since had those determinations 
downgraded by the Housing Agency’s Framework Engineers, often 
without any inspection. 
 
Appeals in these cases have experienced lengthy delays, in some 
instances since February 2024, during which time affected homes have 
continued to deteriorate rapidly. 
 
In line with current scientific evidence, and to ensure that the science is 
adhered to in all decision-making, this Council calls for: 
 
a) The reinstatement of the original recommendation made by the 
homeowners IS465 registered engineer. 
b) The rescinding of Options 2-5, as partial remediation does not work 
in the case of an internal sulphate attack which have been scientifically 
proven to be the wrong solution.   
c) A transparent maximum timeframe for the conclusion of all 
outstanding appeals. 
This Council requests a written response from both the Minister and 
the Chair of the Appeals Panel.”   
 
She received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above. 
 
 
Cllr Beard said that the level of downgraded determinations and the 
appeals backlog was unacceptable. She noted that six appeals had 
been determined and annulled in the past week. It was imperative, she 

29 
 
said, that an urgent intervention was made to the Chair of the Appeals 
panel and to the Minister for Housing.  
 
 
The families concerned, she said, had been pushed back into a further 
cycle of delay with the applications referred to the Housing Agency. 
These were families, she said, who were living in deteriorating homes 
with every delay creating further damage and associated risks to the 
structural integrity of their homes. 
 
 
An internal sulphate attack caused by reactive iron sulphate was, she 
advised, the true mechanism of the failure of these homes. The science 
was, she added, clear and had to be adhered to. Thus, it was 
acknowledged that the continued use of options 2, 3, 4, and 5 was 
wrong and unsafe and the downgrading of applications was prolonging 
the hardship for homeowners. She cited the need for fairness, clarity 
and scientific integrity and said that the delays needed to stop, and the 
scientific evidence heeded.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that he was supportive of the motion but that ongoing 
pleas on behalf of the homeowners were not being taken seriously. He 
said that he did not blame Donegal County Council and that the fault 
lay with the Minister and the Government who were not paying 
attention to the crisis in Donegal.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he 
would write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government  & Heritage 
and to the Chair of the Appeals Panel in relation to the downgrading of 
applications and the appeals backlog. 
 
 
Cllr Beard concluding the debate said that 205 homes had been  
remediated under the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme 
and that the majority of these were not rebuilds but rather partial works, 
surface repairs or temporary solutions and might all need to be 
revisited in the future. The reality, she stated, was that this was not a 
100% remediation scheme and existed in sharp contrast to the Pyrite 
Scheme where homeowners were not burdened financially or mentally. 
She called for an end to the discrimination and the introduction of a 
remediation option which was science based.  
 
C/417/25  
RESTORATION OF DISTRICT COURT SERVICES IN DONEGAL  
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
"Donegal County Council urges the Department of Justice & OPW to 
provide the essential state investment required that directs and enables 
the Building Committee of the Courts Service to initiate an immediate 
works plan that ensures the retention, refurbishment and restoration of 
District Court Services in Donegal."    

30 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Corporate, Housing and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Doherty welcomed the commitment to write to the Department of 
Justice and the OPW. He noted that there were specific issues in the 
Inishowen Municipal District and called for Carndonagh to be returned 
as soon as possible as a District Court venue. It was imperative, he 
added, that the courthouse in Carndonagh was not allowed to fall into 
further disrepair given that it had effectively been abandoned since 
2019 with no effort made to repair the roof. He said that a local solicitor 
also had concerns that the Department of Justice were intent on 
shutting down all Inishowen Court services. It was, he said, very unfair 
to expect people to travel a distance to access such services. 
 
 
The importance of the courts service to the local community was 
acknowledged including the impact on the local economy.  
 
 
Cllr Jordan said that there were similar issues in Donegal Town where 
the courthouse had closed several months ago. With the service now 
being provided in Ballyshannon, he said that people were worried that 
the facility might not open again. He called on the OPW to address the 
situation. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that he would forward correspondence to the Minister for Justice, Home 
Affairs & Migration and to the Minister of State with responsibility for the 
OPW. 
 
Cllr Doherty said that it essential that people were aware of the 
intentions of the Courts Service and that the retention of such services 
was critical at local level in Donegal.  
 
C/418/25  
UNFINISHED DEVELOPMENTS IN RURAL AREAS  
On the proposal of Cllr Crossan, seconded by Cllr Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council proceeds to implement Section 34 (6) of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended ) to grant planning 
permission in respect of planning applications for unfinished 
developments in rural areas which would materially contravene the 
Donegal County Development Plan 2024-30.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Planning Services and 
Community Development in relation to the above.  
 
 

31 
 
 
Cllr Crossan acknowledged the response. He said that Donegal was in 
the middle of housing crisis, and it was in everybody’s interest that as 
many houses as possible were made available particularly those in 
unfinished estates. He noted that the response referenced the rural un-
serviced nature of the sites in question, and the fact that the limited 
scale of development placed them outside the category of cases where 
Section 34(6) could be considered. He noted that on one of the sites in 
question there was an occupied house and that services were most 
available in that development. He asked for additional clarity on the 
comment that these developments were outside the category of cases 
where Section 34(6) would generally be considered.  
 
 
He then called for Section 34(60 to be triggered and asked members 
for their support. Referencing a letter received from the Senior Planner 
on the 10th November in respect of one particular development, he 
asked that the proposal therein be pursued and that further 
negotiations take place.  
 
 
 
Cllr C Brogan supporting the motion said it was important that planning 
policy was shaped to meet the needs of the people. He said that all 
members had encountered areas with legacy issues and that the 
proper tools needed to be in place to address the issues that had 
arisen. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, A/Director Community Development  & Planning 
Services thanked Cllr Crossan for his engagement on the matter over 
recent days. There were two elements to the response, he noted 
namely, the provisions and use of Section 34(6) and the acknowledged  
 
policy gap in respect of unfinished rural estates.  
 
 
The vehicle to address these anomalies was, he contended, through a 
variation of the County Development Plan.  
 
 
Mr Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner, noted that there had been 
engagement over the past number of weeks on the issues raised in the 
motion. The advice, he stated, was based on the appropriateness of 
Section 34(6) to the circumstances in question and the need to address 
at this juncture the lack of a policy framework. He said that were 
Section 34(6) applied to a grant of planning permission proposed by the 
executive, and where it contravened the Development Plan the 
requirement was to go out to public consultation and referred again to 
the applicant who would be kept briefed on the outcome and also to the 
various prescribed bodies and various third parties for their 
observations. Crucially it was only granted when the Planning Authority 
intended to grant planning permission. There was a clear policy 
vacuum, he noted, which needed to be addressed through the variation 
process. There was a pathway there, he said, to address such legacy 

32 
 
issues. This was the way to proceed, he advised and not through the 
misapplication of Section 34(6) 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach outlined the implications of triggering Section 34(6) 
and noted that ultimately after the statutory consultation process the 
matter would revert to Council and that approval of same required the 
support of three quarters of the members present. He drew attention to 
the fact that the Senior Planner had indicated that the appropriate 
mechanism for dealing with this matter was through the variation 
process. 
 
 
The Senior Planner said that the fundamental difference here was that 
the motion referenced individual developments as opposed to 
addressing the policy vacuum in the County Development Plan. The 
issue was, he said, that there was no provision to deal with such the 
developments referenced. The Planning Authority, was, he contended, 
not in a position to trigger Section 34(6) in a positive way at present.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that members had concerns in relation to the 
various assessments, directives etc and the overall timeframe to 
address the matter through the variation process.  
 
 
 
Mr Quinn said that the variation process needed to be complete by July 
2026 but that a number of steps needed to be taken to get to that point 
and have the proposal agreed by members. 
 
 
Cllr Crossan said that he appreciated the response but asked why 
Section 34(6) was in place if it could not be utilised. He said that he 
would like to proceed with the process as requested in the motion. 
 
C/419/25 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING 
 
It was unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting until 1.45pm  
 
C/420/25 
ACCOMMODATION PLANS 
It was agreed to take Cllr C Brogan’s motion at this juncture. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C. Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“I propose that this Council's working group on our future plans for 
accommodation and in line with our review plan that we look at the 
possibility of decentralising our council services in line with our current 
plans for the regeneration of our town centres, so that there is real 
meaningful permanent employment and a presence of jobs and 
economic benefits together with the distribution of services for our 
county and its people.” 
 
He received a response from the Director Housing, Corporate, & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above. 
 

33 
 
Cllr Brogan said that the motion was self-explanatory and that there 
was a huge need to invest in Council services. He urged the executive 
and members to get together and look at ways of upgrading and 
investing in Council Headquarters as facilities in Lifford were not up to 
standard. He noted that there were a number of regeneration plans in 
motion throughout the county and said that the Council should look at 
moving services to different parts of Donegal. There was also an 
opportunity, he said, to lease properties which would be of benefit to 
many of these towns. This was an opportune time, he added, as the 
organisational review had just taken place.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott seconded the motion and contended that there was 
now a good opportunity to bring services back to the Public Service 
Centres. He referenced Planning in particular and the fact that it would 
be of benefit to all concerned if this service was provided at local level.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
advised that a review of the management and staffing structure had just 
been completed in parallel to the Workforce Plan for the period 2025 to 
2029.The issue of office accommodation, he stated, was being 
reviewed and the motion would be considered in the context of this 
review. It was acknowledged that a working group had been set up to 
look at the issue of office accommodation and that an examination 
would take place to examine and explore the most efficient and 
appropriate location for each department, in the context of the nature of 
the work and the implications for remote and blended working. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he agreed with the relocation of 
services to rural areas. He highlighted the fact that staffing 
complements needed to take into consideration the new statutory 
obligations for the provision of services through the medium of Irish.  
 
 
Cllr Brogan welcomed the response and said that the plans as outlined 
were a work in progress.  
 
C/421/25 
PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGN REMINDING HOMEOWNERS 
TO HAVE THEIR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS CHECKED  
On the proposal of Cllr McDermott, seconded by Cllr Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council request the Executive to run a public information 
campaign reminding homeowners to have their electrical systems 
checked, particularly in respect of older homes. A number of houses 
have recently come to my attention with wiring failures, which pose a 
serious safety risk — particularly for elderly people living alone. 
Furthermore, I ask that this motion be circulated to all Councils, as this 
measure has the potential to save lives.”    
 

34 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above. 
 
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that he wanted the Council to highlight the need 
for having electrical systems checked, particularly in older homes. He 
cited a specific example in his own constituency where wiring had 
deteriorated to such an extent that the coating on the cabling had 
melted. It was noted that the Older Persons Grant was available to 
cover the cost of the necessary electrical works. He drew members 
attention to a number of photographs which showed clearly the signs of 
deterioration especially around the electrical sockets.  
 
 
 In the interest of public safety, he said, the message needed to go out 
that there could be an issue in some older houses. He said that he had 
also contacted RECI and SAFE Electric in relation to the matter.  
 
 
The Emergency Services Department, he contended, could do a 
promotional campaign to highlight the matter in a sensitive way so as 
not to alarm or frighten elderly residents and those in vulnerable 
situations.  
 
 
Cllr Brogan said the motion was very much based on common sense 
and championed the need to create an awareness of the dangers 
involved. There was an opportunity, he said for the issue to be 
highlighted and promoted through the current housing related public 
information event sessions.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
it was important to raise an awareness of the issue and stated that 
grant assistance was available from the Council for a range of housing 
related matters including the Housing Aid for Older People Scheme 
which provided assistance for older people over 66 years to cover the 
cost of essential repairs, which included electrical works. The motion 
was timely, he added, in that the standard costings under the Housing 
Grant Schemes had been increased with effect from the 1st January 
2026. 
 
It would be possible, he said, to have detail provided on the options 
available at the housing information sessions currently underway in the 
Public Service Centres and to circulate the motion to other local 
authorities for their consideration.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott welcomed the response and thanked all who had 
assisted with the situation that had arisen in Inishowen.  
 
C/422/25  
IMPROVEMENT IN PUBLIC LIGHTING FOR RURAL AREAS  

35 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr Devine it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
Donegal's rural areas are characterised by limited public lighting, and 
an absence of footpaths which impacts the safety and wellbeing of 
residents. 
  
“I ask the Council to explore and implement localised solutions to 
increase public lighting in isolated communities. I ask that the Council 
engages with relevant stakeholders, including Transport Infrastructure 
Ireland and local communities to ensure that any measures taken align 
with the specific needs of Donegal's rural population. Improving public 
lighting in rural Donegal will significantly enhance safety, reduce 
isolation and improve quality of life for residents. By tailoring our 
approach to local conditions, we can ensure that our rural communities 
are safe and well-supported”. 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee cited a number of examples where people were afraid to 
venture out for a walk as public lighting was poor or non-existent. He 
called on the Council to check out these dangerous locations county-
wide.  
 
 
He was, he said, unhappy with the response and cited the difficulties in 
explaining to elderly constituents that lighting could not be provided.  
 
 
Cllr Devine supporting the motion said that it was not just rural areas 
and cited issues along the Ballymacool Road where the road was dark 
and the footpath narrow. €7000 per member under the Public Lights 
and Minor Infrastructure Fund was not, he advised, sufficient.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that he 
appreciated the sentiment and the rationale for the motion. He 
referenced the detail in his reply and noted that the Public Lights and 
Minor Infrastructure Fund did not allow for the provision of lights in rural 
areas. He said that the Roads  & Transportation SPC had considered 
the public lighting policy at its recent meeting and had agreed that an 
updated policy would go forward to the Corporate Policy Group in 
January 2026. This, he sated, proposed to limit the installation of public 
lighting to areas within urban speed limits.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that he was disappointed as he was not looking for 
lights all over the place but rather trying to help a number of elderly 
citizens.  
 

36 
 
 
The Director of Service said that he would circulate the terms of the 
Public Lights and Minor Infrastructure Fund to members so that they 
were up to speed on the conditions and criteria involved. 
 
C/423/25  
REVIEW OF BEACH ACCESS FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Carr, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That Donegal County Council carry out a review of beach access for 
emergency vehicles and ensure that all necessary safety equipment, 
including life buoys, is regularly inspected and maintained. 
Furthermore, that these actions apply to all beaches used by the public 
across County Donegal, and not solely to designated Blue Flag 
beaches, in the interest of public safety and emergency response 
capability. 
Additionally, that Donegal County Council provide an individual 
identification number or code for every beach and pier in the county, to 
assist the public in accurately directing emergency services to the 
correct location in the event of an incident.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme and Facilities Management in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Cllr Carr said that he had been involved in an incident three months 
ago and that as a result he was aware of what was needed and where 
the gaps were in relation to the beach access for the emergency 
services. He noted that Blue Flag Beaches were well equipped but that 
other beached and piers lacked attention. 
 
 
Donegal, he said, had 18% of the country’s coastline and as such 
needed to lead out in terms of monitoring and safety. He alluded in 
particular to Tramore Beach, Dooey and Leitirmacaward all of which 
were extremely busy but had no emergency vehicle access, buoys or 
proper warning signs. An emergency ambulance arriving at Tramore, 
he stated, had no access and personnel had to carry equipment for 
over a kilometre in an emergency situation. Dooey, he added, required 
helicopter access in such a situation.  
 
 
He called on the Council to review access to these beaches for the 
emergency services and noted that there had been engagement with 
the Director of Service and his team on the matter. Another issue of 
concern, he said,  was that there were no Eircodes for beaches and 
this was causing difficulties  and had implications for life saving 
operations. Each beach, he added, needed a location code and a sign 
with a dedicated reference number so that the exact location could be 
provided in an emergency. The Council, he said, should introduce, 
promote or create a universal location code for all beaches an piers in 
the county.  
 

37 
 
 
This would he said help locals and tourists alike and Donegal County 
Council could lead out on the initiative.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said the Ambulance Service used a location system 
and that something similar could be utilised for piers an beaches.  
 
 
Cllr Jordan seconding the motion said that a location code was an 
excellent idea and noted that not all beaches had a defibrillator in 
place. He said that the Council should lead the way on this matter.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he was 
committed to working on the first part of the motion. People, he noted, 
were encouraged to go to beaches where the water quality was safe 
and public lifeguards were on duty. In relation to safety equipment and 
inspections, he confirmed that there were 188 ring buoys located at the 
13 lifeguard beaches and an additional 418 at 69 other beach locations 
around the coast from Moville to Bundoran. Ring buoys were checked 
at least monthly during the year, he advised, and during the bathing 
season checked daily at lifeguarded beaches and fortnightly at other 
beaches. He noted that when the emergency numbers 112 or 999 were  
dialled the GPS system on the caller’s phone was automatically 
activated.  
 
 
He said, he would look at the Blue Flag beaches and designate bathing 
areas  and work with the Irish Coastguard to see what could be done.  
 
Updates would be provided, he said, through the Climate Action  & 
Environment SPC and a report brought to members in March 2026. 
 
 
Cllr Carr thanked members for their support and said that he and his 
family would be delighted if something could be done to improve beach 
access in emergency situations.  
 
C/424/25  
REUNIFICATION OF IRELAND  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Murray it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
That this Council recognises that: 
 
➢ the reunification of Ireland is an objective of Bunreacht na 
hÉireann; and 
➢ there is a growing national discussion around constitutional 
change with people from diverse backgrounds now exploring the 
possibility of Irish unity: 
 
                    notes that: 
 

38 
 
➢ the Good Friday Agreement 1998 provides the democratic and 
peaceful means to achieve reunification through the provision of 
unity referendums, 
➢ the significant Joint Oireachtas Committee on the Implementation 
of the Good Friday Agreement report "Perspectives on 
Constitutional Change: Finance and Economics", recommends 
the establishment of Citizen Assemblies and other relevant 
forums, a designated Joint Oireachtas Committee and a 
Government Department to take responsibility for planning and 
preparing for constitutional change, received cross-party support: 
 
And will write to the Office of An Taoiseach, seeking the Irish 
Government to plan and prepare for Irish unity, through the following 
actions: 
 
➢ establish an all-island representative Citizens' Assembly or 
Assemblies, to allow for informed debate, and a Joint Oireachtas 
Committee on Irish Unity to enable careful planning, 
➢ produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with 
civic society and key stakeholders, 
➢ engage with northern protestant and unionist opinion about the 
future of Ireland; and 
➢ work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in 
the Good Friday Agreement.”    
 
 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Corporate, Housing and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
 
 Cllr Mc Monagle said the work on the reunification of Ireland was 
ongoing and growing and that a range of bodies and organisations had 
worked hard to progress this conversation. He noted that a recent 
private member’s bill put forward by Sinn Fein on this subject had 
received unanimous support. Those who wanted a united Ireland, he 
said, needed to take on board the views of all stakeholders. Sinn Fein’s 
Commission on the future of Ireland, he noted, had worked to create an 
environment where dialogue was encouraged and feedback valued. 
This message, he said, had been conveyed at both home and abroad 
and had taken on board the concerns of all involved. This, it was 
acknowledged had garnered the views of young people and was based 
on grassroots consultation reaching out to all communities and 
demographics and political perspectives on this Island. 
 
 
It was, he added, time for change and the future rested in the hands of 
people north and south. He alluded to the fact that the First Minister in 
Northern Ireland was now of the nationalist persuasion, and this clearly 
indicated that political change was possible. There was now, he 
confirmed a real opportunity to build a shared future and to build a 
stronger and more affluent democracy and disregard the division and 
inequality of the past. This, it was noted, required a collective approach 
and for the Irish Government to establish as soon as possible a 

39 
 
Citizen’s Assembly to discuss Irish unity. All, he contended, should 
have a say in that discussion and he thus called on the Government 
and the Taoiseach’s office to put the necessary plans in place to enable 
that discussion take place.  
 
 
Cllr Murray said it was appropriate that Donegal take the lead in this 
discussion given that it was most impacted by the border. It was no 
longer he said about the conversation but rather the timeline for 
reunification process. Opinion polls, he said, clearly indicated that this 
was what people wanted and the failure to move forward with this 
would be irresponsible. It was imperative, he said, that a new Ireland 
was created encompassing all of the essential political, educational and 
health services.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
advised that a copy of the motion would be forwarded to the Office of 
An Taoiseach. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle concluding contended that a general shared future 
would benefit all elements of the community and facilitate the pooling of 
resources and talents nationwide so as to allow all concerned to shape 
their future. 
 
He said that he envisaged a new Ireland where healthcare would be 
free, housing a right and the education system world class with an 
economy that served the interest of all the people on this Island.  
 
 
C/425/25 
 EXCLUSION OF TRADE AND SERVICES IN THE OCCUPIED 
TERRITORIES BILL  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 “That this Council opposes the exclusion of trade in services in the 
Occupied Territories Bill and writes to the Tánaiste and Minister for 
Foreign Affairs and Trade, Simon Harris TD, calling on him to include a 
ban on trade in services in the government's proposed Occupied 
Territories Bill with immediate effect.” 
 
 Also, that Donegal County Council endorses and supports the following 
recommendations: 
 
• The Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade which strongly 
recommends progressing the Bill and that the prohibition of 
imports from the Palestinian Occupied Territories should be 
extended to include trade in services, in line with the Advisory 
Opinion of the International Court of Justice and the Resolution 
which Ireland co-sponsored at the United Nations General 
Assembly  

40 
 
• The Joint Committee recommends that the title of the Bill be the 
‘Illegal Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory 
(Prohibition of Importation of Goods & Services) Bill’.”    
 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Corporate, Housing and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Meehan called on the Government to act decisively and fulfil their 
obligations in terms of international law. There were, he said, serious 
legal and humanitarian issues involved that underpinned the passing of 
this legislation. To do so, he said, would be a concrete act of 
compliance with international law and human rights directives and 
would show true action and solidarity with the Palestinian people.  
 
 
The occupied Territories Bill was, he stated, a critical piece of 
legislation, but the exclusion of trade and services was a serious 
omission and undermined the purpose of the legislation. A stand, he 
contended, need to be taken against the illegal settlements in Palestine 
and for this reason the bill needed to be comprehensive and consistent. 
These settlements, it was noted, were built on stolen land seized from 
Palestinian families and the ultimate aim ethnic cleansing. We cannot , 
he said, declare these settlements illegal whilst allowing Irish 
Companies to trade in goods and services. To leave these out, he said, 
created a loophole. The Joint Committee on Foreign Trade with cross-
party backing had, he said, recommended the inclusion of trade in 
services in line with international law and the resolution which Ireland 
had co-sponsored at the United Nations General Assembly.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan highlighted the fact that the Irish people were supportive of 
the inclusion of trade and services and the Government allegedly so. 
The delay in passing the legislation was, he added, unsatisfactory. 
 
 
This Council ,he said, needed to send a clear message that it 
supported the inclusion of trade and services as there was still nothing 
in the statute books to reflect the urgency of the situation. 
 
 
Human rights, he said, had to be defended in words and by actions. He 
called on the new Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms Helen Mc Entee T.D 
to ensure that the OTB is robust and comprehensive and in line with 
the standards that Ireland has long championed. 
 
He asked members for their support and assistance in standing for 
justice and in ensuring that Ireland leads the way aligning its legislation 
with its values.  
 
Cllr J Brogan said that the Government parties had reneged on their 
election commitments and were stalling in relation to the need to the 
ban on goods and services. He commended the efforts of Senator 
Frances Black who had kept the topic on the agenda. A new draft back 

41 
 
in June, he advised, had placed a focus on goods but ignored services. 
Despite the recommendations of the Joint Committee on Foreign 
Affairs and Trade there was still no definitive response from the 
Government, he added. He called on the new Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, Helen Mc Entee, T.D to include services and speed up the 
adoption of the Occupied Territories Bill.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that he would arrange to have the motion forwarded to the Tánaiste 
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs.  
 
Cllr Meehan in conclusion said that a number of members of the 
independent grouping had met with the Director of Economic 
Development, Information Systems and Emergency Services and that a 
commitment had been given to review the Council’s BDS policy. He 
paid tribute to Cllr Frances Black and her colleagues in the 
Oireachtas together with Christian Aid Ireland and Irish Palestine 
Solidarity Campaign who had championed this cause over the last 
number of years.  
 
C/426/25  
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr McGee it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council support my motion condemning the decision taken 
by the 79 TDs to vote in favour of the Government's counter motion to 
the one put forward by Deputy Charles Ward in Dáil Eireann on the 
15th October 2025 entitled "Reform of the Defective Concrete Redress 
Scheme.” 
 
In doing so, these TDs have demonstrated their approval to the 
defective concrete crisis here in Donegal and other affected counties. 
This runs contrary to the expressed will of the 37 elected members of 
DCC as demonstrated by the unanimous passing of 27 motions since 
July 2024, highlighting the urgent and essential changes that need to 
be made to the enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme and the 
Governments approach to the humanitarian crisis. It’s only right the 
people affected by DCB know that DCC will publicly call out this 
Government when it makes decisions that are totally and morally 
wrong.”   
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme and Facilities Management in relation to 
the above.  
 
Cllr Devine said that the motion was self-explanatory and needed no 
additional explanation. 
 

42 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said it was shameful that 79 T.D.s had voted not to help 
the people of Donegal. He said that people should speak to their 
Oireachtas member and query why they had voted against their own 
people. The current scheme, he said, was not working and this needed 
to be addressed as a matter of urgency. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water  & Environment, said that the 
Council would write to the Minster for Housing Local Government  & 
Heritage accordingly. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion . 
 
Cllr Devine said it was disappointing that members had not spoken to 
the local Oireachtas members on the subject and if they had then their 
please were not taken seriously. A message needed to be sent 
nationally, he added, that the present scheme was not working for 99% 
of the families impacted 
 
C/427/25  
CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS   
 
 Meeting with Government Ministers 
 The Cathaoirleach said that it had been agreed by the CPG that 
information would be circulated in the New Year in relation to dedicated 
meetings with the Minister for Local Government, Housing & Heritage 
and the Minister for Transport. The proposed delegations, he 
confirmed, would include the Corporate Policy Group, the Executive 
and the local Oireachtas Members. 
 
Cllr Devine noted that a specific meeting was needed for defective 
concrete block issues alone.  
 
Letter of Congratulations – President Connolly 
It was agreed that a letter of congratulations be sent to President 
Connolly congratulating her on her inauguration and offering best 
wishes for her term in office. 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
 
➢ Edel Kelly (Shalvey), Senior Management Team Support on the 
death of her father, Peter O’ Donnell. 
➢ Eddie Mc Grane, Water Services, Donegal MD on the death of his 
mother Eilis Mc Grane.  
➢ The family of the late Dickie Curran former employee of Letterkenny 
Parks & Open Spaces. 
➢ Cllr Martin Harley on the death of his sister, Margaret Harley.  
➢ Roisin Mc Monagle, Library Administration on the death of her 
father, Barney Mc Monagle.  
➢ Colin MC Nulty, Area Manager, Lifford, Stranorlar MD on the death 
of his father, Fergus Mc Nulty. 

43 
 
➢ The family of the late Anthony Breslin, formerly Water Services, 
Donegal MD.  
➢ Paul Strawbridge, Water Services, Inishowen MD on the death of 
his mother, Sheila Strawbridge.  
 
Section 34(6) Planning  & Development Act 2000 (As Amended) 
Cllr Crossan queried the status of his motion debated earlier in the 
meeting. Mr Eamonn Brown, A. Director Community Development & 
Planning Services said that the Planning Division could not act on the 
proposal and that the appropriate vehicle for addressing the matter 
highlighted and at a small number of other locations was through the 
variation of the County Development Plan. The applicable timeline for 
same was July 2026, he noted which gave reasonable time to address 
and deal with the public comments submitted.  
 
Planning Workshop 
It was unanimously agreed that a Plenary Planning Workshop take 
place on Monday 1st December 2025 at 10 a.m. in the County House, 
Lifford to consider issues raised at the workshop on the 5th October in   
relation to the Proposed Variation No. 1 to the County Development 
Plan 2024-2030. 
 
 
 
C/428/25  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
The Chief Executive informed members that he was available to 
discuss any of the items outlined in the report. 
 
 Members noted the updates in relation to the following: 
 
1.Corporate 
Organisational Structure Review 2025 
 
2.Community Development & Planning Services 
Community Development  
Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme 
Pride of Place Awards 
Older Person’s Council – Annual General Meeting 
Capital Projects Delivery Unit & Taking in Charge of Housing Estates 
Division 
Major Projects Update 
Refugee Response Unit Update 
Number of Refugees 
Local Authority Integration Team (LAIT)  
Community Integration Forum 
Planning Services 
Planning Policy 
Review of Development Contribution Scheme  
Enforcement  
Development Applications Unit 
Regeneration and Development Team 
Rural Regeneration and Development Fund (RRDF)  

44 
 
Urban Regeneration and Development Fund (URDF)  
Croi Conaithe Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme 
Addressing Vacancy and Dereliction 
 
3.Water and Environment  
Environment Report 
Septic Tank Inspections 
Septic Tank Grants & Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme 
Air Quality and Solid Fuel Regulation 
Public Service Announcements (PSA’s)  
Bathing Waters 2025 Season 
Solid Fuel Regulations 
Community Climate Action Fund – Phase 2 
Climate Action Week 
 
Community Climate Action Fund-Showcase Event 
Donegal County Council signs up to Reduce Your Use Energy 
Campaign for 2025/2026 Winter Season 
National Tidy Towns Results 
Defective Concrete Blocks - Update 
 
4. Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
Social Housing 
Social Housing Delivery Pipeline 2022-2030 
Housing Grants 
Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme 
Culture Division 
Creative Ireland 
Library Service 
Skills for Life  
County Donegal Heritage Office 
“Working Over By” Travelling Exhibition 
Glasgow Corporation Transport & The Donegal Connection  
Heritage Week Awards 
The Laurels, Glenties Historic Towns Initiative 
Ballyshannon Historic Towns Atlas 
Local Authority Heritage Practice Seminar 
 
5. Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services 
Information Systems 
Northern Periphery Arc (NPA) European Project: INNOCAP 
Economic Development Division  
Donegal Tech Advocates Event 
“Powering Progress & Opportunities in Offshore Renewables”  
Blue BioEconomy Event-BIM in collaboration with Donegal County 
Council 
Disrupt by the Sea 2025 - Showcasing Donegal’s Global Innovation 
Reach 
National AI Challenge 2025 – Donegal Punches Above Its Weight  
Tip O’Neill Awards  
Donegal Tourism Business Clinics 

45 
 
National Quality Standard Awards (NQSA)  
Local Enterprise Office 
Progress Against Targets 
National Women’s Enterprise Day 
Blas na hÉireann Irish Food Awards 
Lead2Grow 
Business Supports Clinics 
Driving on Ambition 
GIFT Project  
 
6. Roads & Transportation 
National Roads Office Update 
A5/N2 Cross Border Committee 
Donegal TEN-T Priority Route Improvement Project 
Roads Areas Update 
Restoration Improvement and Restoration Maintenance 
Community Improvement Schemes 
Storm Response 
Local Improvement Scheme 
Invasive Species Control 
Winter Maintenance 
Strategic Rehabilitation Regional Road Grant 
Central Technical Services 
NTA Funded Active Travel Projects 
Piers and Harbours 
Urban Speed Limits 
Fintra Bridge and Road Realignment 
R250 Currynanerriagh Bridge (Droichead an Churraoin) and Road 
Realignment Scheme 
Bridge Assessments 
Glenmore Bridge 
Letterkenny Northern Network Project 
Letterkenny Southern Network Project 
Road Safety 
 
C/429/25 
UPDATE ON MAY MOTION TO DEAL WITH DERELICT SITES AND 
BUILDINGS  
 
 
Cllr Naughton submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I have update on my motion in May in relation to allocating 
€5million in the revenue budget for 2026 to deal with derelict sites and 
buildings?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
and Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/430/25 
FULL LIST OF VACANCIES ACROSS ALL DEPARTMENTS OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
Cllr Naughton submitted the following question:-  
 

46 
 
Can I get the full list of vacancies across all departments of Donegal 
County Council?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/431/25 
HEDGES AND OVERGROWTH POSING A DANGER TO ROAD 
USERS.  
 
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
To ask the Director for Roads what steps the Council take with regard 
to hedges and overgrowth which pose a danger to road users. I 
understand the law is that it is the landowner’s responsibility to 
maintain vegetation, however in the event a landowner refuses to cut 
overgrowth what enforcement steps do the Council follow.    
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.     
 
C/432/25  
REVIEW OF THE WINTER MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME  
 
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
To ask the Director for Roads when the review of the winter 
maintenance programme routes will take place.    
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/433/25  
SEVERE WEATHER OCCURRENCE   
 
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
On 15th October 2025 Minister Browne said in Dail Eireann  "— Local 
Authorities, working together with the Office for Emergency Planning 
and the National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management 
have systems in place to assist all homeowners to remain safe and to 
secure alternative accommodation should it be required in the case of 
any severe weather occurrence: 
 
Could I be advised on specific arrangements referenced by Minister 
James Browne specifically? 
 
▪ What is the plan currently in place for Donegal? 
▪ What criteria would trigger the plan? 
▪ How and where emergency or temporary accommodation would 
be provided? 
▪ How homeowners will be notified in advance about the steps to 
take and who to contact in such circumstances?   
 
She received a response from the Director of Economic Development, 
Information Systems and Emergency Service in relation to the above.  

47 
 
C/434/25 
COST OF STREAMING OF THE DEFECTIVE BLOCKS COMMITTEE 
MEETINGS  
 
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
Could I get an itemised breakdown of the costs associated with the 
streaming of the Defective Blocks Committee meetings?   
  
She received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/435/25  
CLAR REVIEW BY DEPARTMENT  
 
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
Following my motion adopted on September 29th last re: current CLAR 
review by Dept. and Council commitment to follow up, 
 
What correspondence has been forwarded by DCC to The Department 
re: Review & increased eligibility areas for CLAR and what 
response(s) have been received from Minister Calleary and /or his 
department? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/436/25  
ENERGY EFFICIENCY RETROFIT PROGRAMME  
 
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
“How many housing units were successfully delivered in 2025 to date 
and in what location? Did discussions with the Department result in 
council securing additional units/budget during the year?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/437/25 
FUNDING DRAWN DOWN FROM THE SOCIAL HOUSING 
MAINTENANCE BUDGET TO DO MAINTENANCE WORKS ON 
SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS AFFECTED BY DEFECTIVE CONCRETE 
BLOCKS  
 
 
Cllr Carr submitted the following question:-  
 
My question concerns the maintenance works carried out by the 
Council on social housing units suspected of being affected by 
defective concrete blocks, with funding drawn from the social housing 
maintenance and painting budgets in each Municipal District. Could 
you please provide details of the total expenditure to date from these 
budgets in each MD on such works, and confirm whether the Council 
has submitted a claim to the relevant Government Department seeking 
reimbursement for this expenditure?     
 

48 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/438/25 
BREAKDOWN OF THE COST OF STREAMING PLENARY 
MEETINGS  
 
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-    
 
Recently the Council made us aware of the cost of streaming Plenary 
meetings - €22,500 euros. Can I get a breakdown of these costs?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/439/25  
UPDATE ON OUR LEGAL SERVICES  
 
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we have an updated report on our legal services and the 
possibility of us employing our own in-house solicitor?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/440/25  
SUPPLY AND FILLING OF SALT BINS  
 
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
Can this Council supply and fill salt bins in estates they have taken 
over and also on roads that are not gritted by our lorries?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/441/25  
ACTIVE TRAVEL PROJECTS  
 
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I have an updated report on all our active travel projects in 
Donegal in the last 3 years, a breakdown of monies spent, including 
consultancy fees to date on the programme of the work, and a timeline 
for the allocations and the schedule of works for the next two years ?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
C/442/25  
FLOOD RELIEF SCHEMES  
 
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
How many Flood Relief Schemes have been approved by the 
Department for Donegal and what is the timeline for the starting of 
these projects and where are they located?   
 

49 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/443/25  
MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
 
 
Members noted the motions from other Councils.  
   
 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Clare County Council calls on the Government of Ireland not to 
support the European Commission’s proposal to establish a single 
common fund under the new Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 
2028-2034, which would merge key EU policy instruments such as the 
Common Agriculture Fund into one overarching funding mechanism.  
 This Council expresses concern that:-  
 
5. The proposed “Common fund” risks undermining the integrity and 
transparency of longstanding EU policies that have delivered 
tangible benefits to Ireland’s regions, farmers, and coastal 
communities.  
6. The Commission’s justification – that this structure would “simplify” 
the MFF – fails to recognise that simplification through 
centralisation can weaken the specific policy objectives and ring-
fenced funding that underpin regional and rural development. 
7. The proposal links the next MFF to the repayment of EU debt 
incurred under the Next Generation EU recovery instrument, 
creating fiscal pressure that is already leading to an overall 20% 
reduction in key investment areas compared with the current 
period.  
8. The Commission’s claim that the new MFF will be “the biggest EU 
budget ever” is misleading, as this increase is largely accounted 
for by debt repayments rather than by additional funding for future 
programmes or regional growth.  
 
Accordingly, Clare County Council urges the Minister for Public  
Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform, and the Minister for Finance, 
to:  
 
▪ Reject any move towards a single aggregated fund that would 
erode the distinct purposes of the CAP, Cohesion, and Fisheries 
policies.  
▪ Advocate instead for a transparent, policy based MFF that 
maintains clear and separate funding streams for agriculture, 
regional development, and the blue economy; and  
▪ Support an ambitious, adequately resourced EU budget that 
ensures balanced and sustainable growth across Ireland and 
the European Union’s regions.” 
 
  GALWAY CITY COUNCIL     
 “Extension of Free Fares for Under-9s to Commercial Bus Operators 

50 
 
 That Galway City Council supports the immediate inclusion of 
Commercial Bus Operators (CBOs) in the Child Leap Card Scheme,  
which provides free bus travel for children under nine.  
 Council notes: 
CBOs are an essential part of Ireland’s public transport network, 
already delivering the Young Adult Leap Card and the Department of 
Social Protection’s Travel Pass.  
Their exclusion from the under-9 scheme creates unfairness, 
particularly for rural families who depend on them, and risk a two-tier 
bus system.  
Extending the scheme would cost just €1 million, a modest sum that 
would support families during the cost-of-living crisis and encourage 
sustainable travel habits among children.  
 
Therefore, Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Transport and 
the National Transport Authority to:  
 
1.Urgently include CBOs in the Child Leap Card Scheme.  
2.Ensure a fair and consistent transport policy that treats all children  
equally, regardless of geography or bus service used.” 
 
KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Kerry County Council endorsees the End Discrimination of 
Inheritance (EDIT) campaign and calls on Ministers for Equality, Norma 
Foley, Public Expenditure, Jack Chambers and Finance Paschal 
Donoghue to commit to harmonising the inheritance laws and bands so 
that people with no direct descendants are treated the same as those 
with children under inheritance law and succession planning. Further, I 
request that upon adoption, this motion is circulated to all Local 
Authorities.” 
 
KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health calling for 
the introduction of a ban on vaping in all workplaces, on the grounds of 
protecting public health and ensuring safe, aerosol-free working 
environments.  
That this motion would be referred to all local authorities for their 
support. 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the Department of Social 
Protection to undertake and an urgent and immediate review around 
the habitual residence clause for carers allowance. This clause impacts 
many in border counties where family and immediately family members 
are caring for loved ones and may only be living five minutes away 
albeit in another county. Immediate action is required to address this 
issue.” 
 
 
 

51 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council write to the Minister for Education, Helan McEntee 
TD, and the Minister of State for Further Education and Skills, Marian 
Harkin TD, requesting that they develop an alternative pathway for 
students following completion of the Junior Cycle through the ETB and 
SOLAS and other networks, to provide skills-based and career-
orientated and training opportunities in construction, business, IT, 
tourism, cosmetology, healthcare and agriculture – to offer students 
practical routes to employment and further study as an alternative to 
the traditional Leaving Certificate Programme.” 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That, Limerick City & County Council call on the Ministers for 
Agriculture and for Forestry to provide an appropriate Scheme to 
compensate for the loss of their livelihoods suffered by landowners due 
to Ash Dieback disease, and that support for this Motion be sought 
from sister authorities nationally.”  
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That, Limerick City & Council Council write to the Taoiseach, Michael 
Martin TD, the Minister for Health, Jennifer Carroll-MacNeill TD, and 
the Minister of State with responsibility for Mental Health, Mary Butler 
TD, in support of the IACP’s call for increased investment in counselling 
and psychotherapy in Budget 2026. The IACP’s Budget 2026 Priorities 
are the following: (i) Removal of VAT on counselling and psychotherapy 
services; (ii) Extension of tax relief to counselling and psychotherapy 
fees; and (iii) Investment in and expansion of access to school 
counselling at the primary and secondary levels. I also ask that this 
Motion, if passed, is circulated to the thirty other local authorities, 
asking that they support this campaign.” 
 
MONAGHAN COUNTY COUNCIL    
“That this Council condemns all those involved in the neglect, 
mistreatment and abuse of residences in Nursing Homes and Care 
Facilities for the elderly, the most vulnerable in our society and 
demands of An Taoiseach, Michael Martin TD, the Minister for Health, 
Jennifer Carroll-MacNeill TD and all of Government to immediately 
prioritise the strengthening of safe guarding protection across the 
Health & Social Care Sector, as national confidence, trust and respect 
for the Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA), the HSE and 
the Department of Health is very low, following the revelations of recent 
years – Children’s Health Ireland (CHI), the numbers of deaths during 
Covid proved standards were very low in Nursing Homes nationally, the 
recent RTE Undercover Report exposed the abuse of residences in 
Nursing Homes and were it not for this programme, the nation would be 
unaware of these outrageous incidents; hence Monaghan County 
Council demands of all members, parties and groups in Government to 
act immediately to ensure the Health and Social Care Sector in Ireland 
is cleansed of neglect, abuse and wrong doing.”  
 

52 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
“To write to the Minister for the Local Government to request that 
development fees be waived for all applicants who served a 
commencement notice prior to the required deadline in 2024. Some 
applicants served the notice within the required timeframe, but failed to 
submit the required waiver form, resulting in them receiving an invoice 
for development charges. Many applicants were unaware of the need 
to complete the form, despite meeting all other guidelines of the 
scheme.” 
  
TIPPERARY COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Tipperary County Council supports the immediate inclusion of 
Commercial Bus Operators (CBOs) in the Child Leap Card Scheme, 
which provides free bus travel for children under nine.  
Tipperary County Council calls on the Minister for Transport and the 
National Transport Authority to: 
 
1. Urgently include CBOs in the Child Leap Card Scheme 
2. Ensure a fair and consistent transport policy that treats all children 
equally, regardless of geography or bus service used.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Council endorses the End Discrimination of Inheritance Tax 
(EDIT) campaign and calls on Ministers for Equality, Norman Foley, 
Public Expenditure, Jack Chambers TD and Minister for Finance 
Paschal Donoghue TD to commit to harmonising the inheritance laws 
and bands so that people with no direct descendants are treated as 
equal to families with children in inheritance law and succession 
planning.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“While strengthening the welfare and health of animals, making dog 
breeders and sellers more accountable, transparent and animal welfare 
centred in their dealings; this Council calls for the reformation of the 
Dog Breeding Establishment Act (2010) to incorporate “Stout’s Law” 
into the act.  
Stout’s Law brings forward changes in the ages, duration and 
treatment/conditions of breeding age dogs, limits the amounts of litters 
in a lifetime, the establishment of an single Independent Regulator with 
a stricter inspection regime and supports for the Local Authorities to 
work with licenced breeders while outlawing the practice of backyard 
puppy farms in Ireland.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“With winter approaching we would like to call for an urgent review of 
the Ash die back situation on our public roads. The older and bigger 
trees are now being affected and pose a serious risk to road users 
power lines and telecommunications networks, we call on Co Councils, 
Departments of Transport, Agriculture and Environment to coordinate a 
plan to deal with this crisis unfolding on our roads.” 

53 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
  
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
