1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
1 Deireadh Fómhair, 2024 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain 7 
Deireadh Fómhair, 2024 ag 10.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an 
chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras 
eile. 
 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
County House 
 
Lifford. 
 
1st October, 2024 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 7th October 
2024 at 10.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
AGENDA  
 
1. Housing Capital Update. 
 
2. Regeneration and Housing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 7TH OCTOBER 2024 
C/316/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, M Boyle ,F Bradley, J 
Brogan, T Crossan, T S Devine, A Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, N 
Jordan, D M Kelly, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Bride, M Mc 
Clafferty, P Mc Garvey, D Mc Gee, P Mc Gowan, G Mc Monagle, D 
Meehan, J S O’ Fearraigh, and M Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs L Blaney, C Brogan, P Canning, D Coyle, G Doherty, J 
Kavanagh, F Mc Brearty Jnr, M Mc Dermott, M Mc Mahon, A Molloy, D 
Nic Mheanman, and J Murray.  
 
C/317/24 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John Mc Laughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator, Garry Martin, 
Director Economic Development, Information Systems and Emergency 
Services, Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning 
Services, John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, Eamonn 
Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, Patricia Mc Intyre, 
Town Regeneration Officer, Sinead Mc Cauley, A/Senior Executive 
Planner, Regeneration & Development, Carol Margey, Senior Executive 
Planner, Urban & Rural Regeneration, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg 
na Gaeilge, Dónall Mac Giolla Choill,Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí 
Aistriúcháin, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, 
Assistant Communications Officer. Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, 
Corporate Services.  
 
C/318/24 
 APOLOGIES  
Apologies were received from Cllr Harley who was unable to attend the 
meeting.  
 
C/319/24 
MINUTES SILENCE 
A minute’s silence at the request of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig was 
observed by all present for the family of missing kayaker Paul 
Buchanan. 
 
C/320/24 
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE  
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer gave an update in respect of the 
various capital projects and items progressed since the last Special 
Meeting on the 16th September.  
 
He said that the Housing Capital team utilised various departmental 
schemes to purchase and renew vacant housing units and to make 
them available for social housing use. This, he confirmed, was done in 
conjunction with the Regeneration Team and allowed the local authority 
to purchase vacant properties of any age and carry out remediation 
works. It also, he added, supported strategies on vacant homes, urban 
renewal and helped tackle dereliction. This work, he noted 
complemented the Repair & Leasing Scheme and tapped into the 
potential of housing that was currently sitting vacant. Housing delivery, 
he confirmed, was being coordinated in conjunction with the 
Regeneration Team and properties purchased acquired in line with the 

4 
 
current House Acquisition Policy. Costs it was acknowledged in respect 
of acquisition and remediation works were subject to departmental 
approval with ten properties currently going through this process.  
Mr Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate outlined 
the purpose and objective of the “Repair and Lease Scheme”, noting 
that under the scheme the Local Authority or an Approved Housing 
Body could provide an interest free loan of up to €80,000 inc VAT to 
repair a vacant property and bring it to rental standard with the specific 
condition that it be made available for social housing. He outlined the 
operational details involved.  
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development  & Planning Services  
Introduced the members of the Regeneration Team and said that the 
total value of the URDF calls to date was €26.1m. 
 
Ms Sinead Mc Cauley, A/Senior Planner said that URDF funding 
allowed the Council to tackle dereliction in multiple ways and 
referenced the workflow process to date.  
 
It was noted that URDF funding was a revolving fund to tackle long-
term vacancy and dereliction in town centres and allowed Local 
Authorities to acquire property and place them on the open market for 
sale. Members were informed that Call 3 for funding had opened on the 
30th January 2023 and that there were currently 46 vacant properties on 
the approved list. She gave an overview as to how Phase 1 and Phase 
had been implemented and the various steps taken in line with the 
national CPO Activation Programme Guidelines. 
 
Ms Carol Margey, A/Senior Planner provided detail in relation to the 
various projects allocated funding under the Rural Regeneration and 
Development Fund. She alluded to the following projects all of which 
had been progressed as a means of addressing vacancy and 
dereliction: 
 
▪ Ballybofey/Stranorlar Seed Project. 
▪ Carndonagh – Tus Nua Regeneration Project 
▪ Ailt an Chorrráin (Burtonport) / Árainn Mhór (Arranmore) 
“Harbour to Island” Regeneration Project  
▪ Killybegs 2040 “A Town Centre Regeneration Project” 
 
She said that going forward it was intended to work closely with all the 
teams involved in the regeneration aspect so as to target vacancy and 
dereliction across all settlements, in the growth drivers, the service 
towns and rural settlements with the aim securing dedicated funding 
packages.  
 
Mr Vincent Cranley, Vacant Homes Officer informed members that the 
“Croí Cónaithe - Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme” had 
received 931 applications to date with 617 approved. Presently, he 
said, that 59 had been paid to a value of €3.04m. Donegal, it was 
acknowledged, had the highest number of applications in the country. 
The success of the various drop in events was noted and it was 

5 
 
confirmed that further events were planned for October and November 
2024.  
Ms Patricia Mc Intyre, Town Regeneration Officer alluding to the 
“Property Activation Programme” launched in April 2023 said that a 
four-step approach had been taken to include: 
 
➢ Step 1 Identification of vacant and derelict properties. 
➢ Step 2 Identification and engagement with owners. 
➢ Step 3 Communication regarding various schemes. 
➢ Step 4 Use of CPO/Derelict Sites/Dangerous Structures 
Legislation.  
 
She said that the set target to activate 350 properties had been met 
and the CPO process commenced in respect of 6 of these units. 
 
The target for 2024, she added, was to activate 300 properties and 
commence the CPO process in respect of 6 of these. This work, she 
said, was now on track and all available options were being pursued to 
acquire funding and progress the acquisition of these properties.  
 
Details were also provided in relation to a new service which the 
Council intended to offer to those seeking to purchase property in 
Donegal.  
 
The  “Find a Home Service” she confirmed was a free service which 
would match individual property owners with people who wanted to 
purchase a property in Donegal as their family home. The Council, she 
said, would hold two lists namely, potential buyers and the names of 
owners who were interested in selling their properties. She said that 
where the Council sees a potential match the seller and buyer would be 
put in touch.  
 
Members were advised however that the Council had role in any 
subsequent negotiations or future sales and would not actively 
advertise the properties.  
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked the members of the various housing teams 
for the informative presentation and opened the meeting to the floor. 
 
Members raised the following issues : 
 
• Concern that the Vacant Property Scheme was putting money in 
private hands. Outlined the need for specific checks and 
balances and to ensure that those who applied lived in the 
properties concerned.  
• Difficulties being encountered under the Croi Conaithe Scheme 
in terms of having to pay up front and then reclaim the monies. 
Staged payment system would work better for grant applicants.  
• Additional information day sessions needed in respect of the 
“Vacant Home” options.  
• Special Housing meetings best suited to the MD structure. 
• Housing Construction staff should be based in each MD. 

6 
 
• Concern regarding the lack of housing provision in the Milford 
Municipal District. Social Housing Programme needs to be 
ramped up as the Vacant property Schemes cannot be solely 
relied on to deliver accommodation.  
• Housing delivery not happening at the pace anticipated. 
• Dedicated programme needed in respect of the Cathedral 
Quarter in Letterkenny.  
• Dereliction on the Main Street in Letterkenny must be 
addressed. 
• Vacant business and commercial properties need to be identified 
also and their potential utilised with a targeted approach taken. 
Specific issues in Ballybofey/Stranorlar highlighted.  
• Outlined the need to provide a home ground for Letterkenny 
Cricket Club on council owned lands adjacent to the River Swilly 
and the Neil T Blaney Road.  
• Proper plan needs to be put in place for the Council owned lands 
opposite the Public Service Centre in Letterkenny.  
• Social Housing policy must take into account and prioritise 
independent living options with cognisance taken of the 
wraparound services needed. 
• Issues regarding the 15 houses in Letterkenny must be sorted 
and further engagement sought with the contractor as this is 
impacting on social housing development in Ballyshannon.  
• URDF Funding needed in respect of all towns and villages . 
• More accountability needed from Uisce Éireann as their inability 
to provide the necessary infrastructure is holding up a number of 
developments. Lough Mourne extension needs to be prioritised 
to ensure proper infrastructural development.  
• Uisce Éireann connection fees are excessive and prohibiting 
development.  
• 13th month timeline for completion of works under the Croi 
Conaithe Scheme is too short and needs to be extended.  
• Building of Specific Instance Housing must be progressed as this 
method of provision is vital for rural communities.  
• Lack of progress in relation to the Tus Nua Project in 
Carndonagh highlighted. Call made for a dedicated staff member 
to be allocated so that the project can move forward.  
• Call for all parties concerned to resolve the issues with the 
Contractor regarding the Ballyshannon Housing Project. 
• Concerns raised in relation to the “Housing First Programme” 
and the fact that some of the placements made are not always in 
the best interests of the wider community in a designated estate.  
• General public need to be kept informed of developments. 
• Imperative that the Housing Construction team and the 
Regeneration team work together to avail of every opportunity so 
that additional housing accommodation can be provided.  
• Sewerage Scheme must be progressed in Falcarragh to facilitate 
proposed development. 
• Information requested in relation to all possible developments for 
older people throughout the county. 
• Concern that there are no AHB projects currently in the 
Inishowen MD.  

7 
 
• Noted that Uisce Éireann commentary in relation to the lack of 
infrastructure/capacity in an area was distorting the picture and 
as a result there was no clear picture of housing need in specific 
locations.  
• 18 houses vacant in Newtowncunningham which could be 
utilised.  
• Sewerage Treatment capacity in Killea will facilitate up to thirty 
houses This needs to be acted on.  
• Must be an opportunity to downsize accommodation so that a 
range of housing needs can be met and facilitated.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty enquired as to the status of his request for a Special 
Meeting to discuss the outcome of the recent judicial review and as to 
why it had been taken by the defendants concerned. He asked what 
role the previous Cathaoirleach had played and if the current 
Cathaoirleach had been informed. He asked that he be given access to 
the full file on this case and queried why his request for a Special 
Meeting had been ignored.  
 
The case, he said, had been settled behind closed doors and was 
directly related to standards and policies created by Donegal County 
Council.  
 
He asked for a full explanation in relation to the settlement, the amount 
of same and the cost of employing a Dublin firm of solicitors and 
queried again as to why the Elected Members had not been informed.  
The Council, he said, was not an authority on standards as that was the 
remit of the National Standards Authority of Ireland.  
He said that he had the documentation that had been presented in the 
High Court and now wanted to see transparency on the Council’s part.  
 
Queries Raised 
▪ Have people signed up to the “Find a Home” service? 
▪ Is the “Repair & Lease Scheme” up and running and how many 
houses have been repaired under this scheme? 
▪ What is the status in relation to the provision of a ramp at the 
Port Bridge to allow the Emergency Services access the River 
Swilly? 
▪ Whether any of the sites identified under the Property Acquisition 
Fund are in the Milford Electoral Area.  
▪ What engagement has taken place with the banks in relation to 
loan facilities for those accessing Vacant Home Grants etc.? 
▪ Update requested in respect of Baile na Carraige in Buncrana.  
▪ Can Donegal County Council write to the Health Service 
Executive in relation to derelict property in Pettigo? 
▪ What is happening in relation to properties owned by Ulster Bank 
in Bundoran? 
▪ What is the position in relation to derelict sites in Ballyshanon 
and Bundoran? 
▪ Can a number of derelict properties on the Main Street in 
Dunkineely be looked? 
▪ Do we have a timeframe where we go back to contractors, 
regarding specific acquisitions? The model to date is not working 

8 
 
and there needs to be greater emphasis on the timeframes 
involved and the level of engagement taken. Dedicated staff 
member with a background in acquisitions is needed to progress 
the Acquisitions Programme. 
▪ Why have remediation works not been carried out in respect of 
the Ard na Guala Duibhe Estate in Moville and what happened to 
Phase 2 of the development? 
▪ What is the position in relation to independent living projects in 
Gweedore and Falcarragh? 
▪ How active are the Approved Housing Bodies and Donegal 
County Council in delivering for older people in the county? 
▪ What provision has been made regarding the provision of 
additional social housing in the Cloondara developing in  
Carndonagh? 
▪ Hs the Department approved tenders for social housing units in 
Carndonagh, Gleneely and Malin? 
▪ Information requested in relation to the number of developers 
that have responded in relation to the latest advertisement for 
turnkey developments. 
▪ Can contact be made with the Courts Service regarding the 
Courthouse in Carndonagh regarding the availability of the 
property and consideration given as to what could be developed 
on the site? 
▪ Query as to whether there was any provision under the Vacant 
Property Schemes to accommodate three dedicated hubs to 
facilitate those wishing to access the Defective Concrete Blocks 
Scheme. 
▪ Is there any recompense for a homeowner who has bought out 
their S.I House, and who now finds that it is impacted by 
defective concrete. They are now in the position where they 
have to find funding to cover the difference in their defective 
concrete block grant and the overall rebuilding cost which is 
expected to be in the region of €130k? 
 
It was proposed at this juncture by Cllr Giolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr 
M Farren to adjourn the meeting to facilitate the commencement of the 
Adjourned September Meeting. This was unanimously agreed.  
 
On recommencement of the meeting Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that 
the current Council Chamber was not fit for purpose and asked what 
plans were in place to progress the provision of a more modern 
chamber equipped to accommodate the members of the media and the 
general public.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing & Corporate Services 
acknowledged that independent living was an important issue and said 
that the Council worked with the Health Service Executive and the 
relevant Approved Housing Bodies together with the Department of 
Housing, Local Government & Heritage to deliver and construct  such 
projects. The HSE, he confirmed, then liaised with the Department in 
relation to the running costs. Examples of this type of initiative, he 
noted, were to be found in Ardara, Dungloe, Malin, Letterkenny etc with 
several new projects in the pipeline. 

9 
 
He said that a report would be prepared and circulated in relation to the 
legal case referenced by Cllr Mc Brearty.  
With regards to the issues raised in relation to the role of Uisce 
Éireann, he said that these had been well articulated, and that the 
Council would continue to work with Uisce Éireann to get approval for 
projects.  
 
It was confirmed that S.I Housing was for individuals on the approved 
social housing list and not for private applicants. An update would be 
provided, he said, in relation to current S.I. initiatives. 
 
With regard to Ard na Guala Duibhe in Moville, he said, that there had 
been regular contact with the Department in relation to a remediation 
package for social housing and that indications were that this was 
imminent. As soon as this approval was received, he said, it would be 
possible to look at carrying out the relevant works.  
 
There were provisions in place, he noted, to accommodate social 
housing tenants who wanted to downsize.  
 
Mr Donal Walker, Senior Engineer, reminded members of the fact that 
closing date for the submission of turnkey projects was 30th September 
2026 and said that it was imperative that this was widely publicised,  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer confirmed that Rockytown Phase 2 
in Buncrana had gone to tender and had been awarded with the 
contractor in question now in the final stages of submitting the 
necessary paperwork prior to the commencement of works. He said 
that the progress on the sewerage scheme in Milford was to be 
welcomed and that this would have significant implications for the 
development of housing in the area with more lands being made 
available for development. Ramelton and Rathmullan would, also 
benefit, he added.  
 
Responding to Cllr Cannings comments in relation to Killea, he said 
that these had been noted and would be acted on. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Planning and Community Development thanked 
members for their positive comments on the Regeneration Programme.  
He said that the “Crói Cónaithe Scheme” operated with the guidelines 
laid down by the Department and that this would continue. 
 
Referring to the comments by Cllrs Mc Bride and Devine in relation to 
Council owned lands adjacent to the Letterkenny Public Service Centre, 
he said, that these were outside the scope of the Regeneration Team. 
He said that he had spoken to Mr Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner in 
relation to putting a plan in place and alluded to the fact that there were 
competing interests involved in terms of the development of this 
location. Proposals, he advised  would have to come before members 
regarding any potential leasing or utilisation of the said lands.  
He confirmed that information would be circulated in relation to the 
proposed drop-in events and that it would be possible to share the 

10 
 
results of the survey carried out in respect of the “Property Activation 
Fund” with members.  
 
With Phase three underway, it was acknowledged that the focus of the 
URDF would move beyond Letterkenny. It was hoped, he added to see 
significant development on the ground in Letterkenny over the next 12 
to 18 months. 
 
He said that he would issue a response to Cllr A Farren in relation to a 
specific issue that had been raised with regard to planning permission 
in Malin Head. He noted however that there were particular challenges 
when development is sought in Special Areas of Conservation.  
 
There had been, he confirmed, an oral hearing on the CPO process for 
the Tús Nua site in Carndonagh and the outcome of same was now 
awaited from An Bord Pleanála. 
 
Alluding to comments from Cllr C Brogan in relation to the engagement 
with property owners, he said that a proactive approach had been taken 
in relation to this aspect, but that he would be happy to follow-up where 
there had been gaps in communication. 
 
Donegal County Council, he stated, was one of the first to adopt an Age 
Friendly Strategy and this had been taken into consideration in terms of 
the universal design aspect. 
 
With regard to the acquisition of properties it was noted that the Council 
had an obligation initially to derisk the property and the overall intention 
was to recoup any costs incurred. It was also confirmed that the 
Council could not sell a property at a loss without getting Departmental 
approval. 
 
Concluding, he said, that it would be possible to review the issues 
highlighted in respect of vacant properties in Dunkineely and Pettigo.  
 
Ms Patricia Mc Intyre, Town Regeneration Officer advised members of 
the following: 
 
➢ That work was ongoing in relation to the compilation of database 
for those who wished to use the  “Find a Home” service.  
➢ It had been agreed to carry out settlement surveys in three 
settlements within each MD and that a further rollout of the 
survey was now due to take place outside of Letterkenny. 
Further information, she said, would be provided to the various 
MD Committees.  
➢ It was noted that the initial survey information had come from the 
Geo Directory and that properties that did not have Eircode’s 
would be picked up as well. 
➢ There was discretion for the Council to extend a Crói Cónaithe 
application beyond the designated 13-month period and she 
encouraged applicants to contact the vacant homes office as 
early as possible should delays arise.  

11 
 
➢ The various financial institutions have been invited to attend a 
meeting on the 21st October at which they will be briefed on the 
various schemes available and the funding issues facing 
homeowners when accessing such schemes including the 
necessity of having a staged payment option.  
➢ There was some follow-up in terms of Carndonagh Courthouse 
but that there were no plans at present in respect of the overall 
refurbishment.  
➢ As part of the ongoing survey works the properties alluded to in 
Pettigo and Dunkineely would be picked up and there would be 
ongoing co-operation with the housing team.  
 
Mr Eamonn Brown confirmed that the “Local Authority Purchase and 
Renovation Loan Scheme” was now open for applications and that the 
same criteria, eligibility and affordability options were in place as 
applicable to the existing “Local Authority Home Loan”. It was possible 
now, he said, to progress stage one of this application process and that 
further clarification was awaited in relation to the next stage of the 
programme.  
 
He acknowledged the fact that there had been challenges with the 
Housing First Programme. Nationally, he said, a new tender process 
was taking place, but that Sligo Social Services currently provided the 
specific support mechanisms. He said that he was currently involved in 
discussions regarding the need for increased levels of supervision and 
an enhanced support network within the new programme. 
 
With regard to the issues raised by Cllr Mc Gowan, he confirmed, that 
he would speak to the housing team involved and the Area Manager 
concerned regarding the ongoing situation. 
 
He agreed to provide details in relation to the number of houses 
repaired under the Repair and Lease Scheme and said that he would 
contact Cllr J Brogan in relation to his specific query on S.Is.  
 
The Chief Executive addressing members drew attention to the fact that 
there was a considerable amount of work taking place at present in 
comparison, to 5 to 10 years ago. The monthly meeting process, he 
said, had been beneficial in keeping members up to date on issues 
such as the Capital programme, with co-operation the key for any future 
development. He thanked the Housing and Regeneration Teams for 
their efforts. 
 
In relation to Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig’s call for a new Council Chamber, 
he alluded to the fact that a comprehensive proposal had been put 
forward a number of years ago for a brand-new chamber. This, he said, 
had not been progressed at the request of the members, who had not 
been able to support the project for varying reasons. 
 
It would be possible, he contended, to take a fresh look at the proposal 
but that ultimately it was a matter for the members to decide. It could, 
he added, be worked through the Corporate Policy Group going 
forward.   

12 
 
There had been, he advised, considerable discussion recently in 
relation to the type of blocks used in social housing projects on the 
basis that many of these had crumbled in the past. 
 
The Council, it was noted, had raised the standard for concrete blocks 
as a result but were well aware that they were not the standard setter 
for the product. He said that in the absence of a designated standard 
from government there had been no other option. There had, he 
confirmed, been challenges to this decision and a specific legal case 
had been taken. The Council, it was noted, had defended same and the 
case subsequently quashed. As referenced by the Director of Housing, 
Corporate & Cultural Services, he alluded to the fact that an update 
would be provided and circulated to all members.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that he was unhappy with the replies from the Chief 
Executive and the Director of Service and said that he had requested a 
Special Meeting back in August to discuss the judicial review.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
