1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
10 Meán Fómhair, 2024 
 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain 16 
Meán Fómhair, 2024 ag 11.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta Clár an 
chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras 
eile. 
 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
County House 
 
Lifford. 
 
10th September, 2024 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 16th 
September, 2024 at 11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the 
meeting is attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 

2 
 
 
AGENDA  
 
1. Schemes and Options available to support Home Ownership. 
a) Current Purchase & Rental Market. 
b) Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme. 
c) First Home Scheme. 
d) Help to Buy Scheme. 
e) Cost Rental Scheme. 
f) Vacant Property Renovation Grant Scheme. 
g) Ready to Build Scheme – Service sites for New Homes. 
h) Local Authority Home Loans & new Local Authority Purchase & 
Renovation Loan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 16TH SEPTEMBER 2024 
C/285/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, F Bradley, D Coyle, T 
Crossan, A Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, D M Kelly, M Mc Clafferty, D 
Mc Gee, P Mc Gowan, M Mc Mahon, G Mc Monagle, M Naughton, D 
Nic Mheanman, J S O’ Fearraigh, and M Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs L Blaney, C Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, T 
Devine, M Harley, N Jordan, J. Kavanagh,  M.C Mac Giolla Easbuig, P 
Mc Garvey, D Meehan, A Molloy, and J Murray.  
 
C/286/24 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John Mc Laughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator, Garry Martin, 
Director Economic Development, Information Systems and Emergency 
Services, John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, Eamonn 
Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, Claire Burke, Senior 
Executive Architect, Patricia Mc Intyre, Town Regeneration Officer, 
Liam Mc Carron, Senior Staff Officer, Housing & Corporate, Thomas 
Melly, Senior Staff Officer, Housing & Corporate, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, 
Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall Mac Giolla Choill,Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí 
Aistriúcháin, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, 
Assistant Communications Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, 
Corporate Services.  
 
C/287/24 
 SCHEMES AND OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO ASSIST HOME 
OWNERSHIP 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
informed members  that the key objective of the presentation was to 
provide a broad overview of the housing initiatives available to those 
who generally would not qualify for social housing support. The 
significant increase in housing prices and rents, he noted, had made 
home ownership and rental much more difficult with many young 
families priced out of the private market. 
 
Members received a presentation in relation to the range of housing 
options and the various schemes available. Mr Eamonn Brown, 
Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate outlined the various options 
available and gave an overview of current house prices for both the 
purchase and rental market. He alluded to the fact that the median price 
of a newly built home in County Donegal in the period September 2023 
to March 2024 was €316, 707. Rental prices, he advised had seen a 
59% increase over a three-year period and rental costs had risen from 
€744 in 2021 to €1,185 in 2024. This, he said, was compounded by the 
fact that Donegal had the lowest median annual earnings in the country. 
 
Mr Liam Mc Carron, Senior, Staff Officer, updated members in relation 
to the “Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme”. It was noted that 
the Affordable Housing Survey 2024 had ran online from 21st February 
2024 to the 12th April, 2024 to assess the potential level of demand for 
such a scheme.  

4 
 
It was acknowledged that a total of 270 submissions had been received 
with 19 appearing to be eligible and financially viable. There was 
recognition also of the fact that Departmental guidance had stipulated  
that developments under this scheme should be of ten units or greater. 
Thus, it was noted that Letterkenny with a potential scheme of 6 houses 
was possibly the only viable location in the county at present. Mr Mc 
Carron advised that there had been initial discussions with the 
Department and that the initial focus would most likely be on 
Letterkenny subject to identifying the required resources to advance the 
scheme.  
 
Members were briefed also in relation to the “Local Authority Home 
Loan” and the “Local Authority Purchase and Renovation Loan”.  
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate provided 
an update in relation to the “First Home Scheme”, the “Help to Buy 
Scheme” and the “Cost Rental Scheme” together with the “Ready to 
Build Scheme” and the “Serviced Sites for New Homes” initiative. He 
confirmed that a high-level assessment was currently ongoing with 
regard to a number of potential sites across the county under the 
“Ready to Build Scheme”. Recommendations on same would he 
advised be tabled for discussion at MD level early in 2025.  
 
Ms Patricia Mc Intyre, Town Regeneration Officer, said that the Croí 
Cónaithe , Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme represented 
an affordable option for home ownership with 885 applications received 
to date. 524 of these, she noted, had been approved with 46 paid to 
totalling €2.52m in value. An overview of the “Vacant Property 
Renovation Grant Scheme” was provided, and a number of case 
studies highlighted. 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate 
concluding the presentation referenced the fact that house prices and 
rental costs had significantly increased over the last 2 to 3 years yet 
income levels in the county were comparatively low. He said that there 
were a number of schemes available to assist potential homeowners, 
but that suitability for same depended on individual circumstances and 
location.  
 
Attention was drawn to the fact that there was considerable demand in 
the county for the “Local Authority Affordable Housing Scheme” but that  
the terms of the scheme were such that the numbers eligible in Donegal 
would be nominal. Alluding to the positive impact of the “Vacant 
Property Renovation Grant Scheme”, he confirmed that this was the 
most affordable way at present to get on the property ladder in Donegal.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services  
said that the presentation had been most informative and had provided 
an excellent assessment of the options available to home owners.. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer gave an update in relation to 
progress on a number of Housing Capital projects for the period 23rd 
July 2024 – 16th September 2024. 

5 
 
 
The meeting was then opened to the floor with members raising the 
following issues: 
 
▪ Rural housing must be prioritised, and more detail provided in 
relation to the S.I. process. People are being forced into towns 
where Uisce Éireann are not able to provide the associated 
infrastructural capacity and support.  
▪ Developer related issues with regard to Part Vs require 
immediate action.  
▪ HAP payment is not sufficient given the low-income levels in 
Donegal. 
▪ Need to keep the momentum going in relation to serviced sites.  
▪ Ongoing issues arising from the fact that a significant portion of 
the Council’s housing stock is affected by defective concrete.  
▪ Concern expressed that the flagship projects identified in 
Letterkenny may not come to fruition because of ongoing 
infrastructural deficits in the waste and water systems. Specific 
reference made to the Oldtown site in Ballymacool and the fact 
that this should only proceed when all the infrastructural 
elements are in place and a proper plan implemented.  
▪ Noted that Uisce Éireann did not appear to have an 
infrastructural plan for the upgrading of water and sewerage 
systems in the county and that this had major implications for 
Letterkenny in particular. Problems identified in estates such as 
Gort na Greine/ Glentain.  
▪ Uisce Éireann need to step up in relation to the Sewerage 
Scheme in Falcarragh which at present is hampering 
development.  
▪ Connection fees for water and sewerage services are far too 
high and are hindering rural development.  
▪ Access to the N56 also a hindrance to development.  
▪ Withdrawal of homeless vouchers in certain circumstances is 
causing a problem.  
▪ Short term housing options need to be explored as a matter of 
urgency. 
▪ Housing acquisition must be progressed in Letterkenny. 
▪ Lending institutions must be on board so that there is access to 
funding for those who want to purchase or rent their home. 
▪ Update requested in respect of the Local Authority Purchase & 
Restoration Loan Scheme.  
▪ Further engagement needed in relation to the Turnkey 
development in Carndonagh (Cloondara) 
▪ Affordable Housing Survey data indicates that there are 
problems with eligibility. This has implications for towns such as 
Buncrana and Carndonagh. Income levels a major issue and a 
scheme needed that suits rural Donegal. 
▪ Request that queries by tenants seeking to buy out their own 
council home or S.I. house be addressed, and the relevant 
replies provided. 
▪ Suggested that special meetings at MD level would be more 
beneficial in addressing issues locally. 
▪ Lack of housing provision in the Glenties MD a major problem. 

6 
 
▪ Concern that certain people are profiting from the Croí Cónaithe 
Scheme. 
▪ Noted that there are still a vast number of vacant houses not 
showing in the Croí Cónaithe applications and that cashflow is 
an issue for potential applicants. 
▪ Need to look at providing S.I Housing for those with specific 
needs. Lack of provision an issue at present. 
▪ Government policy needs to be challenged as current housing 
policy is failing and many of the schemes referenced are not 
applicable to Donegal. 
▪ Donegal County Council must step up and deal with the lack of 
social housing and the DCB crisis.  
▪ Provision of Modular Homes is the only quick fix solution at 
present. Could be provided in each Municipal District. 
▪ Housing rental market is in crisis and more and more families are 
going to be impacted as people will be unable to pay the current 
market prices. 
▪ Affordable Housing model is wrong and there needs to be an 
emphasis on building private houses in the countryside. 
▪ Highlighted the fact that the extension of the Lough Mourne 
Reservoir to include the Letterkenny MD should be prioritised 
and funding sought to develop same thus facilitating housing 
delivery.  
▪ Housing need in the Milford Electoral Area is not being 
addressed and there is a lack of urgency in the overall delivery 
of same. 
▪ Additional information needed on S.I.s and Part V applications 
and an assessment of all available options. Additional funding 
needed.  
▪ Additional Roadshows needed to encourage public engagement 
and make public aware of the range of schemes available.  
▪ Need to explore further opportunities in terms of derelict 
properties in our towns and villages. CPO process must be used 
to deal with vacant properties and to send out a strong message 
that dereliction is being tackled county-wide. Important that 
people are encouraged to report vacant houses. Donegal County 
Council should look at buying such properties.  
▪ Some concern that those selling properties are incurring 
additional expenditure in terms of testing for mica. 
▪ Opportunities in terms of the Urban Regeneration Development 
Fund need to be pursued.  
▪ More engagement needed with contractors regarding the various 
delivery options.  
▪ Significant problems with eviction notices and suggestion made 
that Donegal County Council should be in a position to buy these 
properties when they come up for sale.  
▪ Cognisance should be taken of all available properties on the 
market including Apartment Blocks. 
▪ General welcome for the fact that there is to be further 
engagement with the lending institutions.  
▪ Time should be set aside at the beginning of each Special 
Housing Meeting to facilitate presentations from the Approved 

7 
 
Housing Bodies, the Banks, Credit Unions and the Construction 
Industry together with other appropriate bodies. 
▪ Noted that after the next round of allocations there will be only 
five houses available in the Donegal MD, yet there are over 400 
families on the waiting list.  
▪ Encouragement should be given to older people living in isolated 
areas to move to urban areas thus freeing up accommodation in 
the country-side.  
 
Queries raised: 
▪ What plans are in place for the remediation of defective concrete 
block affected social housing? Specific query re houses in 
Carndonagh. 
▪ Have sites been identified in North Inishowen for the disposal of 
DCB waste and rubble? 
▪ Has there been any engagement or involvement with the 
Approved Housing Bodies in relation to the Cloondara 
development in Carndonagh? 
▪ What long term plan do Uisce Éireann have for the Gweedore 
area? 
▪ Update requested in respect of Ard Scoil Mhuire Gweedore . 
▪ Are there any proposals to develop sheltered housing 
accommodation? Noted the success of the Habinteg 
development in Lifford. 
▪ What certainty is there that the concrete blocks used at present 
and the material from the quarries is fit for purpose? Are the 
relevant checks being carried out and is a certificate issued? 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that the purpose of the meeting was to make people aware of the range 
of schemes available how they could help them attain home ownership. 
Some he noted , had been, very successful and others less so. He said 
that the Vacant Home Grant Scheme had been well received in 
Donegal and that the new Renovation Loan option would complement 
this initiative. He said that there would be continued engagement with 
the Department in relation to all applicable options.  
 
Significant progress, he added, had been made to date in terms of 
Social Housing delivery and every effort would be made to continue 
with same. It was acknowledged that there was frustration in relation to 
the various infrastructural deficits but that the intention was to continue 
engaging with Uisce Éireann.  
 
Members were informed that several submissions had been made to 
the Department in relation to the DCB Scheme for Social Housing and 
that an update would be issued after the next scheduled meeting with 
the Department in early October. He said that Donegal County Council 
whilst not experts had introduced a higher specification for  concrete so 
that the issues previously encountered would not happen again. This, it 
was acknowledged, would be used until a new national standard was 
issued.  

8 
 
He confirmed that the Housing & Regeneration team intended to roll out 
a number of roadshows in the various Public Service Centres and that 
new members would be provided with an overview of the S.I. process.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
