1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
24 Meitheamh, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Céadaoin 
30 Meitheamh, 2025 ag 9.30rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe 
leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
 
County House 
 
 
Lifford. 
 
 
 24th June, 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 30th June 2025 
at 9.30am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An 
online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 

2 
 
AGENDA  
 
 
1. Economic Development 
To approve the Donegal County Council Tourism Strategy 2025 and 
Beyond.  
 
2. Housing 
 
Housing Capital Update  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 30th JUNE 2025 
C/237/25 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, M Boyle, F Bradley, C 
Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, D Coyle, T Crossan, T. S 
Devine, A Doherty, A Farren, M Harley, J Kavanagh, D. M Kelly, M. C. 
Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Bride, M Mc Dermott, P Mc Gowan, G Mc 
Monagle, D Meehan, M Naughton, D Nic Mheanman, J S O’ Fearraigh 
and M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs Blaney, M Farren, N Jordan, Mc Clafferty, P Mc Garvey, D 
Mc Gee, and M Mc Mahon. 
 
C/238/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
Mr John Mc Laughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of 
Housing, Corporate and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator, 
Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services, Anne Marie Conlon, Head of Economic 
Development, John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, 
Donal Walker, A/Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, Eamonn Brown, 
Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, Thomas Melly, Senior Staff 
Officer, Housing & Corporate, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na 
Gaeilge, Clíona Ni Ghallachóir, Rannóg na Gaeilge, William Colvin, 
Assistant Communications Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, 
Corporate Services. 
 
C/239/25 
DONEGAL COUNTY TOURISM STRATEGY 2025 AND BEYOND  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services said that the item had been deferred from the 
May meeting and that a number of the key statistics as requested by 
the members at that meeting had now been included in the document 
circulated. It had also been considered and reviewed in detail, he said, 
at Municipal District level.  
 
He referenced Page 7 of the document and said that the following 
figures had now been added in respect of the Signature Discovery 
Points in Donegal: 
 
Attraction  
Visitor Numbers 
Sliabh Liag 
160,000 
Fanad Head 
101,591 
Malin Head  
99,073 
 
These, he advised, had not been included on the original table which 
had been based on Fáilte Ireland validated figures and dashboard. The 
figures outlined above had, he confirmed, been captured from the 
Council’s own activity data and monitoring equipment. It was intended, 
he added, to work with Fáilte Ireland to have these included in a similar 

4 
 
fashion going forward. Other items raised at the May meeting in 
relation to specific towns and locations not referenced in the document 
were, he said, not included in the strategy for the purposes of distance 
but would be included in further marketing material.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott welcomed the fact that Malin Head was now included 
and expressed disappointment that Fáilte Ireland had not included 
same in the initial statistics. He said that they should be contacted, and 
an explanation sought as to why such an important signature point in 
Donegal and a prime location on the Wild Atlantic Way had not been 
referenced. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Dermott, seconded by Cllr  Meehan it was 
resolved to approve the adoption of the Donegal County Council 
Tourism Strategy 2025 – 2030. 
 
C/240/25 
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE   
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Construction updated 
members in relation to the Housing Capital Programme. He outlined the 
status of the various in-house projects at Lifford Common, Mulroy View, 
Tamney, Cois Abhainn, St Johnston and Stranorlar all of which were 
now at various stages of the tendering process and which he confirmed 
would provide 108 units of accommodation. Detail was also provided in 
respect of in-house projects at planning and detailed design stage. It 
was acknowledged that a Part 8 application had been granted for 19 
units at Doirí Beaga and that the design had been finalised for 18 units 
at Old Fintra Road, Killybegs with designs also being progressed for 
schemes at Dunkineely, Ballintra and Ard an Rátha. Planning approval 
it was noted had been received for 4 No. Schemes at Na Gleanta, Cill 
Charthaigh, Gleann Cholm Cille and Laghy to provide 16 units of 
accommodation.  
 
Members were updated on the progress of 6 No S.I. Projects at various 
locations in the county together with the 40 Design and Build Projects 
at construction stage, and the 100 units at design stage. 
 
Reference was also made to the status of the ongoing turnkey 
acquisition projects, which it was noted would provide 130 units of 
accommodation. An update on the progress of the Letterkenny 
Flagship projects at Ballymacool and High Road, was provided.  
 
A summary was then provided in relation to the 511 social housing 
units under construction in County Donegal.  
 
Concluding Mr Gallagher acknowledged the hard work and dedication 
shown by the Housing team and said that the priority was to get 
projects to advanced design stage and ultimately on site.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
acknowledged the efforts of the Housing team and said that 511 units 

5 
 
on site was a positive development with a significant number of 
additional houses at various stages of planning. Several issues, he 
advised, were outside the control of the Council. He said that there 
would be continued engagement with the various utilities and agencies 
to get projects over the line.  
 
Members welcomed the presentation, and the meeting was opened to 
the floor during which the following issues were raised: 
 
• Serious investment was needed in Donegal to speed up the 
delivery of housing and to ensure that same is concentrated also 
in smaller towns and villages and in rural areas.  
• Acknowledged that timber farmed housing was the way forward 
taking into consideration the concrete block crisis. 
• Need to look at independent living options in Buncrana and 
Inishowen generally. Suggested that general template based on 
the Ballymacool model could be used in developments 
throughout the county. 
• No indication had been given of the plans for Carrigart, 
Ramelton and Kerrykeel where over there was a demand for 
over 100 units.  
• Housing delivery is too slow with reference made to the slow 
pace of progress at Windy Hall. 
• Solution needed as soon as possible in relation to the houses at  
Ard na Greine.. 
• Additional Homeless Shelters needed in Donegal and further 
liaison with the HSE is needed.  
• Two Homeless Shelters are not sufficient and whilst very 
welcome do not work for a county the size of Donegal. With 
rising rents and costs the numbers presenting as homeless are 
increasing. 
• HAP needs to increase in line with rising rents.  
• Availability of water and sewerage service one of the key issues 
and whilst the ambition is excellent there are problems with the 
overall capacity for same. 
• Contractors need to be given confirmation at an early stage as to 
what price they will be paid. 
• €2m allocation for the second hand acquisition programme is 
insufficient. 
• Concern that houses in Fintra, Glencolmcille, Cill Carthaigh will 
not start this year.  
• The housing need in the Donegal MD is for 500 units yet only 42 
identified in Ballyshannon and 35 turnkey units in Donegal Town  
• Cognisance needs to be taken of the comments made by the 
C.I.F representatives at the meeting on the 28th May.  
• Abnormal costs will be different on every site. 
• Noted that the income thresholds for Social Housing had not 
been increased thus isolating many applicants who were not in 

6 
 
receipt of social welfare payments and who had no other means 
of securing accommodation. 
• Series of Workshops needed at MD level to discuss and assess 
the recent communication from the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage, Mr James Browne T.D. urging greater 
speed in housing activation.  
• County Development Plan needs to be revisited to see where 
the opportunities are for further development. Rezoning issues in 
Buncrana highlighted where a shovel ready site is now going to 
be redesignated as “agricultural” 
• Part V developments are not progressing, and reasons needed 
as to why this is happening. 
• Anomaly in terms of the 7 Year Strategic Plan for Carndonagh 
which details provision for 200 housing units yet Uisce Éireann 
have indicated that there is not sufficient capacity. 
• New innovative and quick building methods need to be utilised 
given the extent of the current housing crisis and the uncertainty 
surrounding building materials. 
• Suggested that decisions are being made on the abnormal costs 
with no professional input. 
• Provision needs to be made for the development of housing in 
Carrick.  
• Housing Supply in Carndonagh required.  
  
Queries 
➢ What is the timeline for the completion of the houses in Tamney 
and when will the contractor be appointed? 
➢ Is the end of 2026 the expected completion date for the units in 
Tamney, Milford and Kilmacrennan areas? 
➢ What plans are there to progress the Repair & Lease Scheme as 
this could be utilised more as an intermediate method for 
housing delivery. 
➢ Why is there a reluctance to engage with developers in relation 
to potential developments under the Part V process? How long 
does it take to acquire same, what is a viable Part V and how is 
developer funding impacted?  
➢ Is the electricity supply sufficient to meet current and future 
demands? 
➢ How many houses have been built by Donegal County Council 
and how many provided by the Approved Housing Bodies? 
➢ How many houses will the Council build in 2025? 
➢ What tax are we paying in respect of the 511 units currently 
underway.  
➢ Are we building enough three bedroom houses? 
➢ Suggested that Council should where needed bypass Uisce 
Éireann and go the Department directly for funding for the 
construction of water and sewerage facilities. 
➢ Update requested in relation to the provision of units in 
Falcarragh.  

7 
 
➢ How can we be sure of the capacity of the water and sewerage 
services in Clochan Liath? 
➢ Residents Association must be contacted in relation to the 
provision of the additional units at Ballymacool. 
➢ Have the Approved Housing Bodies or St Vincent De Paul 
accommodation on hold throughout the county at present? 
➢ Further to the stipulation in the County Development Plan, is the 
85% ruling in favour of Irish speaking tenants being implemented 
in Gaeltacht areas? 
➢ Has the response issued in relation to the Revised National 
Planning Framework and has any correspondence issued from 
the Housing Activation Office in relation to the county’s housing 
need? 
➢ Have we a calculation on what €2m allocated under the Second 
Hand Acquisition Programme will deliver for Donegal and what 
areas will benefit? 
➢ Query as to whether interest was shown by an Approved 
Housing Body in relation to the Cloondara Estate in 
Carndonagh. Request for briefing and rationale as to what is 
happening with these units. 
➢ What plans are there for Ballyshannon where there is a need for 
140 houses? 
➢ What is the cost of building two and three bedroom housing in 
Donegal on Council owned sites? 
➢ Has there been any further interaction with the C.I.F in relation to 
the issues that they raised at the last meeting? 
➢ What is being done to further the acquisition of vacant properties 
in Letterkenny? 
➢ What is happening in relation to the design of the schemes in 
Dunkineely, Ballintra, Ardara and Fintown and why has Fintown 
been dropped from the list? 
➢ Are we using tools for staged payments and recognising 
financial costs for developers as permitted by the Department to 
help contractors move forward? 
➢ Is there any update in relation to the utilisation of modular homes 
and what is being put in place for those families who will be 
impacted by the Social Housing Remediation Scheme?  
➢ Why is there no mention of Manorcunningham and does the 
Council have land at this location? 
➢ Do Uisce Éireann have any plans to increase the capacity of the 
reservoir at Rahan in light of the Ballymacool development?  
➢ What is happening in relation to land acquisition in Bundoran 
and when can this be finalised?  
➢ Can a breakdown be provided detailing the costs for the building 
of housing units and outlining the costs applicable to Donegal 
County Council and those incurred by Approved Housing Bodies 
for similar accommodation.  
 
 
 

8 
 
Follow-Up 
▪ Cllr J Brogan asked if a response had been received from the 
Department in relation to his motion on social housing income 
limits as submitted to the January 2025 Plenary Meeting. 
▪ Request that dates be agreed for a series of MD Workshops to 
identify areas in our towns and villages that could be utilised for 
housing development.  
▪ Update requested in relation to the 9 houses in Ballymacool 
which the Council has been asked to purchase.  
▪ Cllr Mc Dermott proposed, seconded by Cllr Naughton that the 
incoming Cathaoirleach together with a cross-section of 
members and Council officials meet with senior personnel in the 
Department of Housing to look at the best way forward for 
housing development in the county and to facilitate the delivery 
of additional housing units in Donegal. 
 
C/241/25  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING  
It was unanimously resolved to adjourn the meeting for a brief period to 
facilitate the commencement of the 2025 Annual General Meeting. 
 
C/242/25 
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE   
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
informed members that there were a number of factors outside the 
Council’s control that impacted on housing provision including utility 
services. He noted that the focus of the new Housing Activation Office 
would be to address the barriers in specific locations to housing 
provision and that this would align and co-ordinate with the focus and 
the investment of the different utility providers. There would, he added, 
be ongoing liaison with this office when operational.  
Regarding a number of queries on costs, he referenced the fact that 
the Council delivered housing in a number of different ways and that 
the Approved Bodies utilised similar delivery methods. With regard to 
provision on Council owned land, he said, that a competitive tendering 
process was operated which allowed the market to set the price based 
on competition.  
 
Developments on private owned sites (turnkeys), he noted, also 
operated with a competitive dialogue tendering process which allowed 
the Council to consider submissions based on certain criteria aligned 
with market prices. He noted that the C.I.F had raised issues in relation 
to abnormal costs. This, he advised, was being looked at in terms of 
ensuring flexibility whilst maintaining a level playing field for all 
contractors and complying with the public spending code. The Council, 
he noted, are discussing the matter with the Department and with other 
local authorities facing similar challenges. It was hoped, he added, to 
come up with a method which would provide more flexibility whilst 
maintaining a level playing field.  
 
There were, he advised, challenges with some Approved Housing 
Body/Turnkey Projects and generally in such instances prices were 

9 
 
higher which created problems for the local authority. It was noted that 
further engagement was to take place with the AHBs in relation to a 
number of sites and that there would be engagement with the 
Department in relation to the issue. He urged all stakeholders involved 
to maintain a focus and find the necessary solutions, noting that the 
solutions did not rest with the Local Authority alone.  
 
With regard to allocations in the Gaeltacht areas, he said, that these 
could be facilitated for Irish speaking tenants and that the current 
allocation process provided for the setting aside of a percentage of 
allocations for certain categories of applicants, 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing &Corporate 
responding to a number of queries confirmed that the Repair and 
Lease Scheme was operational, but that the level of interest had 
dropped due to the success of the Vacant Property Grant Scheme. He 
alluded to the fact that members had endorsed the Homeless Action 
Plan which was now in its early stages. There were, he advised 
challenges ahead and an obligation to adhere to national criteria.  
 
There was now, he said a renewed emphasis on homeless prevention, 
and this was being progressed in each Municipal District so that a 
roadmap could be developed to meet the needs of those who found 
themselves in this position going forward. Expressions of interest, he 
said, had been received in respect of hostel facilities but many were 
not of a suitable standard. It was confirmed that the facilities currently 
operated by the Council had onsite supervision from 9pm until 9am and 
clients had access to the accommodation during the day. It was hoped, 
he advised, to increase the number of hostels and to develop viable 
exist strategies for those who used the facilities.  
It was intended, he said, to deliver a presentation and give an overview 
of the work and role of the Approved Housing Bodies sector at a future 
meeting as they presently operated over a thousand units in the 
county.  
 
Mr Brown alluded to a number of queries raised in relation to the social 
housing list and associated income thresholds. It was noted that in 
January 2023 the income limits baseline had increased by €5000 thus 
increasing the income threshold to €30k for single applicants in 
Donegal and depending on household size up to €37,500 -  €38,000 for 
family units. He said that it would be possible to follow up on Cllr J. 
Brogan’s query in relation to a departmental response.  
 
Concluding, he confirmed that there was no general Housing 
Acquisition Programme open at present but that the Council did have 
access to €2m under the Social Housing Second-Hand acquisitions 
Programme. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital informed 
members of the following: 

10 
 
• That the Council was looking at new technology in relation to  
housing construction and that the timber frame option was being 
utilised at present.  
• There was ongoing engagement with the HSE in relation to 
independent living options. 
• Acknowledgement of the need to review the social housing need 
in each town and village. Focus to be kept on the smaller towns 
and villages as well as the larger towns. 
• Department approval was awaited in respect of the project at 
Tamney and that subject to department approval it was 
anticipated that works would start in the Autumn. 
• Members would be updated at local level on the Windy Hall 
project. 
• Donegal County Council was willing to engage with contractors 
in relation to Part V applications. 
• Uisce Éireann had given permission for the development in 
Dungloe to connect to the main sewer. 
• Budget availability for housing acquisition was an issue and that 
this had been raised with the Department.  
• An independent quantity surveyor was employed to review and 
assess costs in terms of in-house design and turnkey projects. 
• Cognisance had been taken of the points raised by the 
Construction Industry Federation and that there was ongoing 
liaison with the Department, the Housing Agency, and other 
Local Authorities etc regarding the issues.  
• Cllr Coyle to be advised directly in relation to the options for 
social housing in Manorcunningham. 
• Has been ongoing collaboration with Uisce Éireann regarding 
the Ballymacool development.  
• Land acquisition issue in Bundoran to be followed up. 
• Options for housing development in Carrick would be looked at. 
 
The Chief Executive noted that the target was to have 879 units in 
place by the end of 2026 and that 511 of these were currently under 
construction in addition to those already completed. He acknowledged 
that more units were needed but that progress was being made, 
nonetheless. The Housing Team, he said, were doing their best to 
meet all relevant targets.  
 
Alluding to recent correspondence from the C.I.F, he said that the 
Council could not settle financial matters at the plenary meeting 
process and that the Local Authority had a responsibility to ensure that 
the value for money aspect was adhered to. He cited the need for clear 
negotiation and a focused pricing mechanism in place at the earliest 
possible stage. He stressed the point that the Council did avail of the 
services of a quantity surveyor when acquiring housing units.  
 
He referred to the call from the Minister’s office for each Local Authority 
to review and enhance their housing provision. Donegal had, he noted, 

11 
 
recently completed their County Development Plan and had been 
knocked back at departmental level with regards to a number of zoning 
issues. In terms of the Ministerial direction, he noted that this would 
have to be worked through and in adherence to the planning process if 
additional housing was to be provided. He said that it was intended to 
develop a matrix of questions in relation to all the issues raised and 
that this would indicate who was responsible for the various elements 
of housing delivery. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that as far as he was aware the Council were 
aware of the increased costs in respect of the development in 
Letterkenny before these houses were built. A solution was urgently 
needed, he added, and the matter looked at again as a matter of 
urgency.  
 
The Director of Service in response said that Council had already 
shared the average contract price in respect of its tender competitions 
and could look again at sharing the average contract price for building 
a house. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
