1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
        Aras an Chontae 
                                             Leifear 
            19 Samhain, 2024 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 25 Samhain 2024 ag 
11.00 r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc 
leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
******************************************************************************************************** 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House  
Lifford 
 
19th November, 2024 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 25th November, 2024 at 11.00am 
in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join the 
meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
______________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  
 

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 16th of September, 2024. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the September Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 30th of September, 2024. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Adjourned Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 7th of October, 2024. 
d) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 7th of October, 2024. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at Cratlagh, Milford Co Donegal by way 
of exchange to Michael Mc Gee. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at the rear of 1A Binnion Avenue, 
Letterkenny, Co Donegal to Mr Hugh Logue. 
c) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at the 2 Binnion Avenue, Letterkenny, 
Co Donegal to Jennifer and Michael Heaney. 
d) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at Leenan Pier to Atlantic Crab Ltd. 
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(Part XI), and the Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 
a) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the demolition and 
rebuilding of Nas Mór Apartment Block C, Carnamuggagh, Letterkenny, 
Co Donegal. 
b) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the construction of a 
single-storey rural SI dwelling including wastewater treatment and all 
associated site development works at Trentaghmuckla, St Johnston, Co 
Donegal. 
c) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the construction of a 
single-storey rural SI dwelling including wastewater treatment and all 
associated site development works at Dunaff, Clonmany, Co Donegal. 

3 
 
d) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the construction of a 
single-storey rural SI dwelling including wastewater treatment and all 
associated site development works at Kinnea, Clonmany, Co Donegal. 
e) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the construction of a 
single-storey rural SI dwelling including wastewater treatment and all 
associated site development works at Knockbrack, Letterkenny, Co 
Donegal. 
 
4. Corporate 
a) Consideration of the Donegal County Council Corporate Plan 2024-2029. 
b) To fill casual vacancy on ICBAN arising from the resignation of Cllr 
Michael Mc Mahon.  
c) Election of Members to the Donegal Tourism Associate Members 
Committee. 
d) To approve Schedule of Council Meetings for 2025. 
e) To approve the holding of a Special Budget Workshop on Monday 2nd 
December, 2024 at 11am in the Council Chamber, Lifford. 
f) Glenveagh National Park – Public Consultation on new Visitor Plan – 
Proposed Workshop at 12 noon on Monday 9th December, 2024. 
 
5. Planning  
a) Development Contribution Scheme Review. To agree date for Plenary 
Workshop on the 12th December, 2024. 
b) To note update report on the Revised National Planning Framework. 
(Report to follow) 
 
6. Endorsement of Minutes 
a) To note minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on the 23rd 
September, 2024. 
b) To note minutes of the Special Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 
the 4th October, 2024. 
 
7. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under Section 
142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. 
No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the Environment, 
Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local Government Act, 
2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local Government (Expenses 
of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 (as amended).  
 
Other 
• Attendance of the Leas-Cathaoirleach at the Long Service Awards for Fire 
Service Personnel in the Knightsbrook Hotel, Dublin Road, Trim, Co 
Meath on the 14th November, 2024. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Chambers Ireland Local 
Government Awards in the Crowne Plaza, Santry on the 21st November.  

4 
 
• Attendance of the A5/N2 Cross Border Committee members at a meeting 
with a representative from the Department for Infrastructure in Northern 
Ireland to take place in Garvaghey, Co Tyrone on Monday 16th December 
2024. 
• To select nominees and approve attendance at the “Ongoing 
Conversations “ Programme” series of events scheduled to take place in 
2025. 
 
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach of the Inishowen Municipal District on an 
exchange visit to the city of St. Charles, Missouri and to attend the 
Missouri River Irish Festival in St Charles in May 2025. 
• Attendance of the EU Cerv Project representative at the Youth & 
Democracy: Empowering Europe’s Next Generation Seminar in Rabat, 
Malta from the 9th to the 12th December, 2024.  
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
  
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate  
8. Cllr Fionán Bradley  
"That this Council write to the leaders of every political party and 
independent grouping running candidates in the forthcoming General 
Election urging them to include within their programme for government to 
fully commit, within the lifetime of the next Dáil to the restoration or creation 
of Town Councils in every town in this State with a population over 5,000 
people". Also to agree to send this motion to every other Council in the 
State. 
 
Housing  
9. Cllr Joy Beard  
It has been scientifically proven that mould and damp can cause asthma, 
coughing and other respiratory problems.  In some cases, particularly for 
infants, young children and older people, mould and damp can be fatal. 
Due to the presence of defective concrete blocks in thousands of homes in 
Donegal, the existence of these threats to health is on the increase.   
 
“This motion calls on Donegal County Council - as a matter of urgency - to 
inspect each and every one of its social housing units, looking for signs of 
mould and damp.  And where remedial action is required, to immediately 
eradicate these potentially deadly spores, eliminate water ingress and 
ensure that the Council's properties are fit for human habitation”. 
 
10. Cllr Albert Doherty  
Turnkey Acquisitions, 
"That DCC share an analysis of the application, performance and housing 
number projected and delivered in the 2018 Turnkey model, 
and, 

5 
 
That the Council share the current performance analysis of the 2022-26 
turnkey acquisitions projection to date including submissions received, 
municipal locations, need and costing issues, with particular focus on the 
interests to deliver housing received from AHBs and issues emerging 
apparently delaying delivery of social housing by AHBs in Donegal". 
 
Environment  
11. Cllr Jack Murray  
"That this Council reaffirms its commitment to providing top class leisure 
centre amenities for all citizens in Donegal, commits that all interactions 
with the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media 
will state this as a priority and, further, this council strongly calls for the 
immediate, and additional, funding for the one outstanding, unsuccessful, 
application to the Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund". 
 
 
  
  
 LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Environment   
12. Cllr Michael Mc Bride 
“That Donegal County Council write to the incoming Housing Minister 
asking for a grant to be considered for rainwater harvesting that would 
lower demand on current domestic supplies and could be used for flushing 
toilets, washing cars, power washing and any other use of treated water 
supplies around dwellings, farms and industrial settings”. 
 
 Water & Environment  
13. Cllr Declan Meehan 
 
"That this Council will write urgently to the Board of Directors of Uisce 
Éireann to outline the dissatisfaction of elected members with the local 
representative desk support and communication from Uisce Éireann, and to 
ask for a full review of the service with a commitment to improving 
communication with elected representatives". 
 
 Defective Concrete Blocks  
14. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
"On behalf of senior citizens who have DCB homes that the Donegal 
County Council submit a letter to the Attorney General questioning the 
legality of the issue of transferability in the DCB Scheme. Article 43 of the 
constitution states the State accordingly guarantees to pass no law 
attempting to abolish the right of private ownership or the general right to 
transfer bequeath and inherit property under the present scheme, the right 
to transfer property is limited, restricting and places a burden on the 
homeowner to designate one heir". 
 
 
 
 
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT”. 
 
  Housing  
15. Cllr Denis Mc Gee  

6 
 
There are a number of  social homes that are in a state of disrepair, due to 
the defective blocks issue.  
"I ask the Council to expedite an application for emergency funding, in order 
to do whatever is necessary to address this issue.  It is imperative that 
something be done in the interim with these homes, particularly those that 
are not waterproof. The Council have a duty of care to the residents of 
these homes, and it has to be seen to act proactively and compassionately 
with regards to these cases.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
  Corporate  
16. Cllr Jimmy Brogan  
"That Donegal  County Council, in light of the recent ruling by the 
International Court of Justice on the illegality of Israeli settlements in 
Occupied Palestinian Territories, calls on the Irish Government to enact the 
Occupied Territories Bill, to cut Irish trade ties with Israeli goods and 
services produced in these illegal settlements”. 
 
 
   
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 Community Development  
17.  Cllr Frank Mc Brearty  
"Requesting that the new incoming Government establish within its first 100 
days an Independent Statutory Judicial Public Inquiry with an open terms of 
reference into the explosion in Creeslough, Co Donegal that killed 10 
people on the 7th Oct 2023, and I am calling on all the elected members of 
Donegal County Council to support my motion for this much needed Public 
Inquiry" 
 
 Economic Development   
18.  Cllr Martin Scanlon  
"That this Council use existing signage infrastructure to promote tourism 
and amenities in local areas throughout the county". 
 
19.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
20. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
 
 Environment  
21. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
How many leisure centres in the county are currently waiting on, applying 
for or are actively seeking funding to renovate, rebuild, restore or expand 

7 
 
their facilities? If there is more than one such leisure centre does the 
Council have a priority list for any such funding for those leisure centres? If 
there is a priority list (in the event that there is more than 1 such centre) 
what is the rationale behind it? 
 
Roads & Transportation  
22. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
To ask the Executive are horses and their riders entitled to use 
Greenways? If not, are there specific equine trails in the county which they 
can use? If there are, what are the locations of ?  
 
Housing  
23. Cllr Albert Doherty 
Dissolution of 33rd Dáil Fri Nov 8th 2024. 
(Remediation of Social housing affected by Defective Concrete Blocks) 
What official correspondence, meetings, engagements were made by DCC 
with the Department of Housing in relation to enabling the Council to 
proceed with the remediation scheme of the significant number of Social 
Homes up to an including Fri Nov 8th 2024.What were the responses, 
commitments received by DCC up to and including Nov 8th that may  
enable the early and necessary remediation of DCB affected social homes 
in Donegal? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
24. Cllr Joy Beard 
On 10 July 2024, I tabled a motion calling on the Executive of the Council to 
engage with suppliers of modular homes to help resolve the housing crisis. 
On 18 September 2024, I put forward a motion requesting that the 
Emergency Plan be amended to provide a place of safety for defective 
blocks homeowners during storms. 
Both motions were approved by the Council with no objections. 
 
Please explain why, as far as I can see, nothing has been done to 
implement or progress the issues raised in these motions? 
 
Planning  
25. Cllr Albert Doherty 
RZLT 2025 
How many  submissions and appeals were received by DCC from 
landowners requesting lands to be excluded and citing the negative impact 
RZLT would have on future farming viability in Donegal? 
What is the current revenue position 08/11/24 on the imposition  RZLT on 
lands actively being farmed in the country? 
What communication and decision role will local authorities including DCC 
be required/obliged to play re RZLT and the publication of the final 
designated RZLT land /farmlands in Donegal? 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
Environment  
26. Cllr Jack Murray 
Has the Council been provided with the scoring of applications to the Large 
Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund? 
 
27. Cllr Jack Murray 
Can the Council executive explain how it prioritised applications to the 
Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund and advise why elected members 
were not advised of this prioritisation? 
 
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Roads & Transportation 
28. Cllr Michael Mc Bride 
Can Donegal County Council give me an update on the Japanese 
Knotweed Programme and who is currently responsible for its rollout? 
 
Housing 
29. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
Can I get a figure of all the new council houses getting built, how many are 
actually fully wheelchair friendly to live in with a downstairs wet room & 
bedroom and how many are 4 bedroom?  
 
Cultural Services  
30. Cllr Declan Meehan 
Can we be provided with the visitor figures for every public library in the 
county, as well as the current levels of staffing resources allocated to each 
library?  
 
Corporate  
31. Cllr Declan Meehan 
Can we be provided with full details of all current HR vacancies across all 
sections of Donegal County Council? 
 
 
 
 
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 Corporate  
32. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty 
 How much money has been paid out by DCC in legal fees to Michael  
J.Staines & Co Solicitors and VP McMullin Solicitors concerning all the 
cases involving Cllr Frank McBrearty Jnr in the Civil High Court and Criminal 
Courts to date and who within the Council instructed the services of these 
two legal firms in these cases? 
 
33. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty 
Names of all Council Staff and County Cllr's that are represented by Michael 
J. Staines & Co Solicitors and VP McMullin Solicitor's in the Civil and 
Criminal Court cases against Cllr Frank McBrearty Jnr. 

9 
 
34. Motions from other Councils/Bodies  
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed that the Council write to the Minister and Department of 
Transport to review the system, and to have notice of bus allocation at least 
4 weeks prior to the commencement of the school year.  
The existing system, characterized by inadequacies and flaws, has resulted 
in significant stress and concern for parents and students, leaving crucial 
matters like school bus placements and ticket allocations uncertain well 
beyond the commencement of the school year. It is imperative that a 
comprehensive overhaul of the entire system is undertaken to guarantee 
that allocations are finalised a minimum of four weeks prior to students 
returning to school.  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
That Roscommon County Council  write to the Department seeking funding 
for a Roadside Tree Survey to identify dead, dangerous and infected trees, 
and that Roscommon be put forward as a pilot for a national scheme. 
 
WATERFORD CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
That Waterford City & County Council supports United Against Gender 
Apartheid and their campaign to have the crime of ‘gender apartheid’ 
incorporated into Article 2 of the draft Crimes Against Humanity Convention.  
 
 
 

10 
 
MINUTES OF NOVEMBER MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
25TH NOVEMBER, 2024 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/371/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney,M Boyle, F Bradley,C 
Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, D Coyle, T Crossan, TS Devine,A Doherty, 
G Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, D. M Kelly, F Mc Brearty, M McBride, M. 
Mc Clafferty, M McDermott, P McGarvey, D McGee, P McGowan, M Mc 
Mahon, G McMonagle, D Meehan, J Murray, M Naughton, D Nic 
Mheanman, JS Ó Fearraigh, M Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs B Carr, J Kavanagh, M MacGiolla Easbuig, A Molloy. 
 
C/372/24 
 OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Bryan Cannon, Director of 
Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, Michael 
McGarvey, Director of Water & Environment, Liam Ward, Director of 
Community Development & Planning Services, Eunan Quinn, Senior 
Planner, Anne Marie Conlon, Senior Executive Officer, Economic 
Development, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, 
Clerical Officer, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall 
MacGiolla Choill, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie 
Crawford, Staff Officer. 
 
C/373/24 
VOTE OF SYMPATHY – FORMER COUNCILLOR SÉAMUS ROGERS. 
 
Cllr Martin Farren on behalf of the Labour Party paid tribute to the late 
Séamus Rogers who had been a member of Donegal Council for 39 years 
and who had served the people of this county with great compassion and 
dignity. He had, he advised, a remarkable political career and in that time 
had contested 11 Dail elections, 12 County Council elections, 3 Údarás 
and 2 EU elections. He extended sympathy to his wife Theresa and 
daughter Rosemary and extended family circle. 
 
 
 
Members of the various political groupings paid tribute acknowledging that 
Mr Rogers had an exemplary record as a public representative. He was, 
they noted a proud Rosses man who had fought hard for the people of his 
own area. They acknowledged his involvement with the GAA and the 
RNLI with his home club of Naomh Mhuire close to his heart. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig it 
was resolved to adjourn the meeting for 39 minutes as a mark of respect 
and an acknowledgement of his 39 years of public service.  
 
C/374/24 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
It was unanimously agreed in accordance with Standing Order No 28 to 
suspend Standing Order No 8 and deal with Motions 16 and 17 at this 
juncture.  
 
C/375/24 
ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INDEPENDENT STATUTORY JUDICIAL 
PUBLIC INQUIRY INTO THE EXPLOSION IN CREESLOUGH  

11 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBrearty, seconded by Cllr Devine it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"Requesting that the new incoming Government establish within its first 
100 days an Independent Statutory Judicial Public Inquiry with an open 
terms of reference into the explosion in Creeslough, Co Donegal that killed 
10 people on the 7th Oct 2023, and I am calling on all the elected 
members of Donegal County Council to support my motion for this much 
needed Public Inquiry."   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty welcomed a number of family members who had lost 
loved ones in the tragedy and two of those who had survived the 
explosion. He referred in his address to the following quote from Martin 
Luther King. 
 
“Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. We are caught in an 
inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. 
Whatever affects one directly, affects all indirectly.” 
 
It had been he noted two years, one month and 18 days since the 
explosion. He paid tribute to all who had been affected by the tragedy and 
remembered those who had perished on that terrible day. He proceeded 
to read out the names of those who had perished. 
 
Jessica Gallagher, Robert Garwe, Shauna Flanaghan Garwe, Leona 
Harper, Hugh Kelly, Martina Martin, Martin Mc Gill, James Monaghan,  
Catherine O’ Donnell and James O’ Flaherty. 
 
An independent public enquiry was needed, he said, so that the families 
could get a full and true account of what happened.  
 
Members, he advised had a mandate to represent and all needed to put 
their personal and personal differences aside to help the families 
concerned find the truth. 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that as someone who had first-hand experience of 
being involved in a Tribunal of Enquiry, he was convinced that this was 
the only way that the families concerned would get justice. 
 
It was imperative, he added, that answers were provided so that it could 
be established why the tragedy happened, and who was to blame. Many 
questions, he said, had to be answered and these could only be delivered 
through an enquiry as outlined. The Government, he stated, had a moral 
obligation to establish an independent tribunal with the appropriate terms 
of reference and a guarantee that there would  be full legal aid.  
 

12 
 
It was incorrect, he said, that an inquiry could not be established whilst 
there were ongoing legal investigations. The Morris Tribunal, it was noted, 
had set the legal precedent in this regard as there had been a number of 
ongoing investigations at the time and none had interfered with the work 
of the tribunal. He called on all the candidates in the forthcoming election 
to include the establishment of an inquiry as a priority item in their 
campaigns.  
 
He would, he advised, continue to submit the motion on a six monthly 
basis until such time as the Government set up the enquiry as referenced 
in the motion. 
 
Cllr Devine said that he wholeheartedly supported the sentiments 
expressed by Cllr Mc Brearty and that he hoped and prayed that the 
tribunal would be established sooner rather than later.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Representatives from each of the political groupings outlined their support 
and advised that every effort would be made to support the people of 
Creeslough. It was acknowledged that this was an emotive issue and that 
no one would be found wanting in helping the families get the truth. 
 
Tribute was paid to all who had assisted in any way with the events in 
Cresslough.  
 
It was noted that the Garda Commissioner had indicated that a public 
enquiry would not impact on any ongoing  investigation. 
 
It would take a long time, they advised, for the people of Creeslough to 
get over the tragedy and it was suggested that the HSE should provide 
additional assistance.  
 
There was acknowledgement also that the setting up of an independent 
public inquiry was something that needed to be embedded in any 
negotiations for the formation of the incoming Government.  
 
Members were in agreement that an inquiry should be set up as quickly 
as possible. 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said he would not be making any comments until a public 
inquiry was established investigating all aspects of the tragedy.  
This, he said , would assist the families in getting justice for their loved 
ones and that it was not about getting compensation but rather the love 
and respect of all concerned for those that they had lost.  
 
He would he said continue to submit this motion on a regular basis until a 
statutory judicial public inquiry was granted. He acknowledged the support 
of all the political groupings and their support for the people of 
Creeslough.  

13 
 
C/376/24 
OCCUPIED TERRITORIES BILL 
On the proposal of Cllr J Brogan, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That Donegal  County Council, in light of the recent ruling by the 
International Court of Justice on the illegality of Israeli settlements in 
Occupied Palestinian Territories, calls on the Irish Government to enact 
the Occupied Territories Bill, to cut Irish trade ties with Israeli goods and 
services produced in these illegal settlements”.    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
Cllr J Brogan welcomed Senator Frances Black and Senator Eileen Flynn 
and members of the public to the meeting. 
 
He said that the Occupied Territories Bill had been introduced 6 years  
ago by Senator Black and had been supported by Trocaire, other Aid 
Organisations, Human Rights Organisations Trade Unions, and politicians 
all over the country. This was more relevant than ever given the recent 
genocide in Gaza, events in the West Bank and the continuation of the 
biggest land grab in recent history. Homes were being destroyed and 
families displaced, he said, with over 750,000 Israeli settlers moving into 
the West Bank. The Israeli Government he stated controlled a significant 
portion of the land and major infrastructure as well as  water and natural 
resources. This has been increasingly condemned as illegal, he said, and 
it was imperative that trade ties were cut in respect of goods produced in 
these illegal settlements. Despite ongoing condemnation Israeli 
settlements continue to expand on Palestinian land. This, he advised has 
become one of the key drivers of poverty in the area and has resulted in 
numerous human rights violations against Palestinians thus obstructing 
their right to self-determination under international law. This, he 
contended, was a war crime and a message needed to go to the Irish 
Government that the Occupied Territories Bill should be passed as soon 
as possible. He cited also the need to stop the US war machine refuelling 
at Shannon Airport. 
 
Cllr Meehan seconding the motion paid tribute to Senator Black who had 
worked tirelessly to move the bill forward in what had been an uphill 
struggle. The legal basis for the bill had not changed since 2028, he 
noted, and there was now additional clarity from the International Court of 
Justice  
 
He alluded to the fact that the situation in Palestine had been deteriorating 
since the 1930s and had deteriorated significantly over the past ten years 
with a massive impact on the Palestinian people with over 45,000 killed to 
date. Effectively, he said, that people were living in an open prison in 
Gaza and the West Bank. Israeli settlers, he added, were given a free rein 
to remove Palestinians and illegally occupy their lands. This it was 
acknowledged had been confirmed by the International Court of Justice. 
 

14 
 
He said that the issuing of arrest warrants for two senior politicians in 
Israel was to be welcomed but that there were many more that could be 
served at this point in time. Ireland, he advised had limited capacity as to 
what it could do but in the interest of humanity and the Palestinian people 
it had to do whatever possible within its remit. The bill, he said, was an 
important piece of legislation and it was imperative that it was passed 
without delay. It was hoped, he said, that it would have an impact on 
European trade with Israel. This country, he added, needed as an 
independent sovereign nation to take a stand with the people of Palestine. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Cllr Brogan said that this was a land grab supported by the EU and the 
USA and that this country could not sit idly by. He thanked Senator Black 
for travelling to Donegal and said it was imperative that the new 
government signed this into law. 
 
Members supporting the motion noted that the support from Ireland had 
not gone unnoticed and that our influence whilst small was important. The 
need for a one state solution was highlighted.  
 
Cllr Devine said that the Council should not send representatives to 
countries which supported this genocide.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Murray it was 
resolved that the motion as adopted be conveyed to the Bani Zaid 
Municipality in the West Bank which is twinned with Donegal.  
 
Senator Black addressed the meeting and thanked members for their 
support. She said that the bill had been first introduced in 2018 and that it 
had been a lengthy process to get it this far. When the new government is 
formed, she said that there would be only two more stages to go through 
with some amendments yet to be worked through with the Department of 
Foreign Affairs. She was she said most appreciative of the support and 
grateful for the interest shown at grassroot level with the motion  now 
passed by 12 local authorities.  
 
She said that the adoption of the motion would be conveyed to the 
Palestinian Ambassador and passed on to the people of Palestine. 
 
C/377/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 16TH SEPTEMBER, 2024  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr A Doherty, the minutes 
of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 16th of 
September, 2024 were adopted.   
 
C/378/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SEPTEMBER MEETING 
OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 30TH SEPTEMBER, 
2024    

15 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Meehan, the minutes of 
the September Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 30th 
September, 2024 were adopted.  
 
C/379/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ADJOURNED MEETING 
OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 7th OCTOBER, 2024.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Farren, seconded by Cllr Coyle, the minutes of 
the Adjourned Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 7th October, 
2024 were adopted.    
 
C/380/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 7TH OCTOBER, 2024  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McMonagle, the 
minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 7th 
October, 2024 were adopted.   
 
C/381/24 
DISPOSAL OF LAND AT CRATLAGH, MILFORD BY WAY OF 
EXCHANGE TO MICHAEL MCGEE  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon, it was 
resolved to disposal of land at Cratlagh, Milford by way of exchange to 
Michael McGee in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).       
 
C/382/24 
 DISPOSAL OF LAND AT THE REAR OF 1A BINNION AVE, 
LETTERKENNY TO MR HUGH LOGUE    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Coyle, it was 
resolved to disposal of land at the rear of 1A Binnion Ave, Letterkenny to 
Mr Hugh Logue in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).      
 
C/383/24 
 DISPOSAL OF LAND AT THE 2 BINNION AVE, LETTERKENNY TO 
JENNIFER AND MICHAEL HEANEY    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Coyle, it was 
resolved to disposal of land at 2 Binnion Ave, Letterkenny to Jennifer and 
Michael Heaney in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).      
 
 

16 
 
C/384/24 
DISPOSAL OF LAND AT LEENAN PIER TO ATLANTIC CRAB LTD  
 
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Crossan, it was 
resolved to disposal of land at Leenan Pier to Atlantic Crab Ltd in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, (as amended).     
 
C/385/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE DEMOLITION AND REBUILDING OF NAS MOR APARTMENT 
BLOCK C, CARNAMUGGAGH, LETTERKENNY    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr Brogan, the carrying out 
of works with regard to the demolition and rebuilding of Nas Mor 
Apartment Block C, Carnamuggagh, Letterkenny was approved, in 
accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as 
amended). 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty responding to a query from Cllr Murray, advised that this 
project was different to the houses in Bucrana that he had referenced. 
This project was different, he said, in that it was being fully repurposed 
and there was contact with the Department in relation to the funding of 
same.  
 
Cllr Devine said that this development was in his own estate and said that 
he was concerned that it would be left as a building site for a prolonged 
period of time. There were also water issues which he contended needed 
to be sorted before any other building works took place. 
 
The Director of Service noted the comments and said that the building 
was being repurposed to create a larger number of smaller units and that 
there would be no increase in the number of people living there.  
 
Cllr C Brogan cited the necessity of having a local workshop to look at the 
water issues and problems arising from same.  
 
C/386/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SINGLE-STOREY RURAL SI DWELLING 
INCLUDING WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND ALL ASSOCIATED 
SITE DEVELOPMENT WORKS AT TRENTAGHMUCKLA, ST 
JOHNSTON, CO. DONEGAL     
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr G Doherty, seconded by Cllr Devine, the carrying 

17 
 
out of works with regard to the construction of a single storey rural SI 
dwelling including wastewater treatment and all associated site 
development works at Trentaghmuckla, St. Johnston was approved, in 
accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as 
amended).     
 
C/387/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SINGLE STOREY RURAL SI DWELLING 
INCLUDING WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND ALL ASSOCIATED 
SITE DEVELOPMENT WORKS AT DUNAFF, CLONMANY      
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Crossan, the carrying 
out of works with regard to the construction of a single storey rural SI 
dwelling including wastewater treatment and all associated site 
development works at Dunaff, Clonmany was approved, in accordance 
with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and 
Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended).         
 
C/388/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SINGLE STOREY RURAL SI DWELLING 
INCLUDING WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND ALL ASSOCIATED 
SITE DEVELOPMENT WORKS AT KINNEA, CLONMANY 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Crossan, the carrying 
out of works with regard to the construction of a single storey rural SI 
dwelling including wastewater treatment and all associated site 
development works at Kinnea,Clonmany  was approved, in accordance 
with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and 
Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended).   
 
Cllr Mc Dermott welcomed the fact that there were a number of SI’s for 
approval and said that it augured well for rural Ireland. He cited the need 
to progress the SI Programme and thus help local communities survive.  
 
C/389/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SINGLE STOREY RURAL SI DWELLING 
INCLUDING WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND ALL ASSOCIATED 
SITE DEVELOPMENT WORKS AT KNOCKBRACK, LETTERKENNY    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr McMonagle, the 
carrying out of works with regard to the construction of a single storey 
rural SI dwelling including wastewater treatment and all associated site 
development works at Knockbrack, Letterkenny was approved, in 

18 
 
accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as 
amended).        
 
C/390/24 
TO CONSIDER THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL CORPORATE 
PLAN 2024-2029    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr C 
Brogan, the Donegal Corporate Plan 2024-2029 was adopted.  
 
 
Cllr Brogan welcomed the recent workshop and noted that there had been 
a considerable level of engagement which had been beneficial in the 
preparation of the plan. 
 
C/391/24 
TO FULL CASUAL VACANCY ON ICBAN ARISING FROM THE 
RESIGNATION OF CLLR MICHAEL MCMAHON 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation ot 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Crossan it was 
resolved that Cllr DakotaNic Mheanman fill the casual vacancy on ICBAN.  
 
C/392/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE DONEGAL TOURISM ASSOCIATE 
MEMBERS COMMITTEE  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Brogan it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Donegal Tourism Associate 
Members Committee: 
 
▪ Cllr Michéal Naughton - Donegal Municipal District  
▪ Cllr Brian Carr – Glenties Municipal District  
▪ Cllr Martin Mc Dermott - Inishowen Municipal District (2024-2025) 
▪ Cllr Ali Farren - Inishowen Municipal District (2025-2026) 
▪ Cllr Albert Doherty - Inishowen Municipal District (2026-2027) 
▪ Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly – Letterkenny/Milford Municipal District  
▪ Cllr Martin Harley Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal District 
Cllr Brogan said it was imperative that Donegal Tourism came to each 
Municipal District a couple of times each year so that members could be 
updated in relation to the various tourism initiatives and have an 
opportunity to input into these developments.  
 
C/393/24 
TO APPROVE SCHEDULE OF COUNCIL MEETINGS FOR 2025  
 
 
It was unanimously agreed to approve the Schedule of Meetings for 2025.  
 
 
 

19 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan queried the situation in relation to the continuation of 
online meetings for the Lifford/Stranorlar MD and was informed that this 
was an issue which would be discussed further with the Lifford/Stranorlar 
members in January 2025.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that there were issues with the clashing of meetings 
and asked that this be looked into. 
 
Cllr J Brogan enquired about induction training for new members and was 
informed that this could be facilitated.  
 
C/394/24 
TO APPROVE THE HOLDING OF A SPECIAL BUDGET WORKSHOP 
ON MONDAY 2ND DECEMBER, 2024 AT 11AM IN THE COUNCIL 
CHAMBER, LIFFORD   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was resolved 
to hold a Special Budget Workshop on Monday 2nd December, 2024 at 
11am in the Council Chamber Lifford.  
 
C/395/24 
GLENVEAGH NATIONAL PARK – PUBLIC CONSULTATION ON NEW 
VISITOR PLAN – PROPOSED WORKSHOP AT 12 NOON ON MONDAY 
9TH DECEMBER, 2024.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved to hold a workshop on the new Visitor Plan for Glenveagh 
National Park on Monday 9th December, 2024.   
 
C/396/24 
DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION SCHEME REVIEW. TO AGREE 
DATE FOR PLENARY WORKSHOP ON THE 12TH DECEMBER, 2024.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was resolved 
to hold a Plenary Workshop to discuss the Draft Development 
Contribution Scheme 2025 on Thursday 12th December, 2024.   
 
C/397/24 
TO NOTE UPDATE REPORT ON THE REVISED NATIONAL 
PLANNING FRAMEWORK (REPORT TO FOLLOW)  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. Cllr A Doherty said that debate was needed in relation to the 
fact that the region was being demoted. He asked if any additional 
material had been submitted in light of the response to the November 
submission. He queried what could be done to bolster the submission as it 
was vital that the Northwest had an imprint on the Revised national 
Planning Framework.  
 
 
Cllr C Brogan said that consideration now needed to be given to 
augmenting the proposals given that the National Planning Framework 
had been helpful to Donegal in the past. 

20 
 
 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning confirmed 
that the revision document published in November had been issued 
following the submission of a number of proposals from different bodies 
and that to date there had not been a call for any further submissions.  
 
 
The Planning and Economic Development Directorates, he advised, were 
examining the document and a more detailed report would be provided 
giving an overall analysis.  It would, he noted, have to go back to get 
Cabinet approval and then to the Oireachtas. It was intended, he added, 
to use the timeline involved to undertake further engagement and to lobby 
on this and a number of other issues so that the overall context for the 
Northwest region is clear.  
 
C/398/24 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE CORPORATE POLICY GROUP MEETING 
HELD ON THE 23RD SEPTEMBER, 2024    
 
On the proposal of Cllr J Brogan, seconded by Cllr Blaney the Minutes of 
the Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on the 23rd September, 2024 
was noted.  
 
C/399/24 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL CORPORATE POLICY GROUP 
MEETING HELD ON THE 4TH OCTOBER, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney seconded by Cllr McMonagle the Minutes 
of the Special Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on the 4th October, 
2024 were noted.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan queried that status of his request on the streaming of DCB 
Committee meetings. 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate  & Cultural Services said 
there had been good discussion at CPG but that the decision was that the 
status quo remained and that the streaming of Council Meetings would 
only apply to Plenary Council meetings.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan said this was disappointing as the motion had been 
unanimously agreed and that streaming of the DCB meetings would have 
provided additional transparency given that there was limited space in the 
public gallery. Cllr Beard concurred with this assessment.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that committee meetings could generally be 
attended and accessed online and that minutes were available on issues 
discussed. 
 
 

21 
 
C/400/24 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
 Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 
of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) 
Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for 
the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 
(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Farren the attendance of 
the  
• Leas-Cathaoirleach at the Long Service Awards for Fire Service 
Personnel in the Knightsbrook Hotel, Dublin Road, Trim, Co. Meath 
on the 14th November, 2024 was approved.  
• 
Attendance of the Leas- Cathaoirleach at the Asia Matters 
Business Awards in the Radisson Blue Royal Hotel Dublin on the 
19th November 2024.  
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach and the Municipal District Chairs 
at the Chambers Ireland Local Government Awards in the Crowne 
Plaza, Santry on the 21st November, 2024 was approved.  
• Attendance of the A5/N2 Cross Border Committee members at a 
meeting with a representative from the Department for 
Infrastructure in Northern Ireland to take place in Garvaghey, Co. 
Tyrone on Monday 16th December, 2024 was approved. 
• To select nominees and approve attendance at the “Ongoing 
Conversations Programme” series of events scheduled to take 
place in 2025 was approved.  
 
Cllr Blaney noted that Donegal County Council had won the Local 
Authority of the Year at the Chambers Local Government Awards and 
congratulated all involved on this great achievement.  
 
Cllr Mc Mahon asked that an update be provided in respect of the A5/N2 
Cross border Committee meeting on the 16th December and that 
members be kept informed of all relevant updates. 
 
Cllr C Brogan advised that the A5 was a major issue for the Northwest 
and welcomed the fact that the Irish Government had committed 
€600,000,000 and that the Shared Island Unit were advancing the project 
in a timely manner. The current legal challenge was unfortunate, he 
added, but there were indications that this would be dealt with as quickly 
as possible.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that the objections were weak and that there  was 
some comfort in the fact that the judge involved had said that the process 
would not be prolonged. He acknowledged all who had worked to 
advance this necessary link. 
 
 

22 
 
Travel Abroad    
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach of the Inishowen MD on the exchange 
visit to the city of St. Charles, Missouri and to attend the Missouri River 
Irish Festival in St. Charles in May, 2025 was approved.  
 
Cllr A Farren said that he felt that it would be appropriate to send more 
than one Councillor given that the Sister Cities initiative had been ongoing 
in Inishowen for the past number of years and that there had been a 
significant monetary contribution from the Missouri delegation towards for 
educational establishments in Inishowen. 
 
Cllr A Doherty proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle that the 
Cathaoirleach and the Leas – Cathaoirleach of the Inishowen Municipal 
District attend the event.  
 
The Chief Executive said that the matter could be revisited in the New 
Year. 
 
• Attendance of the EU Cerv Project representative at the Youth & 
Democracy: Empowering Europe’s Nex Generation Seminar in Rabat, 
Malta from the 9th to the 12th December, 2024 was approved.  
 
C/401/24 
 RESTORATION OF TOWN COUNCILS    
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That this Council write to the leaders of every political party and 
independent grouping running candidates in the forthcoming General 
Election urging them to include within their programme for government to 
fully commit, within the lifetime of the next Dáil to the restoration or 
creation of Town Councils in every town in this State with a population 
over 5,000 people". Also to agree to send this motion to every other 
Council in the State.   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Bradley alluded to the fact that there were a total of 949 Councillors 
nationwide and that these represented on average 5399 constituents. He 
said that there were fewer elected representatives per capita in Ireland 
than any other country in Europe. He quoted a number of statistics from 
other European Countries and said that Ireland clearly lagged behind in 
terms of overall representation. The principle of the motion, he contended, 
was about subsidiarity. Referring to the Inishowen Peninsula, he noted 
that ten years ago there were 9 County Councillors and 9 Town Council 
members in Buncrana. It was fair to say, he added, that the bigger towns 
got the biggest chunk of the investment, and that smaller towns and 
villages were left behind. The thrust of the motion, he advised, was that 
local decisions should be taken by local people at a local level.  
 

23 
 
 
Cllr C Brogan concurred with the above and noted that over the last 
number of years the Seanad had carried out public  consultation on the 
future of local democracy. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig asked if the motion could be amended to include 
other towns in rural areas with populations of under 5000. He said that the 
Glenties MD would again be disadvantaged if only towns over 5000 were 
to be considered. Towns such as Dungloe, Creslough and Dunfanaghy, 
he added, deserved recognition.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Cllr Bradley said that his motion referenced towns with a population over 
5000 and the rationale was that this would benefit smaller towns and 
villages as it would free up resources at county level. He said that he had 
been inspired to submit the motion as a tribute to former Buncrana Town 
Councillor, Phillip Diggins who had inspired his own interest in politics. 
 
 
He said that he did not wish to amend the motion. 
 
 
Cllr J Brogan said that a different model of local democracy was needed, 
and that provision should be made for smaller towns to come together and 
form councils at local level.  
 
 
It was further resolved that the motion be forwarded to all other Local 
Authorities for consideration. 
 
 
C/402/24 
THAT THE COUNCIL INSPECT EACH OF ITS SOCIAL HOUSING 
UNITS FOR SIGNS OF MOULD AND DAMP  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr McGee it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
It has been scientifically proven that mould and damp can cause asthma, 
coughing and other respiratory problems.  In some cases, particularly for 
infants, young children and older people, mould and damp can be fatal. 
 Due to the presence of defective concrete blocks in thousands of homes 
in Donegal, the existence of these threats to health is on the increase.   
 
 
“This motion calls on Donegal County Council - as a matter of urgency - to 
inspect each and every one of its social housing units, looking for signs of 
mould and damp.  And where remedial action is required, to immediately 
eradicate these potentially deadly spores, eliminate water ingress and 
ensure that the Council's properties are fit for human habitation”. 
  
 She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
Cllr Beard highlighted the urgency of the situation and advised of the need 
to think outside the box. The fact that a remediation scheme had not been 
put in place after two years was not good enough, she said.  
 

24 
 
 
She drew attention members attention to a brown mouldy jacket taken out 
of a defective concrete block house and the fact that this represented what 
many families lived with on a day to day basis. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee supporting the motion said that government had let the 
people of Donegal down. It was different up  here, he said, and Donegal 
geographically was isolated. He said that members needed to stand 
together and put their political differences aside to help their own people.  
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that in relation to social housing the procedure was that tenants were 
asked to contact the Council where problems existed and that there was 
an established maintenance system in place. Maintenance staff, he 
stated, would go out to the affected houses and this allowed for the 
identification and resolution of issues. In some instances, he said, it was 
not possible to remedy the issue as full remedial works were required. In 
such cases, he said, the solution was to relocate the tenant if possible. 
Where tenants highlighted concerns, the issues would be followed up by 
maintenance staff, he added.  
 
 
He referenced the fact that a number of months ago a delegation had met 
with Department officials and a follow-up meeting had been agreed by 
year end. This it was confirmed would take place on the 5th December and 
strong emphasis would be put on the urgency of putting in place a 
remediation scheme for social housing.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
C/403/24      TURNKEY ACQUISITIONS  
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-   
 
Turnkey Acquisitions, 
"That DCC share an analysis of the application, performance and housing 
number projected and delivered in the 2018 Turnkey model, 
and, 
That the Council share the current performance analysis of the 2022-26 
turnkey acquisitions projection to date including submissions received, 
municipal locations, need and costing issues, with particular focus on the 
interests to deliver housing received from AHBs and issues emerging 
apparently delaying delivery of social housing by AHBs in Donegal".   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr A Doherty said that he had submitted the motion out of exasperation 
and disappointment at the progress in providing social housing through 
the Turnkey process. He asked for an overview of what had been 
delivered under the 2018 Turnkey model, what had been delivered and  
 

25 
 
He asked for an update in relation progress on turnkey developments over 
the past two years and analysis of the progress made and the hiccups 
encountered in the period 2022-2026. 
 
He alluded in particular to the Turnkey project in Carndonagh which was 
to deliver 58 houses. Enquiries in relation to same in 2022 had, he 
advised, elicited a response that there were technical issues hindering 
development. In 2023, he said that rumours abounded that an Approved 
Housing Body was coming on board to deliver accommodation. Members, 
he said, had been informed in August 2024 that the offer to the developer 
had been rescinded. 
 
He queried if there had been any engagement with the AHBs and the 
Department regarding the provision of social housing in Carndonagh and 
what efforts had been made to progress same since the 2nd August. 
 
There had been, he advised, considerable engagement with the 
Department over the past three years and an indication from the 
Department in September 2024 that a scheme was imminent. 
 
He confirmed that an Approved Housing Body was anxious to explore the 
provision of housing in Carndonagh and asked that this be actively 
explored.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle noted that there were similar problems in Letterkenny 
and that immediate action was needed. He welcomed the fact that an 
update was to be provided in relation to. the Turnkey Acquisition 
Programme. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that it was hoped to bring the update on the Turnkey Programme to the 
next Special Plenary Housing Meeting.  
 
C/404/24 
PROVISION OF TOP CLASS LEISURE CENTRE AMENITIES FOR ALL 
CITIZENS IN DONEGAL      
 
  
 On the proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr Beard it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
  
 "That this Council reaffirms its commitment to providing top class leisure 
centre amenities for all citizens in Donegal, commits that all interactions 
with the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media 
will state this as a priority and, further, this council strongly calls for the 
immediate, and additional, funding for the one outstanding, unsuccessful, 
application to the Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund".     
 
 
  
 He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Murray said that the Inishowen members had supported various 
projects county-wide and that there was now an urgent need for a leisure 

26 
 
facility in Buncrana. He acknowledged the work carried out by the Water 
and Environment Directorate in making an application for Buncrana 
Leisure Centre under the Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund. It was 
disappointing, he added, that this had not been successful and had come 
as a shock to the people of Inishowen who now had to travel to 
Templemore to avail of such facilities.  
 
The people of Inishowen, he confirmed, were now waiting ten years for a 
leisure centre, yet Edenderry in Co Offaly received funding to replace their 
centre damaged in a fire in January 2024. A recent public meeting, he 
said had highlighted the necessity of getting the facility up and running 
and there had been cross-party support for the project.  
 
It was disappointing, he said, that Minister Mc Conalogue had laid the 
blame at the Council’s doorstep. It was acknowledged that the scoring 
mechanism for the application had not yet been provided. He asked that 
the Minister be informed of the frustration that existed within the 
community who were anxious that proper leisure facilities be put in place. 
 
Cllr Beard supporting the motion said that such a facility was very 
important in terms of mental health and general well-being and 
encouraged all members to lobby at the highest level for its provision.  
 
Buncrana, she said, was the second largest town in Donegal and 
Inishowen was at the epicentre of a humanitarian crisis in terms of the 
defective concrete blocks issue. This facility, she contended, was badly 
needed and queried who was responsible for the refusal. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment alluded to his 
response and said that he wanted to reaffirm the Council’s commitment to 
the project and said that the application was still live. Constructive 
engagement, he said, would be maintained with the Department going 
forward. He was , he said, confident that funding would be approved given 
that the project was included on the reserve list. He said that contact had 
been made with another potential agency in Northern Ireland regarding an 
application under Peaceplus. All available options would, he advised, be 
pursued. 
 
Cllr Murray concluding said that he was glad that the Council was not to 
blame for the failure of the application and cited the need to explore all 
available funding options.  
 
C/405/24 
 RAINWATER HARVESTING  
 
  
 On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was resolved 
to adopt the following Motion:-  
 
 
  
 “That Donegal County Council write to the incoming Housing Minister 
asking for a grant to be considered for rainwater harvesting that would 
lower demand on current domestic supplies and could be used for flushing 

27 
 
toilets, washing cars, power washing and any other use of treated water 
supplies around dwellings, farms and industrial settings”.  
 
 
  
 He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that he would like to see an initiative similar to the Croi 
Conaithe Grant Scheme put in place to encourage rainwater harvesting. 
Water, he noted, was a valuable commodity and the issue was how to 
sustain the water supply and cater for future development without wasting 
the resources that we have.  
 
Rainwater harvesting, he contended, would assist in removing the 
potential for flash flooding and was ideally suited to industrial and 
domestic settings.  
 
Cllr Meehan supporting the motion said rainwater harvesting made 
common sense and that whilst there were various types of grants it made 
sense to concentrate specifically on the harvesting of rainwater given that 
we live in one of the wettest countries in Europe, Recent calls for water 
rationing in November were ludicrous, he said, and reflected the 
dependence on outdated water infrastructure.  
 
The promotion of this initiative, he contended, would benefit all concerned 
and assist Uisce Éireann with their operating costs. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he had 
outlined in his reply the range of existing options available. Responding to 
Cllr Meehan’s comments on Lough Colmcille, he said that water levels 
had been significantly reduced over the recent dry period. Generally, he 
said, that water levels were replenished over the winter months. He was, 
he said, happy to explore the suggestions in the motion further and write 
to the Minister as requested. 
Cllr Mc Bride thanked the Director of Service and Cllr Meehan for their 
comments and asked that the motion be circulated to all Local Authorities.  
 
  
 
C/406/24 
 DISSATISFACTION OF ELECTED MEMBERS WITH THE LOCAL 
REPRESENTATIVE DESK SUPPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS FROM 
UISCE ÉIREANN    
 
  
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Mc Bride it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
  
"That this Council will write urgently to the Board of Directors of Uisce 
Éireann to outline the dissatisfaction of elected members with the local 
representative desk support and communication from Uisce Éireann, and 
to ask for a full review of the service with a commitment to improving 
communication with elected representatives".   
 

28 
 
 
  
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan said that there had been meetings with Uisce Éireann in 
September at MD level and that responses to the queries raised were still 
outstanding. There was also a problem, he advised, in terms of receiving 
written responses to issues raised as far back as June 2024. 
There was, he advised, growing dissatisfaction with this multi-million euro 
agency responsible for a critical piece of infrastructure which impacted on 
people’s day to day lives and was essential for any future development 
work that the Council might undertake.  
 
Accountability, he contended, was lacking and the various communication 
channels used elicited either no response or a delayed one. Current 
communication channels, he added, were not fit for purpose, and there 
seemed to be no means of getting information in instances where water is 
cut off early or late in the evening. 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that previously clinics had been held on the day of  
plenary meetings. This initiative, he said, should be revived and Uisce 
Éireann in situ for the full day.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he would 
pass on the issues that had been highlighted to Uisce Éireann. He 
encouraged members to use the local support channels to record the 
various issues that arose.  
 
Concluding Cllr Meehan said that it was imperative that channels were 
found which would address the current communication issues.  
 
C/407/24 
 DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS.    
 
  
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
  
"On behalf of senior citizens who have DCB homes that the Donegal 
County Council submit a letter to the Attorney General questioning the 
legality of the issue of transferability in the DCB Scheme. Article 43 of the 
constitution states the State accordingly guarantees to pass no law 
attempting to abolish the right of private ownership or the general right to 
transfer bequeath and inherit property under the present scheme, the right 
to transfer property is limited, restricting and places a burden on the 
homeowner to designate one heir".    
 
 
  
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment In 
relation to the above.  
 

29 
 
Cllr Devine said that this was a significant issue for senior citizens living 
defective concrete block affected homes and one which warranted 
clarification. 
 
 
 
Cllr Farren seconding the motion said that issues arose when parents 
wanted to leave their property to a number of their children and that this 
was problem with the current scheme in terms of grant access. This was, 
he noted, an issue for many families and in general terms should be one 
of the easy fixes.  
 
 Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment clarified the fact 
that more than one person could be listed as owner for the purposes of 
the scheme. What was not provided for, he said, was where the 
homeowner wanted to pass the property on.  
 
He informed members that where an applicant to the Enhanced Defective 
Concrete Blocks Scheme passes away the person who inherits can 
continue on the scheme as referenced in Section 13 of the Regulations. 
There was, he added, no provision for any other person during the lifetime 
of the current owners. It was acknowledged that if the homeowner was not 
a current applicant and passed away then the person who inherits the 
property could make an application. 
 
Dwellings with more than one owner, he added, could apply as joint 
owners. He said that he would be happy to write as requested given that 
the scheme does not currently provide for the applicant to pass on the 
property during the lifetime of the applicants. 
 
Cllr Canning queried what would happen if a current applicant inherited 
the original family home which was also included on the scheme. 
 
The Director of Service said that it was his belief that you can be a current 
applicant and inherit a property and process both.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott clarified same and said that in such cases the issue of 
principle residence did not come into play. He confirmed that persons not 
on the scheme or in possession of a recommendation from the Housing 
Agency who inherited a property could not avail of the grant as they were 
not the principle private owner.  
 
It was agreed that the matter would be put on the agenda for the next 
Defective Concrete Block Committee Meeting.  
 
C/408/24 
 EXPEDITION OF THE APPLICATION FOR EMERGENCY FUNDING 
FOR SOCIAL HOMES THAT ARE IN DISREPAIR DUE TO THE 
DEFECTIVE BLOCKS ISSUE   
 
  
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr Beard it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 

30 
 
 
  
There are a number of social homes that are in a state of disrepair, due to 
the defective blocks issue.  
 
"I ask the Council to expedite an application for emergency funding, in 
order to do whatever is necessary to address this issue.  It is imperative 
that something be done in the interim with these homes, particularly those 
that are not waterproof. The Council have a duty of care to the residents of 
these homes, and it has to be seen to act proactively and 
compassionately with regards to these cases.     
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that the key issue here was that the Government was not 
giving enough to money to Donegal County Council in the first instance. 
He said that he had submitted a motion several months ago looking for the 
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage to come to Donegal 
and was informed at the time that he already had plans to do so. This, he 
said, had clearly not materialised. He called for an urgent application to be 
made to Government to help people living in defective concrete blocks 
houses over the winter months. 
 
 
Cllr Devine concurred and said the problem was that there was no 
alternative accommodation and that tenants were being offered other DCB 
properties. He said that people living in such conditions should not have to 
pay rent as it was only a matter of time before a tragedy happened. 
 
It had been discussed, he added, at a recent DCB Committee meeting 
that the Council should remediate their own housing stock and send the 
bill to the Government. Number of affected houses were expected to 
double in the Letterkenny/Milford area, and something needed to be done 
as soon as possible.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that his department had been carrying out preventative works to keep 
people in their homes and that this had been done on a case to case 
basis, as full remediation was not possible until there was a funded 
scheme in place for social housing. Indications had been, he said, that a 
scheme was imminent, and this could be clarified at the next meeting with 
the Department on the 5th December.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said it was clear that the Government did not want to help 
Donegal. Cllr Devine asked if there was any indication that an 
announcement was imminent and was advised that there was no specific 
detail available at this point in time.  
 

31 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that the notice 
for the meeting had only been received last Friday evening and that the 
usual arrangements would be put in place for a delegation. 
 
Cllr Beard queried how much longer this had to go on and said that the 
Government was failing people in both social and private homes The issue 
was ongoing for 14 years now she said, with more and more people living 
in extremely dangerous conditions.  
 
C/409/24 
USE EXISTING SIGNAGE INFRASTRUCTURE TO PROMOTE 
TOURISM AND AMENITIES IN LOCAL AREAS IN THE COUNTY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Mc Clafferty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
"That this Council use existing signage infrastructure to promote tourism 
and amenities in local areas throughout the county".   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development 
Information Systems & Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Scanlon said that the repurposing of signage that was no longer 
relevant was something that should be seriously considered going 
forward. Many of these, he added, could be repurposed at very little cost 
and could be used to highlight additional amenities in an area. He cited 
the example of Fintown where old signage on the Glenfin Road could be 
used promote the historical aspect of the area.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that the recycling of old signage would save money 
in the long run. He alluded also to the fact that lack of hedge cutting was 
an ongoing problem in the Falcarragh area particularly on side roads and 
was giving rise to safety issues.  
 
Concern was raised as to who was actually responsible where overgrown 
hedgerows were the cause of an accident.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation said that his 
response outlined the requirements regarding road signage and the 
special category of tourism signage that allows tourists to be guided to 
amenities in a local area. He said there was a recommendation that 
Roads Authorities should prepare plans for tourist signing along the road 
network, rather than dealing with individual requests, in consultation with 
the Department of Transport, Fáilte Ireland and other relevant authorities 
and interests. It was noted that there was also a requirement to consult 
with neighbouring Roads Authorities in relation to cross boundary 
attractions. 
 
He said that as with all other directional signs, tourist signs are an aid to 
safe and efficient navigation and are intended to complement, but not 

32 
 
replace, pre-planning of the journey and the use of maps and satellite 
navigation systems. 
 
There was acknowledgement also that the T.I.I had plans to commence a 
further review of their plans for tourism signage along the national road 
network in Donegal next year. 
 
Mr Cannon advised that a range of capital signage was at the end of life 
stage and said that he would speak to colleagues within the roads, tourism 
and planning section regarding same.  
 
Concluding Cllr Scanlon welcomed the response and said that anything 
that would promote tourism and the local area would be widely welcomed. 
 
C/410/24 
CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS   
 
 Votes of Sympathy 
 
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
 
 
US Trade Mission  
 
The Cathaoirleach updated members in relation to the joint US Trade 
Mission with Derry City and Strabane District Council which had taken 
place on from the which had taken place from the 11th to the 15th 
November 2024. She acknowledged the good working relationship that 
existed between both local authorities and the Mayor of Derry, Cllr Lillain 
Senoi Barr and the Chief Executive of Derry City & Strabane District 
Council, Mr John Kelpie. 
 
She proceeded to given an overview of the trip and the meetings which 
had taken place with the various agencies in Philadelphia and Boston. A 
video highlighting the benefits of promoting and investing in the Northwest 
City Region was shown to members. 
 
 
Chambers Local Government Awards 
Cllr Kennedy said that this was the first time that Donegal had won Local 
Authority of the Year and that this was a great achievement. It reflected, 
she said, the work that Councillors do, and the work carried out by staff on 
a day to day basis. She noted that the Council has also won the 
“Supporting Sustainable Communities Award for the Burtonport & 
Arranmore – Harbour to Island Regeneration and the “Health & Wellbeing 
Award” for Model Beach Accessibility to improve Health and Wellbeing – A 
Strategic Approach project. 
 
It was noted that the following projects from Donegal had also been 
shortlisted:  
 
• 
Climate Change 
Donegal County Council – Energy Retrofit Programme 
 
• 
Festival of the Year 
Donegal County Council – Sound! Soundtrack Film Festival 
 

33 
 
• 
Heritage & Built Environment 
Donegal County Council – The Wonder of Weave – A Showcase of 
Irish & Scottish Tweed 
 
• 
Promoting Economic Development  
Donegal County Council – Food Coast Donegal 
 
Events Attended 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that she had attended the following 
events: 
Launch Donegal Tourism Autumn Campaign in Castlegrove House on the 
3rd October. 
 
▪ Road Safety Roadshow in the Aura Leisure Centre on the 8th 
October 2024. 
▪ Donegal Town 550th Long Table Dining Event on the 10th October 
2024. 
▪ Donegal Diamond Launch in Donegal Town on the 11th October 
2024. 
▪ Attendance at the Dúiche Workshop “Capitalising on Culture, 
Competing the Difference” in Leuven, Belgium from the 14th to the 
18th October, 2024. 
▪ Launch of Wainfest in Donegal Castle on the 19th September 2024. 
▪ Photocall for the new Renault Trucks on the 25th October 2024. 
▪ Sports Bursary Awards in the Council Chamber on the 25th October   
2024. 
▪ Pride of Place Awards in Monaghan on the 2nd November 2024.  
▪ Allingham Arts Festival launch in Ballyshannon on the 6th 
November 2024. 
▪ Arts Exhibition Launch in the Regional Culture Centre on the 9th 
November 2024. 
▪ US Trade Mission from the 11th to the 15th November 2024. 
▪ Age Friendly Meeting with visit to the Trusk Road site on the 19th 
November, 2024. 
▪ Chambers Ireland Local Government Awards on the 21st November 
in Santry, Dublin. 
▪ T.I.I delegation to Dublin on the 22nd November 2024.  
 
 
C/411/24 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and noted the update in relation to the following. 
 
Community Development &Planning Services  
• Community Development 
 
• AGE Friendly Awards 
• Riverine  
• Local Enhancement Programme 2025 
• Older Person’s Council – Annual General 
Meeting……………………………………………………………… 
• Urban & Rural Regeneration Division  

34 
 
• Rural Regeneration and Development Fund-Fourth Call for Cat 2 
Applications  
• Capital Projects Delivery Unit and Taking in Charge of Housing Estates 
Division  
• Major Projects 
• Taking in Charge of Private Housing Estates 
• Refugee Response Division 
 
Water & Environment 
• Climate Action 
• Community Climate Action Fund 
• Buncrana Leisure Centre  
• Environment 
• Anti-Dumping Initiative (ADI) Cinema Campaign 
• Household HAZ Waste Project 
• #Love Donegal Day 
• ADI Monster SUP Project 
• Reduce, Reuse, Recycle 
• Irish Farm Film Producers Group (IFFPG) Farm plastic Recycling 
Days) 
• Flood Relief Scheme Updates  
• Defective Concrete Blocks – Update  
 
 Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services  
• Social Housing Delivery 
• Social Housing Delivery Programme  
• Land Acquisition  
• Social Housing through Turnkey Acquisition  
• Best Kept Council Housing Schemes 2024 Competition 
 
• Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme 
 
• Housing Grants  
• Library Service  
• Biodiversity Office 
 
• Culture Division  
• Heritage Office  
 
Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services 45 
• Information Systems Division Update 45 
• Fire Service  
 
Roads & Transportation  
• Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure 
 
• National Roads Office Update ..........................................................  
• Piers & Harbours Programme ..........................................................  
• Roads Areas Update ........................................................................  
 
Local Authority of the Year Award 

35 
 
 
The Chief Executive said it was imperative that this accolade was used for 
the benefit of the county and said that it boded well for the type of work 
and projects that the Council had undertaken. He thanked the Director of 
Community Development, Mr Liam Ward and the Head of Economic 
Development, Ms Anne Marie Conlon for their assistance in delivering the 
final presentation which secured the award. It was, he added, recognition 
of the work that the Council did and would be used over the next 12 
months to promote and encourage various initiatives.  
 
 
Cllr C Brogan congratulated the Cathaoirleach and the Senior 
Management team on the award. 
 
 
Rural Regeneration & Development Fund 
 
The Chief Executive informed members that it was now intended to submit 
a second application under the fourth call for Category 2 applications 
under the RRDF and that this would be in respect of An Clochán Liath. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig welcomed this development. He expressed 
concern that signage in a number of towns was not in keeping with the 
planning regulations. He asked that reports from the islands Committee 
and Coiste na Gaeilge be included on the agenda for plenary meetings.  
 
 
 Gaeltacht signage, he said, was also an issue and he said that he was 
very concerned that the Gaeltacht Lar was being left behind. 
 
 
Cllr J Brogan was informed that detail from the recent T.I.I delegation 
meeting would be circulated at MD level.  
 
 
The following questions were submitted 
 
C/412/24 
FUNDING FOR LEISURE CENTRES IN THE COUNTY 
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How many leisure centres in the county are currently waiting on, applying 
for or are actively seeking funding to renovate, rebuild, restore or expand 
their facilities? If there is more than one such leisure centre does the 
Council have a priority list for any such funding for those leisure centres? 
If there is a priority list (in the event that there is more than 1 such centre) 
what is the rationale behind it?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/413/24 
ARE HORSES AND THEIR RIDERS ENTITLED TO USE THE 
GREENWAYS  
 
Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
To ask the Executive are horses and their riders entitled to use Greenways? 
If not, are there specific equine trails in the county which they can use? If 
there are, what are the locations of ?    

36 
 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/414/24 
DISSOLUTION OF 33RD DAIL FRI NOV 8TH 2024 – REMEDIATION OF 
SOCIAL HOUSING AFFECTED BY DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Dissolution of 33rd Dáil Fri Nov 8th 2024. 
 (Remediation of Social housing affected by Defective Concrete Blocks) 
What official correspondence, meetings, engagements were made by 
DCC with the Department of Housing in relation to enabling the Council to 
proceed with the remediation scheme of the significant number of Social 
Homes up to an including Fri Nov 8th 2024.What were the responses, 
commitments received by DCC up to and including Nov 8th that may  
enable the early and necessary remediation of DCB affected social homes 
in Donegal?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/415/24 
MODULAR HOMES TO HELP SOLVE THE HOUSING CRISIS  
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
On 10 July 2024, I tabled a motion calling on the Executive of the Council 
to engage with suppliers of modular homes to help resolve the housing 
crisis. 
 
 On 18 September 2024, I put forward a motion requesting that the 
Emergency Plan be amended to provide a place of safety for defective 
blocks homeowners during storms. 
 
Both motions were approved by the Council with no objections. 
 
Please explain why, as far as I can see, nothing has been done to 
implement or progress the issues raised in these motions?   
 
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/416/24 
 RZLT 2025  
 
 Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
RZLT 2025 
 How many  submissions and appeals were received by DCC from 
landowners requesting lands to be excluded and citing the negative 
impact RZLT would have on future farming viability in Donegal? 
 What is the current revenue position 08/11/24 on the imposition  RZLT on 
lands actively being farmed in the country? 

37 
 
 What communication and decision role will local authorities including DCC 
be required/obliged to play re RZLT and the publication of the final 
designated RZLT land /farmlands in Donegal?  
 He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/417/24 
 SCORING OF APPLICATIONS TO THE LARGE SCALE SPORT 
INFRASTRUCTURE FUND  
 
 Cllr Murray submitted the following question:-  
 
Has the Council been provided with the scoring of applications to the 
Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/418/24 
HOW DID THE COUNCIL PRIORITISE APPLICATIONS TO THE 
LARGE SCALE SPORT INFRASTRUCTURE FUND  
 
 Cllr Murray submitted the following question:-  
 
Can the Council executive explain how it prioritised applications to the 
Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund and advise why elected members 
were not advised of this prioritisation?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/419/24 
 UPDATE ON THE JAPENESE KNOTWEED PROGRAMME  
 
 Cllr McBride submitted the following question:-  
 
Can Donegal County Council give me an update on the Japanese 
Knotweed Programme and who is currently responsible for its rollout?  
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads  & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/420/24 
 A FIGURE OF ALL NEW COUNCIL HOUSES GETTING BUILT  
 
 Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get a figure of all the new council houses getting built, how many 
are actually fully wheelchair friendly to live in with a downstairs wet room 
& bedroom and how many are 4 bedroom?    
 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/421/24 
 LIST OF VISITOR FIGURES AND STAFFING IN EACH LIBRARY  
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  

38 
 
 
Can we be provided with the visitor figures for every public library in the 
county, as well as the current levels of staffing resources allocated to each 
library?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/422/24 
 FULL DETAILS OF ALL CURRENT HR VACANCIES IN DONEGAL 
COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we be provided with full details of all current HR vacancies across all 
sections of Donegal County Council?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/423/24 
HOW MUCH MONEY HAS BEEN PAID OUT BY DCC IN LEGAL FEES 
INVOLVING CLLR FRANK MCBREARTY JNR  
 
 Cllr McBrearty submitted the following question:-  
 
How much money has been paid out by DCC in legal fees to Michael  J. 
Staines & Co Solicitors and VP McMullin Solicitors concerning all the 
cases involving Cllr Frank Mc Brearty Jnr in the Civil High Court and 
Criminal Courts to date and who within the Council instructed the services 
of these two legal firms in these cases?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/424/24 
NAMES OF ALL COUNCIL STAFF AND COUNCILLORS THAT ARE 
REPRESENTED BY MICHAEL J STAINES & CO SOLICITORS AND VP 
MCMULLIN SOLICITORS IN THE CIVIL AND CRIMINAL COURT 
CASES AGAINSE CLLR FRANK MCBREARTY JNR.  
 
 Cllr Mc Brearty submitted the following question:-  
 
Names of all Council Staff and County Cllr's that are represented by 
Michael J. Staines & Co Solicitors and VP McMullin Solicitor's in the Civil 
and Criminal Court cases against Cllr Frank McBrearty Jnr.   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/425/24 
 MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
 
Members noted the motions from other councils.  
 
 
 ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed that the Council write to the Minister and Department of 
Transport to review the system, and to have notice of bus allocation at 
least 4 weeks prior to the commencement of the school year.  

39 
 
The existing system, characterized by inadequacies and flaws, has 
resulted in significant stress and concern for parents and students, leaving 
crucial matters like school bus placements and ticket allocations uncertain 
well beyond the commencement of the school year. It is imperative that a 
comprehensive overhaul of the entire system is undertaken to guarantee 
that allocations are finalised a minimum of four weeks prior to students 
returning to school.  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
That Roscommon County Council  write to the Department seeking 
funding for a Roadside Tree Survey to identify dead, dangerous and 
infected trees, and that Roscommon be put forward as a pilot for a 
national scheme. 
 
WATERFORD CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
That Waterford City & County Council supports United Against Gender 
Apartheid and their campaign to have the crime of ‘gender apartheid’ 
incorporated into Article 2 of the draft Crimes Against Humanity 
Convention.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
