1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
22 Aibreán, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain 28 
Aibreán, 2025 ag 10.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe leis 
seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
 
County House 
 
 
Lifford. 
 
 
 22nd April, 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 28th April, 
2025 at 10.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 

2 
 
AGENDA  
 
1. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 2000 
(as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as 
amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and Development 
Act 2000and Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
• To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the construction of 40 
No. Social Housing Units at Ballyhasky, Newtowncunningham. 
 
2. Housing Capital Update. 
 
3. House Acquisitions Update 
 
4. Homeless Update. 
 
5. Roads & Transportation 
a) Pursuant to Section 85 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) 
that Donegal County Council enter into agreements with the County 
Councils of Clare, Galway, Mayo and Sligo, in respect of the Department 
of Transport Zero Emissions Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI) funded project to 
prepare Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Strategies for Region 7; 
whereby Donegal County Council will be enabled to appoint and manage 
the consultant completing said strategy as relevant to the overall region 
and incorporating the Counties of Clare, Donegal, Galway (county only), 
Mayo and Sligo". 
 
b) To approve the commencement of the Non-Statutory Public Consultation 
process for the Urban Speed Limit Review.  
 
6. Corporate Services 
To consider and approve the adoption of the Donegal County Council Annual 
Report 2024 in accordance with Section 221 of the Local Government Act, 
2001. 
 
7. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event 
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under Section 
142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. 
No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the Environment, 
Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local Government Act, 2001 
(Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local Government (Expenses of 
Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -2025(as amended) 
 
Travel Abroad  
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at Transatlantic Conference as part of the 
Plymouth /Donegal Sisters Agreement on the 22nd May in Plymouth, 
Massachusetts.  

3 
 
➢ Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CMPR Political Bureau 
Meeting in The Hague on the 4th July, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 28th APRIL 2025 
C/151/25 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F 
Bradley, C Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, D Coyle, T S Devine, A 
Doherty, A Farren, D M Kelly, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Clafferty, 
M Mc Dermott, D Mc Gee, D Meehan, J Murray, M Naughton, D Nic 
Mheanman, J S O’ Fearraigh and M Scanlon  
Online: Cllrs J Brogan, G Doherty, M Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, J 
Kavanagh, P Mc Garvey, P Mc Gowan, M McMahon, G Mc Monagle, 
and A Molloy. 
 
C/152/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John Mc Laughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator, John 
Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, Eamonn Brown, 
Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, Claire Burke, Senior 
Executive Architect, Housing Design, Jim Boner, Senior Executive 
Engineer, Housing Design, Linda Mc Cann, Homeless Prevention 
Officer, Donna Mc Groarty, Area Manager, Housing Design, Thomas 
Melly, Senior Staff Officer, Housing  & Corporate, , Executive Engineer, 
Housing Design, Aideen Doherty, Ukrainian Response, Co-ordinator, 
Christina O’ Donnell, Staff Officer, Social Inclusion Unit, Róise Ní 
Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Cliona Ni Ghallachoir, Rannóg na 
Gaeilge, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, 
Assistant Communications Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, 
Corporate Services. 
 
C/153/25` 
APOLOGIES 
Apologies were received from Cllr Terry Crossan who was unable to 
attend the meeting: 
 
C/154/25 
TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD 
TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF 40 NO. SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS AT 
BALLYHASKY, NEWTOWNCUNNINGHAM  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr Murray, it was 
resolved to approve the carrying out of works with regard to the 
construction of 40 No Social Housing Units including all associated site 
works at Ballyhasky, Newtowncunningham, Co Donegal in accordance 
with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) 
and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as 
amended). 
 
C/155/25 
THAT DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS 
WITH THE COUNTY COUNCILS OF CLARE,GALWAY, MAYO AND 
SLIGO IN RESPECT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT 
ZERO EMISIONS VEHICLES IRELAND FUNDED PROJECT TO 
PREPARE ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 

5 
 
STRATEGIES FOR REGION 7 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
On the proposal of Cllr M Boyle, seconded by Cllr F Bradley it was 
agreed that pursuant to Section 85 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) that Donegal County Council enter into agreements with 
the County Councils of Clare, Galway, Mayo and Sligo, in respect of 
the Department of Transport Zero Emissions Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI) 
funded project to prepare Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure 
Strategies for Region 7; whereby Donegal County Council will be 
enabled to appoint and manage the consultant completing said strategy 
as relevant to the overall region and incorporating the Counties of 
Clare, Donegal, Galway (county only), Mayo and Sligo".    
 
C/156/25 
TO APPROVE THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE NON-STATUTORY 
PUBLIC CONSULTATION PROCESS FOR THE URBAN SPEED 
LIMIT REVIEW  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was 
resolved to approve the commencement of the non-statutory public 
consultation process for the Urban Speed Limit Review.  
 
C/157/25 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS – TO MEET IN COMMITTEE 
In accordance with Standing Order No 28 it was resolved to suspend 
Standing Order No 8 and to continue with the meeting in committee 
pursuant to Section 45 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as 
amended) to facilitate discussion on the planned anti-immigration 
protest scheduled to take place in Letterkenny on the 3rd May, 2025. 
 
C/158/25 
RESUMPTION OF THE MEETING  
The Cathaoirleach at this juncture opened the meeting and continued 
for the remainder of the meeting in public session. 
 
C/159/25 
TO CONSIDER AND APPROVE THE ADOPTION OF THE DONEGAL 
COUNTY COUNCIL ANNUAL REPORT 2024  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Canning it was 
resolved to approve the adoption of the Donegal County Council 
Annual Report 2024 in accordance with Section 221 of the Local 
Government Act, 2001.  
 
C/160/25 
TO AGREE DATE FOR THE NEXT PLENARY WORKSHOP ON THE 
DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTION SCHEME  
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold a Plenary Workshop in relation to 
the Draft Development Contribution Scheme on Friday 23rd May, 2025 
at 10a.m. in the County House, Lifford.   
 
 

6 
 
C/161/25 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 
668 of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by 
the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in 
relation to the Local Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 
2010, and the Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations, 2014 -2025(as amended).  
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Canning attendance 
at the following was approved.   
 
Travel Abroad  
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at Transatlantic Conference as 
part of the Plymouth /Donegal Sisters Agreement on the 22nd 
May in Plymouth, Massachusetts.  
• 
Attendance of the CPMR representative at the CMPR Political 
Bureau Meeting in The Hague on the 4th July, 2025.    
 
C/162/25 
HOUSING UPDATES  
Cllr Devine asked if there had been any indication or confirmation from 
the new Housing Minister as to whether he intended to come to 
Donegal to see the conditions that defective concrete block affected 
homeowners were living in. He said that the 100% Redress Party had 
been on the Council for nearly a year, and nothing was being done at 
national level to assist families living in mould and rat infested 
accommodation. He expressed grave concern at the lack of action and 
the failure to provide a social housing remediation scheme. Donegal 
County Council was, he contended not doing enough to get the 
message across that immediate intervention and action was needed. 
As a result, he said, that the 100% Redress members had no option 
but to leave the meeting in protest at the lack of intervention and the 
failure to address this ongoing housing crisis.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
advised members that updates would be provided in relation to the 
Housing Capital Programme, Housing Acquisition initiatives and 
ongoing developments within the Homeless Service. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer gave a detailed update on the 
status of Turnkey Acquisitions, In House Projects, Design & Build 
Projects together with an overview of the Letterkenny Flagship 
Projects. 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Senior Executive Officer, Housing & Corporate 
provided an update on the Social Housing Second Hand Acquisitions 
Programme 2025 highlighting the priority acquisition categories, and 
the associated funding and compliance measures. The purpose of the 
Programme, he advised was to increase the supply of social housing 

7 
 
through targeted second-hand acquisitions for priority categories. It was 
noted that the overall national budget was €325 million and that the 
2025 allocation would not be a number allocation and available only for 
four priority acquisition categories only. The four categories were 
identified as follows: 
 
➢ Tenancy Sustainment (Tenant -In Situ) 
➢ Exits from Homelessness Services 
➢ Persons with Disabilities 
➢ Buy and Renew (Vacant /Derelict Properties) 
 
Members were informed that 10 units had been acquired in 2024 at a 
combined cost of €1,888,977.40. It was noted that the Department had 
been allocated €2 million for 2025 under the Social Housing Second 
Hand Acquisitions Programme. This, he advised, was subject to review 
and meeting the revised criteria and that improvement works were not 
generally eligible under the priority acquisition category- tenancy 
sustainment. Overall, he said, there was no general house acquisition 
programme and there was limited capacity under the current capital 
funding allocation.  
 
Ms Linda Mc Cann, Homeless Prevention Coordinator updated 
members in relation to homeless services in Donegal and confirmed 
that there were currently 43 single adults and 4 families availing of 
homeless supports. Service users, she advised, were staying longer in 
homeless services due to the lack of private rented 
accommodation/HAP properties etc and also due to the lack of 
affordable rental accommodation. Of those availing of the service, she 
confirmed that, over 50% of the clients had mental health/addition 
issues.  
 
It was noted that the Homeless Action Pan for the Northwest Region 
had been endorsed by the Council and that the key priorities now were 
to 
• Roll out the Homeless Prevention Service within the Council. 
• Establish the role of HAP Placefinder. 
• Provide a lead role to other agencies providing wraparound 
services to service users. 
• Engage with the Housing First Programme. 
• Aim for the creation of temporary tenancies through the Shared 
Accommodation & Transition Home Models. 
 
The Homeless Prevention Team, she advised, were tasked with the 
implementation of the NW Regional Homeless Plan 2023-2028 and 
with the delivery of three strategic aims which included preventing 
homelessness, providing support services and creating progression 
pathways into housing. A detailed analysis of each specific aim was 
provided.  
 
Several specific case studies were presented.  

8 
 
Concluding, members were informed that homelessness was not 
unique to Donegal and that the Action Plan allowed a structure to be 
put in place for the roll out of the service. It was important, she noted, 
that there was an understanding of the scale of the issues and a 
knowledge of what needed to be done going forward. She encouraged 
members to engage with the Area Housing Teams and the Homeless 
Service Team.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Service alluded to the fact that the 
presentations had provided a good overview of where the Council was 
at and of the work that needed to be done. He noted that a HAP 
Placefinder position had been created to assist those who were finding 
it difficult to secure accommodation under the Housing Assistance 
Payment (HAP) Scheme together with creation of a Tenancy 
Sustainment Officer as a support to assist people in retaining 
tenancies.  
 
A lengthy debate took place with members raising the following issues: 
 
▪ Need for Homeless Emergency Accommodation in all Municipal 
Districts. 
▪ Noted the excellent work being carried out by the Homeless 
Service Team.  
▪ Acknowledgement that the Homeless team have significant 
challenges to deal with on a day to day basis and that their remit 
involves ongoing collaboration with several other agencies.  
▪ Contended that there were a considerable number of “Hidden 
homeless” for whom the current voucher system was 
inadequate and not suitable. Noted that the hostel option was 
under severe stress at present. 
▪ Acknowledged the need for a stepdown service for homeless 
persons with addiction issues as this would be of enormous 
benefit and would help prevent relapses. It was noted that the 
Drumboe Respite Centre had been closed since 2020 and that 
there was no other accommodation of this nature available in 
the county.  
▪ General welcome for the new HAP Placefinder staff member. 
▪ HAP monies are not sufficient and with the current cost of living 
many more people will find themselves homeless.  
▪ €2m allocated to Donegal for the Tenant-In Situ Scheme is 
totally inadequate and it was noted that Donegal has only 
received 0.6% of the overall national allocation.  
▪ Noted that some applicants were to be dropped from the 
Tenant-In-Situ Scheme and that there was little movement on 
applications in the Letterkenny/Milford MD over the past number 
of years.   
▪ Concern raised as to the lack of housing provision in 
Ballyshannon and the delay in progressing same given that up 
to 100 houses are needed at this location. Members said that it 
was taking too long to get blocks on the ground around the 

9 
 
county generally and that Donegal County Council needed to 
work with the developers at all levels. 
▪ Welcome for the 42 units in train in the Milford Electoral Area but 
concern raised that this represented only 17% of the overall 
housing need in the Milford area. 
▪ Budget allocation for housing acquisition in the Milford Area is 
unrealistic and will only make minimal changes to the housing 
stock. 
▪ Many of the policies included in the “Housing for All” initiative 
are not working in Donegal. 
▪ Members encouraged to engage with the Area Housing teams 
and the Homeless Service teams at MD level. 
▪ Tenants living in defective concrete block houses should not be 
presented with rental decreases not rental increases.  
▪ Donegal County Council is not delivering an eligible Affordable 
Purchase Scheme. 
▪ Message needs to go out that the sum of €2m allocated under 
the Social Housing Second Hand Acquisitions Programme 2025 
is insufficient and a slight to Donegal. 
▪ Tenant Purchase Scheme is not working, and the overall policy 
needs to be reviewed including the associated timelines. Elderly 
tenants are being caused unnecessary delays especially where 
they want to sign the house over to a family member.  
▪ Reason must be given as to why Donegal is receiving so little 
money under the Second Hand Acquisitions Programme 2025. 
▪ Housing must be provided in our smaller towns and villages so 
as to sustain rural communities. Liscooley, Cloghan and Laghy 
identified as needing additional accommodation.  
▪ Must be continual liaison with the local Oireachtas members in 
relation to accessing the various funding strata.  
 
Questions  
• Has there been any further update from the Department in 
relation to the remediation of social housing impacted by 
defective concrete blocks? 
• Query as to when the Construction Industry Federation would be 
available to meet with members.  
• Is the budget for the 2025 Tenant-In-Situ Scheme based on 
activity and previous years allocations/ 
• With over 50% of service users in the Homeless Service 
presenting as having mental health or addiction issues, does 
this represent an increase or a decrease on previous years? 
• Are the projections for housing provision to the end of 2026 in 
the Milford Electoral Area realistic? 
• Can further information be provided on the ten houses were 
acquired under the Acquisition Programme in Donegal? 
• Are there caps in place as to what Donegal can spend in terms 
of modifying or adapting houses for the elderly/disabled 
throughout the county? 
• How many people are in “Housing First” Projects in the county? 

10 
 
• What impact will the upgraded IS465 have on the Tenant 
Purchase Scheme and on the timelines for the testing of 
houses? 
 
• Is there anything that the Local Authority can do to incentivise 
and encourage contractors to take on apprentices given the 
current labour shortages.  
 
Follow-Up 
Requested that members concerns in relation to the acquisitions 
allocation be conveyed to the Department and an increased allocation 
sought. Case needs to be made for an increase and to establish what 
can be done for people who went ahead and got their houses tested.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
thanked members for their comments and noted that there had been 10 
units provided under the 2024 Second Hand Acquisitions Programme 
with 15-16 targeted for completion in 2025. There had been no 
application process, he confirmed, but continual engagement had taken 
place with the Department in relation to same. Other Local Authorities, 
he advised, were in a similar position. Noting the concern expressed by 
members in relation to the funding aspect, he said, that it would be 
possible to express the sentiment raised by members in the form of a 
letter to the Department. With regard to the Social Housing 
Remediation Scheme for houses affected by defective concrete blocks, 
he confirmed, that a positive meeting had taken place with the 
Department last month and that it was intended that another one would 
take place in May. He said that it was hoped this would bring some 
positive news but that without Department approval and funding a 
remediation scheme could not proceed.  
 
He alluded to the fact that the timelines for acquiring test results were 
inadequate and affecting a range of initiatives such as the Tenant 
Purchase Scheme, the Acquisition Programme etc. The new IS465 
standard when available would, he confirmed, have a positive impact 
and that this was something that would then be worked through the 
Housing SPC.  
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing  & Corporate in 
relation to the provision of homeless accommodation advised that each 
case was looked on an individual basis and confirmed that the voucher 
system was still in place. A concerted effort, he said, was being made 
to make use of the two hostels that were in place where there was full-
time supervision, and the staff concerned were all Garda vetted thus 
providing a secure accommodation setting.  
 
The role of the HAP Placefinder would also, he advised, contribute to 
the approach in addressing homelessness. He encouraged members 
when approached regarding homeless situations or by those who may 
be couch surfing to direct clients in the first instance to the Homeless 

11 
 
Clinics. The HAP Placefinder would be able to help here, he said, 
having built up a relationship with estate agents etc. It was, he added, 
specifically about homeless prevention in the first instance and this was 
what the clinics were designed to assist with.  
Responding to Cllr Meehan, he said, that under the “Housing First 
Programme” there were 11 individuals availing of the initiative at 
present with a target of 26 to be included by the end of 2028. The 
tender for the delivery of same was, he confirmed, expected to be 
rolled out nationally and contact would be made with the Department 
regarding increasing the number of slots for Donegal. “Housing First”, 
he advised, included provision for various wraparound services and the 
ambition was to aim higher than the 26 referenced above.  
 
Ms Linda Mc Cann, Homeless Prevention Officer, responding to a 
query from Cllr Blaney, said that there had been an increase in those 
presenting as homeless as a result of mental health and addiction 
issues. She alluded to the fact that there was continuous liaison with a 
number of associated services and that all concerned were involved 
with the overall client care plan. Services were offered, she added, but 
it was crucial that the individual concerned was in a position to want the 
help that was available. 
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked members for attending and advised that the 
next Special Meeting would take place on the 28th May. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:________________________ 
 
 
Dated:______________________________ 
