1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
16 Eanáir, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Céadaoin 
22 Eanáir, 2025 ag 11.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe leis 
seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
County House 
 
Lifford. 
 
16th January, 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Wednesday 22nd 
January 2025 at 11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 

2 
 
AGENDA  
 
1. Housing Capital Update. 
 
2. Design  & Build Projects Update. 
 
 
3. Letterkenny Flagship Projects Update. 
 
4. Date of next Special Plenary Meeting – 25th February 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 24th FEBRUARY 2025 
C/76/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, F Bradley, J 
Brogan, B Carr, T Crossan, T S Devine, A Doherty, A Farren, M 
Farren, M Harley, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Clafferty, P Mc 
Garvey, D Mc Gee, P Mc Mc Gowan, G Mc Monagle, D Meehan, J 
Murray, M Naughton, D Nic Mheanman, and J S O’ Fearraigh.  
Online: Cllrs C Brogan, D Coyle, G Doherty, J Kavanagh, D M Kelly, M 
Mc Bride,  M Mc Dermott, A Molloy and M Scanlon.  
 
C/77/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John Mc Laughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator Liam Ward, 
Director Community Development & Planning Services, John 
Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, Eamonn Brown, 
Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, Claire Burke, Senior 
Executive Architect, Housing Design, Donal Walker, Senior Engineer, 
Housing Capital, Jim Boner, Senior Executive Engineer, Housing 
Design, Gillian Dempsey, Senior Executive Engineer, Donna Mc 
Groarty, Area Manager, Housing Design, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, 
Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall Mac Giolla Choill,Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí 
Aistriúcháin, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, 
Assistant Communications Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, 
Corporate Services. 
 
C/78/25 
LAMA AWARDS 2025 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that Donegal County Council 
had been nominated in nine different categories at the Local Authority 
Members Association’s All-Ireland Community and Council Awards in 
Cork on the 22nd February and had received the Council of the Year 
Award at the event.  
 
It was noted that the Council had been nominated in the following 
categories: 
 
• The Civic Dollars Project - Best Mental Health Initiative 
• Spraoi agus Spórt - Best Business working with the Community 
• ii Inovation Hub - Best Enterprise & Start-Up Category 
• Donegal Town Diamond – Outdoor Public Space Scheme - Best 
Town or village Regeneration Category 
• Cuirt an Troisc – Exemplary Age Friendly Housing - Best 
Housing & Urban Planning Category 
• Food Coast Donegal - Best Tourism Initiative Category 
• Lionra Leitir Ceanainn - Best Irish Language Initiative 
• Love Donegal - Best Communications Initiative 
 
The Cathaoirleach paid tribute to all staff involved, acknowledging the 
effort, dedication and commitment that had gone in to all of the projects 

4 
 
concerned. It was, she confirmed a fantastic achievement and well 
deserved. 
 
C/79/25 
TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD 
TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF 20 NO SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS 
INCLUDING ALL ASSOCIATED SITE DEVELOPMENT WORKS AT 
ARD NA GLAISE (PHASE 2), KILMACRENNAN, CO DONEGAL 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Mc Garvey, it was 
resolved to approve the carrying out of works with regard to the 
construction of 20 No Social Housing Units including all associated site 
works at Ard na Glaise, (Phase 2), Kilmacrennan, Co Donegal in 
accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 
2001(as amended). 
 
C/80/25 
ATTENDANCE OF THE CATHAOIRLEACH AT A DIASPORA 
FUNDRAISING EVENT IN CELTIC PARK, GLASGOW ON THE 28TH 
MARCH 2025 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Mc Garvey, it was 
resolved to approve the attendance of the Leas-Cathaoirleach at a 
Diaspora Fundraising event in Celtic Park, Glasgow on the 28th March, 
2025. 
 
C/81/25 
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE  
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, provided an overview of the 
Inhouse Design projects referencing those recently completed and 
those currently on site. 
 
Ms Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, informed members that 
the bill of quantities and the contract documentation was being 
prepared for the following schemes with a combined total of 111 units: 
 
➢ Lifford Common (60 units) 
➢ St Johnston (30 units) 
➢ Rosebud Place, Stranorlar (8 units) 
➢ Mulroy View (Phase 2) Tamney (10 units ) 
➢ Massiness, Creeslough (3 units) 
 
She further advised that tender reports were being prepared for the 
appointment of Architect Led Design teams to progress 4 No Housing 
Schemes at Glencolmcille (5), Kilcar (5), Laghy (2) and Glenties (3) 
through detailed design to completion. 
 
An overview of the projects to be completed under the Part 8 process 
was provided including detail on the current status of the following: 
➢ Ard na Glaise, Kilmacrennan (Phase 2) (20) 
➢ Oldtown, Letterkenny (16) 

5 
 
➢ Old Fintra Road, Killybegs (16) 
➢ Fintown (15) 
➢ Rosgarrow, Milford (12) 
➢ Ballyhaskey, (Newtowncunningham) (40) 
➢ Derrybeg (12) 
 
Ms Gillian Dempsey, Senior Executive Engineer, gave an update on 
the Ballymacool and High Road Social Housing Projects. 
 
Ms Donna Mc Groarty, Area Manager, Housing Capital outlined the 
status of turnkey acquisitions and confirmed that 130 units were to be 
provided with 18 complete and the balance onsite. She informed 
members that a total of 307 turnkey acquisitions were projected for the 
period 2022 to 2026 representing an overall projected investment of 
€84m. It was noted that departmental approval had been received for 8 
projects encompassing 210 units some of which were to be delivered 
by the end of 2026 with a further proposal for 35 units in the pipeline for 
submission. She said that one to one meetings were ongoing with 
developers. A video of the recently completed Phase 1 turnkey 
acquisition at Convoy was then viewed by members. 
 
Mr Donal Walker, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital advised that there 
were a number of Design & Build projects ongoing, and that Stage 4 
Departmental approval had been received for projects at Barrack Hill, 
Carndonagh (21 units ), Malin (9 units) and Gleneely (10 units). He 
proceeded to update members on the status of S.I. projects at Urris, 
Clonmany, Letterkenny and Ballyliffin and confirmed that departmental 
approval had now been received for each of these. Work was ongoing, 
he advised, in relation to the associated land transfers and the 
tendering process progressed in respect of each project. 
 
Concluding Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital gave 
a progress report on the key updates since the 22nd January 2025 and 
an overview of the key upcoming deliverables.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that there were 40 projects ongoing at present all of which required 
considerable time and effort and all with a dedicated process in place 
for completion. Inevitably, he said, there were blockages and 
challenges associated with such a wide range of projects and 
continued engagement was needed with contractors, the Department 
and other utilities to allow works proceed. He acknowledged the 
ongoing efforts of the housing team and said that it was an important 
milestone that Stage 1 approval had been granted for the Ballymacool 
Social Housing Project. 
 
A lengthy debate ensued with members advising of the following: 
 
• Issue with the names of Housing Estates in Gaeltacht areas and 
the fact that these are in English. Advised that this was 

6 
 
disrespectful to the people of the Gaeltacht. Concern that in 
some cases where Irish names had been used the correct 
spelling had not been utilised. 
• Derrybeg site can accommodate additional units, and case 
needs to be made to the Department for additional funding to 
facilitate sewerage works so that additional housing units can be 
built.  
• Independent living options must be explored at Derrybeg.  
• All estates going forward should accommodate independent 
living options with the relevant wraparound services in place.  
• Thresholds for social housing applicants need to be increased 
as many people are unable to get a mortgage and are often just 
over the threshold for social housing. 
• Suggested that the provision of social housing through the 
Approved Housing Bodies option was not a success and that the 
emphasis going forward should be on design and build.  
• No mention of the Islands where social housing is non-existent.  
• Important that there is adequate public consultation in respect of 
the Ballymacool Project so that it can be delivered in line with 
the needs of the local community, with the proper infrastructure 
in place and fit for purpose. Roads Section need to be involved 
also in terms of general access to the town given that the 
additional traffic will create problems unless a dedicated plan is 
put in place. Needs to be public consultation for the whole 
county as this development is adjacent to one of the main 
access routes into Letterkenny. 
• More S.I Housing needed in rural areas, and ongoing effort 
required to process the applications on hand in a timely manner. 
Conveyance process for S.I.s is lengthy and drawn out. Policy 
should be reviewed by the Housing & Corporate SPC especially 
where applicants are being turned down because of the 
presence of a specific housing scheme in their locality.  
• Power outages are impacting on the Air to Water heating 
systems in social housing units. Consideration needs to be 
given to looking at alternative options in these types of situations 
and also at the planning stage of any development. 
• Accessible showers should be the norm in social housing 
developments. 
• Concern that new developments are relying heavily on timber 
fencing which has a limited lifespan. Other options need to be 
explored. 
• Welcome for the developments in Kilmacrennan and Milford but 
noted that the 42 units in the pipeline represented only 17% of 
the need in the Milford Electoral Area. Advised of the need to 
keep the momentum going. 
• Acute housing need in the Ramelton, Kerrykeel and Carrigart 
areas.  
• Independent living options should be an integral part of the 
overall housing programme.  

7 
 
• Potential for additional housing provision through greater 
collaboration with the Approved Housing Bodies. 
• Concern expressed in relation to the condition of the houses in 
the Ard na Guaille Duibhe development in Moville and St 
Patrick’s Park in Carndonagh. 
• Turnkey option identified as being the quicker delivery option 
with less impact for the local authority.  
• Need to identify sites for housing development in Termon and 
Churchill. 
• Growing demand for housing which warrants the use of new 
technologies and a ramping up of building in Donegal. Noted 
that the 3 D method had proved to be a viable method and that it 
was something that the Council should explore going forward. 
• Clear and immediate deadline needed for the introduction of a 
remediation scheme for social housing together with urgent 
interim measures.  
• Need to look at what can be done to ensure that vacant 
properties become homes given that 9% of residential properties 
are still vacant. New targeted campaign needed to encourage 
owners to bring these properties back into use and look at the 
utilisation of addition incentive or enforcement measures.   
• Imperative that everything possible is done to ensure that all 
houses built in the county are built with blocks free from 
deleterious materials.  
• Caution urged in terms of the methods of construction used and 
lessons need to be learned from options undertaken in the past. 
• Opportunity now to be innovative in terms of the provision of 
Group Homes and to the fore in terms of disability and mental 
health issues. Early engagement needed with the HSE in 
relation to the provision of same in the High Road and 
Ballymacool sites. 
• Concern that development and construction is not as prevalent 
in the wider Letterkenny area. Progress at Killylastin, Oranhill 
and Windy Hall  has been slow.  
• Little or no provision for social housing on our Islands.  
• Delays with the Tenant Purchase Scheme especially where 
houses have to be tested. This needs to be reviewed.  
• Need to look at the reasons why people are being turned down 
for S.I Housing. 
• Unfair that tenants living in properties affected by defective 
concrete blocks should be subjected to a rent review.  
 
Questions  
➢ What is the situation in relation to one-off housing and what will 
happen in 2026? 
➢ Query as to why the only Irish Company in a position to install 
Air to Water Heating Systems has not been contracted by this 
Council.  

8 
 
➢ Update sought in relation to the Cluid development in 
Letterkenny. 
➢ What is the situation in relation to the 29 vacant houses in 
Carndonagh and what is being done to progress the matter? 
➢ Is enough  being done to progress the turnkey option? 
➢ What progress if any had been made in relation to the 
Cloondara project? 
➢ Has there been any progress in relation to housing provision in 
Portnason in Ballyshannon? 
➢ What has been done to promote and progress the serviced site 
initiative? 
➢ Are there any plans to include group homes in the overall 
delivery programme? 
➢ In terms of housing provision at present how much of this is 
adapted for wheelchair use and for those with special needs? 
Can a percentage be built to accommodate same? 
➢ What is the latest correspondence from the Department with 
regard to the Social Housing Remediation Scheme? 
➢ Has there been engagement with the HSE in relation to the 
provision of group homes in the High Road and Ballymacool 
sites? 
 
Follow-up 
❖ Report requested in relation to the recent meeting with Udarás 
na Gaeltachta and the proposed land swap. 
❖ Update needed urgently in terms of the remediation options for 
social houses impacted by defective concrete blocks. Minister’s 
office must  be contacted and options for the remediation of 
social housing stock clearly outlined with a definitive plan in 
place.  
❖ Request that the Council liaise with companies that engage in 
modern methods of construction. 
❖ Update needed in terms of the status of ongoing turnkey 
discussions.  
❖ Cognisance must be taken of the current state of the housing 
programme and an effort made to identify the challenges and 
streamline the overall process. 
❖ Need to look at the competitive dialogue procurement process 
which is making it difficult for people to build houses.  
❖ Request that correspondence issue to the new Housing Minister 
outlining the conditions and pressures that people are living with 
and citing the urgent need for a Social Housing Remedial 
Scheme. 
❖ Welcome for the development at Malin Garda Station and it was 
suggested that the Council should look at other possible sites in 
smaller towns and villages.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services said 
that the executive shared members frustrations in relation to the Social 
Housing Remediation Scheme. Any specific programme, he advised, 

9 
 
required departmental approval and funding. The scale of the issue at 
hand, he said, was way beyond the Council’s capability and that to 
proceed without the relevant approval and funding would be not be 
prudent. He said that there was continued engagement with the 
department and that an updated meeting had been requested.  
 
Members were informed that there was ongoing engagement with 
other agencies in terms of independent living, group homes etc and 
that this would continue in the long term. This involved, he added 
considerable interagency collaboration especially with the HSE. The 
Council, it was noted, liaised with the Department of Housing, Heritage 
& Local Government in terms of construction cost, while the HSE 
sought approval for the running costs from the Department of Health. 
 
The Housing and Corporate SPC would, he said, look at a number of 
the policy issues raised. Concerns surrounding the Air to Water 
heating, he said, were taken on board but noted that this was 
something that would have to be sorted at national level. 
 
Mr Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate advised 
members that in relation to the Ardrawer Scheme a meeting had taken 
place with the Chief Executive of Cluid, together with the Regional 
Delivery team back on the 17th January 2025. Housing Capital staff and 
a representative from the Letterkenny/Milford MD had also been in 
attendance, it was confirmed. This, he advised, afforded an opportunity 
to convey the concerns raised by members, the overall project 
management of the project and key issues in relation to the nomination 
of the properties. It was confirmed that there had also been a 
discussion on the adverse test results on the property and the timelines 
involved in sharing same. It was noted that additional testing had been 
commissioned and that the results of same would be relayed to the 
Housing Section when available. 
 
Responding to Cllr Mc Monagle’s query that some tenants had been 
nominated for housing within this development, he said, that this was a 
cause for concern and that the Area Manager in Letterkenny was 
seeking clarification on the matter. Without the test results referenced 
previously, he said it was unlikely that the project would be completed 
by the end of April. Members would, he confirmed, be kept updated on 
the matter.  
 
Mr Brown said that a meeting had taken place with Ms Mary Mc 
Groarty, General Manager, Disability Services as that it was essential 
that HSE support was in place regarding ongoing housing projects. 
There was a resource implication for the HSE, he added, in that each 
Group Home had running costs in the region of €650k per annum. 
Agreement had been reached, he said to compile a combined list of 
schemes for the county for a period of at least five years.  The HSE 
staff he said were meeting on a one to one basis with Area Managers 
and looking at the overall need for potential schemes across the county 

10 
 
after which a list would be created in terms of what was practical to 
deliver. Group Homes, he advised, were one method of delivery but 
there was also the potential for general housing and accessible 
accommodation to meet the needs of those with a disability. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, said that the success in delivering 
land acquisition was an important aspect in terms of future proofing 
housing delivery. He noted that there were challenges in certain towns 
and villages where it was not possible to source land by consent.  
 
In relation to Air to Water systems, he said, that performance 
requirements were developed around the requirements of the building 
regulations with specific reference to Part L. This was something, he 
said, which could be reviewed and looked at again. 
 
In terms of accessible showers, he said that there was ongoing contact 
with the various areas in terms of access issues and disability access. 
It would be possible, he said, to raise the points referenced by 
members with the Department Inspector who was due to visit Donegal 
in the coming week and to keep members informed on the matter.  
He said that the issue of boundary fencing could be looked at again 
and that there were a number of options that could be looked at such 
as concrete posts etc with the aim of creating overall balance but 
taking into consideration the durability issue. 
 
Mr Gallagher advised that there was Department consultation on every 
scheme in the county and that all projects went out to public 
consultation. This, he advised, would also happen with the Ballymacool 
project. 
 
In relation to the Turnkey process, he noted, that there had been 
considerable interaction with developers county-wide. He said that the 
Council were open to talking to any developer and encouraged 
members to assist with this engagement where possible. 
 
The Cathaoirleach acknowledged the efforts of the Housing team. 
 
She said that it was hoped to send a delegation to meet with Sligo 
County Council in April or May to discuss matters of mutual interest. 
 
This was proposed by Cllr Kennedy and seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle. 
 
The Chief Executive referred to the ongoing collaboration between 
Derry City & Strabane District Council, & Omagh and Fermanagh 
District Council and said that it was hoped now to extend same to the 
wider Northwest. Further detail, would, he confirmed, be provided at 
the March Plenary Meeting. 
 
 
 

11 
 
C/82/25 
DATE FOR NEXT MEETING 
It was unanimously agreed to hold the next Special Plenary Housing 
Meeting at 10am on Thursday 27th March.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
