1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
        Aras an Chontae 
                                             Leifear 
    24 Meán Fómhair, 2024 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 30 Meán Fómhair 2024 
ag 11.00 r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc 
leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
******************************************************************************************************** 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House  
Lifford 
 
24th September, 2024 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 30th September, 2024 at 
11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link 
to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
______________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 16th of May, 2024. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the July Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 22nd July, 2024. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 23rd July, 2024. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at Dunmore, Falcarragh to Joseph 
Corcoran Jnr. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at Ardmeen, Crolly, to Hugh & 
Geraldine Walsh. 
c) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of two plots of land at Ardmore, Muff to Anne 
Mc Laughlin. 
d) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land by way of lease at Rathmullan Pier to 
Rathmullan Sailing & Watersports School, C/O Rathmullan District 
Resource Centre. 
e) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) – to dispose of land at 9 Ard McCool, Stranorlar to Mary 
Kathleen, Critchley.  
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(Part XI), and the Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 
a) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the Old Garda Station, 
  Malin Town. 
b) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the proposed 
refurbishment and extension project at Waterworld, Atlantic Way, 
Drumacrin, Bundoran, Co Donegal. 
c) To approve the carrying out of works in respect of the construction of a 
bridge extension and road realignment along the R-232 at Glenmore 

3 
 
Bridge over the Loughultan River between Tieveboy and Glenmore, Co 
Donegal. 
d) To approve the construction of a two-storey rural S.I dwelling including 
wastewater treatment and all associated site development works at 
Cruckakeehan, Annagry, Co Donegal. 
e) To approve the carrying out of works at a high collision location to improve 
a section of the N15 in the vicinity of the existing priority junction between 
the N15 and R232 at Laghey, Co Donegal.  
 
4. Roads & Transportation 
To adopt the Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) (County of Donegal) 
(Amendment) Bye-Laws 2024. 
 
5. Environment 
To make the Donegal County Council (Presentation of 
Kerbside Waste for Collection) Bye-Laws, 2024. 
 
6. Corporate 
a) To adopt the Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 to 2029. 
b) Draft Scheme for the Establishment and Operation of Strategic Policy 
Committees 2024-2029. 
c) Election of Members to the Donegal Heritage Forum. 
d) Election of Members to Fort Dunree. 
 
7. Finance 
a)  To agree date for 2025 Statutory Budget Meeting.  
b) To agree Overdraft Accommodation of €10,000,000 for the full year 
ending 31st December, 2025. 
c) That Members consider whether they wish to pass a resolution to vary the 
rate of Local Property Tax in County Donegal by up to 15% in respect of a 
period of one or more years commencing in 2025. 
 
8. Planning  
To consider and endorse submissions to the review of the National Planning 
Framework to include: 
a) Northwest City Region (NWCR) Submission. 
b) Donegal County Council (DCC) Submission.  
 
9. Community Development  
To note change in the membership of the Donegal Local Community 
Development Committee. 
10. Endorsement of Minutes 
 
To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 
15th July, 2024. 
 

4 
 
11. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under Section 
142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. 
No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the Environment, 
Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local Government Act, 
2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local Government (Expenses 
of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 (as amended).  
 
Training  
• AILG Autumn Seminar held on the 11th and 12th September, 2024 in the 
Hillgrove Hotel, Monaghan.  
• AILG Elected Members Autumn Training Programme  
• AILG & Office of the Planning Regulator Seminar “Overview of the 
Planning System” in the Bridge House Hotel, Tullamore on the 28th 
September, 2024.  
• LAMA Autumn Seminar to be held on the 17th & 18th October, 2024 in the 
Newgrange Hotel, Navan, Co Meath. 
 
Other 
• Attendance of the Mayor of Letterkenny at the 78th Independence Day of 
India event at India House, Foxrock, Dublin on the 15th August, 2024. 
• Attendance & participation of ICBAN members on the ICBAN Capacity 
Building Programme 2024-2025 
 
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Dúiche Workshop “Capitalising on 
Culture, Competing the Difference” in Leuven, Belgium from the 14th to 
the 18th October, 2024. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Golden Bridges Events in the USA 
from the 11th to the 14th November, 2024. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the EMA Forum in Amsterdam on the 
20th and 21st November, 2024.  
• ICBAN Members Study visit to the Borderlands Region of Scotland at the 
end of November 2024. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the 135th anniversary celebrations for 
the Donegal Association of Philadelphia in Philadelphia from the 6th to the 
8th December, 2024.  
 
 
12. Conference Reports  
• Attendance by the Mayor of Letterkenny, Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle at the 
78th Anniversary of India’s Independence at India House, Foxrock, Dublin.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 LIFFORD-STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Water & Environment  
13. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan  
"That this Council write to Uisce Éireann, the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage and to Minister Darragh O’ Brien unanimously 
calling for Lough Mourne Reservoir to be extended to include the 
Letterkenny MD and to include outlying areas not covered, upgrading all 
existing networks and upgrading reservoirs within the existing 
Lifford/Stranorlar MD". 
 
 
  
  
  
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Community Development   
14. Cllr Albert Doherty 
"That this Council welcomes the roll out nationwide of the Healthy Age 
Friendly Homes Programme, particularly confirmation of the placing of co-
ordinators in each of the 31 local authorities, 
Calls now on Donegal County Council to continue to provide and assist the 
network of support dedicated to helping all citizens live well as they age and 
ensure that older people receive the right support, at the right time, in the 
right place”.  
 
 Roads & Transportation  
15. Cllr Terry Crossan 
 
"In light of the fact that 14 people, to date, have died on our Donegal roads, 
I propose that permanent speed cameras are installed at specific locations 
throughout the county. As a precursor to this, a pilot scheme, at least, 
should be initiated to evaluate the potential success and impact of such a 
scheme".  
 
16. Cllr Martin Farren 
 
“That Donegal County Council engage with the Department of Transport in 
relation to the Regional Roads in parts of Donegal where a number of 
accidents have occurred”. 
 
17. Cllr Paul Canning 
 
"Given the success of the raised tables in Newtowncunningham, I would 
ask that the road safety team and the roads engineers within this county put 
in place a proper low-cost safety plan that includes raised tables in areas 
that are witnessing high traffic speed in built up areas". 
 
 
Civil Defence  
18. Cllr Joy Beard 
 
With the winter storm season fast approaching, it is imperative that those 
homeowners who feel unsafe living in properties affected by the presence 
of defective concrete, or temporary accommodation such as static caravans 

6 
 
while remediation work is taking place, have a place of refuge during 
severe weather events. 
 
 
“This motion calls on Donegal County Council to amend its existing Civil 
Defence Plan to provide rest centres for all affected homeowners when a 
red weather warning has been issued by Met Eireann”. 
 
 
Housing  
19. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
 
"That this Council will adopt a policy to provide housing in every new social 
housing development in the county for those with SEN, AEN and physical 
disabilities". 
 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
20. Cllr Ali Farren 
“I propose a motion that Donegal County Council agrees to purchase the 
homes of families who are impacted by both defective concrete blocks and 
flooding in areas where OPW and Donegal County Council are developing 
flood relief schemes. This would allow families whose homes were 
knowingly built in flood plains by the Donegal County Council planning 
department to be relocated out of these dangerous areas. Currently families 
on these flood plains cannot move forward on the enhanced defective block 
scheme because of the high risk of flooding impacting on the remediated 
home again. None of these families can obtain flood insurance and will 
therefore be unable to reinstate their remediated home when it does flood 
again. This proposal would allow these families to either purchase a new 
home or rebuild one on land that is safe to do so. Currently they are in 
limbo waiting for flood relief schemes that are going to take far too long to 
deliver and they do not have the time to wait because of the increasing 
structural damage that is being caused by defective blocks to their homes”. 
 
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
  Housing  
21. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle 
"That this Council seek an immediate meeting with Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage Darragh O Brien TD to discuss the delays 
in the implementation of the DCB Remediation Scheme, the mental and 
physical health impacts that these delays are having on hundreds of 
families forced to continue to live in these deteriorating houses and impress 
upon him the importance that this scheme be implemented without further 
delay, furthermore call on this council to initiate a quick repair scheme on 
the worse affected homes until such times that the DCB Scheme for social 
houses is implemented”. 
 
Roads &Transportation  
22. Cllr Michael Mc Bride  
"That the hedge cutting policy currently in place be reviewed as it is not 
working for farmers, bus operators or contractors at present”. 

7 
 
23. Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly  
"That this Council look into installing ASD ( Autism Spectrum Disorder ) 
parking bays throughout Donegal please as it has been brought to my 
attention that ASD parking permits do not permit families with children with 
autism/additional needs to park in Disabled Parking Bays therefore we have 
no allocated parking bays available in Donegal to facilitate such families". It 
is vitally important that such families have the option of allocated bays 
particularly at Schools, Hospitals, Shopping Centres, and also on the main 
streets of our towns and villages please. 
 
Corporate   
24. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
"Can the council support my motion in that all presentations be forwarded 
by email before council meetings while I respect and appreciate the amount 
of work goes into this work, I do believe they take up too much time at 
council meetings plus it would give councillors time to read over and ask 
questions if need be". I do believe we need to use the time we have at 
meetings to discuss the issues that affect the people that elected us. 
 
 
Finance 
25. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
“I propose that Donegal County Council prioritises its core services, i.e. 
Housing, Roads and Recreation Amenities in this new council term". 
 
 Defective Concrete Blocks   
26.  Cllr Declan Meehan  
"That this Council will facilitate online public streaming of all meetings of the 
Defective Concrete Blocks Committee". 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 Corporate  
27.  Cllr Micheál Choilm Mac Giolla Easbuig  
“Cáineann agus diúltaíonn an Chomhairle seo an úsáid roghnaitheach den 
nós imeachta eiseachadta i gcoinne áitritheoirí an chontae seo agus in aon 
chuid eile de na 26 contae, imeachtaí arna n-agairt ag oifigigh na Breataine 
sna 6 chontae áitithe, bunaithe ar fhianaise a deirtear a bailíodh agus a 
tiomsaíodh na blianta fada ó shin ag Constáblacht Ríoga Uladh agus a 
bhfuil a chlú millte le fada an lá. 
 
Fórsa atá iomráiteach as a pháirteachas, a sheicteachas, a 
chlaonpháirteachas coiriúil agus an droch-chóireáil brúidiúil ar líon mór 
daoine atá faoina choimeád. Ina theannta sin, fórsa a theip orthu minic go 
leor fianaise ríthábhachtach a choinneáil maidir le gníomhartha dílseoirí, 
ach is cosúil go bhfuil fianaise curtha ar fáil acu anois maidir leis na daoine 
sin. 
 
Ní próiseas cuí an dlí é an rud atá ag tarlú anseo leis na himeachtaí 
eiseachadta seo, ach a mhalairt air sin, is mí-úsáid polaitiúla é chun aird a 
tharraingt ar shiúl ó fhoréigean stáit na Breataine. 

8 
 
Iarraimid, mar ionadaithe tofa ar Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall, ar an 
rialtas i mBaile Átha Cliath críoch láithreach a chur leis na himeachtaí 
scannalacha seo”. 
 
"This council condemns and rejects the selective use of the extradition 
procedure against residents of this county and any other part of the 26-
Counties, proceedings invoked by British officials in the occupied 6 counties 
based on so-called evidence supposedly collected and collated many 
decades ago by the long-discredited Royal Ulster Constabulary.  
 
A force notorious for its partisanship, sectarianism, criminal collusion and 
brutal maltreatment of countless people in its custody. A force, moreover, 
that failed so often to retain crucial evidence in relation to loyalist actions 
yet apparently has now produced evidence in relation to these individuals. 
 
What is happening here with these extradition proceedings is not the due 
process of law but is instead the misuse of power for crass political purpose 
in order to distract from British state violence. 
 
We as elected representatives to Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall 
therefore call upon the government in Baile Atha Cliath to order a halt to 
these outrageous proceedings immediately". 
 
 Planning   
28.  Cllr Denis Mc Gee  
“I propose the motion that Donegal County Council provide test results from 
the testing of quarries throughout the county that were done according to 
the IS EN 12620 standard for raw aggregate as adopted in 2002 by the 
Irish state”. 
 
This information needs to be forthcoming at the earliest opportunity as the 
public should have confidence that the products that they are buying is of 
the recommended standard. Donegal County Council have a duty of care to 
every citizen of the county to ensure that any building products are of the 
highest standard. 
 
29.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
30. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
LIFFORD-STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
 
 Information Systems  
31. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
Can this Council request a face-to-face meeting with NBI (National 
Broadband Ireland) to discuss how the Fibre Network is being rolled out in 
the County and what role if any is being played by the existing provider? 

9 
 
Roads & Transportation  
32. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
Can the Council ensure that the county’s N15 is included in any review of 
the Government's National Development Plan especially the remaining 
uncompleted section to Lifford? 
 
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing  
33. Cllr Albert Doherty 
How many AHBs in Donegal are presently in contact with DCC and 
developers, requesting housing need confirmation from DCC confirming an 
interest in providing additional Social Homes in Donegal and finalising 
agreements with housing developers? 
What are the current timelines between receipt by DCC and response of 
queries to AHBs on this matter? 
In what DCC municipal areas are the current AHB housing provision 
proposals located? 
 
34. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
To ask the Director of Housing what plans or provisions are being made to 
rehouse those who have a disability and who live in one of our social 
houses which has DCB while their home is being remediated, when a social 
housing remediation scheme is established? 
 
Planning 
35. Cllr Albert Doherty 
NWRA have called for "Urgent Investment" in infrastructure in the region, 
pointed out that the region received less than 10% of investment in large 
projects and stated that a policy of positive discrimination is needed to 
deliver regional equality in the region. 
What contribution and submission has DCC included in the recent Project 
Ireland 2040 review that supports and demands regional equality in 
Donegal and the Northwest area?  
 
36. Cllr Joy Beard 
Since the council executive first became aware of the defective concrete 
products being supplied by manufacturers in Donegal, how many quarries 
have been closed due to enforcement action by the council? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
37. Cllr Joy Beard 
Could the council write to Minister Darragh O'Brien to apply pressure to 
ensure that the 10% increase in the cap that was announced under the 
"Enhanced Defective Concrete Block Scheme" will be applied 
retrospectively? As stated by Minister O'Brien during the Dail debate on 
Thursday 20 June 2022 - "Existing applicants under the current scheme will 
not be disadvantaged from being early movers and will benefit 

10 
 
retrospectively from the increased grant amounts and allowances that will 
be available under the enhanced scheme." 
 
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing   
38. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  
 How many social houses are now vacant due to DCB, and where are they 
located?  
 
39. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle 
With the roll out of Air to Water heating systems across our social housing 
schemes around the county will the Council be responsible for the 
maintenance and upkeep of these systems going forward or will it be the 
responsibility of the tenant?  
 
40. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
We have council tenants living in appalling conditions due to defective 
concrete, cracks, black mould, and dampness rodents etc. What 
emergency plan is in place for these people, and can the council not go into 
estate agents throughout the county and buy homes as there are 100s for 
sale?  
We are steady being told that the money is not an option from the housing 
minister, surely this is a fast option to rehouse people plus sort our housing 
problem. 
 
41. Cllr Declan Meehan  
Can the Housing Directorate put in place a plan to carry out remedial repair 
works, including painting, addressing mould, and crack-filling ahead of the 
autumn and winter seasons, for Council-owned DCB houses across the 
county, in lieu of the much-anticipated, long-delayed Social Housing 
Remediation Programme for Defective Blocks?  
 
 
  
Planning 
42. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
Can Donegal County Council please fast-track the taking over of unfinished 
estates as there are people living in appalling conditions between roads and 
water outages on a regular basis and also on the basis that numerous 
promises have been made that these issues would be fixed over the past 
number of years? 
 
Planning 
43. Cllr Michael Mc Bride  
When do we plan to have our weekly planning meetings fully reinstated 
around the county? 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Roads & Transportation 
44. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
Can we get an updated report on applications made to the Department of 
Transport and to Transport Infrastructure Ireland on our behalf for Donegal, 
and the progress of 2023 and 2024 allocations to date? 
 
45. Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly  
Can this Council write to the relevant departments requesting that the 
current commencement date to cut hedges be reviewed and pulled forward 
as the current date September 1st is too late in the year and causing 
serious havoc particularly on our roads in relation to vision lines and a 
number of other safety concerns, please?  
 
Cllr Declan Meehan  
46. Will this Council consider the extension of the winter gritting programme to 
include public transport routes across the county, to allow for the efficient 
and dependable operation of public transport in Donegal?  
 
Economic Development 
47. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
What steps can Donegal County Council take to remove and prevent 
sabotaging and damage done with red paint causing huge reputational 
damage to our tourism market and our county brand of Donegal despite the 
huge efforts by so many people to invest in and promote our true potential 
in the last number of years in both private and public investment? 
 
Finance 
48. Cllr Michael Mc Bride  
When will the review by Donegal County Council regarding the tendering 
process for those wishing to tender for council work be complete? 
 
 
 
 
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Planning 
49. Cllr Denis Mc Gee  
Donegal County Council is a Building Control Authority under the Building 
Control Acts 1990 to 2014.  It has the role of monitoring compliance with 
Building Regulations and has strong powers of inspection and enforcement 
under the Acts. In the case of situations where homeowners are concerned 
that the building professional and or engineer that is engaged with the 
remediation of their home is in breach of current building regulations, what 
measures has Donegal County Council in place to deal with such situations, 
given its role of Building Control Authority as its requirement to review and 
monitor the implementation of the Enhanced Grant Scheme?  
Donegal County Council has a duty of care to protect all its citizens in these 
situations. 
 
 
 

12 
 
50. Motions from other Councils/Bodies 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council call on the Minister for Finance, Jack 
Chambers to reduce the VAT rate from 13.5% to 9% for the hospitality 
sector. With the amount of cafes, restaurants and pubs shutting due to 
increased operating costs, the cost-of-living impacting visitors and footfall, 
and inflation impacting prices, this sector is being significantly and badly 
impacted. I ask for this motion be approved and sent to other County 
Councils for their consideration and support.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Leitrim County Council call on the Minister for Finance, and the 
Government to again look at reducing the VAT rate from 13.5% back to 9% 
for the food and restaurant sector. Restaurants & cafes are finding it 
extremely difficult to survive with the current rate of VAT.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL    
“That Leitrim County Council write to Eamon Ryan, Minister for 
Environment, Climate and Communications expressing our deep concern 
and disappointment with government plans to build a Strategic Gas 
Emergency Reserve in Ireland in the form of a Fracked Gas Import 
Terminal as per action 17 of the Energy Security in Ireland to 2030 (Energy 
Security Package) published November, 2023. We ask him to change the 
new policy and instead ban LNG terminals in Ireland, in policy and in line 
with the May 2021 Policy Statement on the Importation of Fracked Gas 
without conditions and in line with the Programme for Government.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed to write to the Minister for Environment seeking the 
imposition of tougher and increased new fines to deter illegal dumping.  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed to send a letter to the Taoiseach calling for a reduction in 
match funding requirements for major capital projects applied for by 
Roscommon County Council.  
Roscommon County Council recognises the current percentage reduction 
in match funding requirements for the North - West. However, in light of 
increasing construction costs and consultancy costs, the current 
percentage required of circa 10% is not sustainable going forward for 
smaller local authorities.  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL  
It was agreed to send a letter to the Minister for Finance Jack Chambers 
and Minister for Tourism Catherine Martin seeking the reintroduction of the 
9% VAT rate for the hospitality sector.  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Sligo County Council writes to the Minister for Social Protection to 
request a review of existing community employment schemes in place in 
the state with a view to putting in place an ambassador/caretaker scheme 

13 
 
for every village in Ireland, that a person, or persons be paid accordingly to 
support tidy towns and community development groups with maintaining 
and enhancing their communities.  For example, a village with a settlement 
of 100 or less, may be eligible for one worker, 1000 plus two workers etc.  
That this motion be forwarded to the Taoiseach, Tánaiste and all other 
Local Authorities for consideration.” 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL  
“To call on Sligo County Council to develop and rollout a scheme to build 
rural housing to support rural families and the rural communities and to 
seek funding from government for staff to implement the scheme.” 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That Wexford County Council write to Minister Helen McEntee and An 
Taoiseach Simon Harris to ask the Government to adopt a zero-tolerance 
approach toward gender based violence and ask that mandatory minimum 
sentencing be introduced in every conviction of sexual, domestic or gender 
based violent assault.”   
 
 
 

14 
 
MINUTES OF SEPTEMBER MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
30TH SEPTEMBER, 2024 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/288/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, F Bradley C Brogan, J 
Brogan, P Canning, D Coyle, T Crossan, A Doherty, G Doherty, A Farren, 
M Farren, N Jordan, D. M Kelly, D McGee, P McGowan, M Mc Mahon, G 
McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, D Nic Mheanman, JS Ó Fearraigh, M 
Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs M Boyle, T. S Devine, J Kavanagh, M MacGiolla Easbuig, M 
Harley, M McBride, M McClafferty, M McDermott, P McGarvey, J Murray, 
M Naughton.  
Apologies: B Carr, M Harley. 
 
C/289/24 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, 
Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Bryan Cannon, Director of 
Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, Garry 
Martin, Director of Economic Development, Information Systems & 
Emergency Services, Michael McGarvey, Director of Water & 
Environment, Liam Ward, Director of Community Development & Planning 
Services, Tanya Kee, Senior Executive Officer, Frances Friel, 
Communications Officer, William Colvin, Clerical Officer, Róise Ní 
Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall MacGiolla Choill, Tacaíocht do 
Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer. 
 
C/290/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 16TH  MAY, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr Canning, the minutes 
of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 16th of May, 
2024 were adopted.   
 
C/291/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE JULY MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 22nd OF JULY, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Coyle, the minutes of 
the July Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 22nd of July, 2024 
were adopted.      
 
C/292/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 23rd OF JULY, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr C Brogan, the minutes 
of the July Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 23rd of July, 
2024 were adopted.      
 
C/293/24 
DISPOSAL OF LANDS AT DUNMORE, FALCARRAGH TO JOSEPH 
CORCORAN JNR. 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr O’Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr C Brogan, it was 
resolved to disposal of lands at Dunmore, Falcarragh to Joseph Corcoran 

15 
 
Jnr. in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, (as amended).   
 
C/294/24 
 DISPOSAL OF LANDS AT ARDMEEN, CROLLY TO HUGH & 
GERALDINE WALSH 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Molloy, it 
was resolved to disposal of lands at Ardmeen, Crolly to Hugh & Geraldine 
Walsh in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, (as amended).     
 
C/295/24 
 DISPOSAL OF TWO PLOTS OF LAND AT ARDMORE, MUFF TO ANNE 
MCLAUGHLIN  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr T Crossan, seconded by Cllr M Farren, it was 
resolved to dispose of two plots of land at Ardmore, Muff to Anne 
McLaughlin in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).    
 
C/296/24 
 DISPOSAL OF LAND BY WAY OF LEASE AT RATHMULLAN PIER TO 
RATHMULLAN SAILING & WATERSPORTS SCHOOL, C/O 
RATHMULLAN DISTRICT RESOURCE CENTRE. 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Blaney, it was 
resolved to dispose of land by way of lease at Rathmullan Pier to 
Rathmullan Sailing & Watersports School, C/o Rathmullan District 
Resource Centre in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).    
 
C/297/24 
 DISPOSAL OF LANDS AT 9 ARD MCCOOL, STRANORLAR TO MARY 
KATHLEEN CRITCHLEY 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr McGowan, it was 
resolved to dispose of lands at 9 Ard McCool, Stranorlar to Mary Kathleen 
Critchley in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning 
& Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).    
 

16 
 
C/298/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE OLD GARDA STATION, MALIN TOWN.  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr M Farren, the carrying 
out of works with regard to the Old Garda Station, Malin Town was 
approved, in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 
2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development 
Regulations 2001(as amended).      
 
C/299/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE PROPOSED REFURBISHMENT AND EXTENSION PROJECT AT 
WATERWORLD, ATLANTIC WAY, DRUMACRIN, BUNDORAN, CO. 
DONEGAL   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr McMahon, seconded by Cllr Jordan, the carrying 
out of works with regard to the proposed refurbishment and extension 
project at Waterworld, Atlantic Way, Drumacrin, Bundoran was approved, 
in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as 
amended).     
 
C/300/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS IN RESPECT OF THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF A BRIDGE EXTENSION AND ROAD 
REALIGNMENT ALONG THE R-232 AT GLENMORE BRIDGE OVER 
THE LOUGHULTAN RIVER BETWEEN TIEVEBOY AND GLENMORE, 
CO. DONEGAL   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr Jordan, the carrying 
out of works in respect of the construction of a bridge extension and road 
realignment along the R-232 at Glenmore Bridge over the Loughultan 
River between Tieveboy and Glenmore, Co. Donegal was approved, in 
accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as 
amended).        
 
C/301/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CONSTRUCTION OF A TWO-STOREY RURAL S.I. 
DWELLING INCLUDING WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND 
ASSOCIATED SITE DEVELOPMENT WORKS AT CRUCKAKEEHAN, 
ANNAGRY, CO. DONEGAL 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Ó Fearraigh, 
the construction of a two-storey rural S.I. dwelling including wastewater 

17 
 
treatment and associated site development works at Cruckakeehan, 
Annagry, Co. Donegal was approved, in accordance with Part XI of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended).       
 
C/302/24 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS AT A HIGH 
COLLISION LOCATION TO IMPROVE A SECTION OF THE N15 IN THE 
VICINITY OF THE EXISTING PRIORITY JUNCTION BETWEEN THE 
N15 AND R232 AT LAGHEY, CO. DONEGAL  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr McMahon, seconded by Cllr Naughton, the 
carrying out of works at a high collision location to improve a section of the 
N15 in the vicinity of the existing priority junction between the N15 and 
R232 at Laghey, Co. Donegal was approved, in accordance with Part XI of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended). 
 
C/303/24 
 TO MAKE THE ROAD TRAFFIC (SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS) (COUNTY 
OF DONEGAL) (AMENDMENT) BYE-LAWS 2024    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Scanlon, it was 
resolved to make the Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) (County of 
Donegal) (Amendment) Bye-Laws, 2024. 
 
C/304/24 
TO MAKE THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL (PRESENTATION OF 
KERBSIDE WASTE FOR COLLECTION) BYE-LAWS, 2024  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr G Doherty, it was 
resolved to make the Donegal County Council (Presentation of Kerbside 
Waste for Collection) Bye-Laws, 2024.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan was informed that there was no change to the payment 
method and the “Pay as you Go” and “ Pay by Weight” systems were still 
in operation.  
 
C/305/24 
TO ADOPT THE DRAFT TRAVELLER ACCOMMODATION 
PROGRAMME 2025 TO 2029  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr C Brogan, it was 
resolved to adopt the Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 to 
2029.  
 
 

18 
 
C/306/24 
DRAFT SCHEME FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEES 2024-2029  
 
It was unanimously agreed to defer the matter to later in the meeting.  
 
C/307/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE DONEGAL HERITAGE FORUM  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Molloy, it 
was resolved that Cllr O’ Fearraigh would represent the Glenties MD on 
the Donegal Heritage Forum. The following representation on the Donegal 
Heritage Forum, Cllrs A Doherty, D Coyle, M McMahon, G Doherty and 
John S Ó’ Fearraigh was unanimously agreed. 
 
C/308/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO FORT DUNREE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr A Farren, it was 
resolved to endorse the nomination of Cllrs Beard and Bradley to the 
Board of Fort Dunree.  
 
C/309/24 
 TO AGREE DATE FOR 2025 STATUTORY BUDGET MEETING.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr M Farren it was resolved to 
hold the 2025 Statutory Budget Meeting on Wednesday 4th December, 
2024. 
 
C/310/24 
TO AGREE OVERDRAFT ACCOMMODATION OF €10,000,000 FOR 
THE FULL YEAR ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 2025.   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
 
 It was noted that the Bank had made, and was continuing to make, 
available to the Council and overdraft facility (the facility) for the purposes 
of the working capital needs of the Council as may be required from time 
to time.  
 
 
After due consideration, it was resolved on the proposal of Cllr M Farren, 
seconded by Cllr Scanlon, and in accordance with Section 106 of the 
Local Government Act, 2001, as amended, and subject to the sanction of 
the Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage that:  
 
 
“It is in the best interests of the Council and in line with its statutory rights 
and obligations to avail of the Facility and provide the Guarantee up to an 
amount of ten million euro (€10,000,000).  
 
 
Accordingly, the Council agrees to avail of the Facility and provide the 
Guarantee.  
 
 
Each of the persons undertaking the roles of Donegal Chief Executive and 
the Director of Finance from time to time be authorised, together and 
separately, to negotiate the terms of each of the facility letters put, and to 
be put, in place to document the Facility (each, a “Facility Letter” and 
together, the “Facility Letters”), together with any amendments or 
variations to the Guarantee or replacement Guarantee, and to sign each 
such Facility Letter and Guarantee by way of acceptance of the terms of 

19 
 
such document (including, without limitation, all terms and conditions 
referred to in each such Facility Letter) and that each such signed Facility 
Letter and Guarantee shall be fully binding on, and enforceable against, 
the Council; and  
 
 
The Council ratifies the availing of the Facility by the Council, within the 
limits specified, and confirms the execution of all Facility Letters together 
with the Guarantee”. 
 
 
C/311/24 
THAT MEMBERS CONSIDER WHETHER THEY WISH TO PASS A 
RESOLUTION TO VARY THE RATE OF LOCAL PROPERTY TAX IN 
COUNTY DONEGAL BY UP TO 15% IN RESPECT OF A PERIOD OF 
ONE OR MORE YEARS COMMENCING IN 2025  
 
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance gave an overview of his report, 
outlining the relevant statutory legislation and background to the Local 
Property Tax. This, he said, was the first major milestone in the 2025 
budgetary process and noted that LPT income in 2024 had been €28m 
comprising 15% of the Council’s total income for 2024. €10.5m, he 
confirmed, was collected from Donegal households and €17.5 allocated 
centrally. Donegal, he informed members gets the largest single 
equalisation distribution of any county in Ireland and this is used to provide 
a range of important local Council services. All of the borrowing 
undertaken by the Council in recent years, it was noted, had been carried 
out on the strength of the Local Property Tax and income generated from 
commercial rates.  
 
 
He drew attention to the fact that the Council was now empowered to 
make multi-annual decisions and could set the local adjustment factor to 
the end of the current Council term. It was noted however that if the 
decision was to return to the base rate, then the matter would have to be 
revisited again in 2025. 
 
 
 It was confirmed that 13 responses had been received on foot of the 
consultation period and that the Department and Revenue Commissioners 
had to be informed of the Council’s decision to vary the rate by the 15th 
October at the latest.  
 
 
 
Members were informed that the baseline allocation for Donegal in 2025 
was €26.6 million and that a decision to keep the 15% increase would 
mean that Donegal County Council’s LPT income would remain the same 
in 2025. This he said was worth €1.4m to the Council. Additional income 
created by retaining the upper adjustment rate would, he advised, be 
retained in full by the Council, but any reduction to the baseline rate would 
not be made up by the Equalisation Fund and result in a loss of income to 
the Council. 
 
 
 
There was acknowledgement that four out of five households (80%) paid 

20 
 
their LPT at the lowest rate. Since 2020 it was noted that this amounted to 
€103 per household per year. There was a common misconception, he 
added, that the rate had increased year on year. The decision to have the 
rate at plus 15% amounted to an additional cost of 26c per week or €13.50 
per year for 80% of the households in Donegal. This equated to 65c per 
week for those in the second valuation band and band and 91c for those 
in the third valuation band. This, he advised, was less than a euro for 98% 
of the households in Donegal.  
 
 
 As part of the LPT process, the Council, he said, was obliged to prepare 
preliminary estimates of income and expenditure in advance of the 
ongoing budget preparations. This, he confirmed, highlighted the need to 
retain the LPT at the current level for 2025 and beyond. The main impacts 
were, he added: 
 
• The impact of inflation on the cost of providing Council services. 
• Increases in pay under the national pay agreements, including those 
connected with the WRC agreement on pay and conditions for 
Retained Fire Fighters.  
• The impact of inflation and cost-of-living challenges on income 
generated from Commercial Rates and other sources. 
• Existing and emerging co-financing demands under the Capital 
Programme.  
• The elimination of income from Non-Principal Private Residence 
Charges from March 2025. 
• The requirement to continue to reduce the structural dependence on 
nonstandard and unsustainable income lines, including reserves, in 
the Revenue Budget process. 
 
Retention of the current rate would, he advised protect the €1.4m Council 
income and, to put that amount in context, would, if used for borrowing, be 
the equivalent of providing capacity to borrow €19m over the next twenty 
years for the Capital Programme. It was noted that €1.4m  was equivalent 
to the combined funding for the Members Development Fund, the 
Development Fund Initiative and the allocation for the Tidy Towns Groups 
and represented one fifth of the budget for housing maintenance or the 
total annual income collected from parking charges and fines. He alluded 
to the fact that it was twice what was collected in planning application fees 
annually and more than the combined annual contributions to An Grianan 
Theatre, Finn Valley Swimming Pool, Ballyshannon Swimming Pool and 
Waterworld in Bundoran and also equivalent to the annual budget for 
Parks and Open Spaces and twice the annual contribution towards 
housing assistance grants. 
 
Concluding he highlighted the following: 
 
1. That a return to the baseline would result in €1.4m less funding in 
2025. 
2. A 15% reduction would generate €2.8m less in income. 
3. A decision to repeat the 15% increase for 2025 would protect the 

21 
 
€1.4m and ensure that households in Donegal would pay the same level 
of charges in place since 2020. 
 
The Chief Executive said that on several occasions throughout the year 
members had to make decisions in relation to financial matters that  
affected the Council’s future. The overall funding model, he said, whilst not 
perfect was the preferred model at present and that much could be done 
with the €1.4m LPT income. 
 
Alluding to the borrowing requirement he said that this was invaluable in 
that loans secured and paid back over a twenty-year period would 
generate the capacity to deliver capital projects for the benefit of future 
generations. He recommended that the rate be retained at plus 15% for 
the next five years as this would provide certainty going forward. 
 
He said that a reduction in LPT would mean that monies would have to be 
sourced elsewhere and alluded to the fact that loans had been drawn 
down on the strength of decisions taken in previous years.  
 
Donegal, he advised, had been particularly successful this past number of 
years in securing various projects and funding and said it would be 
prudent to keep the momentum going. He cited the successful completion 
of Portsalon Pier as one of those projects which had benefited from the 
co-funding aspect. 
 
A lengthy debate ensued, and members advised of the following: 
 
• Many families were not able to pay the LPT and therefore it should 
be reduced. 
• People in Defective Concrete Block affected houses should not 
have to pay. Noted that this was applicable at present but only for 
those availing of the new DCB Scheme. Self-declaration should be 
an option for DCB affected homeowners.  
• Better funding model needed and suggestion that the €14 billion 
Apple repayment could be used to fund local authority 
requirements.  
• Not an equitable tax an unfair on people in rural Donegal. 
• Query as to the implications for the Glenties MD. 
• Noted that social housing tenants and defective concrete block 
homeowners did not have to pay the LPT. 
• LPT Rate was not a major issue during the local election campaign.   
• Noted that it was a specific issue for many in the Donegal Municipal 
District. 
• Sinn Fein grouping indicated that this was a regressive and unjust 
austerity tax and that the people of Donegal already paid their fair 
share in terms of motor tax, development levies and commercial 
rates, universal social charge, value added tax etc. Noted that the 
national Sinn Fein alternative budget proposals called for this to be 
reduced by 20% in 2025 and abolished within five years.  
 

22 
 
• Allocation of LPT income has not been equal across all Municipal 
Districts and this reflected in (1) the failure to address staffing 
problems in the Letterkenny Public Services Centre (2) lack of 
housing provision in the Milford Electoral Area and (3) the 
Letterkenny Milford MD with 40% of the social housing in Donegal 
has only one housing engineer.  
• Cognisance needs to be taken of the overall value for money 
aspect and whether the LPT income is being spent wisely.  
• LPT must be retained at the current rate so as to safeguard 
borrowing requirements, match funding applications and the 
various projects that are ongoing together with those at proposal 
stage. 
• Concern that a reduction would impact on projects such as the 
Buncrana Leisure Centre.  
• Query as to how a reduction would impact on the spend of capital 
investment and the impact if any on the Tús Nua Regeneration 
project in Carndonagh. 
• Noted that there were limited options for funding local government 
nationally and that people were not seeing value for money in terms 
of overall service provision. 
• Call for members to have confidence in the executive and to 
consider the impact that a reduction would have on communities 
county-wide. 
• Noted that only 13 submissions had been received in total. 
• Concern expressed that members were being pushed into retaining 
the status quo. 
• Query as to whether a reduction would lead to an increase in 
commercial rates. 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan requested that a list of projects and services which could 
possibly be impacted by a reduction in the LPT be provided in respect of 
the Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal District. He said that he had no qualms 
about supporting the retention of the rate at plus 15% above the baseline 
and contended that any reduction would see monies go to other counties 
such as Dublin, Kerry, or Cork. He said that people were right to criticise 
the Council if service delivery was unsatisfactory, but that it was 
imperative that current funding levels were maintained.  
 
Cllr Canning asked for a breakdown of the projects that would have to be 
shelved if the LPT rate was cut and queried what % of the Members 
Development Fund, Development Fund and the Infrastructure Fund would 
be impacted. This was endorsed by Cllr Kavanagh. 
 
Cllr Kavanagh proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan that the rate of the  
Local Property Tax in Donegal be varied by plus 15% from the baseline in 
respect of the period 2024-2029.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he could not support any increase in the 
LPT and proposed, seconded by Cllr J Brogan that the rate of the Local 

23 
 
Property Tax in Donegal be reduced by 15% from the baseline.  
 
C/312/24 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to adjourn the meeting until 2.30pm. 
 
C/313/24 
THAT MEMBERS CONSIDER WHETHER THEY WISH TO PASS A 
RESOLUTION TO VARY THE RATE OF LOCAL PROPERTY TAX IN 
COUNTY DONEGAL BY UP TO 15% IN RESPECT OF A PERIOD OF 
ONE OR MORE YEARS COMMENCING IN 2025  
 
The Chief Executive addressing the meeting outlined the fact that there 
was a specific timeline for agreeing the LPT rate and stated that the 
Housing Capital Programme was fully funded by Government. Alluding to 
the borrowing capacity generated by the €1.4m LPT income, he 
acknowledged the significance of same in assisting with co-funding 
requirements. He drew attention to the fact that the co-funding 
requirement for Department Projects and URDF projects had been 
reduced in 2023. Any reduction, he advised, would result in the scaling 
back of current ambitions. This was something, he added, which would 
ultimately be a matter for the members.  
 
 
 
The Director of Finance provided an insight into the level of investment 
and budget capacity over the past number of years and noted that the 
Capital Budget had risen from €25m in 2014 to €127m in 2023, all made 
possible by the increase in borrowing, facilitated by LPT income and 
monies generated from commercial rates. He said that the Municipal 
District Budget Workshops were due to commence in the coming week 
and that conversations could be had in relation to various priorities. He 
noted however that €1.4m less in income would result in less work being 
done.  
 
 
With regard to Local Government funding, he said that the Senior 
Management teams across all local authorities and the Director of Finance 
Association nationally of which he was Chair ,were all working hard to 
secure an increase in Local Government funding. This, he said, would 
continue, but for now the LPT was the only mechanism available and was 
unlikely to change overnight. A minus fifteen percent reduction in the LPT 
would, he advised result in the loss of €2.8m in income.  
 
 
Members again asked for specific examples of what would be impacted if 
the LPT was reduced from the current level. Several issues were then 
raised including: 
 
▪ Whether all Council assets were being properly utilised and could 
some of these be used to generate income.  
▪ Was the option available to refinance a number of Council loans? 
▪ Clarification requested as to whether €1.4m was being lost or €19m 
in total. 
▪ Noted that a vacuum existed in that much of the 2025 budgetary 
discussions had yet to take place. 

24 
 
• Highlighted the fact that the retention of the current LPT rate in 
Donegal for a further five-year period would give the Council a 
strong bargaining position and borrowing capacity for the next five 
years. By demonstrating an ability to secure and repay loans it 
would send a message to the Department that Donegal was willing 
and ready to avail of any available funding mechanisms.  
• Requested a commitment that the Members Development Fund, 
the Development Fund Initiative, Infrastructure Fund and projects 
such as Fort Dunree, Inishowen Greenway Projects and the 
funding for Buncrana Leisure Centre would not be cut if the LPT 
rate was reduced. 
 
The Director of Finance informed members that a decision was required 
by the 15th October in relation to the local adjustment factor and that there 
would be no further detail available at that point in time to influence the 
decision. Any necessary spending cuts, he added, would be discussed 
prior to the publication of the 2025 Budget Book. He proceeded to give an 
overview of where the various elements of discretionary expenditure were 
and how this equated to the €1.4m income line that would be lost if a 
reduction in the LPT was agreed.  
 
He clarified in response to a query by Cllr Mc Gee that in this year’s 
budget there was €28m of LPT income in total. This was made up of €10.5 
m collected in Donegal and €17.5m from the Equalisation Fund and €1.4m 
in income which was 15% of what was collected locally. €1.4m was, he 
said what it would take to draw down €19m and repay over a twenty-year 
period. He referred also to the fact that the Council’s asset  book included 
social housing, the road network etc and that these were assets that could 
not be sold. The importance of maintaining sustainable income lines was  
highlighted.  
 
Several loans it was confirmed had been repaid early from annual 
surpluses and this had created the capacity for additional borrowing. 
 
The Senior Management Team proceeded to give an outline of the 
possible impact that a reduction in LPT income would have for their 
respective Directorates.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he could not support any increase in the 
LPT and proposed, seconded by Cllr J Brogan that the rate of the Local 
Property Tax in Donegal be reduced by 15% from the baseline.  
 
At this juncture, Cllr Mc Bride said that he was of the opinion that the LPT 
was an unfair tax and proposed seconded by Cllr Meehan that the rate of 
the Local Property Tax in Donegal be retained at the baseline rate. 
 
A recorded vote was then taken by the Meetings Administrator in relation 
to the proposal by Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, seconded by J Brogan to 
reduce the rate of the LPT in Donegal by 15% from the baseline. 
 

25 
 
This resulted in 2 voting for the proposal, 17 voting against and 5 no. 
abstentions. 
 
Those voting in favour included: 
 
Cllrs J Brogan and Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig. (2) 
 
Those voting against included: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Boyle, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Coyle, M Farren, 
Kavanagh, Kelly, Mc Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc Garvey, Mc Gee, Mc 
Gowan, Molloy, Naughton and Scanlon. (17) 
 
The following abstained: 
 
Cllrs Beard, T Crossan, A Doherty, G Doherty, A Farren, Jordan, Mc 
Bride, Mc Monagle, Meehan, Murray, Nic Mheanman and O’ 
Fearraigh.(12) 
 
The motion fell. 
 
A recorded vote was then taken in relation to the proposal by Cllr Mc 
Bride, seconded by Cllr Meehan to retain the rate of the Local Property 
Tax in Donegal at the baseline rate. 
 
This resulted in 13 voting for with 17 against and 2 no members 
abstaining. 
 
Those voting for included: 
 
Cllr J Brogan, T Crossan, Devine, A Doherty, G Doherty, Jordan, Mac 
Giolla Easbuig, Mc Bride, Mc Monagle, Meehan, Murray, Nic Mheanman, 
and Ó Fearraigh. (13) 
 
Those voting against included: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Boyle, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Coyle, M Farren, 
Kavanagh, Kelly, Mc Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc Garvey, Mc Gee, Mc 
Gowan, Molloy, Naughton and Scanlon. (17) 
 
Cllrs Beard and A Farren abstained. (2) 
 
Thus, the motion fell. 
 
The Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a vote in relation to the 
proposal by Cllr Kavanagh, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan to retain the 
Local Property Tax in Donegal at its current rate for the next five years i.e. 
at 15% above the baseline rate. 
 
This resulted in 17 voting for, 14 voting against and 2 abstentions. 

26 
 
Those voting in favour included: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Boyle, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Coyle, M Farren, 
Kavanagh, Kelly, Kennedy, Mc Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc Garvey, Mc 
Gowan, Molloy, Naughton and Scanlon. (17) 
 
Those voting against included: 
 
Cllr J Brogan, T Crossan, Devine, A Doherty, G Doherty, Jordan, Mac 
Giolla Easbuig, Mc Bride, Mc Gee, Mc Monagle, Meehan, Murray, Nic 
Mheanman, and Ó Fearraigh. (14) 
 
Cllrs Beard and A Farren abstained.  
 
 
Thus, it was resolved in accordance with the Local Property Tax (Local 
Adjustment Factor) Regulations 2022 and under Section 20 of the Finance 
(Local property Tax) Act 2012 (as amended) to vary the rate of Local 
Property Tax in County Donegal by plus 15% of the baseline for the period 
2024 to 2029.  
 
  C/314/24 
 DRAFT SCHEME FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEES 2024-2029. 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
advised that members were now being asked to formally adopt the Draft 
Strategic Policy Scheme 2024-2029 with or without modification and that 
following same the process to select members and sectoral representation 
would commence. 
 
Alluding to the summary of the 243 submissions received, he advised of 
the following: 
 
That the Council did not have a policy making role in respect of the DCB 
Scheme and that its role was to administer the scheme on behalf of the 
Department of Housing, Local Government  & Heritage. Thus, he said, 
that the setting up of a separate Defective Concrete Blocks SPC 
Committee would not be consistent with what the SPCs were designed 
for. 
 
He noted that the Council had in accordance with Section 51 of the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (as amended) established a specific Defective 
Concrete Blocks Committee and that this was the most appropriate means 
for discussing and highlighting the relevant issues and for bringing them to 
the attention of the Department. He recommended that the DCB 
Committee look at any changes in its membership or structure that would 
best accommodate the issues highlighted in the 236 individual 
submissions.  
Cllr Mc Gee queried whether or not there would be an SPC established 

27 
 
specifically to deal with the Defective Concrete Blocks issue and if not why 
not. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services in 
response said that Donegal County Council had no policy making role and 
managed the DCB Scheme on behalf of the Department. The Council, he 
noted had set up a committee with a specific role to focus on the DCB 
issue. The DCB committee itself, he said, could look again at its structure 
and revert back to Council if it wished to change its modus operandi.  
 
Cllr C Brogan noted that all members would have an opportunity to sit on 
at least two SPCs and there was unanimous agreement that the DCB 
Committee should have all the backing and support it needed to 
adequately represent the DCB issue.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment, said that the issue 
of a separate SPC had been discussed and it had already been noted that 
the  Council did not have a policy making role in respect of the DCB 
Scheme. It was acknowledged that the setting up of a dedicated SPC 
would not be consistent with what Strategic Policy Committees were 
designed for. He said that he had arranged to meet with the Chair and 
with Cllr Mc Gee representing the Vice Chair to discuss the terms of 
reference for the committee going forward. 
.  
Cllr Meehan said that assurance was needed that community and sectoral 
representatives would be permitted to sit on the committee and alluded 
specifically to the need to include representatives from the Mica Action 
Group. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that there were 15 Councillors on the committee and 
that consideration needed to be given as to how five more groupings could 
be included on the committee. He would he said be meeting with the 
Director of Service along with Cllr Mc Gee and that the matter could then 
be discussed further at the next DCB Committee Meeting. He said that 
there would be difficulties in managing a committee which could have 
potentially up to 25 number representatives. 
 
Cllr Beard said that one the biggest concerns was to ensure that all 
stakeholders were represented including the health and education sectors 
and the Mica Action Group. She cited the need for monthly meetings of 
the committee. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that provision existed to bring in the various 
groupings and that the deputation process could accommodate this. He 
would, he said, welcome anyone that could help and lobby to get the best 
deal possible for homeowners.  
 
Cllr G Doherty said that all members wanted the DCB Committee to be as 
powerful and effective as it could possibly be and welcomed the opening 
up of the membership and any provision that could facilitate the reception 

28 
 
of relevant delegations. The DCB Committee in its present state, he 
acknowledged, had greater flexibility than a Strategic Policy Committee, 
given that SPCs had structured guidelines as to their overall membership.  
SPC membership, he added, would not facilitate all interested 
stakeholders in this case. There was, he confirmed more flexibility in 
keeping the DCB Committee which could effectively draw up its own rules.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle concurred and noted that the policy enshrined in the 
DCB Scheme was not the making of Donegal County Council and that 
there was therefore no policy role or control in relation to the governing 
legislation despite the Councils efforts to date. Members on the Regional 
Health Forum, he advised, had continually raised mental health, general 
health and children’s health issues arising from the DCB issue with no 
specific response to date. He said the best way forward at present was to 
continue with the DCB Committee.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
responding to a query from Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig on foot of the 
submission requesting the establishment of an Irish & Language or 
Gaeltacht sub-committee of an SPC, to focus on strategies and 
recommendations for the promotion of the Irish Language. He said that 
there was already a committee in place entitled 'Coiste na Gaeilge' which 
dealt with the issues outlined and that the recommendation was for this to 
continue. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said it was imperative that the translation service was made 
available at DCB Committee meetings. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Planning & Community Development said that the 
Council had adopted a policy in relation to the provision of translation 
services with same being available at Plenary, MD and Islands Committee 
Meetings. This commitment, he added, had been given based on resource 
implications. It was important, he said, that members did not go away with 
the impression that the service would now be available at SPC and other 
committee meetings. Any change, he said, would require an overall review 
and consideration of the available resources.  
  
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr G Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the Draft Scheme for the Establishment and Operation 
of Strategic Policy Committees in Donegal for the period 2024- 2029 
subject to the following: 
 
• That the title of the 'Community, Social & Cultural' SPC be amended 
to the 'Community, Social, Culture & Gaeltacht' SPC. 
• Each SPC includes the issue of Climate Action & Biodiversity as part 
of its SPC Meeting Agenda. 
 
Members proceeded to appoint the SPC Chairs Designate to their 
respective Strategic Policy Committees. 
 

29 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott it was 
resolved to appoint Cllr Liam Blaney as the Chair of the Housing & 
Corporate Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott it was 
resolved to appoint Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly as the Chair of the 
Community, Social, Culture & Gaeltacht Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr G Doherty, seconded by Cllr T Crossan it was 
resolved to appoint Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle as the Chair of the Planning 
Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr G Doherty, seconded by Cllr T Crossan it was 
resolved to appoint Cllr Noel Jordan as the Chair of the Roads & 
Transportation Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Kennedy it was 
resolved to appoint Cllr Pauric Mc Garvey as the Chair of the 
Economic Development Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Scanlon, seconded by Cllr Kennedy it was 
resolved to appoint Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty as the Chair of the 
Climate Action & Environment Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
  C/315/24 
 ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING. 
It was unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting until 12 noon on 
Monday 7th October following the Special Plenary Housing Meeting at 
10am.  
