1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
        Aras an Chontae 
                                             Leifear 
               `     16 Iúil, 2024 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 22 Iúil 2024 ag 11.00 r.n 
in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an 
chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
******************************************************************************************************** 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House  
Lifford 
 
16th July, 2024 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 22nd July, 2024 at 11.00am in 
the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join the 
meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
_______________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  
 
 

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 6th of February, 2024. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 12th of February, 2024. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 8th of May, 2024. 
d) Confirmation of the Minutes of the May Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 20th of May, 2024. 
e) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Annual General Meeting of Donegal 
County Council held on the 21st of June, 2024. 
 
2. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(Part XI), and the Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 
To approve the carrying out of works regarding the the demolition of existing 
derelict dwelling & construction of a two-storey apartment block containing 2 
no. 2-bed apartments complete with new vehicular entrance onto Laghy Main 
Street, onsite parking area, connection to existing services including 
upgrading of storm drainage network & all associated site development 
works at Main Street, Laghy, Co. Donegal. 
 
3. Corporate 
a) Draft Scheme for the establishment and operation of Strategic Policy 
Committees 2019-2024. 
b) Establishment and Election of Members to the Emergency Response 
Committee. 
c) Establishment and Election of Members to Coiste na Gaeilge. 
d) Establishment and Election of Members to the Islands Committee. 
e) Election of Members to the Donegal Heritage Forum. 
f) Election of Members to the Inishowen Development Partnership. 
g) Election of Members to Latch Ltd. 
h) Election of Members to Colmcille Heritage Centre. 
i) Election of Members to Erne Enterprise. 
j) Election of Members to Letterkenny Theatre Management Company Ltd. 
k) Election of Members to Ballyshannon Leisure Centre. 
l) Election of Members to Bundoran Waterworld. 
m) Election of Members to Finn Valley Leisure Centre. 
n) Election of Members to Letterkenny Sports Complex.  
o) Election of Members to Western Inter County Rail Committee. 
 
4. Finance 
a)  To consider and note the Audited Financial Statement (Audited) 2023. 
b) To consider and note the Local Government Audit Report on the Annual 
Financial Statement for 2024. 

3 
 
c) To note the report from the Donegal County Council Audit Committee on 
its consideration of the 2023 Audited Financial Statement and Audit 
Report for 2023 of Donegal County Council as required by Section 121(3) 
of the Local Government Act, 2001 (as amended). 
 
5. Community Development  
Local Community Safety Partnership – Expression of Interest process for 
Chairperson of the Partnership. 
6. Planning 
County Donegal Development Plan, 2024-2030: “Notification of the Minister’s 
intention to issue a direction to Donegal County Council’. 
7. Roads & Transportation  
To approve the commencement of the public consultation process for the 
Draft Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) (County of Donegal) (Amendment) 
Bye Laws 2024. 
 
8. Endorsement of Minutes 
a) To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 
13th May, 2024. 
b) To endorse minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal Heritage 
 Forum held on the 11th May 2023. 
c) To endorse minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal Heritage 
 Forum held on the 13th July 2023. 
d) To endorse minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal Heritage 
 Forum held on the 5th October 2023. 
e) To endorse minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal Heritage 
 Forum held on the 8th February 2024. 
 
9. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under Section 
142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. 
No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the Environment, 
Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local Government Act, 
2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local Government (Expenses 
of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 (as amended).  
 
Other 
• Attendance of the A5/N2 Cross Border Committee members at a meeting 
with Mr John O’ Dowd MLA, Infrastructure Minister in the Northern Ireland 
Executive, in Aughnacloy, Co Tyrone on Monday 12th August, 2024. 
 
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the London Irish Vintage Club Day in 
Greenford, West London on the 8th of September, 2024. 

4 
 
• Attendance of the EU Cerv Project representative at the YOUth & 
Democracy: Empowering Europe’s Next Generation Seminar in Sofia, 
Bulgaria from the 9th to the 12th September, 2024.  
• Attendance of the CPMR representative at the 52nd CPMR General 
Assembly meeting in Gozo, Malta from the 2nd to the 4th of October, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
  
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
10. Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
"I propose the motion that three hubs should be established in the county 
for all those affected by defective concrete products.  These hubs should be 
located east, west, and central in the county.  The centres should be staffed 
by well-informed facilitators who will have the up-to-date knowledge and 
resources to help the people of Donegal.  The number of staff in these hubs 
should match the level of need required considering the large number of 
those that are affected by this issue". 
 
 
  
  
 LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Finance  
11. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
“That the Council Management present what plans it has to deal with 
allocating the council's own funding across the county following my motion 
earlier this year”. 
 
“That this Council agree to develop a plan to distribute Council own funding and 
resource to all towns and villages across the County prior to the next Council 
budget in October / November 2024. An agreement similar to 2014 when the then 
Council agreed to support former Town Councils from a sudden loss in revenue 
and agreed to top sliced supports in order to lessen the impact on them as they 
were no longer had Town Council status. This agreement by all members saw the 
former town councils continue to grow and benefit from that decision. A new 
agreement would ensure balance in the way all local towns and villages are 
supported based on their size so that even the smallest towns & villages receive 
some mainstream country wide resources”. 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks   
12. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty 
 
That this newly elected council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage Darragh O'Brien TD, Secretary General of the 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage Mr Graham Doyle, 
the Minister for Justice Helen McEntee TD and Secretary General of the 
Department of Justice Ms Oonagh McPhilip's to ensure and put the 
Housing Agency on notice that if they do not desist from and reverse their 
unlawful actions to overturn qualified and registered I.S. 465 Chartered 
Engineers recommendations made on behalf of their clients "based on 

5 
 
science" and that the Housing Agency gives a legal undertaking that they 
will not ignore the science which proves that Mica and Freeze Thaw is not 
the cause of the Donegal defective concrete scandal incorrectly labelled as 
the Mica Scandal by those in power. The Engineers recommendations are 
legally based on scientific evidence obtained from scientific testing, 
especially that of Petro lab from Cornwall in the UK. The above 
departments must legally act before it is too late for the affected 
homeowners who have had their engineers’ recommendations downgraded 
to date. The Housing Agency's illegal actions have been imposed on 
desperate homeowners unlawfully, which has resulted in them accepting an 
incorrect engineering solution forced on them because of the flawed I.S. 
465 Mica protocol enforced by DCC and HA when entering both the 90/10 
and now the enhanced grant schemes. The Housing Agency must act on 
this unlawfulness with immediate effect and do so based on the science 
that proves that the presence of Mica in concrete blocks and the incorrect 
theory that Freeze Thaw is a contributing factor in the defects identified in 
the Irish Mica Standard I.S. 465 Protocol used for testing is a clear breach 
of EU directives that have been endorsed by the NSAI in the I.S. EN 771-
3:2002 standard and standards prior to this. The I.S. EN 12620:2002 
standard for aggregates used in concrete is also being ignored by the Irish 
Mica Standard I.S. 465 protocol, which is also a clear breach of EU 
directives and Irish Standards that must be adhered to for concrete blocks 
manufactured in the Republic of Ireland. The Department must act now, 
and the evidence today shows that Local Authorities all over Ireland are 
testing all new developments under the block’s standard I.S. EN 771-3 and 
not the Mica Standard I.S. 465. The over whelming scientific evidence of 
internal sulphate attack in the concrete blocks tested over the last 4 and 
half years is now undeniable, and this evidence is supported by the world’s 
leading experts from around the world by way of peer review studies and 
peer reviewed literature published in the past and today. If the departments 
above do not act on this motion, then I am calling on the newly elected 
council to come together and take the appropriate legal action in the 
superior courts and do so on behalf of all those directly and indirectly 
affected by the defective concrete scandal labelled incorrectly as caused by 
Mica and Freeze Thaw. 
 
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
  Veterinary Services  
13. Cllr Terry Crossan  
“I propose that D.C.C. dog warden services are increased to include 
weekends and Bank Holidays. There should also be an emergency number 
available for out of hours requirements. 
 
Corporate  
14. Cllr Jack Murray  
"That this Council notes the ongoing reduction in services provided by local 
health centres across Donegal, expresses our ongoing opposition to this 

6 
 
decline, and resolves to contact the Minister for Health, demanding 
immediate intervention to save these vital services". 
 
Housing  
15. Cllr Paul Canning  
"Taking on board the New Development Plan and in particular Policy RH-
P-4, I would ask that this council puts in place a plan under the remit of the 
Housing Capital team to look at options and proposals that will help 
construct social and affordable housing at locations around rural schools 
and rural settlements through the development of wastewater treatment 
facilities along with negotiations with developers to bring life back into our 
small rural settlements". 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
16. Cllr Joy Beard  
“That as a matter of urgency (i) this Council engages with suppliers to 
explore either the purchase or leasing of modular homes and (ii) identifies 
suitable sites across the county to provide temporary accommodation for 
those availing of the Enhanced Defective Blocks Scheme and for those 
living in unsafe and unhealthy homes due to the presence of defective 
concrete”. 
 
17. Cllr Martin Mc Dermott  
"To call on this Council to send letter to the Minister for Housing and the 
National Standards Authority requesting the immediate publication of the 
new standard to the replace the IS465 standard that is being used to 
determine the remediation options for the Defective Concrete block 
Scheme". 
 
Roads & Transportation  
18. Cllr Albert Doherty  
"That Donegal County Council engage with RSA to establish, encourage 
and advance how interests that result in the provision of additional 
Commercial Vehicle Road Worthiness Test Operator(s) in the County can 
be delivered." 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
  Defective Concrete Blocks  
19.  Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  
 
 
 As we are in the midst of a housing crisis with a severe shortage of social  
and private housing to meet the growing demand for housing in the county. 
 
“This Council now calls on our Housing Directorate to put together a plan 
and an application for funding to the Minister for Housing, Darragh O Brien 
for the provision of modular homes to support and house those families 
whose homes are to be demolished due to Defective Concrete Blocks. 
 

7 
 
 Corporate  
20.  Cllr Michael Mc Bride  
I am asking Donegal County Council to carry out a root and branch review 
of our electoral registers and review the methods used to maintain these 
important documents. 
 
 Corporate  
21.  Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
"That the Elected Members support me in a vote of no confidence in the 
Housing Minister, Darragh O Brien". 
 
22.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
23. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 Defective Concrete Blocks  
24. Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
  Will the council set up, as a matter of urgency, a strategic plan to deal with 
  all those affected by defective concrete blocks in the county? 
 
Corporate  
25. Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
Is there anything that the council can do to influence the HSE to take 
immediate steps to improve the health services in Donegal? We need the 
embargo to be lifted, medical services to be provided in local communities 
and the number of respite beds increased. 
 
 
 
 
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
26. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty 
How many applications to the 90/10 defective concrete blocks grant 
scheme have been downgraded by Donegal County Council and how many 
of those that were passed over to the enhanced grant scheme have been 
downgraded by the Housing Agency to date. 
 
Housing  
27. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
Can this Council employ a few plumbers who have some experience in Air 
to Water systems, especially as these are now the Council’s preferred 
heating system? Issues can arise and we should have an independent 
professional to advise if it is a tenant’s issue or a faulty system. 
 
 

8 
 
28. Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
Can this Council review how residents are supported in maintaining their 
estates and consider collecting funding from each house to maintain the 
green areas, walls and fences etc? 
 
29. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty 
What alternative accommodation has been sourced for the tenants living in 
the 8 owned Council houses at Railway Park St Johnston that have been 
identified by Petrolab as defective due to internal sulphate attack in the 
blocks and what is the time frame for full demolition and rebuild of their 
homes? 
 
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Planning  
30. Cllr Ali Farren 
 On the canvas, Defective Concrete homeowners asked why did the council    
not regulate the quarries because if they had maybe 1000s of homeowners 
would have escaped this nightmare? Has the council inspected every quarry 
in the county to ensure that they are not producing defective concrete 
building material or if it’s not their job who is responsible to ensure people 
who are rebuilding never have to encounter the same problem again? 
 
Veterinary Services   
31.  Cllr Terry Crossan 
How many licensed dogs are there in the County and what percentage of the 
overall dog population does that represent? 
 
32.  Cllr Terry Crossan 
Is there enough information out there to inform owners of dogs that would 
come under Dangerous Dogs Legislation of the requirements for compliance 
to keep such dogs especially when out in public places? 
  
Housing   
33.  Cllr Albert Doherty 
How many AHBs are active in Donegal and currently have housing schemes 
approved for Social Housing delivery in the County? 
Have AHBs and ICSH responded to recent correspondence from DCC and 
outlined how recent ongoing issues and requirements are to be addressed to 
enable the approval of future potential Housing Schemes in the county? 
 
34. Cllr Albert Doherty 
Social Housing Remediation 
Donegal Co. Council forwarded to the Department of Housing a detailed 
social housing remediation submission on Jan 24th 2024. 
Will the Council outline the correspondence received from the Department 
since January on this matter, the number, and dates of follow up on this 
matter by DCC to the Department and outline the current council plan to 

9 
 
engage with the Department to procure the necessary funding to commence 
work on the remediation of social houses? 
 
35. Cllr Martin Mc Dermott 
How many SI houses have been built per MD since 2010? 
 
Environment   
36.  Cllr Paul Canning 
Has this Council any plans to increase the workforce that are inspecting our 
septic tanks at present given that the grants have increased significantly but 
require a tank inspection before an application can be made? 
 
Planning   
37.  Cllr Paul Canning 
Is this Council in a position to accept any material as a finish to the exterior 
of a dwelling, if not, can I have a breakdown of what is accepted and what is 
not accepted? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks   
38.  Cllr Joy Beard 
Does the Council have plans to assess the number of properties affected by 
the presence of defective concrete in the county, including commercial, 
residential, functional (i.e. septic tanks), community and public service 
buildings? 
 
39.  Cllr Joy Beard 
In light of reports in “The Ditch” does the Council intend to write to the 
Attorney General or the Department of Housing to confirm whether the 
Enhanced Defective Blocks Scheme has been set up in such a fashion so as 
to deliberately discourage applicants by not offering 100% redress and 
intentionally not providing the most appropriate remediation option?   
 
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing 
40. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  
Has Housing Capital/Housing Directorate identified any sites across the 
County that would be suitable locations to place modular homes and if so, 
where are the sites? 
 
41. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  
How many families, individuals are currently in receipt of homeless vouchers, 
what number of individuals and families have presented to Council with 
Eviction Notices in the last twelve months and what are the long-term plans 
of this Council to deal with the rising number of people presenting as 
homeless in the County? 
 
Roads & Transportation  
42. Cllr Michael Mc Bride  

10 
 
Can Donegal County Council give us a presentation on Japanese knotweed 
and other invasive species and who is responsible for the delivery of the 
current policy within Donegal Council? 
 
Planning  
43. Cllr Michael Mc Bride  
Can the new Council be given a presentation on Donegal County Council's 
policy on CE certification? 
 
Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
44. Will the Council arrange to open public buildings for families affected by DCB 
on the nights where there are severe weather warnings and where it is not 
possible to pay for emergency accommodation hotels etc.? 
 
45. Motions from other Councils/Bodies 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL     
“I am calling on the Taoiseach of the day Simon Harris and the coalition 
partners Fianna Fail, Fine Gael and the Green Party to address the huge 
failures in the reconfigured health services established by the Government 
some years ago and the establishment of the HSE for responsibility in 
implementing the policy.  
Health services for the public in Ireland has been led by Health Ministers 
from Fianna Fail, Progressive Democrats and Fine Gael for over 24 years 
and the current model of reconfiguration has been a failure. Recent reports 
indicated that rural parts of Ireland have been impacted the most and have a 
higher risk of poor outcomes and this is borne out by the experience of 
people from Clare attending overcrowded emergency departments and at 
times having tragic outcomes. People in need of health services from Clare 
are suffering and there is no evidence to suggest that the reconfigured health 
service has delivered improved outcomes. I am calling on the Government to 
urgently address the serious consequences for the public in Clare from the 
current government’s model of health care. I would request the circulation of 
this motion if supported to our Oireachtas Members in Clare and other local 
authorities.”   
 
FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL    
“That Fingal County Council formally backs the call for a Fossil Fuel Non-
Proliferation Treaty, and urges the Irish Government to support the initiative 
for a Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty, if passed, a letter should be sent to 
all Local Authorities, An Taoiseach, An Tanaiste and the Minister for the 
Environment.”  
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That, Limerick City and County Council call on the Minister for Finance, 
Michael McGrath, T.D., and the Government, to allow taxpayers one week 
where no tax is paid, in line with Social Welfare recipients whereby their 
welfare payments increase at Christmas, and, if agreed, that the Motion be 
circulated to all Local Authorities.” 
 

11 
 
TIPPERARY COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Tipperary County Council would write to the Minister for Land use and 
Biodiversity, Pippa Hackett, asking that she implements in full, without further 
delay the recommendations of the report titled “Review of support for farmers 
impacted by Ash Dieback” which was compiled by Dir Matthew Crowe, Jerry 
Grant and Jo O’Hara.  
In June 2023, Dr. Matthew Crowe, Jerry Grant and Jo O’Hara were asked to 
carry out a rapid review of the DAFM approach and supports for landowners 
affected by ash dieback since 2013 and to provide the Minister with advice 
and recommendations on a way forward in line with the draft Forest Strategy. 
The report was submitted to the Minister last September.  
Furthermore, that the letter would be sent to the Minister for Agriculture, 
Food and the Marine, the Taoiseach, Tánaiste, and the Minister for the 
Environment and that this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities.”   
 
WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL  
“Due to the very worrying increase in road fatalities throughout the country, 
this Council demands that the Government provides funding for the 
employment of a full time Road Safety Officer in each Local Authority in the 
country.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
MINUTES OF JULY MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 22ND 
JULY, 2024 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/215/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F Bradley C 
Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, D Coyle, T Crossan, TS Devine, A 
Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, DM Kelly, M 
McClafferty, M McDermott, P McGarvey, D McGee, P McGowan, G 
McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, M Naughton, D NicMheanman, JS Ó 
Fearraigh, M Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs G Doherty, J Kavanagh, M MacGiolla Easbuig, F McBrearty, 
M McBride, J Murray.  
 
C/216/24 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & 
Transportation, Eamon Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, 
Meetings Administrator, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, Garry 
Martin, Director of Economic Development, Information Systems & 
Emergency Services, Michael McGarvey, Director of Water & 
Environment Liam Ward, Director of Community Development & Planning 
Services, Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner, Paul Christy, Senior Executive 
Planner, Alana Green, Executive Planner, Roisin Kelly, Executive 
Planner, Cillian Smith, Executive Planner, Frances Friel, Communications 
Officer, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní Ghallachóir, 
Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer.    
 
C/217/24 
 CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr Coyle, the minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 6th February, 
2024 were adopted.    
 
C/218/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 12TH FEBRUARY, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr Canning, the minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 12th February, 
2024 were adopted.   
 
C/219/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 8TH MAY, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr Harley, the minutes of the 
Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 8th May, 2024 
were adopted.    
 
C/220/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MAY MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 20TH MAY, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr McDermott, the minutes 
of the May Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 20th May, 2024 
were adopted.     
 

13 
 
C/221/24 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE ANNUAL GENERAL  
MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 21ST 
JUNE, 2024   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McDermott, the minutes 
of the Annual General Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
21st June, 2024 were adopted.    
 
C/222/24 
TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS REGARDING THE 
DEMOLITION OF EXISTING DERELICT DWELLING & 
CONSTRUCTION OF A TWO STOREY APARTMENT BLOCK AT MAIN 
STREET, LAGHY, CO. DONEGAL  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Kennedy, the carrying 
out of works regarding the demolition of existing derelict dwelling & 
construction of a two storey apartment block containing 2 no. 2 bed 
apartments complete with new vehicular entrance onto Laghy Main St, 
onsite parking area, connection to existing services including upgrading of 
storm drainage network & all associated site development works at Main 
Street, Laghey was approved, in accordance with Part XI of the Planning 
& Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & 
Development Regulations 2001(as amended).        
 
C/223/24 
 DRAFT SCHEME FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF 
STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEES 2024-2029    
 
Mr Paul Mc Gill, Area Manager, Housing & Corporate informed members 
that the report set out the detail in relation to the establishment of the 
scheme including the make-up and numbers proposed for each individual 
committee. A consultation period of one month was being proposed, he 
said, and this was a sufficient timeframe to enable the nomination 
process. It was intended, he added, following the public consultation 
period to come back to members with the proposals for the adoption of the 
scheme.  
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr McGowan it was 
resolved to approve the commencement of the public consultation process 
in respect of the Draft Scheme for the Establishment and Operation of 
Strategy Policy Committees for the period 2024-2029.  
 
C/224/24 
ESTABLISHENT AND ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE 
EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMMITTEE.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to re-establish the Emergency Response Committee in 
accordance with Section 51, of the Local Government Act, 2001 (as 
amended) with the following membership as agreed at municipal district 
level. 
 
➢ Cllr Gary Doherty 
➢ Cllr Noel Jordan  
➢ Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle  

14 
 
➢ Cllr Jack Murray 
➢ Cllr John Sheamais Ó Fearraigh 
 
C/225/24 
ESTABLISHMENT AND ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO COISTE NA 
GAEILGE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to re-establish Coiste na Gaeilge in accordance with Section 51, 
of the Local Government Act, 2001 (as amended) with the following 
membership as agreed as agreed at municipal district level: 
 
➢ Cllr Donal Coyle 
➢ Cllr Terry Crossan 
➢ Cllr Albert Doherty 
➢ Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig 
➢ Cllr Denis Mc Gee 
➢ Cllr Declan Meehan  
➢ Cllr Anthony Molloy 
➢ Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman 
➢ Cllr John Sheamais Ó Fearraigh 
➢ Cllr Martin Scanlon 
➢ Vacancy Donegal MD  
➢ Vacancy Donegal MD  
 
C/226/24 
ESTABLISHMENT AND ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE ISLANDS 
COMMITTEE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved that the following be appointed to the Islands Committee: 
 
➢ All Members of the Glenties Municipal District 
➢ Vacancy Letterkenny/Milford MD  
 
C/227/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE DONEGAL HERITAGE FORUM  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Donegal Heritage Forum as 
agreed at municipal district level. Members noted that Cllr Coyle was the 
second nominee and not Cllr Kelly as outlined in the report. 
 
➢ Cllr Albert Doherty 
➢ Cllr Donal Coyle 
➢ Cllr Michael Mc Mahon  
➢ Vacancy Glenties MD  
➢ Vacancy Lifford/Stranorlar MD  
 
C/228/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE INISHOWEN DEVELOPMENT 
PARTNERSHIP   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to the Inishowen Development Partnership and as agreed 
by the members of the Inishowen Municipal District: 
 

15 
 
➢ Cllr Joy Beard 
➢ Cllr Albert Doherty 
➢ Cllr Ali Farren 
➢ Cllr Jack Murray 
 
C/229/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO LATCH LTD  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to Latch Ltd based on the recommendation of the 
members of the Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal District: 
 
➢ Cllr Gary Doherty 
➢ Cllr Martin Harley 
➢ Cllr Martin Scanlon 
 
C/230/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO ERNE ENTERPRISE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to Erne Enterprise based on the recommendation of the 
members of the Donegal Municipal District: 
 
➢ Cllr Michael Mc Mahon  
➢ Cllr Michéal Naughton  
 
C/231/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO COLMCILLE HERITAGE CENTRE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to the Colmcille Heritage Centre as agreed by the 
members of the Letterkenny/Milford Municipal District: 
 
➢ Cllr Donal Coyle  
➢ Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly 
➢ Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh 
➢ Cllr Michael Mc Bride  
➢ Cllr Declan Meehan 
 
C/232/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO LETTERKENNY THEATRE 
MANAGEMENT COMPANY LTD  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to the Letterkenny Theatre Management Company Ltd 
based on the recommendation of the members of the Letterkenny/Milford 
Municipal District: 
 
➢ Cllr Donal Coyle 
➢ Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
➢ Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh 
➢ Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle 
 
 

16 
 
C/233/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO BALLYSHANNON LEISURE CENTRE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to Ballyshannon Leisure Centre as agreed by the 
members of the Donegal Municipal District: 
 
➢ Cllr Manus Boyle 
➢ Cllr Noel Jordan 
➢ Cllr Michael Mc Mahon  
 
C/234/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO BUNDORAN WATERWORLD  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to Bundoran Waterworld based on the recommendation of 
the members of the Donegal Municipal District: 
 
➢ Cllr Michael Mc Mahon  
➢ Cllr Michéal Naughton 
➢ Mr Barry Sweeny 
➢ Vacancy Donegal MD  
 
C/235/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO FINN VALLEY LEISURE CENTRE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to Latch Ltd based on the recommendation of the 
members of the Lifford/Stranorlar Municipal District: 
 
➢ Cllr Martin Harley 
➢ Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan 
➢ Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman  
➢ Cllr Martin Scanlon 
 
C/236/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO LETTERKENNY SPORTS COMPLEX  
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following as Donegal County Council 
representatives to the Letterkenny Sports Complex based on the 
recommendation of the members of the Letterkenny/Milford Municipal 
District: 
 
➢ Cllr Ciaran Brogan 
➢ Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh 
➢ Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly 
➢ Cllr Michael Mc Bride 
➢ Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle 
 
C/237/24 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO WESTERN INTER COUNTY RAIL 
COMMITTEE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved to appoint the following to the Western Inter-County Rail 
Committee as recommended by the members of the various Municipal 

17 
 
District Committees: 
 
➢ Cllr Fionán Bradley 
➢ Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
➢ Cllr Niamh Kennedy 
➢ Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan  
➢ Vacancy Glenties MD  
 
C/238/24 
TO CONSIDER AND NOTE THE AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENT 
(AUDITED) 2023.   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance said that the report was a 
summary of the overall financial performance in 2023. He noted that there 
had been an overall surplus of €1,151,999 which had the effect of 
improving the accumulated revenue deficit from €4,895,529 at the end of 
2022 to €3,743,530 at the ned of 2023. Capital Expenditure, he advised, 
had increased from €114,789,446 in 2022 to €161,613,970 in 2023. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren seconded by Cllr Scanlon members 
noted the Audited Financial Statement for 2023.   
 
C/239/24 
TO CONSIDER AND NOTE THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUDIT 
REPORT ON THE ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR 2023  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance said that this was the Statutory 
Audit Report and reflected the positive audit opinion of the Local 
Government Auditor. He said that he had identified a number of issues 
and that the associated Chief Executive’s response was outlined in the 
report.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr Scanlon members 
noted the Local Government Audit Report on the Annual Financial 
Statement for 2023.  
 
C/240/24 
TO NOTE THE REPORT FROM THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
AUDIT COMMITTEE ON ITS CONSIDERATION OF THE 2023 AUDITED 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT AND AUDIT REPORT FOR 2023 OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 121(3) OF 
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT, 2001 (AS AMENDED)   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr M Farren, seconded by Cllr Scanlon members 
noted the above report.  
 
 

18 
 
C/241/24 
LOCAL COMMUNITY SAFETY PARTNERSHIP – EXPRESSION OF 
INTEREST PROCESS FOR CHAIRPERSON OF THE PARTNERSHIP  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Planning & Community Development said that an 
expression of interest process was being undertaken by the Council in 
order to identify a suitable Chairperson for the Partnership in Donegal with 
a deadline of the 2nd August, 2024. Cllr A Doherty said that the new 
process placed extensive responsibility on the Chairperson and queried 
what support and salary was available to the successful applicant. Local 
communities needed to be alerted to the process and the significance of 
the role, he added. 
 
 
The Director of Planning & Community Development said that the report 
had been placed on the agenda to generate awareness. He was, he 
advised, appreciative of the fact that there were concerns regarding the 
voluntary nature of the post and the level of commitment involved. 
 
 
Cllr Canning concurred and queried whether or not Donegal County 
Council would be part of the Assessment Panel. He was, he said, 
concerned, that the Elected Members were being more and more 
excluded from the overall process.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that the Joint Policing Committee in the main had 
worked but that the task of the Chairperson going forward was immense. 
 
There was also a responsibility, he noted, to ensure that the various sub-
groups that emanated from the JPC had sufficient focus and diversity. He 
said that he had concerns but was willing to go along with the process. It 
was imperative, he stated, that any initiatives arising from the JPC were 
properly funded. 
 
C/242/24 
COUNTY DONEGAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 2024-2030: 
NOTIFICATION OF THE MINISTERS INTENTION TO ISSUE A 
DIRECTION TO DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL  
Members noted the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
8 Sites in Buncrana 
Members advised of the following: 
 
➢ Urgent and immediate need for housing in Buncrana. 
➢ Minister is forcing zoning on farmers who do not want to develop 
their land. 
 
It was resolved initially on the proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr 
Bradley to reject the Minister’s direction in respect of the 8 sites in 
Buncrana. 
 

19 
 
After further consideration it was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Bradley, 
seconded by Cllr Murray to accept the Minister’s direction in respect of 
NR1.11 and NR1.12 but to reject his decision on the remaining 6 sites. 
 
It was also agreed to include the reasons as agreed at the Special Plenary 
Meeting on the 12th February, 2024 as the rationale for members decision. 
 
3 Sites in Ballybofey/Stranorlar  
Members advised of the following: 
 
➢ Material Alteration 19. (B) 2 – 200 metres from college and has 
water and sewerage services. New Treatment Plant in the area 
which support the “New Residential Phase 2” designation. 
This is infill and sustainable development. 
➢ A(V)BE1 – Economic zoning Donegal Road 
➢ No area in the town to set up business on a large scale. Members 
zoning in February was to facilitate business set up. 
➢ Sensible to have new manufacturing facility on the outskirts of the 
town with easy access and proximity to the National Primary Road. 
➢ NR2.2 Ongoing development in this area which supports the 
original decision by members. 
 
It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan 
to reject the Minister’s direction and to include the the reasons as agreed 
at the Special Plenary Meeting on the 12th February, 2024 as the rationale 
for the members decision. 
 
Settlement Frameworks 
Carrick 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Boyle it was resolved 
to reject the Minister’s direction given the potential for an 
educational/tourism business to develop at this location and the fact that 
there is no other suitable location in Carrick. 
 
Bruckless 
It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Jordan 
to reject the Minister’s direction. 
 
Members advised that there was development on this site already and that 
there was a specific need for housing at this location. They said that 
cognisance had been taken of the floodplain issues and noted that works 
had already been carried out along the river.  
 
Mountcharles  
It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr J Brogan 
to reject the Minister’s decision for the following reasons: 
 
➢ Two sites. Previously constrained in terms of wastewater capacity. 
New Treatment Plant being constructed at present.  

20 
 
➢ Little or no development over the past twenty years and there is an 
opportunity now to allow the village to develop in terms of proper 
sustainable development and the promotion of business and job 
opportunities. 
➢ Opportunity now to identify sites and boost tourism related 
activities. 
➢ Development will allow people to live in their own locality. 
➢ Mountcharles is five minutes from Donegal Town where there is a 
deficit of land for zoning. Opportunity here to keep people in their 
own area and provide an alternative to one-off housing.  
 
Newtowncunningham 
It was noted that the original proposal required amendment. 
 
It was thus resolved on the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr 
Crossan to reduce the original proposal and to include a 1-acre site for the 
purpose of regeneration of the town centre and away from the National 
Primary Road.  
 
Fahan 
It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr A Farren 
to reject the Minister’s direction. Members said that there was an 
awareness of the lack of wastewater infrastructure and the SAC and SPA 
designations around Lough Swilly. They advised that there were a number 
of developers in a position to continue with the development of and the 
improvement of the marina and that a hotel type development at the 
location was a possibility going forward. It was noted that plans were in 
place for a Greenway to run through this location. Cognisance was also 
taken of the proximity to Derry and the associated tourism potential. 
 
Kilmacrennan 
It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Mc Bride, seconded by Cllr Mc 
Garvey to reject the Minister’s direction and to include the rationale as 
provided previously. 
 
Creeslough 
It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr O’ Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr Mc 
Clafferty to reject the Minister’s direction. 
 
Members drew attention to the fact that this could possibly be a ten -year 
plan and that there would be significant funding opportunities going 
forward for Creeslough. They alluded also to the fact that the need for 
housing in this location had been consistently noted at MD level. They 
said that the removal of the designation would limit opportunities going 
forward. Cognisance, they said, needed to be taken of a projected 
population increase which would have a significant impact on future 
development. They queried what options were available should the 
direction proceed. 
 
 

21 
 
Dunfanaghy 
It was resolved on the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty, seconded by Cllr 
Blaney to reject the Minister’s direction for the following reason 
 
➢ No alternative offered. Relatively small site and people are looking 
to build there on their own land.  
➢ Noted Donegal County Council own a small piece of land in this 
area, and this would be beneficial in terms of the extension of the 
graveyard.  
 
TP-12 Access 
Members noted the following: 
 
• No movement in terms of ongoing access to the N56.  
• Must go back to Minister and the paragraph as agreed previously 
by the members must be included. Noted that road safety is 
paramount and that there are plenty of clear exits onto the N56 
with various sections of the road upgraded in the past number of 
years.  
• Contradiction in that people already living and using laneways, 
access routes to the N56 are being refused permission to build. 
Clarification needed regarding the definition of “Intensification”. 
• Access issues are having a negative impact on west and 
southwest of Donegal. Must find a way to amend the policy at 
national level as decisions are being made in Dublin with no regard 
for the way of life in Donegal or the impact on rural communities. 
• Query as to the impact of the impending speed limit review.  
• Raises issues in terms of where people can actually build. Civil 
Servants and policy makers in Dublin are not in tune with the 
needs of rural Ireland and the needs of those living along the N56. 
Options for building are becoming more and more limited. 
Economic development is being hindered.  
• Road safety issues whilst not a major drawback are being used to 
entrench the policy. 
• Specific issues regarding the hindrance of development and lack of 
investment from the Five Points, Killybegs to the Port itself and 
along the Five Points to Ardara road.  
 
Cllr Canning proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Clafferty that consideration 
be given to the taking of legal action in relation to Policy TP-12 and 
access onto the N56. This action he advised could be taken in response 
to the discriminatory aspect of the policy.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that he supported legal action but that the corporate 
entity could not legally represent the members on this matter. He said that 
members could challenge national legislation by way of judicial review.  
 
The Director of Planning & Community Development cited the necessity 
of holding back on any consideration of legal action until the final direction 
was received. He suggested that legal advice could be taken as to what 

22 
 
the options were for the Planning Authority and the Elected Members to 
challenge the Ministerial direction.  
 
Leaving aside the legal aspect, he said, that the report to the Minister was 
due to be submitted by the 14th August and would include the detail on 
the 26 submissions received to date and the issues raised by members 
during the course of the meeting.  
 
C/243/24 
COMMENCEMENT OF THE PUBLIC CONSULTATION PROCESS FOR 
THE DRAFT ROAD TRAFFIC (SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS) (COUNTY OF 
DONEGAL) (AMENDMENT) BYE LAWS 2024  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that approval was 
being sought to publish the amendments to the Draft Road Traffic (Special 
Speed Limits) (County of Donegal) (Amendment Byelaws) 2024 in light of 
the recent Road Traffic Act 2024 No 10 which became law in April 2024. 
Following the submission process, he said, that the matter would be 
brought back to members for consideration. 
 
 
Members advised of the following: 
 
➢ Reduction to 60km was inappropriate on some roads. 
➢ Not just a matter of reducing the speed limit. Need proper policy to 
deter reckless drivers.  
➢ Traffic calming options need to be examined. 
➢ Safety measures essential in Housing Estates. This could be examined 
at budget time. 
➢ Noted ongoing issues re hedge cutting and were of the opinion that the 
current policy is not working. 
➢ Suggestion that where there are issues in relation to hedge cutting that 
the Roads Division should proceed to cut same and send the bill to the 
relevant landowners.  
➢ Concern that the 30km limit in urban areas was unrealistic. 
➢ That the number one cause of accidents at present was mobile phone 
use. 
➢ Lack of adequate speed traffic unit in the county.  
➢ Consideration should be given to using the average speed between two 
points on a road instead of reducing the speed limits. 
➢ Educational aspect and promotion of Road Safety the way forward. 
➢ Road Safety Working Group need to engage and work with people. 
➢ Public consultation should be widened to include the promotion of and 
enhancement of the road safety aspect.  
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that he was well 
aware that the lowering of speed limits was not the be all and end all when 
it comes to road safety. He alluded to the overall government strategy and  
 
the vision zero focus which covered seven main areas. He said that he 
welcomed any opportunity to avail of any funding. 

23 
 
He alluded to the fact that the strategy covered a wide range of issues and 
said that the new Roads SPC would maintain an ongoing focus on all 
aspects of road safety. With regard to the list of housing estates and those 
referenced by Cllr A Doherty, he advised, that the overall list had been 
based on those adopted under the “Taking in Charge Programme”. Any 
that had not been referenced, he confirmed could be included through the 
public consultation process.  
 
 
With regard to hedge cutting, he said that if there were concerns in 
relation to particular roads and that it was imperative that these issues 
were brought to the attention of the local area teams so that matters could 
be resolved when the hedge cutting moratorium ended.  
 
 
The consultation and byelaws, he advised, were very much a statutory 
process, but that all other aspects of road safety and the need for an 
educational programme highlighting the various elements was something 
that could be undertaken by the Road Safety Working Group. They could, 
he advised, discuss and examine ways of ensuring that there was better 
engagement with the general public.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty asked that every effort be made to ensure no hedge 
cutter would be penalised for clearing and cutting at a dangerous junction. 
 
Cllr Devine referenced a particular situation in the Letterkenny/Milford MD 
where fines had been issued for the cutting hedges outside the designated 
timeframe even though they were clearly a danger to the public.  
 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig asked if there was any provision that would allow 
the Council to cut hedgerows where required and send the bill to the 
landowner concerned. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr McGowan it was 
resolved to approve the commencement of the public consultation process 
for the Draft Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) (County of Donegal) 
(Amendment) Bye Laws 2024. Cllr McMonagle proposed, seconded by 
Cllr McGowan that the scope of the public consultation be widened to 
include the promotion of road safety and extended beyond the five Public 
Service Centres to local venues and halls.  
 
C/244/24 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE POLICY 
GROUP HELD ON THE 13THMAY, 2024  
 
Members noted the Minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group 
held on the 13th May, 2024.  
 
C/245/24 
TO ENDORSE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COUNTY 
DONEGAL HERITAGE FORUM HELD ON THE 11TH MAY, 2023   
 
Members noted the minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal 
Heritage Forum held on the 11th May, 2023.   
 
C/246/24 
TO ENDORSE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COUNTY 
DONEGAL HERITAGE FORUM HELD ON THE 13TH JULY, 2023.    

24 
 
 
Members noted the minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal 
Heritage Forum held on the 13th July, 2023.   
 
C/247/24 
TO ENDORSE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COUNTY 
DONEGAL HERITAGE FORUM HELD ON THE 5TH OCTOBER, 2023  
 
Members noted the minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal 
Heritage Forum held on the 5th October, 2023.   
 
C/248/24 
TO ENDORSE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COUNTY 
DONEGAL HERITAGE FORUM HELD ON THE 8TH FEBRUARY, 2024.  
 
Members noted the minutes of the meeting of the County Donegal 
Heritage Forum held on the 8th February, 2024.  
 
C/249/24 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 
of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) 
Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for 
the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 
(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr McMonagle the 
attendance of the A5/N2 Cross Border Committee members at a meeting 
with Mr John O’Dowd MLA, Infrastructure Minister in the Northern Ireland 
Executive, in Aughnacloy, Co. Tyrone on Monday 12th August, 2024 was 
approved.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr McGowan the 
attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the London Irish Vintage Club Day in 
Greenford, West London on the 8th September, 2024 was approved.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr McMonagle the 
attendance of the EU Cerv Project representative at the Youth & 
Democracy: Empowering Europe’s Next Generation Seminar in Sofia, 
Bulgaria from the 9th to the 12th September, 2024 was approved.    
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr McGowan the 
attendance of the CPMR representative at the 52nd CPMR General 
Assembly meeting in Gozo, Malta from the 2nd to the 4th October, 2024 
was approved.  
 
C/250/24 
 ESTABLISHMENT OF HUBS FOR ALL THOSE AFFECTED BY 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE PRODUCTS     
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr Devine it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion. 
 
 "I propose the motion that three hubs should be established in the county 
for all those affected by defective concrete products.  These hubs should 

25 
 
be located east, west, and central in the county.  The centres should be 
staffed by well- facilitators who will have the up-to-date knowledge and 
resources to help the people of Donegal.  The number of staff in these 
hubs should match the level of need required considering the large 
number of those that are affected by this issue".   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
Cllr Mc Gee said that this was the biggest issue in the county at present 
and asked that three hubs be set up and staffed by suitably trained 
facilitators. These, he contended, should be located in Glenties, 
Letterkenny and Inishowen and staffing reflective of the demand for same. 
People’s voices, he said, needed to be heard and no one must be left 
behind regardless of their situation.  
 
Cllr Devine, seconding the motion said this was a very valid point and that 
the hubs were needed as a matter of urgency.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment alluded to the fact 
that Donegal County Council was only administering the scheme on behalf 
of the Government. He agreed that there was need for assistance for the 
homeowners concerned as the process was complex. He alluded to the 
fact that the Department had approved funding for Defective Concrete 
Blocks (DCB)Community Facilitators employed by the Donegal Local 
Development Company and Inishowen Development Partnership Their 
role, he advised, involved assisting homeowners through the DCB 
application process, sourcing or securing alternative accommodation and 
signposting them to other supports and services. The rollout of the DCB 
Community Facilitator initiative, had, he confirmed, had already had a 
positive response with assistance provided to almost 1500 homeowners. 
The Council had also, he confirmed, supported a request from the 
agencies outlined for an increase in the number of facilitators and a 
business case made to the Department. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that three hubs were only the tip of the iceberg, and even 
more were required. People, he said, were in dire straits and believed that 
no one was listening. It was imperative, he added, that this matter was 
kept on the agenda. 
 
C/251/24 
 THAT THE COUNCIL MANAGEMENT PRESENT WHAT PLANS IT HAS 
TO DEAL WITH ALLOCATING THE COUNCIL’S OWN FUNDING 
ACROSS THE COUNTY   
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion.  
 
“That the Council Management present what plans it has to deal with 
allocating the council's own funding across the county following my motion 
earlier this year”. 

26 
 
“That this Council agree to develop a plan to distribute Council own funding and 
resource to all towns and villages across the County prior to the next Council 
budget in October / November 2024. An agreement similar to 2014 when the 
then Council agreed to support former Town Councils from a sudden loss in 
revenue and agreed to top sliced supports in order to lessen the impact on them 
as they were no longer had Town Council status. This agreement by all members 
saw the former town councils continue to grow and benefit from that decision. A 
new agreement would ensure balance in the way all local towns and villages are 
supported based on their size so that even the smallest towns & villages receive 
some mainstream country wide resources”.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance in relation to the 
above.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan said that this was a follow on from his motion earlier in the 
year and one most appropriate for the new Council term. He called on 
members and the executive to explore new ideas and funding options. It 
was noted that over the past ten years funding had been provided for the 
former Town Councils out of the Council’s own resources. He said that the 
question must now be asked as to what could be put in place for all the 
other towns in the county? The time was right, he said, to streamline 
opportunities and co-ordinate resources. He requested a breakdown of 
expenditure from the Councils’s own resources which had been spent on 
the maintenance of towns and villages in the county.  
 
Cllr C Brogan concurred and said that the Council should now take the 
opportunity to review the various Directorates and see how bread and 
butter services could be enhanced. A lot of the smaller issues, he said, 
were not getting funded and that issues such as housing maintenance and 
grass cutting were no longer being carried out in towns like Letterkenny. 
He called for a dedicated mechanism to be put in place so that the various 
pressure points could be pinpointed, and improvements made. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance outlined the statutory budget 
process and the approach to drafting the Council’s budget for 2025. He 
noted that the motion had been raised at CPG and was something that 
would be kept in mind as the 2025 budget was being prepared at both 
CPG and at MD level.  
 
There was no knowledge yet of the financial package that would be 
available in 2025, he said, but that the Schedule of Municipal District 
Works would provide members with an opportunity to allocate budgets 
and discuss local work programmes.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan concluding said that this needed to be looked at by Roads, 
Environment, and Housing collectively and a new approach taken. There 
was little or no power at MD level, he contended. He called for a co-
ordinated approach and collective assessment of the allocation process as 
the current approach was cumbersome and outdated. 

27 
 
C/252/24 
I.S 465  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBrearty, seconded by Cllr Devine it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion.  
 
 
 
That this newly elected council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage Darragh O'Brien TD, Secretary General of the 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage Mr Graham Doyle, 
the Minister for Justice Helen McEntee TD and Secretary General of the 
Department of Justice Ms Oonagh McPhilip's to ensure and put the 
Housing Agency on notice that if they do not desist from and reverse their 
unlawful actions to overturn qualified and registered I.S. 465 Chartered 
Engineers recommendations made on behalf of their clients "based on 
science" and that the Housing Agency gives a legal undertaking that they 
will not ignore the science which proves that Mica and Freeze Thaw is not 
the cause of the Donegal defective concrete scandal incorrectly labelled 
as the Mica Scandal by those in power. The Engineers recommendations 
are legally based on scientific evidence obtained from scientific testing, 
especially that of Petro lab from Cornwall in the UK. The above 
departments must legally act before it is too late for the affected 
homeowners who have had their engineers’ recommendations 
downgraded to date. The Housing Agency's illegal actions have been 
imposed on desperate homeowners unlawfully, which has resulted in them 
accepting an incorrect engineering solution forced on them because of the 
flawed I.S. 465 Mica protocol enforced by DCC and HA when entering 
both the 90/10 and now the enhanced grant schemes. The Housing 
Agency must act on this unlawfulness with immediate effect and do so 
based on the science that proves that the presence of Mica in concrete 
blocks and the incorrect theory that Freeze Thaw is a contributing factor in 
the defects identified in the Irish Mica Standard I.S. 465 Protocol used for 
testing is a clear breach of EU directives that have been endorsed by the 
NSAI in the I.S. EN 771-3:2002 standard and standards prior to this. The 
I.S. EN 12620:2002 standard for aggregates used in concrete is also 
being ignored by the Irish Mica Standard I.S. 465 protocol, which is also a 
clear breach of EU directives and Irish Standards that must be adhered to 
for concrete blocks manufactured in the Republic of Ireland. The 
Department must act now, and the evidence today shows that Local 
Authorities all over Ireland are testing all new developments under the 
block’s standard I.S. EN 771-3 and not the Mica Standard I.S. 465. The 
over whelming scientific evidence of internal sulphate attack in the 
concrete blocks tested over the last 4 and half years is now undeniable, 
and this evidence is supported by the world’s leading experts from around 
the world by way of peer review studies and peer reviewed literature 
published in the past and today. If the departments above do not act on 
this motion, then I am calling on the newly elected council to come 
together and take the appropriate legal action in the superior courts and 
do so on behalf of all those directly and indirectly affected by the defective 
concrete scandal labelled incorrectly as caused by Mica and Freeze 
Thaw. 
 

28 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said the motion was for all those who had been let down 
by this defective standard and asked members to support the motion in 
solidarity with those homeowners who had received downgraded 
recommendations as a result of the faulty IS465 standard which Donegal 
County Council had assisted in developing. He noted that members 
running in the 2024 Local Elections had promised to support homeowners 
and through this motion today could do that and stand by them in 
attempting to get the faulty decisions reversed.  
 
 
To grant people anything other than option 1 was, he advised totally 
unacceptable. 
 
 
Cllr Devine supporting the motion said that he concurred with the 
assessment provided by Cllr Mc Brearty. He had, he said, met many 
families whose applications had been downgraded by the Housing 
Agency. He referred to a particular anomaly where a semi-detached 
house was downgraded, and the adjoining property had received a 
demolition order. It was time, he said, to move on from IS465. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
  Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that 
correspondence would issue to those identified in the motion. 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that the response from the Director was insufficient, 
and the overwhelming evidence is that total sulphites are the cause of 
structural defects in properties in Donegal. The Council, he said, needed 
to accept the fact that they had got it wrong with the mica theory. It was 
nothing short of a cover up, he added, and warranted a public enquiry. 
 
C/253/24 
DOG WARDEN SERVICES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Crossan, seconded by Cllr Murray it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion.   
 
 
“I propose that D.C.C. dog warden services are increased to include 
weekends and Bank Holidays. There should also be an emergency 
number available for out of hours requirements.  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
 
Cllr Crossan said that there had been a number of dog attacks recently 
and that all had happened at weekends when the dog warden service was 
not available. Those involved, he noted, had contacted the Gardaí who in 
turn referred them to the Dog Warden service. He called for increased 
resources to be made available and more done to ensure that all relevant 
criteria and regulations were adhered to. 

29 
 
 
 
Cllr Murray supporting the motion said having a set of rules was 
meaningless if they were not enforced. He cited recent issues that had 
arisen in Swan Park and outlined the need for a warden at this location. 
Options such as a dog friendly zone, he advised, needed to be explored 
and dogs kept on a leash in public places. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Eamon Brown, Meetings Administrator said that it was not just Donegal 
County Council involved and that a case had been made nationally by the 
Local Authority Sector for additional resources across the entire sector. 
 
C/254/24 
REDUCTION IN SERVICES AT THE LOCAL HEALTH CENTRES 
ACROSS DONEGAL  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion.  
 
 
"That this Council notes the ongoing reduction in services provided by 
local health centres across Donegal, expresses our ongoing opposition to 
this decline, and resolves to contact the Minister for Health, demanding 
immediate intervention to save these vital services".   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Murray referred in particular to the local health centre in Fahan and 
the fact that there was now no nursing cover. He asked that contact be 
made with the Health Service Executive so as to ensure that this facility 
remained open and that the services of a Public Health Nurse were 
retained at this location. He alluded also to issues in Kilmacrennan. 
 
 
Cllr A Doherty supporting the motion referenced the fact that child dental 
services had been moved to the Primary Care Centre in Buncrana from 
Carndonagh thus creating access issues for parents in the Carndonagh 
and Moville areas.  
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Eamon Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate said that 
correspondence would issue to the Minister and the HSE as requested.  
 
C/255/24 
THAT THE COUNCIL PUT IN PLACE A PLAN TO LOOK AT OPTIONS 
AND PROPOSALS THAT WILL HELP CONSTRUCT SOCIAL AND 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AT LOCATIONS AROUND RURAL 
SCHOOLS AND RURAL SETTLEMENTS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion.  
 

30 
 
 
"Taking on board the New Development Plan and in particular Policy RH-
P-4, I would ask that this council puts in place a plan under the remit of the 
Housing Capital team to look at options and proposals that will help 
construct social and affordable housing at locations around rural schools 
and rural settlements through the development of wastewater treatment 
facilities along with negotiations with developers to bring life back into our 
small rural settlements".  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Canning said that with the commencement of the new Development 
Plan it was imperative that Policy RH-P-4 was acted upon, and efforts 
made to ensure the survival of smaller settlements across the county. 
Noting that Irish Water did not appear to be at the table, he called on 
Donegal County Council to deliver in terms of proposals catering for 20-30 
housing developments in such locations. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said it was essential that help was forthcoming for these 
smaller rural communities who were struggling and where it was often too 
late when the local school closed. Council policy had not helped 
previously, he said, in that social housing had been more or less 
concentrated in the larger towns. The whole S.I process, he added, had 
fallen on deaf ears and was more or less non-existent at this point in time. 
 
Mr Eamon Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing  & Corporate said that the 
need for housing provision in smaller towns was acknowledged and that 
Housing Capital already took cognisance of Policy RH-P-4. 
 
The motion, he advised, would be referred to Housing Capital in terms of 
the wider context of housing delivery.  
 
C/256/24 
THAT THE COUNCIL WRITE TO THE MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND 
THE NATIONAL STANDARDS AUTHORITY REQUESTING THE 
IMMEDIATE PUBLICATION OF THE NEW STANDARD TO REPLACE 
THE IS465   
 
On the proposal of Cllr McDermott, seconded by Cllr Canning it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion.  
 
 
"To call on this Council to send letter to the Minister for Housing and the 
National Standards Authority requesting the immediate publication of the 
new standard to the replace the IS465 standard that is being used to 
determine the remediation options for the Defective Concrete block 
Scheme".   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that this was in a similar vein to the motion submitted 
by Cllr Mc Brearty. The standard we are working to at the minute is well 

31 
 
out of date, he said, and there were situations out there where the 
recommendations coming from the Housing Agency were questionable 
especially in relation to bison slabs and Option Three which goes as far as 
the top of the rising wall. 
 
C/257/24 
PURCHASE OR LEASE OF MODULAR HOMES TO PROVIDE 
TEMPORARY ACCOMMODATION FOR THOSE AVAILING OF THE 
ENHANCED DEFECTIVE BLOCKS SCHEME  
 
It was unanimously agreed to take Motion No. 16 and Motion No 19 
together. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr McGee it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion.    
 
 
“That as a matter of urgency (i) this Council engages with suppliers to 
explore either the purchase or leasing of modular homes and (ii) identifies 
suitable sites across the county to provide temporary accommodation for 
those availing of the Enhanced Defective Blocks Scheme and for those 
living in unsafe and unhealthy homes due to the presence of defective 
concrete”. 
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
  
Cllr Beard said that in the midst of the housing and defective concrete 
block crisis there were no homes to rent. She noted that there was a grant 
available for temporary accommodation but there was nowhere to go. 
Families, she said, were being forced to live in homes which were 
becoming more and more unsafe. 
 
Modular Homes, she said, were a quick fix solution and could 
accommodate families with specific needs. This was now a priority, she 
said, given the health and safety issues involved. 
 
She asked what the alternative options were said it was not good enough 
to say that we could not do it. In the midst of this humanitarian crisis, it 
was very clear, she said, that modular homes offered the quickest and 
effective solution. 
 
 Cllr Mc Gee concurred with this assessment. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Carr it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion.  
 
 
 As we are in the midst of a housing crisis with a severe shortage of social  
 and private housing to meet the growing demand for housing in the 
county. 
 
“This Council now calls on our Housing Directorate to put together a plan 
and an application for funding to the Minister for Housing, Darragh O Brien 

32 
 
for the provision of modular homes to support and house those families 
whose homes are to be demolished due to Defective Concrete”. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that all acknowledged that housing was in short 
supply and that people were living in dangerous conditions. It was evident, 
he said that the private sector was not in a position to assist at this point 
in time, and that the Local Authority was not meeting its housing targets. 
Rental had become a very expensive option, he noted, and this too was in 
short supply. 
 
He called on the Housing Directorate to put together a plan and to submit 
same to the Minister for Housing as soon as possible, given that he had 
previously indicated that he was amenable to receiving such a proposal. 
 
Modular Homes, he contended, offered an immediate solution and there 
was a need also to identify specific locations where these could be   
located. There was a responsibility, he added to ensure that people had a 
roof over their head. He asked that an application be put together and sent 
to the Minister and that following same all the political groupings put 
pressure on the Minister to deliver the necessary funding. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that all 
involved wanted to assist the homeowners but pointed out that Donegal 
County Council’s role and function was to administer the Enhanced 
Scheme. He said that this role did not involve providing alternative 
accommodation for private homeowners. The key housing related role and 
function of local authorities, was, he advised, to provide social housing. 
 
Donegal County Council, he noted, faced challenges in securing 
accommodation and the housing team were looking at a plan to utilise  
existing vacant accommodation. He had he said spoken with the 
Cathaoirleach and the Leas-Cathaoirleach this morning and would push 
for a meeting with the Department highlighting the fact that the €15,000 
allocated for temporary accommodation was not enough. 
 
He confirmed that the motions as agreed would be forwarded to the 
Department for consideration and every effort would be made to lobby for 
an increase in the temporary accommodation grant. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said it was imperative that no difference was made in 
relation to social and private homeowners. The Council, he contended, 
needed to represent all the electorate and go to the Minister with a 
dedicated and costed plan. No one, he said, was asking Donegal County 
Council to provide the modular homes. 
 
Cllr Beard outlined the necessity of thinking outside the box so as to 
ensure that everything possible was done to assist those living in 
intolerable conditions. It was evident, she said, that the full scale of the 

33 
 
problem had yet to be realised and there was nothing in place to deal with 
the many complex issues arising. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that the Minister needed to come to Donegal and see the  
situation for himself. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle asked for a commitment that a dedicated plan would be 
put in place. The Chief Executive said that he could not give an absolute 
response but would revert with an update in due course.  
 
C/258/24 
ESTABLISH, ENCOURAGE AND ADVANCE INTERESTS THAT 
RESULT IN THE PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL COMMERCIAL 
VEHICLE ROAD WORTHINESS TEST OPERATORS IN THE COUNTY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Crossan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion.  
 
 
"That Donegal County Council engage with RSA to establish, encourage 
and advance how interests that result in the provision of additional 
Commercial Vehicle Road Worthiness Test Operator(s) in the County can 
be delivered."   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr A Doherty welcomed the response and said that the absence of a Test 
Centre in Inishowen meant that commercial and businesspeople had to 
make an 80-mile round trip to access services. He alluded to a response 
received from the RSA who had indicated that they were not responsible 
for the opening of centres but that same was a commercial decision for 
private operators to make. 
 
 
He said that the Minister for Transport, Mr Eamon Ryan, T.D should also 
be contacted regarding the implications for the business sector.  
 
 
It was clear, he advised, that there was a gap in the service and thus 
called on Donegal County Council to represent the business community in 
Inishowen who needed a CRVT centre as a matter of urgency. 
 
 
Cllr T Crossan concurred with this assessment.  
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that there were 
four vehicle test centres located in Donegal along the eastern spine and in 
West Donegal and Letterkenny. It would be possible, he added, to write to 
the Road Safety Authority to see how alternative facilities could be found.  
 
Acknowledging that the provision was a matter for the private sector, he 
noted that that the Local Enterprise Office would be in a position to assist 
with business setups. 
 
 
Cllr Doherty asked that the motion be forwarded to the Road Safety 
Authority and to the Minster for Transport, Mr Eamon Ryan, T.D. 

34 
 
C/259/24 
ELECTORAL REGISTER  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Devine it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion.  
 
 
I am asking Donegal County Council to carry out a root and branch review 
of our electoral registers and review the methods used to maintain these 
important documents.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride said that he had two issues namely the fact that there were a 
number of deceased persons listed on the register and that multiple 
names were recorded as living in two and three bed accommodation. It 
was not possible, he said, that these were all living at these addresses 
and there was a danger that there could be an abuse of polling cards. He 
cited the need for intermittent workshops and for the matter to be kept on 
the agenda on a regular basis. 
 
 
Cllr Devine seconded the motion and noted that there had been an issue 
in Letterkenny of people getting polling cards at two to three different 
addresses. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
 
Mr Paul Mc Gill, Area Manager, Housing & Corporate said that he would 
take on board the comments raised by Cllr Mc Bride and if there was to be 
a follow-up then a specific mechanism could be agreed. One option, he 
said, was to pursue same through the Housing & Corporate SPC. 
 
 
The accuracy of the register was, he stated, critical for any electoral event. 
The priority for staff, he said, had been to deal with applications and that 
over 16,000 applicants had been added to the register over a four-month 
period. 95% to 98% of this, he said, was in line with the provisions of the 
Electoral Reform Act 2022 including the verification of details where 
people  had gone online and entered their Eircode, PPS No, etc. 
 
 
He said that there were a number of deceased persons on the register 
and that it was intended to deal with this issue as a matter of urgency. 
 
 
 
 It was confirmed that a number of polling cards had been returned by An 
Post and these would be used to bring the register up to date. The number 
one priority prior to any electoral event, he confirmed, was to get all 
applicants on the register. 
 
 
Generally, he said, there were issues in relation to identical surnames and 
people not giving a specific address or Eircode, thus making it more 
difficult to make amendments. The register, he added, was in transition for 
the next number of years and he encouraged anyone who had not 

35 
 
updated their details to complete same as this was the only mechanism 
for ensuring the accuracy of the register. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride acknowledged the work of the team working on the register. 
He asked that the matter be kept on the agenda going forward. 
 
C/260/24 
 VOTE OF NO CONFIDENCE IN THE HOUSING MINISTER DARRAGH 
O’BRIEN   
 
On the proposal of Cllr T Devine, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion.  
 
 
"That the Elected Members support me in a vote of no confidence in the 
Housing Minister, Darragh O Brien".   
 
 
Cllr Devine alluding to a recent report by “The Ditch” in respect of the 
Attorney Generals advice to the Minister for Housing that DCB 
homeowners would seek the most generous grants was, he said, a cause 
for concern and showed that there was no empathy for the people of 
Donegal. He thus called on members to support the vote of no confidence 
in the Minister for Housing, Darragh O’ Brien, T.D. 
 
 
Cllr A Farren concurred and said that DCB homeowners were very 
disappointed and felt that they had been badly treated.  
 
 
Cllr C Brogan said that a lot of work had been done on the scheme and 
that the Minister had indicated that he would come to Donegal shortly. He 
said a more considerate approach should be adopted. He was, he 
confirmed aware of the fact that there was a need for review and that 
there was an increase in the pipeline. It was imperative, he added, that the 
scheme worked for all concerned. He alluded to the considerable funding 
that had been directed towards the scheme and cited the need for a joint 
approach as opposed to chasing headlines that did not actually achieve 
anything. People, he said, needed to have a realistic approach and be 
aware of what was actually achievable. He thus called on members to 
defer the motion until they had an opportunity to meet with the Minister 
and discuss the difficulties encountered at present. 
 
 
Cllr C Brogan proposed, seconded by Cllr Blaney that the motion be 
deferred pending further consultation with the Minister.  
 
 
 
Cllr Kavanagh said that a vote of no confidence would send out the wrong 
message and create the impression that members were unwilling to work 
with the Minister. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, supporting the motion said it was clear where 
Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael policies lay and that there were people in 
Donegal who were not receiving any assistance and now had nowhere to 
live. 

36 
 
 
Cllr Mc Bride said he was in support of the motion and expressed concern 
that the Minister’s visit would possibly be in August when there were no 
meetings. 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty supported the motion but said that though relevant the 
members had no power and could not do anything about the outcome. 
The whole thing, he said, had been subject to a cover up and it was now 
widely accepted that mica was not the cause of the structural defects. It 
was incredible, he said, that anyone would think that the scheme was 
working.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee supporting the motion said that the Minister was not 
interested in visiting Donegal. He called for the immediate revision of 
IS465 in light of the recent scientific research results. This was not only 
about the DCB issues, he said, as the Minister had not delivered in terms 
of social housing and other related housing issues.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan in support of the counter proposal by Cllr C Brogan said 
that a considerable amount of progress had been made to date on the 
scheme. There were very few people in the county, he said, who were not 
impacted in some way. He noted that it was not down to one specific 
Minister and that that there was a need for a co-ordinated approach from 
the Council.  
 
 
 
Cllr G Doherty said that a vote of no confidence would highlight to the 
Minister exactly what the people of Donegal were dealing with. The lack of 
social housing, missed housing targets, insufficient rental accommodation 
combined with a failure to implement enhanced regulations for the proper 
testing of concrete blocks all contributed to the situation. 
 
This was supported by Cllrs A. Doherty, Mc Monagle and Murray.  
 
 
Cllr Canning said that the adoption of the motion would send out the 
wrong message and possibly impact on the Minister’s intention to come to 
Donegal. Cllr Blaney contended that the motion was populist and said that 
his presence in the county would afford an opportunity to highlight the 
inconsistencies in the scheme to date.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that she was of the opinion that this was the wrong 
time to send out such a message and that there was merit in listening to 
what the minister had to say.  
 
 
A recorded vote was taken by the Meetings Administrator in relation to the 
counter proposal by Cllr Brogan, seconded by Cllr Blaney.  
 
 
This resulted in 11 voting for with 18 voting against. 
 
 
Those voting for were: 
 
 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Coyle, Kavanagh, Kelly, 
Kennedy, Mc Gowan, Molloy and Naughton. (11) 

37 
 
 
Those voting against were: 
 
 
 
Cllrs Beard, J Brogan, Carr, Crossan, Devine, A Doherty, G Doherty, A 
Farren, Jordan, Mac Giolla Easbuig, Mc Brearty, Mc Bride, Mc Gee, Mc 
Monagle, Meehan, Murray, Nic Mheanman, and O’ Fearraigh. (18) 
 
 
Cllrs Boyle, M Farren, Harley, Mc Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc Garvey, Mc 
Mahon and Scanlon abstained.  
 
 
Thus, the counter proposal was rejected, and the motion as submitted by 
Cllr Devine adopted.  
 
C/261/24 
CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
 
 
• Mairead Cranley, Community Development on the death of her father 
Thomas Flannery.  
• Paul Gallagher, Environment on the death of his mother Eileen 
Gallagher.  
• Kathleen Logue, Information Systems on the death of her father PJ 
McGuire.  
• Charles Sweeney, Community Development & Planning on the death 
of his mother Sadie Sweeney.  
• Yvonne Nelis, Income Collection on the death of her mother Rose 
Nelis.  
• Alana Green, Community Development & Planning on the death of her 
father Charles Green.  
 
Freedom of the County 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Molloy, it was resolved 
to award the Freedom of the County to Jim Mc Guinness in recognition of 
his outstanding contribution to Gaelic Football in Donegal. 
 
Water Services Workshop Date  
Cllr Blaney said that no responses had been received in relation to the 
queries raised at the last plenary workshop. He said that he could see no 
benefit in proceeding with another workshop as the previous one had 
been of no benefit to members.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment advised members 
that it would be prudent to run with the workshop in September and that a 
request could be made to Uisce Eireánn to meet members at MD level. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that there were serious problems in the Glenties 
area and that warranted consideration and needed to be discussed at 
local level.  
 
After considerable debate members failed to select a date for the 
workshop. 

38 
 
Hedgerows 
Cllr Mc Clafferty asked for an update in relation to the cutting of hedges 
and what could be done to secure an exemption from fines for those who 
were willing to cut hedgerows/grass etc close to dangerous junctions. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation informed members 
that the enforcement of the Wildlife and Heritage Acts was not within the 
remit of Donegal County Council and that they could not provide such 
exemptions. The Roads Authority had, he advised, some authority under 
the Roads Act to carry out works where there were safety issues but that 
this did not extend to individuals.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan asked if the Council could issue a letter to a landowner to 
cut material in proximity to a dangerous junction and thus do so under the 
instruction of the Council.  
 
The Director of Roads & Transportation said that if there were particular 
issues, then the first point of contact should be through the MDs. He 
advised that there were policies in place at this level to deal with the 
issues concerned. 
 
CPMR Atlantic Arc Commission Meeting in Cantabria 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Blaney, it was 
resolved that the CPMR representative could attend the CPMR Atlantic 
Arc Commission meeting in Cantabria from the 19th to the 20th September.  
 
C/262/24 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda and noted the 
contnets of same. The Chief Executive asked if there were any queries 
and said that he would provide any member wo wished with a response 
outside of the meeting. 
 
1. Finance 
A. Budget 2025-Local Property Tax (LPT) Public Consultation 
B. DETE Increased Cost of Business (ICOB) grant scheme 
 
2. Community Development & Planning Services 
A. Community Development  
(i) 
CLAR Programme 2024 
(ii) 
Town & Village Programme 2023 
(iii) 
Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme 2023 
(iv) 
Community Recognition Fund 2024 
 
B. Urban & Rural Regeneration & Development  
(i) Rural Regeneration & Development Fund (RRDF) 
(ii) Urban Regeneration & Development Fund (URDF) 

39 
 
(iii) Croi Conaithe Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme 
 
C. Major Projects Update 
D. Ukrainian and International Protection Accommodation and 
Integration Unit 
E. Planning Services Update 
 
3. Water and Environment 
A.  Environment 
(i) 
Half Price Bulky Goods Events 
(ii) 
National Food Waste Recycling Week  
(iii) 
WEEE Collection Days in Donegal during July 2024 
(iv) 
Bathing Waters 2024 Season 
(v) 
EPA 2023 Annual Report on Domestic Wastewater 
Treatment Systems Inspections 
B. Defective Concrete Blocks - Update 
 
4. Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services   
A. Social Housing Programme Update 
B. Affordable Housing Survey 
C. Cultural Services  
(i) 
Creative Ireland 
(ii) 
Library Service 
(iii) 
Arts Service 
(iv) 
Museum Service 
(v) 
Heritage Office 
 
D. Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025-2029 
E. Homeless Action Plan 2023-2028 
 
5.  Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services 
 
A. Information Systems Update 
B. Fire Service  
(i) 
Operations 
(ii) 
Fire Prevention 
(iii) 
Major Emergency Management 
 
6.  Roads & Transportation 
 
A. TEN-T PRIP Donegal Update 
B. A5 Western Transport Corridor and Access to the Northwest 
C. Donegal National Road Projects 2023 Midyear Status 
D. TII Greenways Projects 
E. General Issues for National Roads arising Mid 2024 
F. Piers and Harbours 
G. Part 8 Planning Processes 
H. Speed Limit Review 2024 
I. Noise Action Plan 2024 – 2028 

40 
 
J. Restoration Improvement (RI) and Restoration Maintenance (RM) 
Programmes 
K. Local Improvement Schemes 
L. Maintenance Works 
 
The following questions were noted. 
 
C/263/24 
 SET UP A STRATEGIC PLAN TO DEAL WITH ALL THOSE AFFECTED 
BY DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Cllr McGee submitted the following question:  
 
 
Will the council set up, as a matter of urgency, a strategic plan to deal with 
     all those affected by defective concrete blocks in the county? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.   
 
C/264/24 
REQUEST THE HSE TO TAKE IMMEDIATE STEPS TO IMPROVE THE 
HEALTH SERVICES IN DONEGAL  
 
Cllr McGee submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Is there anything that the council can do to influence the HSE to take 
immediate steps to improve the health services in Donegal? We need the 
embargo to be lifted, medical services to be provided in local communities 
and the number of respite beds increased.   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/265/24 
HOW MANY APPLICATIONS TO THE 90/10 DEFECTIVE CONCRETE 
BLOCKS GRANT SCHEME HAVE BEEN DOWNGRADED BY DCC   
 
Cllr McBrearty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How many applications to the 90/10 defective concrete blocks grant 
scheme have been downgraded by Donegal County Council and how 
many of those that were passed over to the enhanced grant scheme have 
been downgraded by the Housing Agency to date.   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/266/24 
CAN THE COUNCIL EMPLOY A FEW PLUMBERS WHO HAVE SOME 
EXPERIENCE IN AIR TO WATER SYSTEMS  
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can this Council employ a few plumbers who have some experience in Air 
to Water systems, especially as these are now the Council’s preferred 
heating system? Issues can arise and we should have an independent 
professional to advise if it is a tenant’s issue or a faulty system.   
 

41 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing,Corporate & Cultural 
Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/267/24 
MAINTAINING ESTATES AND CONSIDER COLLECTING FUNDING 
FROM EACH HOUSE TO MAIN THE GREEN AREAS, WALLS AND 
FENCES ETC  
 
Cllr McGowan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can this Council review how residents are supported in maintaining their 
estates and consider collecting funding from each house to maintain the 
green areas, walls and fences etc?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/268/24 
WHAT ALTERNATIVE ACCOMMODATION HAS BEEN SOURCED FOR 
THE TENANTS LIVING THE 8 OWNED COUNCIL HOUSES AT 
RAILWAY PARK, ST JOHNSTON  
 
Cllr McBrearty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
What alternative accommodation has been sourced for the tenants living 
in the 8 owned Council houses at Railway Park St Johnston that have 
been identified by Petrolab as defective due to internal sulphate attack in 
the blocks and what is the time frame for full demolition and rebuild of their 
homes?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/269/24 
DID THE COUNCIL INSPECT EVERY QUARRY IN THE COUNTY TO 
ENSURE THEY ARE NOT PRODUCING DEFECTIVE CONCRETE 
BUILDING MATERIAL  
 
Cllr A Farren submitted the following question.  
 
 
 On the canvas, Defective Concrete homeowners asked why did the 
council    not regulate the quarries because if they had maybe 1000s of 
homeowners would have escaped this nightmare? Has the council 
inspected every quarry in the county to ensure that they are not producing 
defective concrete building material or if it’s not their job who is 
responsible to ensure people who are rebuilding never have to encounter 
the same problem again?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/270/24 
HOW MANY LICENSED DOGS ARE THERE IN THE COUNTY  
 
Cllr T Crossan submitted the following question.  
 
 
 How many licensed dogs are there in the County and what percentage of 
the overall dog population does that represent?   

42 
 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/271/24 
IS THERE ENOUGH INFORMATION OUT THERE TO INFORM 
OWNERS OF DOGS THAT WOULD COME UNDER DANGEROUS 
DOGS LEGISLATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLIANCE 
TO KEEP SUCH DOGS ESPECIALLY WHEN OUT IN PUBLIC PLACES  
 
Cllr Crossan submitted the following question.  
 
 
Is there enough information out there to inform owners of dogs that would 
come under Dangerous Dogs Legislation of the requirements for 
compliance to keep such dogs especially when out in public places?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/272/24 
AHBs and ICSH  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question.  
 
 
How many AHBs are active in Donegal and currently have housing 
schemes approved for Social Housing delivery in the County? 
Have AHBs and ICSH responded to recent correspondence from DCC 
and outlined how recent ongoing issues and requirements are to be 
addressed to enable the approval of future potential Housing Schemes in 
the county?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/273/24 
SOCIAL HOUSING REMEDIATION  
 
Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question.  
 
 
Social Housing Remediation 
 Donegal Co. Council forwarded to the Department of Housing a detailed 
social housing remediation submission on Jan 24th 2024. 
Will the Council outline the correspondence received from the Department 
since January on this matter, the number, and dates of follow up on this 
matter by DCC to the Department and outline the current council plan to 
engage with the Department to procure the necessary funding to 
commence work on the remediation of social houses?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development & 
Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/274/24 
HOW MANY SI HOUSES HAVE BEEN BUILT PER MD SINCE 2010   
 
 
Cllr McDermott submitted the following question.  
 
 
 
How many SI houses have been built per MD since 2010?   
 

43 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/275/24 
 HAS THE COUNCIL ANY PLANS TO INCREASE THE WORKFORCE 
THAT ARE INSPECTING SEPTCI TANKS   
 
Cllr Canning submitted the following question.  
 
 
Has this Council any plans to increase the workforce that are inspecting 
our septic tanks at present given that the grants have increased 
significantly but require a tank inspection before an application can be 
made?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/276/24 
IS THE COUNCIL IN A POSITION TO ACCEPT ANY MATERIAL AS A 
FINISH TO THE EXTERIOR OF A DWELLING  
 
Cllr Canning submitted the following question.  
 
 
Is this Council in a position to accept any material as a finish to the 
exterior of a dwelling, if not, can I have a breakdown of what is accepted 
and what is not accepted?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/277/24 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS  
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question.  
 
 
Does the Council have plans to assess the number of properties affected 
by the presence of defective concrete in the county, including commercial, 
residential, functional (i.e. septic tanks), community and public service 
buildings?   
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/278/24 
ENHANCED DEFECTIVE BLOCKS  
 
Cllr Beard submitted the following question.  
 
 
In light of reports in “The Ditch” does the Council intend to write to the 
Attorney General or the Department of Housing to confirm whether the 
Enhanced Defective Blocks Scheme has been set up in such a fashion so 
as to deliberately discourage applicants by not offering 100% redress and 
intentionally not providing the most appropriate remediation option?     
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
 

44 
 
C/279/24 
SUITABLE LOCATIONS TO PLACE MODULAR HOMES  
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question.  
 
 
Has Housing Capital/Housing Directorate identified any sites across the 
County that would be suitable locations to place modular homes and if so, 
where are the sites?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/280/24 
HOMELESSNESS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question.  
 
 
How many families, individuals are currently in receipt of homeless 
vouchers, what number of individuals and families have presented to 
Council with Eviction Notices in the last twelve months and what are the 
long-term plans of this Council to deal with the rising number of people 
presenting as homeless in the County?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/281/24 
JAPANESE KNOTWEED AND OTHER INVASIVE SPECIES  
 
Cllr McBride submitted the following question.  
 
 
Can Donegal County Council give us a presentation on Japanese 
knotweed and other invasive species and who is responsible for the 
delivery of the current policy within Donegal Council?  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/282/24 
CE CERTIFICATION  
 
Cllr McBride submitted the following question.  
 
 
Can the new Council be given a presentation on Donegal County 
Council's policy on CE certification?    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Planning & Community 
Development in relation to the above.  
 
C/283/24 
OPEN PUBLIC BUILDINGS FOR FAMILIES AFFECTED BY DCB  
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question.  
 
 
Will the Council arrange to open public buildings for families affected by 
DCB on the nights where there are severe weather warnings and where it 
is not possible to pay for emergency accommodation hotels etc.?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Planning & Community 
Development in relation to the above.  

45 
 
C/284/24 
MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
 
Members noted the motions from other councils.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL     
“I am calling on the Taoiseach of the day Simon Harris and the coalition 
partners Fianna Fail, Fine Gael and the Green Party to address the huge 
failures in the reconfigured health services established by the Government 
some years ago and the establishment of the HSE for responsibility in 
implementing the policy.  
Health services for the public in Ireland has been led by Health Ministers 
from Fianna Fail, Progressive Democrats and Fine Gael for over 24 years 
and the current model of reconfiguration has been a failure. Recent 
reports indicated that rural parts of Ireland have been impacted the most 
and have a higher risk of poor outcomes and this is borne out by the 
experience of people from Clare attending overcrowded emergency 
departments and at times having tragic outcomes. People in need of 
health services from Clare are suffering and there is no evidence to 
suggest that the reconfigured health service has delivered improved 
outcomes. I am calling on the Government to urgently address the serious 
consequences for the public in Clare from the current government’s model 
of health care. I would request the circulation of this motion if supported to 
our Oireachtas Members in Clare and other local authorities.”   
 
FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL    
“That Fingal County Council formally backs the call for a Fossil Fuel Non-
Proliferation Treaty, and urges the Irish Government to support the 
initiative for a Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty, if passed, a letter 
should be sent to all Local Authorities, An Taoiseach, An Tanaiste and the 
Minister for the Environment.”  
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That, Limerick City and County Council call on the Minister for Finance, 
Michael McGrath, T.D., and the Government, to allow taxpayers one week 
where no tax is paid, in line with Social Welfare recipients whereby their 
welfare payments increase at Christmas, and, if agreed, that the Motion 
be circulated to all Local Authorities.” 
 
TIPPERARY COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That Tipperary County Council would write to the Minister for Land use 
and Biodiversity, Pippa Hackett, asking that she implements in full, without 
further delay the recommendations of the report titled “Review of support 
for farmers impacted by Ash Dieback” which was compiled by Dir Matthew 
Crowe, Jerry Grant and Jo O’Hara.  
In June 2023, Dr. Matthew Crowe, Jerry Grant and Jo O’Hara were asked 
to carry out a rapid review of the DAFM approach and supports for 
landowners affected by ash dieback since 2013 and to provide the 
Minister with advice and recommendations on a way forward in line with 
the draft Forest Strategy. The report was submitted to the Minister last 
September.  

46 
 
Furthermore, that the letter would be sent to the Minister for Agriculture, 
Food and the Marine, the Taoiseach, Tánaiste, and the Minister for the 
Environment and that this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities.”   
 
WICKLOW COUNTY COUNCIL  
“Due to the very worrying increase in road fatalities throughout the 
country, this Council demands that the Government provides funding for 
the employment of a full time Road Safety Officer in each Local Authority 
in the country.”  
 
 
 This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
 
 
