MINUTES OF ADJOURNED BUDGET MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY 
COUNCIL HELD IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 4th DECEMBER 
2025 
 
C/452/25 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, L Blaney, M Boyle F Bradley, Brogan, 
J Brogan, B. Carr, D Coyle, T Crossan, T S Devine, A Doherty, A 
Farren, M Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, J Kavanagh, D M Kelly, N 
Kennedy, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, P Mc Garvey, D Mc Gee, P Mc 
Gowan, M Mc Mahon,  G Mc Monagle, D. Meehan, J Murray, M 
Naughton, D Nic Mheanman, J S O Fearraigh and M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs Beard, G Doherty, F Mc Brearty Jnr, M Mc Bride, M Mc 
Clafferty, M Mc Dermott, and Molloy. 
 
C/453/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John Mc Laughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, 
Corporate & Cultural Services/Meetings Administrator, Eamonn Brown, 
A/ Director Community Development  & Planning Services, Bryan 
Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of 
Finance, Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information 
Systems and Emergency Services, Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water 
& Environment, Tanya Kee, Management Accountant, Eunan Quinn, 
Senior Planner, Anne Marie Quinn, Administrative Officer, Finance, 
Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, Assistant 
Communications Officer, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, 
Clíona Ní Ghallachóir, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne 
Marie Crawford, Staff Officer. 
 
C/454/25 
ADJOURNMENT   
The Cathaoirleach welcomed members to the reconvened meeting. He 
said that the group leaders were looking for clarity on number of issues 
and that this warranted further discussion. On the proposal of Cllr 
Blaney, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was resolved to adjourn the meeting 
until 12 noon. Cllr J Brogan said that members had received the 
Budget Book over three weeks ago and that there had been a week 
and a half since the last meeting which had been ample time to 
consider the 2026 proposals.  
 
C/455/25 
FURTHER ADJOURNMENT 
On resumption of the meeting a further adjournment to 12.30pm was 
proposed by Cllr Canning and seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan. Cllr Mac 
Giolla Easbuig said that he was dismayed at the pretence as there had 
been sufficient time to consider the proposals.  
 
C/456/25 
CONSIDERATION OF THE 2026 DRAFT REVENUE BUDGET  
Reopening the meeting, the Cathaoirleach thanked members for their 
patience. He said that should the 5% increase in commercial rates be 
rejected the Director of Finance would have to revise the budgetary 
figures and that this would involve 1.5 to 2 hours preparation time. 

Cllr Mc Brearty said that he had been looking for a report in relation to 
legal fees and had not received same to date. He queried why year on 
year the cost for legal fees was not included in the Budget Book. This 
detail, he contended, needed to be made available as significant 
monies had been paid out to three legal entities. Provision of these 
figures, he added, was essential if members were to consider a rates 
increase. The Cathaoirleach said that the Director of Finance would 
correspond directly to Cllr Mc Brearty on the matter.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride thanked the Director of Finance and his team for their 
work on the 2026 Budget. He said that he could not support a 5% 
increase based on discussions with the business community and 
Letterkenny Chamber of Commerce. Rising costs, less disposable 
income and an increase in the minimum wage were all impacting on 
the business sector, he noted. There was acknowledgement also that 
25 businesses had closed on Letterkenny’s Main Street and that this 
situation was being replicated county-wide. He thus proposed, 
seconded by Cllr Devine that the 2026 Revenue Budget proceed with a 
0% increase in commercial rates.  
 
Cllr C Brogan then proposed that the meeting be adjourned for further 
appraisal of the figures and to see where a small increase in 
commercial rates could be accommodated. He said that there had 
been no increase in commercial rates since 2018 and that this needed 
to be taken into consideration There were, he stated, challenges ahead 
for the business community but there was a need also to be realistic 
about the situation. He referenced the fact that significant funding had 
come into Letterkenny in terms of the Urban Regeneration Programme 
together with substantial investment in the Atlantic Technology 
University. Specific challenges, he said, needed to be looked at namely 
traffic management and the roadworks associated with the Active 
Travel Programme. It was important, he added, that the message went 
out that Letterkenny was open for business.  
 
He said that recent meetings with the business community had clearly 
shown that there was a need to improve conditions for business and he 
thus highlighted the need to be creative in finding the relevant 
solutions. 
 
Cllr Brogan said that there had been discussion with all the party 
groups and that honest concerns had been raised. He called for further 
discussion citing the need for people to see a working Council and the 
creation of an environment to facilitate further investment in the county.  
 
The Cathaoirleach said members needed to be clear on what they 
were voting for and that the 0% increase in commercial rates as 
proposed by Cllr Mc Bride would see a €1.9m reduction in expenditure 
in 2026. 
Cllr Brogan proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan that the meeting be 
further adjourned to facilitate further discussion on the matter.  

Cllr Martin Farren alluded to the impact that a 5% increase would have 
on businesses in the smaller towns where small and medium 
enterprises were struggling to cope and make ends meet. He said that 
he could not support a 5% increase on that basis. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that the crux of the matter was how Local 
Government was funded with the Local Property Tax and Commercial 
Rates being the central funding elements. It was inevitable, he added, 
that a rates increase would be passed on to the consumer. The issue 
here, he contended, was government policy and the lack of essential 
investment in the county. He said he was firmly of the opinion that an 
increase in rates would put an extra burden on people, increase the 
cost of groceries, retail processes etc and lead to job losses. 
A restructuring of the overall funding mechanism was required, he 
added. He asked for clarity as to the impact of a 0% increase in rates.  
 
Cllr Beard said that nothing had changed since 2024 for the business 
sector, and they now had to deal with the impact of an increase in the 
minimum wage, the new rolling pension contribution on top of rising 
costs and increased energy bills. She said that families in Donegal had 
less disposable income and this too was an issue for the business 
community with many business operating on narrow margins and their 
premises impacted by the defective concrete blocks crisis. She alluded 
also to ongoing business closures in the Inishowen Municipal District 
as a result of repeated water outages. Thus, she said that the 100% 
Redress Party could not support the 5% increase. 
 
Cllr Kennedy concurred with this assessment and noted that the recent 
rates revaluation had been particularly harsh on smaller businesses. 
She alluded also to the fact that the Casual Trading Byelaws had not 
yet been completed which was unfair on businesses who paid their 
rates, allowing casual traders to take advantage of town centre 
locations. Failure to look after small and medium enterprises, she said, 
sent out the wrong message and undermined the regeneration and 
town development programmes. She asked for data on the number of 
casual traders operating in the county. 
 
Cllr Harley thanked the Director of Finance and his team for their 
efforts in producing a Budget Book that allowed for €224m of 
expenditure in 2026. He said that he agreed with much of what Cllr C 
Brogan had said and that consideration should be taken of the fact that 
service delivery had increased significantly since 2008 and that rates 
were at a lower level now than back then. He said that without an 
increase in rates the same level of service could not be delivered. It 
was, he advised, a difficult time for businesses and that the range of 
applicable charges for these entities had not changed over the years. 
He said that cognisance had to be taken of the range of regeneration 
projects being promoted and pursued and the impact that these would 
have on dereliction and vacancy in the various towns. The issue now, 
he stated, was what would happen to these projects and where the 

money would be found if €1.8m was removed from the budget. He said 
an additional conversation was now needed to look at this aspect and 
what could be achieved with a 2% to 3% increase in rates.   
 
He asked that consideration be given to putting in place a system 
utilised in other counties whereby business with under €10k in rates got 
a dedicated rebate. This could involve, he added, amending the current 
rates rebate criteria and amending the overall total form €375 to 
between €500 and €600. 
 
Casual trading, he said, needed a review as the enterprises concerned 
did have to provide facilities or services. He called for a level playing 
field for all. It was acknowledged that considerable investment had 
been put in over the last number of years to fund and develop the 
tourism product. This investment, he noted, had been at a cost and 
said it was imperative that this was maintained so the full tourism 
potential of Donegal could be realised.  
 
Cllr Mc Giolla Easbuig at this juncture proposed a vote of sympathy to 
the family of the Jim Chonaill Ó Domhnaill who had worked tirelessly 
for cancer patients and their families throughout Donegal. 
 
A minute’s silence was then observed by all present.  
 
Cllr Meehan said it was important to put on record that the Budget 
Book as presented included €550k for Housing Maintenance, and 
€100k extra for the Minor Infrastructure and Public Lighting. These 
were items, he said, which the electorate were continually looking for.  
 
He said that Cllrs could not on the one hand look for funding for 
specific items and at the same time be told that not enough money was 
available. He said that he could appreciate that businesses were facing 
difficulties and highlighted the need for a better rebate scheme for 
small businesses. This, he contended, needed to be part of the 
ongoing discussion. The overall issue here, he added, was the 
government funding model which was dysfunctional at best. 
 
He cited the need for a realistic approach as not increasing the budget 
would only harm tenants, those in housing estates etc and ultimately 
impact on the bread and butter issues. A rates increase was the right 
thing to do at this point in time, he added, as better service delivery 
was dependent on the generation of sufficient revenue.  
 
It was thus unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting until 3pm. 
 
C/457/25 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING 
On resumption of the meeting a further adjournment until 4pm was 
proposed by Cllr M Farren and seconded by Cllr Mc Garvey.  
 
 

C/458/25 
CONSIDERATION OF THE 2026 DRAFT REVENUE BUDGET  
The Cathaoirleach informed the meeting that the Group Leaders were 
reviewing the revised figures and that these would then be presented 
to members.  
 
C/459/25 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Mc Clafferty, it was 
resolved to adjourn the meeting until 5pm to facilitate this process.  
 
C/460/25 
CONSIDERATION OF THE 2026 DRAFT REVENUE BUDGET  
The Cathaoirleach informed members that detail had been circulated in 
relation to the cuts required to facilitate an 0% increase. He asked if 
there were any other proposals.  
 
Cllr C Brogan said there had been considerable discussion with the 
aim of delivering a positive budget at a time when record levels of 
funding was available. Having taken on board the concerns raised by 
members, he proposed, seconded by Cllr Harley that a 2% increase in 
commercial rates be applied in 2026. He outlined the various areas 
where funding was needed, including Housing Maintenance, Tidy 
Towns initiatives, and the whole area of Roads &Transportation put 
front and centre. Roads issues, he stated, could be brought to the fore 
at the monthly meetings citing traffic congestion and the impact of 
Active Travel works for traders in Letterkenny. He proposed that these 
be suspended from the 10th December 2025 to assist the business 
community in the town and that a traffic consultant be employed to 
assess and provide options to alleviate the ongoing congestion 
problem.  
 
There were, he advised, many positive elements in the book and that 
the proposals for expenditure totalling €224m offered considerable 
opportunity for all involved. Attention was drawn to the fact that when 
funding was being sought at national level, there was always a 
requirement to show exactly what Donegal was prepared to contribute. 
A 2% increase, he stated, would facilitate investment and provide the 
executive with a level of confidence.  
 
Cllr Harley said that the 2% increase would see borrowing capacity 
drop by €1m. The reality, he said, was that a lot of projects would not 
happen in the future. He referenced the fact that even with a 2% 
increase, housing maintenance would have to be reduced, and Tidy 
Towns funding reduced by €72k. 
 
He acknowledged that it had been a difficult time for business but that 
€85m had come into the county under the various rural programmes. 
He referenced the fact that the SEED Project in Ballybofey/ Stranorlar 
would be most likely affected. 
 

Cllr Mc Brearty said that he had not received the documentation as 
circulated and was informed by the Cathaoirleach that the figures 
would be shared online in due course.  
 
He said that he did not agree with Cllrs Brogan and Harley. 
Letterkenny, was, he advised, impossible to get in and out of and 
people were discouraged from travelling to it. There were similar issues 
in Kilross, he added, where people were now taking back roads to 
avoid Ballybofey/ Stranorlar where the fault lay with the overall design 
aspect. He called on the elected members to stand up for small and 
medium businesses. 
 
He said that he had made a request for a breakdown of the 
extortionate legal fees being paid by the Council and not detailed in the 
Budget Book this or any other year. He alluded to a particular business 
in Ballybofey where after the recent rates revaluation, there had been a 
quadruple increase in their rates liability from €10k to €35k. 
 
Another area of concern, he said, was the fact that Defective Concrete 
Block Homeowners had to pay their Local Property Tax to get access 
to the Enhanced DCB Scheme designed around the false mica 
narrative. People, he said, needed to be put first and not the Council 
executive.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that the increased cost of living, and national 
taxation was having a significant impact on families whilst private 
developers were increasing rents. There was, he stated, considerable 
finance in circulation yet the Government were pushing Local 
Authorities to increase rates thus putting pressure on businesses to 
pay for services and impacting homeowners through the Local Property 
Tax. A 2% increase, he contended, would see hard pressed 
businesses transfer the costs to the general public. Issues such as the 
traffic problem in Letterkenny, lack of progress on the TEN-T, and the 
slow progression of the Letterkenny 2040 objectives etc were, he 
advised down to lack of investment by the Government. Thus, he said, 
that the Sinn Fein grouping were in favour of Cllr Mc Bride’s proposal 
for a 0% increase in rates.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig asked for clarity as to what would be voted on 
with the Cathaoirleach confirming that a vote would be taken initially on 
the counter proposal from Cllr Brogan.  
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance proceeded to outline the 
consequences of adjusting the Draft Budget figures and outlined the 
impact associated with a 2% and a 0% increase in commercial rates.  
See Appendix 1  
 
Cllr Meehan at this juncture said that there was need to be honest with 
all concerned and contended that a 2% increase in rates was not an 
excessive burden. It amounted, he said to €4 per week for 90% of the 

businesses in Donegal. He said that he supported the 2% increase but 
accepted that Donegal had challenges in terms of discretionary 
funding. An increase was needed, he added, to meet demand and 
provide adequate service delivery.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig advised that he could not support the budget in 
light of the ongoing housing issues, the failure to address 
homelessness, lack of investment in our Piers and Harbours, Islands 
etc.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty asked what reserves the Council had which were not 
included in the Budget Book and was informed that that could be 
addressed after the meeting. 
 
A vote was then taken by the Meetings Administrator in relation to Cllr 
C Brogan’s proposal for a 2% increase in commercial rates for 2026. 
This resulted in 15 voting for and 20 voting against with one abstention. 
 
Those voting in favour included: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Boyle, C Brogan, J Brogan, Canning, Coyle, Harley, 
Kavanagh, Kelly, Mc Dermott, Mc Gowan, Meehan, Molloy, Naughton 
and Scanlon.(15) 
 
Those voting against included: 
 
Cllrs Beard, Carr, Crossan, Devine, A Doherty, G Doherty, A Farren, M 
Farren, Jordan, Kennedy, Mc Brearty, Mc Bride, Mc Clafferty, Mc 
Garvey, Mc Gee, Mc Mahon, Mc Monagle, Murray, Nic Mheanman, 
and O’ Fearraigh. (20) 
 
Cllr Mc Giolla Easbuig abstained. 
 
Thus, the counter proposal fell and it was therefore agreed that there 
would be no increase in commercial rates for 2026. 
 
Cllr Blaney noted that there had not been an increase in rates from 
2018. He said that discussions with business owners in Letterkenny 
had raised a number of queries namely, 
 
• The suspension of Active Travel in Letterkenny over the 
Christmas period to assist access and increase footfall. 
• Need for a traffic survey on all the junctions to see what could 
be utilised to improve the traffic flow. 
 
Failure to adopt a 2% increase would, he added, also impact on social 
housing tenants, especially those living in defective concrete homes as 
monies for maintenance works would be reduced. 
 
 

C/461/25 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS – EXTENSION OF THE 
MEETING  
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Scanlon it was 
resolved in accordance with Standing Order No 28 to suspend 
Standing Order No 3 and continue the meeting beyond 6pm.  
 
C/462/25 
CONSIDERATION OF THE 2026 DRAFT REVENUE BUDGET  
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Meetings Administrator read into the record the 
required resolution for the adoption of the Scheme for the Abatement of 
Rates. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was 
resolved that: 
 
“Donegal County Council makes a scheme for the abatement of rates 
due to it by liable persons, or classes of liable persons, in respect of 
vacant properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 9 of the 
Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended. 
 
Such a scheme in respect of vacant property will provide for an 
abatement of 100% of rates due to Donegal County Council by a liable 
person for the financial year ended 31st December 2026.” 
 
He proceeded to read into the record the resolution in respect of the 
adoption of an Early Incentive Payment Credit (EPIC). 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Mc Gee, it was 
resolved that, 
 
“Donegal County Council, in accordance with Section 66 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 (as amended), adopt for the financial year ended 
31st December 2025 and Early Payment Incentive Credit Scheme 
(EPIC).  
 
The Early Payment Incentive Credit Scheme will allow businesses to 
avail of a 7.5% reduction on their 2026 Commercial Rates Liability, to a 
maximum of €375, when paying their Commercial Rates liability in full 
by the 31st October 2026. The entitlement will be applied as a credit 
against the business’s Commercial Rates liability for 2027.” 
 
The Meetings Administrator then read into the record the required 
resolution for the adoption of the 2026 Budget and the Annual Rate on 
Valuation. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by A Doherty it was 
resolved that, 
 
“Donegal County Council, in accordance with Section 103 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 (as amended), adopt for the financial year ended 
31st December 2026 the Budget set out in Tables A and B, subject to 

the amendments listed below, resulting in an Annual Rate on Valuation 
of 0.232 as shown in Table A, subject to Section 10 of the Local 
Government (Financial Provisions) Act 1978 and hereby adopted in 
accordance with Section 3 of the Local Government Rates and Other 
Matters Act 2019.” 
 
Members were informed that as a result Draft Expenditure for 2026 had 
been reduced to €222,059,839 from the proposed figure of 
€224,034,793 resulting in budgetary difference of €1,974,954 with 
similar reductions on the income side.  
 
The following analysis of the expenditure and income reductions by 
service was provided: 
 
Expenditure Reductions  
Service 
Division  
Code  
Description  
Estimated 
by Chief 
Executive  
Expenditure 
Adopted by 
Council  
Net 
Change  
A 
A01 
Maintenance  
& 
Improvement 
LA Housing 
Units  
9,468,058 
9,168,058 
300,000 
D 
D06 
Community 
& Enterprise 
Function  
6,616,502 
6,606,502 
10,000 
D 
D09 
Economic 
Development  
& Promotion 
6,793,111 
6,682,111 
111,000 
D 
D11 
Heritage  & 
Conservation 
Services  
1,123,392 
1,023,392 
100,000 
E 
E05 
Litter 
Management 
2,393,316 
2,321,316 
72,000 
E 
E15 
Climate 
Change & 
Flooding 
807,739 
707,739 
100,000 
F 
F02 
Operation of 
Library and 
Archival 
Service 
5,835,989 
5,822,989 
13,000 
H 
H11 
Agency & 
Recoupable 
Services  
8,844,106 
7,605,152 
1,238,954 
J 
J05 
Human 
Resources 
Function 
2,364,919 
2,334,919 
30,000 
 
 
 
 
Total  
1,974,954 
 
Income Reductions  
Service 
Division  
Code  
Description  
Income  
by Chief 
Executive  
Income  
Adopted by 
Council  
Net 
Change  
RA  
RA 
Rates  
41,474,042 
39,499,088 
1,974,954 
 
 
 
 
Total  
1,974,954 
 

Cllr Mc Dermott queried the status of projects including the Tús Nua 
Project in Carndonagh, Buncrana Leisure Centre, and the development 
of Malin Head in light of the 2026 budgetary reductions.  
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance said that over the past three 
years €35m had been borrowed to facilitate match funding. This he 
said, would help for some time but would not deliver all the projects in 
the pipeline. In the years ahead, he said that co-funding would be 
needed to assist with the delivery of the Capital Programme. Whilst 
there was no immediate jeopardy, he confirmed, that additional 
borrowing would be needed in the years ahead.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan said that members had agreed and named a lot of 
these projects with some fast forwarded and others not specifically 
named including a number in his own area. He asked what the position 
was in relation to these various initiatives.  
 
The Director of Finance said that members could possibly benefit from 
a meeting to look at these projects and agreed to circulate a dedicated 
listing. 
 
C/463/25 
THREE YEAR CAPITAL BUDGET 2026-2028  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott the 
Three Year Capital Budget 2026 -2028 was noted, and it was agreed 
that members would have a further opportunity in early 2026 to review 
the programme.  
 
The Cathaoirleach confirmed that the proposals made earlier in relation 
to Letterkenny were now off the table given the decision to go forward 
with no increase in  commercial rates.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said he wanted it made clear that the lack of monies for  
defective concrete blocks social housing was not the fault of the 
business sector but rather a consequence of the Government’s failure 
to provide adequate funding. Cllr Beard concurred and noted that the 
business community had kept the Council going and should not be 
blamed or have to carry the can for failure at national level. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_________________________ 
